/.

*7V

(l  *

/Uj  ‘v^Ci

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2017  with  funding  from
University  of  Toronto

https://archive.org/details/lettersofcicerow02cice.

THE  LETTERS  OF  CICERO

GEORGE  BELL  & SONS

LONDON  : YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN
NEW  YORK  : 66,  FIFTH  AVENUE,  AND

BOMBAY:  53,  ESPLANADE  ROAD

CAMBRIDGE  : DEIGHTON,  BELL  & CO.

THE  LETTERS  OF

CICERO

THE  WHOLE  EXTANT  CORRESPONDENCE
IN  CHRONOLOGICAL  ORDER

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH
BY

EVELYN  S.  SHUCKBURGH,  M.A.

LATE  FELLOW  OF  EMMANUEL  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE
AUTHOR  OF  A TRANSLATION  OF  POLYBIUS,  A HISTORY  OF  ROME,  ETC.

IN  FOUR  VOLUMES
VOL.  II.  B.C.  51-49

LONDON

GEORGE  BELL  AND  SONS

899

Pa

G30S

E5S5

va

CHISWICK  PRESS  CHARLES  WHITTIKGHAM  AND  CO.
TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY  LANE,  LONDON.

LETTERS  IN  VOLUME  II

Fam.  II.

7

N umber
in  this
Translation

...  226

! Fam.  VIII.  9

N umber
in  this
Translation

...  210

5)

8

. . . 200

: » 10

...  225

...  223W

« „ II

. . . 266

9 J

...  224

„ 12

...  278

„ J

•(St

...  234-

13

...  270

...  262

» |4l-

...  279

1.1,

)>  15

•••  343

14*"

...  244

„ 16  *

...  382

15

...  272

Fam.  XIII.  I

...  198

5?

i6

• ••  393

» 2

...  258

17

...

7/.  ^ 3

...  259

55

i8

...  257

» 9

...  236

55

...  261

.1  182

jj  53

...  229

Fam.  III.

; 2

„ 54

...  252

55

...  190

» 55

...  231

55

4

....  193

„ 56

...  230

55

5

...  204

„ 57

253

55

6

...  212

58

...  247

55  -

...  243

» 59

. . . 246

55

8

...  221

„ 61

...  232

5 5

9

. . . 248

„ 62

..  233

55

lO

. . . 260

,,  63

...  250

55  ■

II

. . . 264

„ 64

...  234

55

12

...  274

„ 65

•••  235

55

13

...  276

Fam.  XIV.  5

. . . 282

Fam.  IV.

...  386

„ 7

•••  3P3  4

5 5

2-

...  388

5,  14

...  307

Fam.  -V.

19

...  389

„ 18  ,

•••  305

,,

20

...  301

Fam.  XV.  i

...  220

Fam.  VII.

3^

...  228

’ „ 2

...  218

rAm.VIIL

.—I

...  191

» 3

...  2~II

5 5

2

...  195

„ 4

...  237

5 5

3

...  196

» 5

...  265

55

4

205

6

...  277

55

5

...  209

7

...  213

55

6

...  241  !

5J  8

...  214

,1

7

...  242

,,  9

...  215

5 5

1

8

...  222  ;

10

...  238

VI

LETTERS  IN  VOLUME  II

5

6

7

8

lo  ^

12

13  a
13b

14

15

16

17

18

19

20
21
22

23

24

25

26

4

5

6

7

8
9

10

11  a
II  b
II  c

11  d

12
12  a
12  b
12  c

ViT  '

14

15

15a

16

Number
in  this
Translation

295
. . . 296
...  297

. . . 298

...  .302

•••  303

...  304

...  306

...  308

...  309

...  310

...  312

...  314

•••  315

...  316

•••  317
...  318
...  319

...  320

...  322
•••  323

...  325

...  327

•••  ill

^)57e‘335
336
•••  337

- 338

•••  339

...  340
...  341

...  321

...  326

333
...  342

...  344

•••  330
...  324
328

347

348

349
345

351

352

IX.

LETTERS  IN  VOLUME  II  vii

2

Number
in  this
Translation

354

Att.  IX.

19  ...

Number
ill  this
Translation

...  376

2 a ...

355

Att.  X.

I

•••  377

3

• ••  357

1 5

2

...  378

4 ...

...  360

55

3

..  379

5 •••

...  358

55

3a  ...

...  380

6 ->...

•••  359

55

4 ...

...  381

6a  ...

•••  356^

55

5 ...

...  383

7 •••

...  361

5 5

6 ...

- 385

7a  ...

• ••  350

55

7 ...

...  387

7b  ...

•••  353

5 5

8 ...

...  391

7c  ...

...  346

55

8a  ...

...  390

8 ...

...  362

55

8b  ...

...  384

9 ...

363

55

9 ...

...  392

lO

...  364

5 5

9a  ...

...  382

II  y..

...  366

55

10

394

II  ...

...  365  1

5 5

u

...  395

12

...  367  1

55

12

...  396

13  •••

...  368

5,

13

...  397

13a  ...

369  and  370

55

14  ...

...  398

14  ...

...  371

55

15  ...

...  399

15  ...

...  372

5,

16

. . . 400

16

...  373

55

17  ...

...  401

17  ...

...  374

55

iS  ...

. . . 402

18  ...

...  375

INTRODUCTION

The  letters  in  this  volume  (April,  b.c.  51 -June,  b.c.  49)
find  Cicero  on  the  point  of  starting  to  his  province
of  Cilicia,  in  which  he  was  to  succeed  Appius  Claudius
Fulcher,  the  elder  brother  of  his  old  enemy  Publius  Clodius.
The  circumstances  in  which  he  had  been,  against  his  will,
constrained  to  undertake  this  duty,  have  been  noticed  in
the  introduction  to  the  first  volume.  From  the  very  first
he  disliked  the  idea  of  it,  and  especially  shrank  from  a pro-
longed absence  from  Rome.

The  district  known  as  Cilicia  is  a narrow  country  between
Mount  Taurus  and  the  sea,  falling  naturally
The  Province  of  into  two  divisions,  near  the  city  of  Soli — on
Cilicia.  the  west  Cilicia  Aspera,  on  the  east  Cilicia

Campestris^  separated  from  the  province  of
Syria  by  Mount  Amanus.  The  Romans  had  first  been
brought  into  connexion  with  Cilicia  Aspera  in  their  efforts  to
put  down  the  piracy  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  in  the  year
B.c.  103.  For  some  years  it  was  a provincia  in  the  sense  of
a military  command,  rather  than  an  organized  province.
But  this  command  was  held  by  a number  of  able  men  who
had  gradually  reduced  it  to  the  regular  form  of  a Roman
province,  adding  to  it  various  neighbouring  districts.  Its
extent  and  organized  administration,  as  found  by  Cicero,
dated  from  the  Asian  settlement  of  Pompey,  after  the
Mithridatic  war  in  b.c.  64.  It  now  consisted  of  five  parts,
Cilicia,  Aspera  and  Campestris,  Pisidia,  Isauria,  Lycaonia.
But  to  these  had  been  added,  temporarily,  three  “dioceses”
in  Phrygia — Laodicea,  Apamea,  and  Synnada — and  the  island
of  Cyprus,  after  its  reduction  by  Cato  in  b.c.  58.  The  pro-
vince thus  contained  a population  some  of  whom,  not  long
before,  had  been  addicted  to  piracy  and  brigandage.  They
had,  indeed,  been  to  a great  extent  civilized,  or  at  any  rate
forced  to  refrain  from  their  old  way  of  life,  by  forty  years  of

X

INTRODUCTION

Roman  administration ; but  sudden  returns  to  old  habits
were  by  no  means  unlikely  or  unknown,  and  the  mountain
district  of  Amanus  especially  contained  robber  tribes  likely
to  cause  trouble,  and  for  victories  over  whom  Cicero  so  long
expected  a triumph.  His  year  of  office,  however,  with  this
exception,  passed  off  quietly.  He  had  been  alarmed  when
starting  for  it  by  the  report  that  the  Parthians — after  their
victory  over  Crassus  in  b.c.  53 — were  on  the  point  of  in-
vading the  neighbouring  province  of  Syria,  and  might,  if  they
succeeded  there,  attack  his  own  province.  Even  if  this
latter  did  not  happen,  he  would  be  bound,  he  thought,  to
go  to  the  assistance  of  Bibulus  in  Syria,  if  he  were  hard
pressed.

We  shall  see  in  the  letters  how  these  fears  were  falsified,
and  how — with  the  one  exception  of  the  short  campaign  on
Amanus — Cicero  was  engaged  mostly  in  the  more  peaceful
duty  of  holding  the  assizes  {conventus)  in  the  head  towns  of
the  several  districts  in  his  province.  The  letters,  however,
give  us  the  most  detailed  account  we  possess
^ T of  the  staff  of  a provincial  governor,  and  of
m the  ProvinTey  ^he  conditions  in  which  he  and  they  per-
formed their  functions,  and  the  pressure  put
upon  them  to  use  their  powers  in  the  interests  of  the  rich
men  at  Rome,  who  made  their  profit  by  provincial  loans  at
exorbitant  interest.  Among  such  men  we  are  rather  sur-
prised to  find  Pompey  and  M.  Brutus,  the  latter  being
especially  usurious  and  urgent.  Cicero’s  staff  consisted  of
four  legati — his  brother  Quintus,  L.  Tullius,  C.  Pomptinus,
who  had  been  a praetor  in  Cicero’s  consulship,  and  had
since  distinguished  him  against  the  Allobroges,  and  Marcus
Anneius ; his  quaestor,  L.  Mescinius  Rufus ; his  secretary,

M.  Tullius;  and  the  usual  number  of prcBfecti  named  by  the
proconsul,  sometimes  as  a compliment  and  sometimes  for  *
actual  service,  and  other  officials  such  as  interpreter,  marshal,
lictors,  etc.  He  was  also  accompanied  by  his  son  and  nephew,
with  their  tutor,  besides  freedmen  and  slaves.  Among  the
freedmen  the  chief  place  in  his  favour  was  held  by  Tiro,  who
afterwards  collected  and  edited  the  letters.  The  progress  of
this  large  company  lasted  nearly  three  months.  It  included
a stay  of  some  ten  days  at  Athens,  where  Cicero  renewed  his
acquaintance  with  many  of  the  philosophical  professors,  and

INTRODUCTION

XJ

was  ended,  as  far  as  sea  voyaging  was  concerned,  at  Ephesus.
The  actual  province  was  entered  at  Laodicea  on  the  31st  of
July,  though  deputations  of  various  sorts  met  him  at  Ephesus
with  representations  of  certain  grievances  awaiting  reform  in
Cilicia.  It  is  a significant  comment  upon  the  heavy  burden
that  these  progresses  inflicted  on  the  provinces,  that  Cicero
continually  boasts  of  the  fact  that  his  staff  were  contented
with  the  provision  supplied  by  the  exchequer,  and  made  no
requisition  upon  the  towns  through  which  they  past,  even  to
the  extent  allowed  by  the  Julian  law.  Whether  this  was  as
completely  the  case  as  Cicero  believed  at  the  time,  appears
to  have  been  somewhat  more  doubtful  to  him  later  on  ; but
there  seems  no  question  that,  on  the  whole,  his  staff  be-
haved well.

The  letters  from  Cilicia  are  in  some  respects  less  interest-
ing than  those  of  an  earlier  and  later  period.
Letters  to  Appius  There  are  several  very  long  ones  to  his  pre-
Claudius.  decessor,  Appius  Claudius,  which  an  evident

want  of  sincerity  makes  rather  tiresome.
Appius  had  been  an  extortionate  and  oppressive  governor :
that  Cicero  shews  in  his  confidential  letters  to  Atticus  to
have  been  his  opinion ; and  he  certainly  interfered  to  pre-
vent some  of  the  cities  from  incurring  the  expense  of  send-
ing laudatory  embassies  to  Rome  to  support  him  in  his
claim  of  a triumph,  and  when  accused  of  extortion  by
Dolabella.  But  for  some  reason  or  other  Cicero  was  anxious
to  stand  well  with  Appius,  and  these  elaborate  letters —
which  begin  by  expressing  a sore  feeling  at  Appius  having
avoided  meeting  him  when  entering  the  province — are
devoted  to  explaining  away  his  action  as  to  the  embassies,
and  reconciling  it  with  his  somewhat  fulsome  expressions  of
friendship.  Later  on  he  has  also  to  explain  away  the  fact
that,  just  at  the  time  that  Dolabella  was  beginning  the
prosecution  of  Appius,  he  was  married  to  Cicero’s  own
daughter.  The  result  is  a number  of  letters  evidently
written  under  considerable  embarrassment,  and  altogether
wanting  in  sincerity  or  spontaneity.  The  same  may  be
almost  said  of  two  of  the  three  letters  to  Cato
Letters  to  Cato.  (CCXXXVIIandCCLXXXVII).  Theformer
of  these  is  a very  fine  composition,  and  gives
a graphic  account  of  Cicero’s  proceedings ; but  it  is  a state

Xll

INTRODUCTION

paper  rather  than  a private  letter  ; and  the  latter  is  an
elaborate  attempt  to  conceal — what  yet  is  plain  in  every
line — Cicero’s  soreness  at  Cato’s  opposition  to  the  sup-
plication which  he  had  got  his  friends  to  propose  in  the
senate  on  receipt  of  his  despatch  detailing  his  successes  in
Amanus.  It  is  therefore  stiff  and  frigid.  The  letters  to
Atticus  of  this  period  have  many  of  the  characteristics  of
the  others,  but  they  too  seem  to  suffer  from  lack  of  interest-
ing matter,  and  the  imperfect  communication  with  the  centre
of  affairs  at  Rome.  Endless  reiteration  of  his  desire  that
Atticus  should  exert  his  influence  to  prevent  the  extension
of  the  proconsular  government  beyond  his  year,  mixed  with
complacent  accounts  of  his  military  achievements  and  the
purity  of  his  administration,  rather  pall  after  a time.  But
there  is  one  very  significant  incident,  fully  detailed  in
Letters  CCXLIX  and  CCLI,  which  throws  a lurid  light
upon  the  transactions  of  capitalists  at  Rome,  and  the  un-
scrupulous support  which  they  often  got  from  provincial
governors.

When  Cicero  arrived  in  his  province  he  heard  that  a
certain  Scaptius,  holding  office  as  prcefectus
The  affair  of  the  under  his  predecessor  Appius,  had  been  at
Salaminians.  Salamis,  in  Cyprus,  with  a squadron  of
cavalry,  which  he  had  employed  to  coerce
the  town  councillors  to  pay  a large  sum  of  money,  with
forty-eight  per  cent,  interest,  which  had  been  lent  them  some
years  before.  He  had  gone  the  length  of  shutting  up  the
councillors  in  their  council  chamber  so  long,  that  some  of
them  had  actually  died  from  starvation.  Cicero  immediately
ordered  the  squadron  of  cavalry  to  quit  Cyprus,  and  when
applied  to  by  Scaptius  refused  to  appoint  him  a prcefectus ^
on  the  ground  that  he  had  made  it  a rule  not  to  appoint
any  man  prcefectus  who  was  carrying  on  financial  business
within  the  province.  He  found,  however,  that  Scaptius
was  being  backed  by  M.  Brutus,  and  for  the  sake  of  the
latter  he  undertook  to  see  that  the  Salaminians  paid  the
amount  of  their  just  debt,  but  only  with  the  legal  (com-
pound) interest  at  twelve  per  cent.,  to  which  he  had
declared  in  his  “edict”  that  interest  recoverable  in  his
court  was  to  be  confined.  The  Salaminians  offered  that
amount,  which  Scaptius  refused.  Cicero  thereupon  declined

INTRODUCTION

Xlll

to  interfere  any  farther,  and  therefore  Scaptius,  not  having
now  any  official  power  at  his  back,  could  not  get  the  money.
But  soon  afterwards  Cicero  discovered,  to  his  surprise,  that
the  real  creditor  was  M.  Brutus  himself,  who  all  along  had
been  writing  in  an  arrogant  and  offensive  tone.  Cicero,
however,  stuck  to  his  point : he  would  order  the  payment
with  twelve  per  cent,  interest,  but  not  with  forty-eight  per
cent.  Whether  Atticus  was  unacquainted  with  the  true
facts,  or  was  overawed  by  the  high  position  of  Brutus,  at
any  rate  he  seems  to  have  himself  urged  Cicero  to  gratify  the
latter.  It  is  not  a dignified  position  for  Brutus,  the  philo-
sopher and  patriot.

But  if  Cicero’s  letters  from  his  province  are  not  quite  up
to  some  others  in  interest,  one  of  his  corre-
M.  Cselius  Rufus,  spondents  has  left  us  some  very  lively  and
piquant  descriptions  of  affairs  at  Rome  during
Cicero’s  absence.  This  is  M.  Caelius  Rufus.  He  had  pro-
mised to  keep  Cicero  posted  in  all  political  and  social  affairs,
and,  to  do  so,  had  employed  some  clerks  to  collect  and  write
out  for  his  benefit  a kind  of  gazette  of  news  and  scandals,
which  he  supplemented  by  a good  many  letters  of  his  own
writing.  As  specimens  of  style  and  Latinity  they  do  not
reach  a high  standard,  but  as  depicting  the  character  of  an
unscrupulous  man  about  town,  who  also  had  political  am-
bitions and  some  cleverness — fairly  representative  of  the
younger  men  of  the  revolutionary  period — they  possess  great
value.  M.  C^lius  Rufus,  born  in  b.c.  82,  the  son  of  a rich
negociator,  had  in  early  youth  been  placed  by  his  father
under  the  patronage  of  Cicero  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of
oratory  and  public  affairs.  After  having  also  been  in
the  province  of  Africa  on  the  staff  of  Q.  Pompeius  Rufus
(b.c.  61),  he  began  to  seek  political  advancement  in  the
usual  way,  by  prosecuting  a prominent  personage,  C.  An-
tonins, for  connivance  with  Catiline  and  malversation  in
Macedonia,  and  secured  his  condemnation,  though  defended
by  Cicero  himself.  Thus  Caslius,  who  had  himself  been  a
friend  of  Catiline’s,  and  suspected  of  having  been  involved
in  his  guilt,  seems  now  to  have  taken  sides  with  the  Optimates.
His  official  career  begins  with  the  quaestorship  in  b.c.  58  or
57,  but  he  could  go  no  farther  till  his  tribuneship  of  b.c.  52,
when  he  supported  the  cause  of  Milo.  In  the  interval  he

XIV

INTRODUCTION

had  been  himself  accused  of  vis  by  a certain  Sempronius
Atratinus,  instigated,  it  is  said,  by  the  notorious  Clodia,
with  whom  he  had  long  been  maintaining  an  intrigue,  but
who  now  affirmed  that  he  had  attempted  to  poison  her.
Cicero’s  speech  in  his  defence  (b.c.  56)  is  extant.  The  vin-
dication of  his  character  there  put  forward  contains  an  ac-
knowledgment of  his  wild  and  licentious  youth.  But  Cicero
believed  in  his  reformation  and  in  his  political  ability,  en-
joyed his  wit,  his  reckless  daring,  and  his  taste  for  literature,
and  looked  forward  to  his  support  of  the  Optimates  as  likely
to  be  of  great  value.  The  letters  will  best  shew  the  charac-
ter of  the  man,  and  how  Cicero’s  expectations  were  deceived.
When  Cicero  returned  to  Rome  he  found  that  Caelius  had
already  made  up  his  mind  to  take  the  side  of  Caesar,  openly
avowing  that  in  a civil  war  the  only  principle  was  to  choose
the  stronger  side.  He  was  employed  by  Caesar  in  North
Italy  and  Spain  in  b.c.  49,  from  which  countries  he  wrote,
urging  Cicero  to  follow  his  example.  He  was  rewarded  by
the  praetorship  of  b.c.  48.  A single  letter  after  that  ’ (March,
B.c.  48)  foreshadows  the  catastrophe.  Caelius  had  become
disgusted  with  the  Caesarian  party,  in  which  he  found  that
he  was  to  play  only  a subordinate  part.  Gains  Trebonius
was  his  superior  as  prcetor  urbanus^  and  the  revolutionary
programme,  to  which  he  had  trusted  for  the  relief  of  his  em-
barrassments, was  not  being  carried  out.  He  tried  to  use
his  authority  as  praetor  to  relieve  the  debtors,  who  had
received  only  partial  relief  under  Caesar’s  law,  and  when
forcibly  suspended  from  his  office  by  the  consul,  he  left
Rome  in  hopes  of  stirring  up  the  cities  of  Italy  to  a fresh
revolution.  There  he  acted  for  a while  with  Milo,  who  had
ventured  into  Italy  to  secure  by  arms  the  restitutio  in  m-
tegrum  which  Caesar  had  refused  him.  Both  failed  and  both
perished  within  a short  time  of  each  other.  His  name  never
occurs  in  the  correspondence  again.

When  Cicero  reached  the  walls  of  Rome  on  the  4th  of
January,  b.c.  49,  on  his  return  from  his  province,  the  civil
war  was  all  but  begun.  He  came,  indeed,  well  knowing  that
Caesar’s  demand — to  hold  his  province  and  army  till  after
his  election  to  his  second  consulship — was  threatening  the

Vol.  iii.,  Letter  CCCCVII.

INTRODUCTION

XV

Cicero’s  period
of  hesitation,
January  to  June,
B.c.  49,
pp.  234  sqq.

acter  of  their

public  peace.  But  his  absence  from  Italy  for  a year  and  a
half  had  prevented  his  having  a clear  grasp
of  the  situation.  He  seems  not  to  have  real-
ized how  much  Pompey’s  prestige  had  fallen,
and  how  much  Caesar’s  position  had  im-
proved. The  Optimates — strong  in  rank
and  wealth,  and,  on  the  whole,  in  the  char-
partisans — were  talking  loudly  of  coercing
Caesar  if  he  resisted  in  arms  : but  they  were  divided,  ill  fur-
nished with  soldiers,  and,  as  it  turned  out,  without  a leader
capable  of  forcing  them  to  submit  to  discipline  and  the  sur-
render of  private  interests  to  those  of  the  party.  On  the
other  side,  Caesar  had  a large  army  of  tried  veterans,  devoted
to  him,  and  not  (as  his  enemies  fondly  believed)  disaffected
and  ready  to  leave  him.  He  had  accumulated  vast  wealth
by  the  plunder  of  Gaul,  and  had  used  it  to  purchase  the
support  of  many  men  of  ability  at  Rome.  He  had  few
scruples,  and  was  prepared  to  take  instant  advantage  of  any
handle  given  him  by  the  mistakes  of  his  opponents.  Such
an  opportunity  was  presented  to  him,  only  three  days  after
Cicero’s  arrival,  by  the  forcible  expulsion  of  the  tribunes
who  vetoed  his  recall.  He  could  now  plead  that  he  was
entering  Italy  in  defence  of  the  constitutional  rights  of
the  tribunes ; and  he  did  so  at  once.  Cicero  at  first  had
no  hesitation  in  taking  part  with  the  magistrates  against
an  invader  of  Italy.  He  accepted  as  his  share  in  the
defence  the  district  of  Capua  and  the  shore  of  Campania.
But  in  a few  days  this  confidence  was  rudely  shaken.
Pompey  left  Rome,  followed  by  the  consuls  and  other
magistrates  : it  became  clear  that  Pompey  had  no  plan
ready,  and  no  means  of  collecting  an  adequate  force.
Moreover,  Cicero’s  own  wish  for  a pacification  between  the
two  leaders  was  scouted  by  the  so-called  constitutional
party,  who,  crowding  Pompey’s  quarters  at  Luceria,  talked
loudly  of  another  proscription  and  confiscation  after  the
model  of  Sulla.  Before  long,  while  Caesar  was  rapidly
seizing  the  towns  in  Picenum,  and  taking  over  the  garrisons
commanded  by  Pompeian  officers,  Pompey  himself  had
made  his  way  to  Brundisium,  and  shewed  that  he  meant  to
abandon  Italy,  and  trust  to  his  influence  in  the  East  to  col-
lect a vast  armament  of  men  and  ships,  with  which  he  would

II.  b

XVI

INTRODUCTION

return  as  a conqueror  to  Italy,  to  destroy  the  party  of  his
enemy.  He  sailed  from  Brundisium  on  the  i yth  of  March.

In  these  circumstances  Cicero,  who  had  soon  resigned
all  active  participation  in  the  controversy,  and  ceased  even
nominally  to  command  in  Campania,  went  through  months
of  painful  hesitation  and  distress.  Hardly  any  part  of  the
correspondence  is  more  painful  to  read.  He  was  swayed
by  various  motives — personal  affection  for  Pompey,  con-
viction that  his  was  the  patriotic  side,  sensitiveness  as  to
what  would  be  said  of  himself  by  the  Optimates  generally,  and
dread  of  his  humiliating  position  if  the  Pompeians  eventually
triumphed — all  these  considerations  were  drawing  him  to
Pompey,  first  at  Brundisium,  and  afterwards  in  Epirus.  On
the  other  hand,  he  had  strong  motives  for  staying  where  he
was.  Among  them — we  must  reluctantly  confess — was  down-
right fear  of  being  on  the  losing  side.  If  Csesar  would  only
fail,  as  he  seemed  for  a moment  to  be  doing  in  Rome  and
then  in  Spain,  Cicero’s  duty  would  then  be  so  clear!  If
Pompey  had  but  shewn  more  resolution,  and  some  intention
and  ability  to  stop  Caesar’s  victorious  progress  1 There  is
no  doubt  that  Cicero  would  have  been  glad  enough  to  have
taken  the  Pompeian  side  at  once,  if  he  had  dared.  At  the
same  time  he  genuinely  hated  civil  war,  and  clung  to  the
hope  that  he  might  do  something  towards  a pacification,  if
he  did  not  commit  himself  too  deeply.  He  was  also  honestly
alarmed  and  disgusted  by  the  “ Lucerian  talk  ” of  the  Pom-
peians— their  threats  of  confiscation  and  proscription,  of
which  he  was  constantly  informed,  and  which  contrasted
badly  with  Caesar’s  magnanimity  to  the  members  of  the
opposite  party  who  fell  into  his  hands.  With  constitutional
right,  joined  to  incompetence  and  cruelty,  on  the  one  side,
and  constitutional  wrong,  joined  to  ability,  vigour,  and  actual
clemency,  on  the  other,  which  was  he  to  choose?  The
violence  of  the  constitutionalists  might  prove  not  to  be  mere
bluster  and  talk  : the  leniency  of  Caesar  might  be  assumed  for
a time  and  might  give  place  with  success  to  violence  and  blood-
shed. In  either  case  what  was  there  but  ruin  and  disaster
to  expect  ? Torn  by  these  conflicting  considerations  Cicero
spent  nearly  six  unhappy  months  at  his  seaside  villas.  One
thing  he  did  resolve  upon  and  stick  to — he  would  not  give
the  sanction  of  his  presence  in  the  senate,  in  spite  of  Caesar’s

INTRODUCTION

XVll

persuasions,  urged  personally  in  an  interview  on  the  28th  of
March  (see  p.  353).  Still  through  April  and  May  he  con-
tinued to  be  torn  by  the  same  doubts,  the  same  balancing
of  duty  and  fear.  Sardinia  and  Sicily  were  already  in  the
hands  of  the  Caesarians ; Caesar’s  hold  on  the  West  now
depended  on  his  success  in  Spain  and  in  the  siege  of
Marseilles.  Accordingly,  Cicero  waits  eagerly  for  news  from
Spain  to  decide  him  whether  he  can  safely  join  Pompey  in
Epirus.  Another  alternative,  that  of  retiring  to  Malta  or
some  place  remote  from  the  war,  was  not,  I think,  ever
seriously  entertained  by  him,  though  often  mentioned.  It  is
not  till  June  that  he  finally  decides  on  going  to  Pompey.
The  last  letter  which  we  have  on  this  subject  is  dated  the
19th  of  May,  in  which  he  is  still  undecided.  On  the  7th  of
June  he  starts.  What  had  decided  him  in  that  interval?
We  cannot  be  sure : but  it  seems  to  coincide  with  Caesar’s
difficulties  on  the  Segre  near  Ilerda,  which  we  know  were
made  much  of  at  Rome,  and  were  followed  by  the  crossing  of
many  waverers  to  Pompey’s  camp.^  Three  years  afterwards,
when  writing  an  account  of  this  to  a friend  (CCCCLXXXVI,
ad  Fam.  vi.  6),  he  says  that  he  “ went  with  his  eyes  open  to  a
ruin  which  he  clearly  foresaw,  overpowered  by  the  feeling  of
duty,  or,  if  you  will,  by  regard  for  the  remarks  of  the  boni^
or  pure  shame.”  He  says  nothing  of  Caesar’s  danger.  But
we  have  to  reflect  that  the  motives  which  he  mentions  had
been  equally  in  existence  during  all  the  previous  months,
and  something  is  required  to  account  for  the  somewhat
sudden  resolution  at  the  end.  Of  course,  in  a time  of  such
disruption,  hesitation  was  natural.  As  M.  Boissier  says :
“ Questions  do  not  present  themselves  to  the  eyes  of  con-
temporaries with  the  same  clearness  as  to  those  of  pos-
terity.” We  cannot  wonder  at  Cicero  having  hesitated :
but  the  process  of  throwing  dust  in  the  eyes  of  both  parties
till  he  has  made  up  his  mind  does  not  make  pleasant  read-
ing. The  third  volume  of  these  letters  will  find  Cicero,
after  taking  the  plunge,  by  no  means  satisfied  with  the  re-
sult. All  his  worst  fears  as  to  the  state  of  things  in  Pompey’s

^ Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  53.  The  fall  of  Curio  in  Africa,  and  the  consequent
hold  of  the  Pompeians  on  that  province,  did  not  occur  till  two  months
later.

XVlll

INTRODUCTION

camp  were  confirmed,  and  all  his  hopes  of  Caesar’s  failure
in  Spain  falsified;  and  after  Pharsalia  we  have  to  follow
him  again  through  another  year  of  doubt  and  distress.  Truly
the  paths  of  the  double-minded  are  hard.

)

CICERO’S  LETTERS

CLXXXII  (F  III,  2)

From  May  in  this  year  Cicero  was  absent  from  Italy  till  November,
B.c.  50,  as  proconsul  of  Cilicia — which,  to  his  chagrin,  he  was  obliged
to  undertake  owing  to  the  regulation  in  Pompey’s  law  {de
B.c.  51.  Coss.,  provinciis)  of  the  previous  year  enforcing  a five  years’
M.  Claudius  interval  between  consulship  or  prsetorship  and  a province,
Se^ius  Sul-  providing  for  the  interim  by  drawing  on  the  ex-

picius  Rufus.  consuls  and  ex-praetors  of  previous  years  who  had  not  had
provinces.  He  is  informed  by  letters  of  what  is  going  on
in  Rome,  where  the  burning  question  was,  should  Caesar  stay  in  Gaul
till  consul-designate  for  B.c.  48,  or  come  home  to  stand  for  the  consul-
ship as  a private  citizen  ? From  the  necessity  of  making  his  professio
in  person  Caesar  had  been  by  name  exempted  in  Pompey’s  law,  but  the
senate  nevertheless  (or  a party  in  it)  hoped  to  make  him  do  so  by  its
, authority,  and  Pompey  played  fast  and  loose  with  the  question,  though
gradually  coming  round  to  the  side  of  the  senate.  Casar  believed  that
he  could  not  safely  come  home  as  a privatus,  as  his  enemies  would  ruin
him  by  a prosecution.  There  are  no  speeches  or  writings  during  this  year.

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (IN  CILICIA)

Rome  (before  May)

Though,  contrary  to  my  own  wishes,  and  to  my  surprise,  it
has  turned  out  that  I am  obliged  to  go  to  a province  with
imperium^  in  the  midst  of  many  various  anxieties  and
reflexions  one  consolation  occurs  to  me,  that  you  could  have
no  more  friendly  successor  than  I am  to  you,  nor  I take  over
a province  from  anyone  more  inclined  to  hand  it  over  in
gopd  order  and  free  from  difficulties.  / And  if  you,  too,  enter-
tain the  same  expectation  as  to  my  goodwill  towards  you,
you  will  certainly  never  find  yourself  mistaken.  In  the  name
of  our  intimate  union  and  of  your  own  extraordinary  kind-
ness, I again  and  again  beg  and  beseech  you  most  earnestly,  in
whatever  particulars  shall  lie  in  your  power — and  there  are
ery  many  in  which  you  will  be  able  to  do  so — to  provide  and

II.  E

2

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

take  measures  for  my  interests./  You  see  that  by  the  decree
of  the  senate  I am  forced  to  take  a province.  If  you  will,  as
far  as  you  have  the  power,  hand  it  over  to  me  as  free
as  possible  from  difficulties,  you  will  greatly  facilitate  what  I
may  call  the  running  of  my  official  course.  I What  it  may  be
in  your  power  to  do  in  that  direction  I leave  to  you  ; I con-
fine myself  to  earnestly  begging  you  to  do  what  occurs  to
you  as  being  in  my  interest.  I would  have  written  at  greater
length  to  you,  had  either  such  kindness  as  yours  looked  for
a longer  address,  or  the  friendship  between  us  admitted  of  it,
or  had  it  not  been  that  the  matter  spoke  for  itself  and  required
no  words.  I would  have  you  convinced  of  this — that  if  I
shall  be  made  aware  that  my  interests  have  been  consulted
by  you,  you  will  yourself  receive  from  that  circumstance  a
great  and  abiding  satisfaction.  [Farewell.]

li

CLXXXIII  (A  V,  I)
TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Minturn^,  May

Yes,  I saw  well  enough  what  your  feelings  were  as  I parted
from  you ; what  mine  were  I am  my  own  witness.  This
makes  it  all  the  more  incumbent  on  you  to  prevent  an
additional  decree  being  passed,  so  that  this  mutual  regret  of
ours  may  not  last  more  than  a year.  As  to  Annius  Satur
ninus,  your  measures  are  excellent.  As  to  the  guarantee
pray,  during  your  stay  at  Rome,  give  it  yourself.  You  will
find  several  guarantees  on  purchase,  such  as  those  of  the
estates  of  Memmius,  or  rather  of  Attilius.  As  to  Oppius,
that  is  exactly  what  I wished,  and  especially  your  having
engaged  to  pay  him  the  800  sestertia  (about  ^^6,400),  which
I am  determined  shall  be  paid  in  any  case,  even  if  I have
to  borrow  to  do  so,  rather  than  wait  for  the  last  day  of
getting  in  my  own  debts.^

These  brief  sentences  are  in  answer  to  statements  in  the  letter  of
Atticus  which  Cicero  in  answering.  In  the  absence  of  that  letter  and

A V,  I

TO  ATTICUS

3

I now  come  to  that  last  line  of  your  letter  written  crossways,
in  which  you  give  me  a word  of  caution  about  your  sister/  The
facts  of  the  matter  are  these.  On  arriving  at  my  place  at
Arpinum,  my  brother  came  to  see  me,  and  our  first  subject
of  conversation  was  yourself,  and  we  discussed  it  at  great
length.  After  this  I brought  the  conversation  round  to  what
you  and  I had  discussed  at  Tusculum,  on  the  subject  of  your
sister.  I never  saw  anything  so  gentle  and  placable  as  my
brother  was  on  that  occasion  in  regard  to  your  sister : so
much  so,  indeed,  that  if  there  had  been  any  cause  of  quarrel
on  the  score  of  expense,  it  was  not  apparent.  So  much  for
that  day.  Next  day  we  started  from  Arpinum.  A country
festival  caused  Quintus  to  stop  at  Arcanum ; I stopped  at
Aquinum ; but  we  lunched  at  Arcanum.^  You  know  his
property  there.  When  we  got  there  Quintus  said,  in  the
kindest  manner,  “ Pomponia,  do  you  ask  the  ladies  in ; I
will  invite  the  men.”  ^ Nothing,  as  I thought,  could  be
more  courteous,  and  that,  too,  not  only  in  the  actual  words,
but  also  in  his  intention  and  the  expression  of  face.  But
she,  in  the  hearing  of  us  all,  exclaimed,  “ I am  only  a stranger
here ! ” The  origin  of  that  was,  as  I think,  the  fact  that

of  any  knowledge  of  the  business  referred  to,  we  cannot  fully  explain
them.  The  satisdatio  may  refer  either  to  a purchase  or  a sale  on
Cicero’s  part  : if  the  former  case,  it  means  a security  for  payment  of  the
purchase  money,  either  in  the  shape  of  a deposit  or  otherwise ; in  the
latter,  a guarantee  of  title.  Annius  Saturninus  is  presumed  to  be  a
freed  man  of  Annius  Milo’s,  with  whom  Cicero  may  have  had  dealings  for
his  patron.  The  satisdationes  of  the  Memmian  or  Attilian  estates  ”
are  quoted  as  models ; they  may  refer  to  the  sales  of  the  property  of
C.  Memmius,  condemned  for  ambitus  in  B.c.  54  [Q.  Fr.  iii.  2 ; iii.  8),
or  of  Sex.  Attilius  Serranus  (tr.  pi.  B.c.  57),  of  whose  sale  we  know
nothing.  Oppius  is  probably  C.  Oppius,  a friend  and  agent  of  Csesar,
and  the  debt  Cicero  is  determined  to  pay  is  a loan  from  Csesar.  The
word  aperuisti  is  peculiar  ; it  is  said  to  mean  in  regard  to  money,  “to
promise  to  pay  ” or  “ to  put  at  a man’s  order.”  In  Letter  CLXXXVI
he  expresses  the  same  meaning  by  exposuisti.

^ Pomponia,  wife  of  Quintus  Cicero.

Cicero  had  gone  round  by  Arpinum,  either  to  visit  his  own  villa  or
to  pick  up  Quintus  (who  was  going  with  him  as  legatus  to  Cilicia).
They  then  went  on  to  the  via  Latina  by  a cross  road.  Cicero  stayed  a
night  at  Aquinum  before  going  by  another  cross  road  to  Minturnse,  on
the  via  Appia.  Quintus,  however,  stopped  at  his  own  villa  of  Arcanum,
between  Arpinum  and  Minturnse,  where  they  both  stopped  for  the
prandium,  the  midday  meal.

^ Reading  (with  Tyrrell)  viros  for  puet'os.

4

CICERO'S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  ^T.  55

Statius  had  preceded  us  to  look  after  the  luncheon.  There-
upon Quintus  said  to  me,  “ There,  that ’s  what  I have  to
put  up  with  every  day  ! ” You  will  say,  “ Well,  what  does
that  amount  to  ? ” A great  deal ; and,  indeed,  she  had  irri-
tated even  me : her  answer  had  been  given  with  such  un-
necessary acrimony,  both  of  word  and  look.  I concealed
my  annoyance.  We  all  took  our  places  at  table  except  her.
However,  Quintus  sent  her  dishes  from  the  table,  which  she
declined.  In  short,  I thought  I never  saw  anything  better-
tempered  than  my  brother,  or  crosser  than  your  sister  : and
there  were  many  particulars  which  I omit  that  raised  my  bile
more  than  they  did  that  of  Quintus  himself.  I then  went  on
to  Aquinum ; Quintus  stopped  at  Arcanum,  and  joined  me
early  the  next  day  at  Aquinum.  He  told  me  that  she  had
refused  to  sleep  with  him,  and  when  on  the  point  of  leaving,
she  behaved  just  as  I had  seen  her.^  Need  I say  more?
You  may  tell  her  herself  that  in  my  judgment  she  shewed  a
marked  want  of  kindness  on  that  day.  I have  told  you  this
story  at  greater  length,  perhaps,  than  was  necessary,  to  con-
vince you  that  you,  too,  have  something  to  do  in  the  way  of
giving  her  instruction  and  advice.

There  only  remains  for  me  to  beg  you  to  complete  all  my
commissions  before  leaving  town ; to  give  Pomptinus  ^ a push,
and  make  him  start ; to  let  me  know  as  soon  as  you  have  left
town,  and  to  believe  that,  by  -heaven,  there  is  notWing  I love
and  find  more  pleasure  in  than  yourself.  I said  a most
affectionate  good-bye  to  that  best  of  men,  A.  Torquatus,  at
Minturnae,  to  whom  I wish  you  would  remark,  in  the  course
of  conversation,  that  I have  mentioned  him  in  my  letter.

’ Pomponia  was  not  going  to  Cilicia  with  Quintus.  She  had  come
with  him  as  far  as  Arcanum,  and  went  back  to  Arpinum.

^ C.  Pomptinus,  praetor  during  Cicero’s  consulship,  was  now  one  of
his  four  legati.  He  had  military  experience  in  a campaign  against  the
Allobroges,  and  Cicero  was  anxious  that  he  should  join  him  promptly.

A V,

2

TO  ATTICUS

5

CLXXXIV  (A  V,  2)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Pompeii,  io  May

On  the  loth  of  May,  the  date  of  this  letter,  I am  about  to
start  from  my  Pompeian  villa,  intending  to  sta3r  to^iight
with  Pontius^  in  his  villa  near  Trebula.  After  that  I mean
to  make  regular  days’  journeys  without  any  farther  delay.*
While  in  my  Cuman  villa  I was  much  gratified  by  a visit
from  our  friend  Hortensius.*  When  he  asked  me  whether
he  could  do  anything  for  me,  I answered  in  general  terms
about  everything  else ; but  I begged  him  in  particular  to
prevent,  as  far  as  in  him  lay,  any  extension  of  my  provincial
government.  In  this  please  confirm  him,  and  tell  him  that
I was  much  gratified  by  his  visit,  and  by  his  promise  to  do
this  for  me,  and  anything  else  I wanted  besides.  I have
strongly  urged  the  same  on  our  friend  Furnius,  who,  I see,
will  be  a tribune  for  next  year.'^  I had  a kind  of  miniature
Rome  in  my  Cuman  villa : there  was  such  a crowd  of  people
in  the  neighbourhood.^  In  the  midst  of  all  this  our  friend
“Rufio,”  seeing  that  he  was  being  watched  by  Vestorius,
tricked  that  gentleman  by  a ruse  de  guerre.  For  he  never
came  near  me.  “What !”  you  will  say,  “when  Hortensius

^ L.  Pontius  Aquila,  who  afterwards  lost  his  life  in  the  campaign  at
Mutina  (b.c.  43).  We  shall  find  Cicero  staying  there  again,  as  well  as
Terentia.

^ Cicero  was  going  to  Brundisium  by  the  Appia^  but  both  his  visit  to
his  Pompeian  villa  and  this  other  to  Pontius  in  the  Trebulanus  ager
were  considerable  deviations  from  it,  one  to  the  south,  the  other  to  the
north.

^ The  last  time  Cicero  ever  saw  his  great  rival  in  the  law  courts,  with,
as  well  as  against,  whom  he  had  so  often  pleaded.  Hortensius  died  just
as  Cicero  was  returning  from  Cilicia.

* That  is,  he  would  enter  on  his  office  loth  December  of  the  present
year,  and  so  would  have  a voice  in  the  senate  as  to  the  arrangements  of
the  provinces.

^ April  and  May  were  the  fashionable  months,  the  season,  for  the
Campanian  coast.

6

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  MT.  55

came,  in  spite  of  being  in  weak  health  and  living  at  such  a
distance  and  being  the  great  Hortensius,  and  such  a crowd
of  people  besides — do  you  mean  to  say  that  /le  didn’t  come  ?
So  you  didn’t  see  the  fellow  at  all?”  How  could  I help
seeing  him,  when  my  road  lay  through  the  mart  of  Puteoli  ?
There  as  he  was,  I presume,  doing  some  business,  I said
“ How  d’ye  do  ? ” to  him  ; and  on  a later  occasion  I bade
him  good-bye  when  he  came  out  of  his  own  villa  and  asked
me  whether  he  could  do  anything  for  me.  A man  like
that  is  one  to  reckon  ungrateful  ? Doesn’t  he  rather  deserve
commendation  for  not  exerting  himself  to  get  a hearing  ? ^

But  to  return  to  my  subject.  Do  not  imagine  that  any-
thing can  console  me  for  this  gigantic  bore,  except  the
hope  that  it  will  not  last  longer  than  a year.  Many  will
not  believe  me  in  this,  because  they  judge  from  the  habit  of
others.  You,  who  know  the  truth,  pray  use  every  exertion  ;
I mean,  when  the  time  comes  for  the  question  to  be  mooted.
As  soon  as  you  return  from  Epirus,  I beg  you  to  write  about
public  affairs  and  tell  me  anything  you  may  detect.  For
satisfactory  intelligence  has  not  reached  as  far  as  this  as  to
how  Caesar  took  the  senatorial  resolution  being  written  out ; ^
and  there  was  also  a rumour  about  the  Transpadani,  that
they  had  been  bidden  to  elect  quattuorviri?  If  that  is  the
case  I fear  some  great  disturbances.  But  I shall  learn
something  from  Pompey.

^ Of  this  sort  of  episode,  or  jesting  anecdote,  it  is  difficult  to  see  the
point  without  fuller  knowledge  of  the  circumstances.  We  learn  from
Letter  CCXXIII  that  C.  Sempronius  Rufus  (whose  name  Cicero  jest-
ingly alters  to  the  servile  one  of  Rufio)  had  some  controversy  with  Ves-
torius  as  to  money  which  he  owed  him,  or  property  which  he  held,  as
Vestorius  alleged,  illegally.  He  therefore  avoided  any  meeting,  and
Cicero  hints  laughingly  that  it  was  a kindness  to  him  (Cicero),  as  it
saved  him  from  the  necessity  of  hearing  the  case  as  arbitrator.

If  a decree  was  passed  in  the  senate  but  vetoed  by  a tribune,  it  was
called  not  a senaius  consultu?n,  but  an  auctoritas ; if  the  senate  de-
termined to  put  their  resolution  on  record,  it  was  written  out  {perscripta)^
otherwise  it  dropped  altogether.  In  Letter  CCXXII  there  is  a specimen
of  such  an  auctoritas.  This  referred,  like  those  we  shall  hear  of  later,
to  a resolution  of  the  senate  that  Caesar  should  resign  his  province  before
standing  for  the  consulship,  moved  by  the  consul  Marcellus.

•'*  That  is,  that  the  towns  north  of  the  Padus  should  become  municipia^
i.e.,  have  the  full  Roman  civitas,  whereas  they  at  present  had  only  the
ius  Latii.  This  was  the  firk  measure  carried  by  Caesar  on  his  election

A V,  2,  3

TO  ATTICUS

7

CLXXXV  (A  V,  3)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

The  Trebulanum  of  Pontius,  ii  May

On  the  loth  of  May  I arrived  at  his  Trebulanum  to  stay
with  Pontius.  There  two  letters  from  you  were  delivered  to
me,  dated  two  days  before.  On  that  same  day,  as  I was
leaving  my  Pompeian  villa,  I had  delivered  a letter  for  you
to  Philotimus  j nor  have  I at  present  anything  to  write  about.
Write  me  word  what  reports  there  are  about  politics,  I be-
seech you.  For  in  the  towns  I observe  that  there  is  much
alarm,  yet  for  the  most  part  it  is  mere  idle  gossip.  What
you  think  about  all  this,  and  when  the  crisis  will  come,
please  let  me  know.  What  letter  it  is  you  want  answered
I don’t  know  : for  I have  as  yet  received  none  except  the  two
delivered  to  me  at  Trebulanum,  of  which  the  one  contained
the  edict  of  P.  Licinius,’^  dated  7th  May,  the  other  an
answer  to  mine  from  Minturnae.  How  uneasy  I feel,  lest
there  should  have  been  something  more  important  than
usual  in  the  one  which  I haven’t  received,  and  to  which  you
want  an  answer  ! With  Lentulus  I will  bring  you  into  favour.
I like  Dionysius  much.  Your  Nicanor  serves  me  excellently.
Well,  I have  nothing  more  to  say,  and  day  is  breaking.  I
think  of  going  to  Beneventum  to-day.  By  disinterested
conduct  and  attention  to  business  I shall  take  care  to  satisfy
all  concerned.

At  the  house  of  Pontius,  Trebulanum,  ii  May.

to  the  consulship  at  the  end  of  B.  c.  49.  Quattuorviri  were  the  regular
annual  magistrates  of  a municipium^  duoviri  of  a colonia.

^ P.  Licinius  Crassus  Dives,  a jurisconsult  who  had  governed  Asia,
and  whose  “ edict  ” Cicero  perhaps  wanted  as  a model.

8

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  55

CLXXXVI  (A  V,  4)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Beneventum,  12  May

I ARRIVED  at  Beneventum  on  the  iith  of  May.  There  I
received  the  letter  which  in  your  previous  letter  (answered
by  me  the  same  day  from  Pontius’s  Trebulanum)  you  had
mentioned  having  sent.  And,  indeed,  I have  received  two
letters  from  you  at  Beneventum,  one  delivered  to  me  by
Funisulanus  early  in  the  morning,  and  a second  handed  to
me  by  my  secretary  Tullius.  I am  much  obliged  by  the
pains  you  have  taken  about  my  first  and  most  important
commission  : but  your  leaving  town  rather  damps  my  hopes.

As  to  the  man  you  mention,  I am  coming  round  in  that

direction,  not  that , but  we  are  forced  to  be  content  with

him  for  want  of  a better.  About  the  other  one,  of  whom
you  say  that  he  appeared  to  you  to  be  not  unsuitable — I am
afraid  my  daughter  could  not  be  persuaded,  and  you  admit
that  there  is  not  a pin  to  choose  between  them.  For  my
part,  I am  not  unreasonable ; but  you  will  be  away,  and  will
not,  therefore,  have  a hand  in  the  business  in  my  absence.
For  if  either  of  us  were  on  the  spot,  some  fairly  satisfactory
arrangement  might  be  made  with  Servius,  with  Servilia  to
back  him.  As  at  present  situated,  even  though  it  should  be
a thing  I like,  I don’t  see  how  I can  do  anything.^

Now  I come  to  the  letter  delivered  to  me  by  Tullius.

^ This  paragraph  refers  to  the  selection  of  a husband  for  Tullia.  She
had  been  left  a widow  in  B.c.  57  by  the  death  of  C.  Calpurnius  Piso,
and  her  betrothal  to  Furius  Crassipes  (b.c.  56)  had  either  not  ended  in  a
marriage,  or  the  marriage  had  been  quickly  dissolved.  The  two  suitors
now  under  consideration  are  P.  Cornelius  Dolabella  and  Servius  Sul-
picius  Rufus.  I have  translated  Schiitz’s  text,  ncc  me  absente  habebis
rei  rationem  and  Sci^io fieri probabile.  Professor  Tyrrell’s  emendations
seem  to  me  to  be  very  difficult.  I take  the  meaning  to  be  that  Cicero
thinks  that  Sulpicius  might  “do,”  with  Servilia’s  support;  perhaps
because  something  good  might  be  got  for  him  from  Coesar  (her  reputed
lover),  though  he  is  himself  inclining  to  Dolabella,  and  is  uneasy  at
the  negotiations  going  on  when  neither  himself  nor  Atticus  is  in  Rome,
Atticus  was  a great  friend  of  Servilia.

A V,  4

TO  ATTICUS

9

You  have  been  very  energetic  about  Marcellus.  Accord-
ingly, if  the  decree  has  passed  the  senate,  please  write  me
word  : but  if  not,  do  your  best  to  get  the  business  through ;
for  a grant  must  be  made  to  me,  as  also  to  Bibulus.^  I have
no  doubt  of  the  decree  of  the  senate  being  passed  without
difficulty,  especially  considering  that  it  is  a gain  to  the  people.
As  to  Torquatus,  excellent ! As  to  Mason  and  Ligur,  that
will  do  when  they  have  come.  As  to  the  request  of
Chaerippus : since  in  this  case  also  you  have  given  me  no
“ tip,”  ^ “ Bother  your  province  ! Must  I look  after  him

too  ? ” Yes  ; but  only  so  far  as  to  prevent  there  being  any
obstructive  “ debate  ! ” or  “ count ! ” in  the  senate.^  For  as

to  the  rest , however,  thank  you  for  speaking  to  Scrofa.^

As  to  what  you  say  about  Pomptinus,  I quite  agree.  For  the
upshot  is  that,  if  he  is  going  to  be  at  Brundisium  before  the
ist  of  June,  M.  Annius  and  L.  Tullius  ° need  not  have  been
so  much  hurried.  As  to  what  you  have  heard  from  Sicinius,^*

' Bibulus,  like  Cicero,  had  not  taken  a province  after  his  consulship,
and  was  now,  in  consequence  of  Pompey’s  law  and  the  decree  of  the
senate,  forced  to  draw  lots  for  one.  Syria  had  fallen  to  him,  where  there
were  rumours  of  a Parthian  invasion.  There  is  no  need,  I think,  to  read
alteram  htioxeconjicies{vf\lh.  Tyrrell):  the  additional  troops  and  the  money
grant  might  be  included  in  one  decree.  The  former  had  been  discussed
before  Cicero  left  Rome,  and  practically  assented  to  ; but  the  consul  Sul-
picius  had  made  difhculties,  and  Cicero  is  afraid  that  outside  influence
may  have  been  brought  to  bear  upon  senators  against  it.

^ Trpoffvevaiv,  “ a nod,”  to  shew  your  wish.  Chserippus  had  been  with
Quintus,  and  was  afterwards  in  Africa  with  Cornificius.  He  was  prob-
ably a Greek  secretary.

® If  the  magistrate  chose  he  could  put  a question  to  the  senate  to  be
voted  on  without  debate.  Such  business  would  be  usually  non-contentious
or  routine.  If  the  senators,  however,  thought  otherwise,  they  cried  “Con-
sule,”  t.e.,  ask  the  opinions  {sententice)  of  the  members.  If  he  gave  way,
speeches  might  follow,  and  the  matter  would  be  prolonged  perhaps
beyond  several  sittings  (which  always  ended  at  sunset).  The  cry  of
“ count  ” was  like  that  in  the  House  of  Commons,  demanding  that  those
present  should  be  counted,  to  see  whether  there  was  a quorum.  We  do
not  know  what  that  quorum  was,  except  in  certain  special  cases,  but  that
a fixed  number  is  mentioned  in  them  [e.g. , the  decree  de  Bacchanalibus)
seems  to  shew  that  business  was  often  done  with  less.

^ Cn.  Tremellius  Scrofa,  who  had  been  a judex  in  the  Verres  case,
seems  to  have  been  with  Cicero  for  a time  in  Cilicia.

’ Three  of  Cicero’s  four  legati,  the  fourth  being  his  brother  Quintus.

® Some  provision  in  the  edict  which  Cicero  meant  to  publish  in  his
province.

10

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  ^T.  55

I quite  assent,  provided  only  that  this  restriction  does  not
apply  to  anyone  who  has  done  me  a service.  But  I will
turn  the  matter  over,  for  I quite  approve  of  it  in  principle.
I will  let  you  know  what  I have  settled  as  to  the  plan  of  my
journey,  and  also  what  Pompey  means  to  do  about  the  five
prefects,  when  I have  learnt  it  from  himself.  As  to  Oppius,
you  have  acted  quite  rightly  in  having  assured  him  of  the
800  sestertia;  and  since  you  have  Philotimus  ^ with  you,
pray  see  the  business  through ; examine  the  account,  and,
as  you  love  me,  settle  it  before  leaving  town.^  You  will
have  relieved  me  of  a great  anxiety.

Now  I have  answered  all  your  letter  : but  stay  ! I almost
omitted  your  being  short  of  paper.  The  loss  is  mine,  if  for
lack  of  it  your  letter  to  me  is  curtailed.  Why,  you  cost
me  a couple  of  hundred  sesterces  : ^ though  how  stingy  I
am  in  this  particular  the  cramped  nature  of  this  page  shews
you  : while  in  return  I expect  from  you  a gazette  of  events,
rumours,  or  even  anything  you  know  for  certain  about
Caesar. Be  sure  you  give  a letter  to  Pomptinus,  as  well  as
to  others,  on  every  imaginable  topic.

' A freedman  of  Terentia’s,  who  seems  to  have  managed  her  business
affairs  for  her.

^ The  debt  to  Caesar.  See  Letter  CLXXXIII.

^ Two  hundred  sestertii  (about  £\  ioj.).  Others  read  sexcentas,  i.e.,
chartas.  I have  ventured  to  read  atifers^  instead  of  the  common  aiifer^
from  which  I think  no  satisfactory  sense  can  be  elicited.  Cicero,  in
answer  to  Atticus’s  remark  that  he  hadn’t  a good  stock  of  paper  by  him,
says  jestingly  that  he  is  sorry  he  is  so  hard  up,  but  he  is  the  same,  for
his  letters  to  Atticus  put  him  to  great  expense  in  paper.  He  (according
to  my  interpretation)  alludes  to  the  jest  again  at  the  end  of  Letter  CXCIX,
where  see  note,  p.  32.  Auferre^  “ swallow  up,”  “ absorb  ” ; cp.  i VeiT.
§ 31,  hi  ludi  dies  xvi  aufei'unt.

^ Therefore,  he  implies,  how  much  greater  must  your  expenditure  on
paper  be.

A V,  4,  5

TO  ATTICUS

1 1

CLXXXVII  (A  V,  5)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Venusia,  15  May

I HAVE  absolutely  nothing  to  say.  I have  neither  any
commission  for  you,  for  everything  has  been  arranged,  nor
anything  to  relate,  for  nothing  has  happened,  nor  is  there
any  room  for  jesting,  considering  my  numerous  anxieties.
Let  me  only  tell  you  that  I despatch  this  letter  on  the  15th
of  May  as  I am  starting  from  Venusia.  Now  on  this  day
I feel  sure  something  has  been  done  in  the  senate.^  There-
fore let  a letter  from  you  follow  us,  to  inform  us  not  only  of
all  actual  facts,  but  of  common  reports  also.  I shall  get  it
at  Brundisium.  For  it  is  there  that  my  plan  is  to  await
Pomptinus  up  to  the  day  you  mentioned  in  your  letter.^
I will  write  out  for  your  perusal  the  conversations  I have
with  Pompey  at  Tarentum  on  the  state  of  the  Republic ;
although  I wish  to  know  precisely  up  to  what  time  I can
write  to  you  safely,  that  is,  how  long  you  are  going  to  be  in
Rome,  so  that  I may  know  either  where  to  direct  my  letters
henceforth,  or  how  to  avoid  sending  them  to  no  purpose.
But  before  you  leave  town,  in  any  case  let  the  payment  of
the  20  sestertia  and  the  800  sestertia  be  put  straight.^  I beg
you  to  look  upon  this  as  of  all  concerns  the  most  important
and  most  urgent,  viz.,  that  I should  complete  with  your
assistance  what  I began  on  your  advice.

^ The  Ides  of  each  month  were  one  of  the  regular  meeting  days  of  the
senate.

“ I.e.^  the  1st  of  June  (p.  9).

^ The  debt  to  Caesar,  but  this  is  the  first  time  we  hear  of  the  smaller
sum  (20  sestertia).  It  is  suggested  that,  it  is  the  interest  due.  The
three  words  he  uses  in  connexion  with  it — aperuisti^  exposuistiy  ex-
plicatum  sit — are  certainly  odd.  I do  not  feel  satisfied  by  the  expedient
of  inserting  a de  after  them.  They  have  the  look  of  technical  business
expressions.  See  pp,  3 and  10.

12

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  /ET.  55

CLXXXVIII  (A  V,  6)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Tarentum,  18  May

I ARRIVED  at  Tarentum  on  the  i8th  of  May.  As  I had  de-
termined to  wait  for  Pomptinus,  I thought  the  most  con-
venient thing  was  to  spend  those  days  in  Pompey’s  society,
and  all  the  more  because  I saw  that  it  gave  him  pleasure,  for
he  has  actually  begged  me  to  give  him  my  company,  and
be  at  his  house  every  day ; and  this  I have  gladly  agreed
to  do.  For  I shall  get  many  notable  talks  with  him  on  the
Republic,  and  I shall  also  be  furnished  with  useful  hints  for
this  business  of  mine.^  But  I begin  now  to  be  briefer  in  writing
to  you,  because  I am  doubtful  as  to  whether  you  have  yet
started  from  Rome.  However,  during  my  uncertainty  as  to
that,  I shall  write  something  rather  than  allow  of  no  letter
from  me  reaching  you  as  long  as  it  is  possible  for  it  to  do  so.
And  yet  I have  no  commission  to  give  you,  or  anything  to
tell  you.  I have  given  you  all  my  commissions,  and  I pray
you  carry  them  fully  out  in  accordance  with  your  promise :

I will  tell  you  any  news  I hear.  There  is  one  thing  I shall
not  cease  to  urge  as  long  as  I think  you  are  in  town,  namely,
as  to  the  debt  to  Csesar,  that  you  will  leave  it  1 settled  and
done  with.  I am  eagerly  looking  for  a letter  from  you,  and
especially  that  I may  know  when  you  go  out  of  town.

i

^ The  government  of  Cilicia,  with  which  Pompey  had  much  to  do  j
during  his  war  with  the  pirates.  j

AV,  6,  7;  Fin,  3 TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS

CLXXXIX  (A  V,  7)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Tarentum,  21  May

Day  after  day,  or  rather  more  and  more  as  the  days  go  on,
I send  you  shorter  letters.  For  day  after  day  I become
more  suspicious  of  your  having  started  for  Epirus.  However,
to  prove  to  you  that  I have  not  neglected  what  you  wrote  to
me  about,  I am  informed  by  Pompey  that  he  intends  to
appoint  five  new  prefects  ^ for  each  of  the  Spains,  in  order  to
exempt  them  from  serving  on  juries.  For  myself,  after  having
spent  three  days  with  Pompey,  and  in  his  house,  I am  start-
ing for  Brundisium  on  the  2 ist  of  May.  In  him  I am  quitting
a noble  citizen,  and  one  most  thoroughly  well-prepared  to
ward  off  the  dangers  which  are  at  present  causing  us  such
alarm.  I shall  look  forward  to  a letter  from  you  to  tell  me
both  what  you  are  doing  and  where  you  are.

CXC  (f  III,  3)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (IN  CILICIA)
Brundisium,  24  May

Upon  my  arrival  at  Brundisium  on  the  22nd  of  May,  your
legate  Q.  Fabius  Vergilianus  was  awaiting  me,  and  by  your

^ See  Letter  CLXXXVI.  The prcefecti  fabrum^  sociUm^  etc.,  were
nominated  by  the  commander-in-chief,z.^.,  the  consul,  in  the  Roman  army.
Later  on  it  became  the  practice  for  a proconsul  to  a province  to  nomi-
nate a certain  number  of  prcefecti^  with  such  duties,  judicial  or  other,  as
he  chose  to  give  them.  Sometimes,  as  in  this  instance  perhaps,  the
office  was  honorary.  Under  the  empire  the  name  was  extended  to  a
large  number  of  officials.  Atticus  seems  to  have  had  somebody  whom
he  wished  to  recommend  to  Pompey.

14

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

direction  put  before  me  what  had  already  occurred,  not  to  me,
whom  it  chiefly  concerned,  but  to  the  whole  senate — that  the
province  you  are  holding  required  a stronger  garrison.  In  fact,
nearly  all  the  senators  expressed  themselves  in  favour  of  a
reinforcement  being  enlisted  in  Italy  for  my  legions  and  those
of  Bibulus.  Upon  Sulpicius  declaring  that  he  would  not
allow  that  measure,  we  protested  indeed  at  great  length,  but
so  unanimous  was  the  wish  of  the  senate  for  our  early  start,
that  we  were  obliged  to  conform  to  it ; and  we  did  so  accord-
ingly. As  things  are  now,  I beg  you,  as  I did  in  the  letter
I gave  to  your  letter-carriers  at  Rome,  that  you  will  make  it
your  object,  in  consideration  of  the  very  intimate  union  of
our  sentiments,  to  bestow  attention  and  care  on  those  details
wherein  an  out-going  provincial  governor  can  consult  for  the
advantage  of  a successor,  who  is  joined  to  him  by  the  closest
ties  of  interest  and  affection ; so  that  the  whole  world  may
see  that  I could  not  have  succeeded  anyone  more  kindly
disposed  to  me,  nor  you  have  handed  over  the  province  to
a warmer  friend.

From  the  despatch  intended  to  be  read  in  the  senate,  of
which  you  have  sent  me  a copy,  I had  gathered  that  a large
number  of  soldiers  had  been  dismissed  by  you ; but  this
same  Fabius  has  pointed  out  that  you  had  thought  of  doing
so,  but  at  the  moment  of  his  leaving  you,  the  number  of
soldiers  was  still  intact.  If  that  is  so,  you  will  be  doing  me
a very  great  favour  if  you  make  as  small  a reduction  as
possible  in  the  scanty  forces  you  already  have  ; and  I imagine
that  the  decrees  of  the  senate  passed  on  this  subject  have
been  sent  to  you.  For  myself,  so  highly  do  I esteem  you,
that  I shall  approve  of  whatever  you  have  done ; but  I feel
confident  that  you  also  will  do  what  you  will  perceive  to  be
most  in  my  interest.  I am  waiting  for  my  legate  C.  Pomp-
tinus  at  Brundisium,  and  I presume  that  he  will  arrive  there
before  the  ist  of  June.  And  as  soon  as  he  has  come  I shall
avail  myself  of  the  first  opportunity  of  sailing  that  is  offered
me.

F III,  3;  VIII,

M.  CiELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

15

CXCI  (F  VIII,  I)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  ^ TO  CICERO  (ON  HIS
JOURNEY  TO  CILICIA)

Rome,  24  May-i  June

AS  I promised  you  on  the  eve  of  your  departure  ^ to  write  a
.ull  and  careful  account  of  all  that  went  on  in  the  city,  I
have  taken  pains  to  secure  a man  to  describe  everything  so
mlly,  that  I fear  his  industry  in  this  respect  may  appear  to
you  somewhat  overdone.  Although  you  know  your  own
curiosity,  and  how  men  abroad  delight  in  being  informed  of
even  the  most  insignificant  things  that  are  going  on  at  home,
still  in  this  point  I must  ask  you  for  a favourable  construc-
tion— that  you  should  not  hold  me  guilty  of  giving  myself
airs  in  thus  performing  the  duty,  because  I have  delegated
this  task  to  another.  Not  at  all  because  it  was  not  the  most
delightful  thing  possible  to  me — busy  as  I am  and,  as  you
know,  the  laziest  man  in  the  world  at  writing  letters — to  keep
my  memory  of  you  fresh : but  the  size  of  the  packet  itself,
which  I am  sending  you,  will,  in  my  opinion,  easily  plead
my  excuse.  It  would  have  required  considerable  leisure  not
only  to  copy  out  all  these  details,  but  even  to  take  notice  of

^ Cicero’s  correspondent  while  in  Cilicia,  M.  Caelius  Rufus,  was  a young
man  still,  and  had  been  rendered  notorious  by  his  long  intrigue  with
Clodia,  who,  when  she  quarrelled  with  him,  accused  him  of  attempting  to
poison  her.  He  was  brought  to  trial  de  vi,  in  B.  c.  56,  by  L.  Sempronius
Atratinus,  whose  father  he  had  himself  accused  of  bribery  ; and  among
the  counts  against  him  was  his  connexion  with  Clodia  and  his  attempt
on  her  life.  An  interesting  essay  on  this  brilliant,  though  dissolute
person,  will  be  found  in  Boissier’s  Ciciron  et  ses  Amis.  He  ended  his  life
disastrously  : adhering  to  Caesar  in  the  Civil  War,  he  was  praetor  in  B.c.
48,  but  in  Caesar’s  absence  in  Egypt  he  attempted  to  secure  popularity
by  opposing  his  law  for  relieving  financial  distress,  and  after  many  con-
flicts with  Antony,  fled  from  Rome  to  join  Milo,  who  was  attempting  to
force  his  own  recall,  and  was  killed.  Cicero’s  defence  of  him  on  the
accusation  of  Atratinus  is  extant.

^ Not  “ on  leaving  town,”  for  Caelius  evidently  accompanied  Cicero
to  Campania  or  met  him  there.

f

1 6 CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  51,  .«t.  5^

them  : for  the  packet  contains  all  the  decrees  of  the  sen;
edicts,  gossip,  and  reports.  If  this  specimen  does  not  m
your  wishes,  let  me  know,  that  I may  not  spend  money  c
to  bore  you.  If  anything  of  unusual  importance  occurs
public  business,  which  these  clerks  cannot  easily  get  a
will  myself  carefully  write  you  an  account  of  how  it  was  d
what  was  thought  of  it,  and  what  is  expected  to  be  its  r^

For  the  present  there  is  nothing  which  causes  much  ant
pation.  For  those  rumours  as  to  the  admission  of  the  T
padani  to  the  comitia  died  out  after  reaching  Cumae  C v
I got  to  Rome  I didn’t  find  that  there  was  the  sligl  C
whisper  about  it.  Besides,  Marcellus  has  not  as  yet  bro
before  the  senate  the  subject  of  a successor  to  the  Gallic  ’
vinces,^  and  has  (as  he  told  me  himself)  postponed  i
motion  to  the  ist  of  June.  He  has  gone  far  to  bring  up  aga  <
the  talk  about  him  which  was  prevalent  when  we  were
Rome.®  But  pray  if,  as  you  wished  to  do,  you  have  foum
Pompey  at  home,^  write  me  a full  account  of  what  yc
thought  of  him,  what  he  said  to  you,  and  what  wishes  he
professed  to  entertain — for  he  is  accustomed  to  think  on
thing  and  say  another,  and  yet  is  not  clever  enough  to  cor
ceal  his  real  aims.  As  to  Caesar,  there  are  frequent  an
rather  ugly  reports — at  any  rate,  people  keep  arriving  wit.
mysterious  whispers : one  says  that  he  has  lost  his  cavalry
which,  in  my  opinion,  is  without  doubt  an  invention  : another
says  that  the  seventh  legion  has  had  a drubbing,  hat  he
himself  is  besieged  among  the  Bellovaci,®  and  cut  off  from

^ See  Letter  CLXXXIV,  p.  6.  !

^ Caesar’s  ten  years’  government  of  this  province  would  be  over  in  ,
March,  B.C.  48  ; but  if  he  was  to  stand  for  the  consulship  for  that  year  in
the  usual  way,  he  must  come  home  in  July,  B.C.  49.  Caesar  maintained
that  by  the  clause  in  Pompey ’s  law  he  was  authorized  to  stay  in  his
province  and  be  elected  in  his  absence,  and  so  would  only  return  to
Rome  at  the  end  of  B.C.  49  to  take  up  his  consulship.  Thus  he  com-  i
plains  that  a resolution  of  the  senate  compelling  him  to  come  home  in  !
July,  B.C.  49,  would  deprive  him  “of  a six  months’  iniperium  bestowed  j

on  him  by  the  people  ” (Caes.  B.  C.  i.  9).  [

^ That  Marcellus  was  weak  and  irresolute.  Expressit  is  not  the  ,
word  Cicero  would  have  used.  It  is  a slang  use  of  the  word  which  .!
means  (i)  to  squeeze  out,  (2)  to  describe,  to  exhibit.  N

« See  Letters  CLXXXVIII,  CLXXXIX,  pp.  12,  13.  |

® Caesar’s  serious  struggle  with  the  Bellovaci  (round  Beauvais,  in  ||
Normandy)  is  described  in  Hirtius’s  continuation  of  Caesar’s  comment-

■i

'l!

TO  ATTICUS

,F  VIII,  I ; A V,  8

17

;iS  main  army.  But  neither  is  there  anything  known  for
.^rtain  as  yet,  nor  are  even  these  uncertain  rumours  publicly
ruited  abroad  after  all — they  are  mentioned  as  open  secrets
'Aong  the  small  clique  with  which  you  are  acquainted ; but
miitius,  with  his  finger  on  his  lips,  hints  at  them.  On  the
^h  of  May,  the  quidnuncs  of  the  rostra,  confound  them  !
ad  a loud  report  that  you  had  been  assassinated  on  your
ijrney  by  Q.  Pompeius.^  Since  I happened  to  know  that  Q.
^ jpeius  was  dieting  himself^  at  Bauli,  and  was  fasting  to  such
h’  Ixtent  that  I was  sorry  for  him,  I was  not  agitated,  and  I
wished  that  we  might  compound  by  this  lie  for  all
1 .^ers  that  might  be  threatening  you.  Your  friend  Plancus,
1 ihis  part,  is  at  Ravenna,  and  though  he  has  been  presented
jii  a large  douceur  by  Caesar,  he  is  neither  wealthy  nor
c:U  set  up.  Your  books  on  the  Republic  are  in  universal
."gue."
b

CXCII  (A  V,  8)

3 TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

.1

Brundisium,  I June

Indifferent  health,  from  which  I have  now  recovered  (for
though  ill,  I had  no  fever),  as  well  as  waiting  for  Pomptinus,
of  whom  as  yet  no  rumour  even  has  reached  me,  have  kept  me
for  these  twelve  days  at  Brundisium ; but  I am  looking  out  for
an  opportunity  to  set  sail.  Now  if  you  are  still  at  Rome — for
I scarcely  think  you  can  be — but  if  you  are,  I am  very  anxious

aries,  B.  G.  viii.  6-22.  A slight  cavalry  disaster,  which  may  have  given
rise  to  the  reported  loss  of  the  cavalry,  is  described  in  ch.  12.  Caesar
invaded  the  Bellovaci  with  the  7th,  8th,  and  9th  legions,  but  at  one  time
he  was  at  any  rate  in  a sufficiently  difficult  position  to  make  it  necessary
for  him  to  send  for  another  legion,  the  13th  (B.  G.  viii.  8-1 1.)

'■  Q.  Pompeius  Rufus,  tribune  in  B.c.  52,  afterwards  condemned  for
his  promotion  of  the  riots  connected  with  the  burning  of  Clodius’s  body
and  the  destruction  of  the  Curia.

^ Reading  facere.

^ The  de  Repiiblica  was  begun  in  B.c.  54,  and  probably  published
before  Cicero  left  Rome  in  B.c.  51.

II.  C

i8

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

that  you  should  give  your  attention  to  the  following.  In  a
letter  received  from  Rome  I am  informed  that  my  friend  Milo
writes  to  complain  of  my  having  ill-treated  him  in  allowing
Philotimus  to  have  a share  in  the  purchase  of  his  property.

I decided  on  that  measure  in  accordance  with  the  opinion
of  C.  Duronius,^  whom  I had  had  reason  to  believe  ex-
ceedingly friendly  to  Milo,  and  whom  I knew  to  be  the  sort  of
man  you  judge  him  to  be.  Now  his  object  and  mine  too
was  this  : first,  that  the  property  should  remain  under  )ur
control — lest  some  outsider,  making  the  purchase  at  a ^ igh
price,  should  deprive  him  of  the  slaves,  a great  number  of
which  he  had  with  him ; secondly,  that  the  settlement  he
had  made  upon  Fausta  should  be  respected.^  There  was
the  farther  motive,  that  we  should  ourselves  have  less  diffi-
culty than  anyone  else  in  saving  anything  that  could  be
saved.  Now  I would  have  you  look  thoroughly  into  the
whole  affair : for  I am  frequently  having  letters  on  it  written
in  exaggerated  terms.  If  he  complains,  if  he  writes  about
it  to  his  friends,  and  if  Fausta  takes  the  same  line,  as  I told
Philotimus  by  word  of  mouth,  and  as  he  undertook  to  do,

I would  not  have  him  take  part  in  the  purchase  against  the  |
will  of  Milo.  It  would  not  be  in  the  least  worth  our  while,  j
But  if  there  is  nothing  in  all  this,  you  will  decide  the  matter.
Speak  with  Duronius.  I have  written  also  to  Camillus  and
Lamia,^  and  the  more  so  because  I did  not  feel  confident  of
your  being  in  Rome.  The  long  and  short  of  the  whole  thing  ;

^ A friend  of  Milo,  otherwise  unknown.  'i

“ After  condemnation  involving  a forfeiture  of  a man’s  property,  the  {
whole  was  usually  purchased  for  a fixed  sum  by  one  or  more  persons
{sec^ores),  who  then  disposed  of  it  by  auction  and  made  what  profit  they
could.  A man  who  had  rich  friends  might  save  a wreck  of  it,  (i)  if  they
chose  to  purchase,  returning  him  the  balance  made  by  the  sale ; (2)  or
sold  enough  of  it  to  pay  the  price  which  they  had  bargained  to  pay  the
treasury,  not  exacting  the  surrender  of  personalty,  slaves,  etc.,  or  at  any
rate  taking  only  a moderate  profit.  This  is  what  Cicero  seems  to  mean
that  Philotimus  (a  freedman  of  Terentia’s)  was,  with  others,  going  to  do  in
this  case.  Again,  it  was  customary  for  a man  receiving  a dowry  with  his
wife  to  give  security  for  its  repayment  in  case  of  divorce  or  death ; such
a security  was  usually  respected  in  case  of  confiscation,  the  property  being
sold  with  that  burden  on  it,  though  this  payment  was  at  times  evaded,  ^
as  in  the  case  of  the  confiscations  of  the  triumvirs  in  b.c.  42  (Dio  Cass,
xlvii.  14).  See  Letter  LXI.

^ C.  Furius  Camillus  was  a lawyer  specially  skilled  in  property  law

A V,  8 ; F III,  4 TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  19

is  this ; decide  as  shall  seem  to  you  to  be  in  accordance
with  my  honour,  good  name,  and  interests.

CXCIII  (F  III,  4)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (IN
CILICIA)

Brundisium,  5 June

On  the  4th  of  June,  being  at  Brundisium,  I received  your
letter  stating  that  you  had  instructed  L.  Clodius  with  what
you  wished  him  to  say  to  me.  I am  much  looking  forward
to  his  arrival,  that  I may  learn  at  the  earliest  possible  moment
the  message  he  is  bringing  from  you.  My  warm  feeling
and  readiness  to  serve  you,  though  I hope  they  are  already
known  to  you  by  many  instances,  I shall  yet  manifest  in
those  circumstances  above  all  others,  in  which  I shall  be
able  to  give  the  most  decisive  proof  that  no  one’s  reputation
and  position  is  dearer  to  me  than  yours.  On  your  side,
both  Q.  Fabius  Vergilianus  and  C.  Flaccus,  son  of  Lucius,
and — in  stronger  terms  than  anyone  else — M.  Octavius,  son
of  Gneius,  have  shewed  me  that  I am  highly  valued  by  you.
This  I had  already  judged  to  be  the  case  on  many  grounds,
but  above  all  from  that  book  on  Augural  Law,  of  which,
t with  its  most  affectionate  dedication,  you  have  made  me  a
I most  delightful  present.  On  my  part,  all  the  services  which
belong  to  the  closest  relationship  shall  be  ever  at  your  com-
mand. For  ever  since  you  began  feeling  attachment  to  me,  I
have  learnt  daily  to  value  you  more  highly,  and  now  there
has  been  added  to  that  my  intimacy  with  your  relations —
for  there  are  two  of  them  of  different  ages  whom  I value
very  highly,  Cn.  Pompeius,  father-in-law  of  your  daughter,
and  M.  Brutus,  your  son-in-law  ^ — and,  lastly,  the  membership

{ad  Fam.  v.  20)  ; .^lius  Lamia  is  probably  a lawyer  also,  but  of  him
we  know  nothing.

* Cn.  Pompeius,  elder  son  of  Cn.  Pompeius  Magnus,  married  a
daughter  of  Appius  Claudius.  M.  Brutus  married,  first,  Claudia,  daughter

20

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.

of  the  same  college,  especially  as  that  has  been  stamped
such  a complimentary  expression  of  your  approval,^  seei
to  me  to  have  supplied  a bond  of  no  ordinary  streng
towards  securing  a union  of  feeling  between  us.  But  I sh
not  only,  if  I come  across  Clodius,  write  you  at  greater  leng
after  talking  with  him,  but  shall  also  take  pains  myself  to  s
you  as  soon  as  possible.  Your  saying  that  your  motive  1'
staying  in  the  province  was  the  hope  of  having  an  intervi(
with  me,  to  tell  you  the  honest  truth,  is  very  agreeable
me.

CXCIV  (A  V,  9)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

On  the  Road  to  Athens,  15  June

I ARRIVED  at  Actium  on  the  14th  of  June,  after  havii
feasted  like  priests  of  Mars  both  at  Corcyra  and  the  Sybo
Islands,  owing  to  your  presents,  which  Areus  as  well  as  n
friend  Eutychides  had  prepared  for  us  with  lavish  profusic
and  the  utmost  kindness.^  From  Actium  I preferred
journey  by  land,  considering  the  unpleasant  voyage  we  h£
had,  and  I did  not  like  the  idea  of  rounding  Leucatas.®  1
arrive,  again,  at  Patrae  in  small  boats,  without  all  this  par
phernalia,  seemed  to  me  somewhat  undignified.

Yes,  your  frequent  exhortations  have  fallen  on  willir
ears  ! I daily  turn  them  over  in  my  own  mind  and  impre
them  on  my  staff : in  fine,  I will  make  certain  of  passii
through  this  extraordinary  function  without  the  least  illegali
or  extortion.  I only  hope  the  Parthian  will  keep  quiet  ar

of  Appius  Claudius  ; and,  secondly,  Porcia,  daughter  of  Cato  and  wide
of  Bibulus.

^ By  the  dedication  of  the  lil^er  auguralis,  after  Cicero’s  election  in
the  college  of  augurs  (B.C.  52).

^ Freedmen  of  Atticus,  who  entertained  Cicero  by  his  orders.  T
Salii,  like  the  Pontifices,  gave  banquets  (Lord  Mayors’  feasts)  proverb;
for  their  splendour  (Horace,  OdeSy  i.  38,  ii).

^ The  famous  promontory  on  the  south  of  Leucadia,  the  scene
Sappho’s  leap.

A V,  9 ; F VIII,  2 M.  CiELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

21

fortune  favour  us  ! I will  do  my  part.  Pray  take  care  to  let
me  know  what  you  are  doing,  where  you  mean  to  be  from
time  to  time,  in  what  state  you  left  things  at  Rome,
and,  above  all,  about  the  820  sestertia.  Put  all  that  into  one
letter,  carefully  directed  so  as  to  be  sure  of  reaching  me  in
any  case.  But  that  my  year  of  office  should  remain  un-
changed and  without  any  addition  being  decreed,  for  this
remember  to  take  proper  measures  yourself  and  through  all
my  friends,  especially  through  Hortensius : for,  though  absent
at  present,  when  the  question  is  not  before  the  house,  you
will,  as  you  said  in  one  of  your  answers,  be  in  town  at  the
proper  time.  While  pressing  this  upon  you,  I feel  half-
inclined  to  beg  you  also  to  fight  against  there  being  an  inter-
calation.^ But  I don’t  venture  to  put  all  the  burdens  on
your  back.  As  for  the  year,  stick  to  that  at  any  rate.  My
son  Cicero,  the  best-behaved  and  dearest  of  boys,  sends  you
his  regards.  I always  liked  Dionysius,  for  my  part,  as  you
know ; but  I get  to  value  him  more  every  day,  and,  by
Hercules,  principally  because  he  loves  you,  and  never  lets  an
opportunity  slip  of  talking  about  you.

CXCV  (F  VIII,  2)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (ON  HIS
JOURNEY)

Rome,  June’^

It  is  certainly  true,  I tell  you,  that  he  has  been  acquitted—
I was  in  court  when  the  verdict  was  announced — and  that,
too,  by  all  three  orders,  and  by  a unanimous  vote  in  each

'■  That  is,  an  intercalary  month,  after  23rd  February,  to  correct  the
year.  It  was  put  in  at  the  discretion  of  the  Pontifices,  whom  Cicero
thought  Atticus  could  influence.

^ I have  followed  Messrs.  Tyrrell  and  Purser  in  placing  this  letter  in
June  instead  of  July,  principally  because  it  appears  to  have  been  written
a considerable  time  before  the  elections.

22

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

order.  “ Well,  that ’s  entirely  their  concern,”  ’ say  you.  No,
by  Hercules  ! For  nothing  ever  happened  so  unexpected,  or
so  scandalous  in  the  eyes  of  everybody.  Nay,  even  I,
though  I countenanced  him  with  all  my  might  for  friend-
ship’s sake,  and  had  prepared  myself  to  condole  with  him,  was
thunderstruck  when  it  occurred,  and  thought  I must  be  under
some  hallucination.  What  do  you  suppose,  then,  was  the
feeling  of  others?  Why,  they  attacked  the  jurors  with  a
storm  of  disapproving  shouts,  and  made  it  quite  plain  that
this  was  more  than  they  could  stand.  Accordingly,  now  that
he  is  left  to  the  mercies  of  the  Licinian  law,  he  seems  to  be
in  greater  danger  than  ever.^  Besides  this,  on  the  day  after
the  acquittal,  Hortensius  came  into  Curio’s  theatre^® — I sup-
pose that  we  might  share  in  his  rejoicing  ! Whereupon  you
had

“ Tumult  sore,

Wild  uproar,

Thunder  bellowing  in  the  clouds,

Tempest  hissing  through  the  shrouds.”

This  was  the  more  noticed  from  the  fact  that  Hortensius  had
reached  old  age  without  ever  having  been  hissed,  but  on  this
occasion  got  it  heartily  enough  to  serve  anyone  for  the
whole  of  his  life,  and  to  make  him  sorry  he  had  won  his
case.  Of  politics  I have  nothing  to  tell  you.  The  active
proceedings  of  Marcellus  have  died  away,  not  from  lack  of
energy,  as  it  seems  to  me,  but  from  policy.  As  to  the
consular  elections,  public  opinion  is  quite  at  a loss.  For
myself,  I have  chanced  upon  one  competitor  who  is  noble

^ Reading  videHnt  modo.  This  is  very  likely  not  the  true  reading,  but
nothing  can  be  made  of  mde  modo  of  the  MSS.  Another  suggestion  is
ride  modo,  “well,  pass  it  over  with  a smile.”  The  acquittal  referred  to
is  that  of  M.  Valerius  Messalla  (consul  B.C.  53),  on  a charge  of  bribery
{a^nbitus).

^ Having  been  acquitted  on  the  charge  of  ambihis,  the  only  thing  to
be  done  with  Messalla  was  to  accuse  him  of  having  used  his  political
club  {sodalitas)  for  corrupt  purposes.  The  iex  Licinia  de  sodalitiis
(B.C. 55)  was  a harsher  law  than  others  de  ambitu  in  regard  to  the  com-
position of  the  jury  {pro  Plam.  § 36).  Cselius  therefore  thinks  that
Messalla  will  have  less  chance  under  it.

^ Two  wooden  theatres  that  swung  round,  with  spectators  sitting  in
them,  to  form  an  amphitheatre  for  gladiators.  Curio  had  therefore  de-
termined on  giving  the  funeral  games  against  which  Cicero  advised  him.
See  Letter  CLXVIII.

F VIII,  2,  3 M.  CiELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

23

and  one  who  acts  the  noble  : for  M.  Octavius,  son  of  Gnseus,
and  C.  Hirrus  are  standing  with  me.  I tell  you  this  because
I know  that  it  was  on  account  of  Hirrus  that  you  were
anxiously  waiting  for  news  of  my  election.  However,  as
soon  as  you  learn  of  my  having  been  returned,  I beg  you  to
be  taking  measures  as  to  the  panthers.^  I recommend  Sittius’s
bond  to  your  attention.  I gave  the  first  batch  of  notes  on
the  events  in  the  city  to  L.  Castrinius  Psetus,  the  second  to
the  bearer  of  this  letter.

CXCVI  (F  VIII,  3)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (ON  HIS  WAY
TO  CILICIA)

Rome,  June

Is  it  so  ? Have  I won  ? And  do  I send  you  frequent  letters,
which,  as  you  were  leaving,  you  said  I should  never  take  the
trouble  to  do  for  you  ? It  is  even  so,  that  is  to  say,  if  the  letters
I send  reach  you.  And,  indeed,  I am  all  the  more  energetic
about  this  because,  being  at  leisure,  I have  nowhere  to  spend
my  little  holiday  with  any  pleasure.  When  you  were  at  Rom.e  I
had  an  unfailing  and  most  delightful  resource  for  an  idle  day —
to  spend  the  holiday  with  you.  I miss  this  exceedingly,  so
that  not  only  do  I feel  myself  to  be  all  alone,  but  now  you  are
gone  a desert  seems  to  have  been  created  at  Rome ; and  I
who  in  my  carelessness  omitted  paying  you  a visit  on  many
days,  when  you  were  here,  am  now  daily  tortured  to  think
that  I have  not  got  you  to  run  to.  But,  above  all,  my  rival  ^
Hirrus  takes  care  that  I should  look  for  you  day  and  night.

^ The  office  Caelius  was  seeking  was  that  of  curule  sedile  ; as  sedile
he  and  his  colleague  had  charge  of  the  ludi  Romani  and  Megalensia,
as  well  as  in  some  degree  other  games.  It  was  the  fashion  to  en-
deavour, in  some  way,  to  make  their  office  notable  by  something  fresh
or  costly ; and  one  of  the  most  popular  features  of  such  games  was  the
vtnatio^  a killing  of  wild  animals.  Cielius  wants  these  panthers  to  ex-
hibit in  this  way.

^ As  candidate  for  the  curule  sedileship.

24

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  55

You  can  imagine  how  vexed  that  rival  of  yours  for  the  augur-
ship  is,  and  how  he  tries  to  conceal  the  fact  that  I am  a surer
candidate  than  himself.  That  you  should  receive  the  news
about  him  which  you  wish  at  the  earliest  possible  moment,

I desire,  on  my  honour,  more  for  your  sake  than  my  own.
For  as  to  myself,  if  I am  elected,  I shall  perhaps  be  so  with  a
colleague  richer  than  myself : ^ but  even  this  is  so  delightful,
that,  if  it  really  does  happen  to  me,  I can  never  all  my  life
long  lack  something  to  smile  at.  Is  it  really  worth  while  ?
Yes  ! by  Hercules.  M.  Octavius  is  unable  to  do  much  to
soften  the  hostile  feelings — and  they  are  many — which  spoil
Hirrus’s  chances.  As  to  the  services  of  your  freedman  Philo-
timus  and  the  property  of  Milo,  I have  taken  care  that  Philo-
timus  should  satisfy  Milo  in  his  absence,  as  well  as  his  family,
by  the  most  absolutely  straightforward  conduct,  and  that  your
character  should  not  suffer  as  far  as  his  good  faith  and  activity
are  concerned.^  What  I now  have  to  ask  of  you  is  that,  if  (as  I
hope)  you  get  any  leisure,  you  would  compose  some  treatise
dedicated  to  me,  to  shew  me  that  you  care  for  me.  “ How
did  that  come  into  your  head,”  say  you,  “ a modest  man  like  ^
you?”  I desire  that  out  of  your  numerous  writings  there  ^
should  be  something  extant  handing  down  to  posterity  also
the  record  of  our  friendship.  “ What  sort  of  thing  do  you  '
want  ? ” I suppose  you  will  ask.  You,  who  are  acquainted
with  every  school  of  thought,  will  hit  upon  the  suitable  thing  i
sooner  than  I.  Only  let  it  be  of  a kind  that  has  some  ap-
propriateness to  me,  and  let  it  contain  practical  instruction,
that  it  may  be  widely  used.

^ The  reading  and  the  interpretation  of  this  clause  are  both  very^
doubtful.

See  p.  18.

F VIII,  3 ; A V,  lo

TO  ATTICUS

25

CXCVII  (A  V,  10)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Athens,  27  June

I ARRIVED  at  Athens  on  the  24th  of  June,  and  have  now
waited  there  three  days  forPomptinus  and  have  heard  nothing
as  yet  of  his  arrival.  I am,  believe  me,  wholly  with  you  ; and
though  I should  have  done  so  without  them,  yet  I am  think-
ing of  you  all  the  more  vividly  from  being  reminded  by  the
traces  of  you  in  this  place.  In  short,  I assure  you  we  talk
of  nothing  else  but  you.  But  you,  perhaps,  would  prefer  to
be  told  something  about  myself.  Here  you  are  then  : up  to
now  neither  I nor  any  of  my  staff  have  been  any  expense  to
any  town  or  individual.  We  receive  nothing  under  the
Julian  law,^  nothing  from  any  public  host : my  whole  staff
are  impressed  with  the  belief  that  they  must  have  a regard
for  reputation.  So  far,  well.  This  has  been  noticed  with
praise  on  the  part  of  the  Greeks  and  is  being  much  talked
of.  For  the  rest,  I am  taking  great  pains,  as  I have  perceived
that  you  wished.  But  on  this  subject  let  us  reserve  our  ap-
plause till  the  last  act  has  been  reached.  Other  circumstances
are  such  that  I frequently  blame  my  folly  for  not  having
found  some  means  of  getting  out  of  this  business.  How
entirely  unsuited  to  my  character  and  habits  ! How  true  the
proverb  is,  “ Let  the  shoemaker  stick  to  his  last ^ You  will
say,  “ What,  already  ? Why,  you  are  not  actually  in  the
business  !”  I know  that  very  well,  and  I expect  greater  trouble
remains : even  as  far  as  it  has  gone,  though  I bear  it  with
cheerful  brow,  I think,  and  expression,  in  my  inmost  heart

’ The  law  passed  by  lulius  Caesar  in  his  consulship,  b.c.  59,  limiting
(among  other  things)  the  amount  which  provincial  governors  could
demand  in  passing  to  and  from  their  provinces.  Cicero’s  boast  is  that
he  has  not  taken  even  what  that  law  allowed.

" Cicero,  as  often,  merely  gives  a word  or  two  of  the  Greek  proverb
(spool  tiq),  which  he  knows  Atticus  can  fill  up,  sp^oi  riq  ijv  eKaarog
tideiT]  Tsxinjv  ( Aristoph.  Vesp.  1431),  “ Let  each  practise  the  artthat  he
knows.  ”

26

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

I am  enduring  agonies:  so  many  instances  are  occurring
every  day  of  ill-temper  or  insolence,  of  foolish  and  senseless
behaviour  of  every  kind,  both  by  speech  and  by  refusal  to
speak.  I don’t  give  you  details  of  these  things,  not  because
I wish  to  conceal  them  from  you,  but  because  they  are  diffi-
cult to  explain.  So  you  shall  admire  my  self-restraint  when
I return  safe  and  sound : I am  bestowing  such  pains  on  the
practice  of  this  virtue.  Well,  enough  of  this.  Though  I had
nothing  in  my  mind  that  I intended  to  write  about,  because
I haven’t  even  the  smallest  idea  as  to  what  you  are  doing,  and
in  what  part  of  the  world  you  are : nor,  by  Hercules,  have  I
ever  been  so  complete  in  the  dark  about  my  own  affairs,  as
to  what  has  been  done  about  the  debt  to  Caesar  or  Milo’s
liabilities  ; and  no  one  has  come,  I don’t  say  from  my  house,
but  even  from  Rome,  to  enlighten  me  as  to  what  is  going  on  in
politics.  Wherefore,  if  there  is  anything  that  you  know  on  the
subjects  which  you  may  suppose  that  I should  wish  to  know,  I
shall  be  very  much  obliged  if  you  take  the  trouble  to  have  it
transmitted  to  me.  What  else  is  there  to  say  ? Why,  nothing
except  this  : Athens  has  pleased  me  immensely,  at  any  rate
as  far  as  the  city  itself  and  all  that  adorns  it  are  concerned,
and  the  affection  of  the  inhabitants  towards  you,  and  what  I
may  call  a prepossession  in  favour  of  myself : but  as  to  its
philosophy — that  is  very  topsy-turvey,  if  Aristus  is  supposed
to^'epresent  it,  in  whose  house  I am  staying.  For  your  and
my  friend  Xeno  I preferred  giving  up  to  Quintus,  and  yet,
owing  to  his  proximity,  we  spend  whole  days  together.^  Pray,
as  soon  as  you  possibly  can,  write  me  word  of  your  plans,
and  let  me  know  what  you  are  doing,  where  you  are  from
time  to  time,  especially  when  you  intend  being  in  Rome.

^ Aristus,  an  Academician  ; Xeno,  an  Epicurean.

A V,  lo;  F XIII,  I TO  GAIUS  MEMMIUS

27

CXCVIII  (F  XIII,  i)

TO  GAIUS  MEMMIUS  (IN  EXILE  AT

MITYLENE)

Athens,  July

Though  I had  not  quite  made  up  my  mind  whether  the
prospect  of  seeing  you  at  Athens  was  painful  or  pleasant —
because  your  undeserved  calamity^  would  have  caused
me  sorrow,  yet  the  philosophic  spirit  with  which  you  bear
it  delight — nevertheless,  I should  have  preferred  to  have
seen  you.  For  I do  not  feel  the  pain  much  less  when  you
are  out  of  sight,  while  such  pleasure  as  is  possible  would  at
any  rate  have  been  greater  had  I seen  you.  Therefore  I
shall  not  hesitate  to  endeavour  to  see  you  whenever  I shall
be  conveniently  able  to  do  so.  Meanwhile,  such  business  as
can  be  put  before  you  by  letter,  and,  as  I think,  can  be
brought  to  a conclusion,  I will  put  before  you  now  at  once.
I will  preface  my  request  by  asking  you  not  to  do  anything
for  my  sake  against  your  own  inclination ; but  if  the  matter
is  one  which  is  important  to  me,  and  in  no  way  of  much  im-
portance to  yourself,  still  only  grant  it  in  case  of  having  first
made  up  your  mind  to  do  so  cheerfully.  I am  in  thorough
sympathy  with  Patron  the  Epicurean,  except  that  I differ
from  him  widely  in  philosophy.  But  not  only  at  the  very
beginning  in  Rome,  when  he  was  paying  attention  to  you  as
well  as  all  your  friends,  did  he  also  cultivate  my  acquaintance
with  special  care,  but  recently  also,  after  having  gained  all
that  he  wanted  in  the  way  of  personal  profit  and  reward,  he
has  continued  to  regard  me  as  almost  the  first  of  his
supporters  and  friends.  Besides  this,  he  was  introduced

^ Gaius  Memmius  Gemellus  (to  whom  Lucretius  dedicated  his  poem)
was  prsetor  in  B.c.  58.  Of  his  conduct  when  curule  aedile  we  have
heard  before  (vol.  i.,  p.  51).  He  was  condemned  for  amdzfus  in  B.c.  54
(see  vol.  i. , p.  304).  He  selected  Athens  as  his  place  of  exile,  being  deeply
versed  in  Greek  literature  {Brut.  § 247),  but  spent  part  of  his  time  at
Mitylene.

28

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  i^;T.  55

and  recommended  to  me  by  Phsedrus/  who,  when  I was  a
boy  and  before  I knew  Philo,  was  highly  valued  by  me  as  a
philosopher,  and  afterwards  as,  at  any  rate,  a good,  agree-
able, and  kindly  man.  This  Patron,  therefore,  having
written  to  me  at  Rome,  begging  me  to  reconcile  you  to  him,
and  to  ask  you  to  grant  him  some  ruined  house  or  other
once  belonging  to  Epicurus,  I did  not  write  to  you  on  the
subject,  because  I did  not  want  any  plan  of  building  which
you  might  have  to  be  hampered  by  a recommendation  of
mine.  On  my  arrival  at  Athens,  however,  having  been
asked  by  the  same  person  to  write  to  you  on  the  sub-
ject, I have  granted  his  request,  because  all  your  friends
agreed  in  saying  that  you  had  given  up  that  building  idea.
If  this  is  so,  and  if  it  is  now  of  no  importance  to  you,
I would  ask  you,  if  some  little  offence  has  been  caused  you
by  the  wrong-headedness  of  certain  persons — and  I know
the  class  of  men — to  take  a lenient  view  of  the  matter,  either
from  your  own  great  natural  kindness  or,  if  you  like,  out  of
compliment  to  me.  For  my  part,  if  you  ask  me  what  I
think  about  it  myself,  I neither  see  why  he  is  so  anxious  for
it,  nor  why  you  make  difficulties ; I only  feel  that  it  is  much
less  natural  for  you  to  trouble  yourself  without  reason,  than
for  him  to  do  so.  However,  I am  sure  that  Patron’s  line  of
argument  and  the  merits  of  his  case  are  known  to  you.  He
says  that  he  has  to  maintain  his  own  honour  and  duty,  the
sanctity  of  a will,  the  prestige  of  Epicurus,  the  solemn
injunction  of  Phaedrus,  the  home,  the  dwelling-place,  the
footprints  of  famous  men.  We  may  ridicule  the  man’s
entire  life  and  the  system  which  he  follows  in  philosophy,  if
we  take  upon  ourselves  to  find  fault  with  what  he  is  now
contending  for.  But,  by  Hercules,  since  I am  not  very
unfriendly  to  him  or  to  others  who  find  pleasure  in  such
things,  I think  we*Tlvust  be  indulgent  to  him  for  being  so
very  keen  about  it.  For  even  if  he  is  wrong  in  this,  it  is
a fault  of  the  head,  not  the  heart.  But  to  come  to  the
point — for  I must  mention  this  sooner  or  later — I love
Pomponius  Atticus  as  a second  brother.  Nothing  can  be

^ An  Epicurean  who  taught  at  Athens  and  at  Rome.  Philo  was  an
Academician,  to  which  sect  Cicero  was  in  later  years  more  drawn.
Phaedrus  came  to  Rome  in  B.c.  88,  and  immediately  won  the  devotion
of  the  young  Cicero  [Brut.  § 306).

F XIII,

TO  GAIUS  MEMMIUS

29

dearer  or  more  delightful  than  he  is  to  me.  Atticus,  then —
not  that  he  is  of  their  sect  (for  he  is  cultivated  to  the  highest
degree  in  all  liberal  learning  ^),  but  he  is  very  fond  of  Patron,
and  was  much  attached  to  Phasdrus — presses  this  upon  me
as  he  has  never  done  anything  else,  though  he  is  the  very
reverse  of  self-seeking,  the  last  person  in  the  world  to  be
troublesome  in  making  requests ; and  he  feels  no  doubt  of
my  being  able  to  obtain  this  favour  from  you  on  the  slightest
hint,  even  if  you  still  had  the  intention  of  building.  In  the
present  circumstances,  however,  if  he  hears  that  you  have  laid
aside  your  plan  of  building  and  that  yet  I have  not  obtained
this  favour  from  you,  he  will  think,  not,  indeed,  that  you  have
been  ungenerous  towards  me,  but  that  I have  been  careless
in  what  concerned  himself.  Wherefore  I beg  you  to  write
word  to  your  agents  that  the  decree  of  the  Areopagites,
which  they  call  a “ minute,”  ^ may  be  cancelled  with  your
free  consent.  But  I return  to  what  I said  at  first.  Before
making  up  your  mind  to  do  this,  I would  have  you  be  sure
that  you  do  it  for  my  sake  with  a willing  heart.  At  any  rate
have  no  doubt  of  this  : if  you  do  what  I ask,  I shall  take  it
as  a very  great  favour.  Farewell.

^ Epicurus  was  noted  for  his  barbarous  style,  and  his  followers,
Greek  and  Latin,  according  to  Cicero,  generally  had  the  same  defect.
See  Brut.  § 131  ; Tuscul.  ii.  § 7:  Epicurii  Latini ipsi projitenturneque
distincte,  neque  distribute.,  neque  eleganter,  neque  ornate  scribere.

“ vTToixvrjfiaTKTubv,  “record,”  “memorial.”  This  it  appears  from
inscriptions  was  the  technical  word  for  a decree  of  the  Areopagus,  though
other  words  are  also  found,  such  as  doy fxa,  £7rsp(t)Ti]iia{consuttum),
etc.  A series  of  inscriptions  also  shews  that  in  the  Roman  period  the
Areopagus  was  an  important  executive  body : thus  we  find  it  superin-
tending the  prosecutions  of  users  of  false  weights  and  measures,  and  con-
stantly joined  with  the  council  of  600  (or  500  later)  in  voting  honours  to
benefactors.  In  one  inscription  (Add.  4315,  n.  C.  I.  G.)  it  is  joined
with  the  “Epicureans  at  Athens”  and  the  theatrical  guild  in  paying
honour  to  a physician.  The  minute  or  record  here  to  be  cancelled
appears  to  be  a grant  or  sale  to  Memmius  of  a building  site  in  Athens,
on  which  were  the  ruins  of  the  house  of  Epicurus,  which  the  Epicurean
Patron  wished  to  preserve.

30

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

CXCIX  (A  V,  II)

(TO  ATTICUS}(AT  ROME)

Athens,  6 July

Hallo  . write  so  often  to  Rome,  and  not  send  a single  line
to  you  ? Well  then,  hereafter,  rather  than  consent  not  to
send  you  a letter,  if  that  can  be  done  safely,  I will  send
one  that  may  never  reach  you.  Whatever  step  can  be  taken
to  provide  against  the  prolongation  of  my  government,  in
the  name  of  fortune,  take,  so  long  as  you  are  in  town.
I can’t  describe  to  you  the  warmth  of  my  longing  for  the
city,  or  the  difficulty  I feel  in  putting  up  with  the  boredom
of  this  business.

^ Marcellus’s  action  in  the  case  of  the  man  of  Comum  was
disgraceful.  Even  if  he  were  not  a magistrate,  he  was  yet
an  inhabitant  of  Gallia  Transpadana.^  So  he  seems  to  me
to  have  given  no  less  cause  of  anger  to  our  friend  Pompey  than
5 to  Caesar.  But  this  is  his  own  look-out. . I think,  from  what
you  tell  me  that  Varro  says,  that  Pompey  certainly  means  to
go  to  Spain.  I entirely  disapprove  of  it,  and  indeed  I easily
convinced  Theophanes  that  the  best  course  was  for  him  not
to  quit  Rome  to  go  anywhere.^  So  the  Greek  will  put

^ A colony  had  been  established  at  Comum  after  the  social  wars  by
Pompeius  Strabo  ( Pompey ’s  father),  whose  law  also  gave  the  Latin
franchise  to  all  Transpadani.  The  colonists  had  suffered  from  attacks
of  neighbouring  tribes,  and  Caesar,  in  virtue  of  a lex  Vatinia  (b.C.  59),
had  determined  to  settle  there  five  thousand  new  colonists.  This  had
been  done  in  the  course  of  his  proconsulship,  and  he  took  great  interest
in  the  place.  But  the  Optimates  were  anxious  to  shew  their  disregard
of  all  Caesar’s  consular  acts,  as  done  in  spite  of  the  obnuntiatio  of
Regulus,  and  without  the  sanction  of  the  senate.  The  Transpadani  had
the  Latin  franchise  only,  but  in  a colony  members  of  the  local  senate
and  magistrates  had  the  full  civitas.  Marcellus,  by  way  of  shewing  that
Comum  was  not  a colonia,  ordered  one  of  its  magistrates  to  be  flogged
on  some  pretext,  which  was  equivalent  to  declaring  him  not  to  be  a
civis.  Cicero  says  that  even  if  this  were  strictly  legal,  it  was  outrageous
— an  abuse  of  the  law.  The  authorities  are  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  26  ;
Suet.  Cas.  28 ; Plut.  Cess.  29.

^ Pompey,  when  proconsul  of  Spain.  It  was  quite  an  unprecedented

AV,  II  TO  ATTICUS  31

pressure  on  him ; and  his  influence  is  very  powerful  with
him.

I send  this  letter  on  the  6th  of  July,  when  on  the  point  ^
of  quitting  Athens,  where  I have  been  exactly  ten  days.^
Pomptinus  has  arrived  along  with  Cn.  Volusius ; my  quaestor
is  here;  the  only  one  missing  is  your  friend  Tullius.  I have
some  open  vessels  of  Rhodes,  some  biremes  of  Mitylene,  and
a certain  amount  of  despatch  boats."  I don’t  hear  a word
about  the  Parthians.  For  the  rest,  heaven  preserve  us  ! , As  5*
yet  our  journey  through  Greece  has  roused  great  admiration,
nor,  by  heaven,  have  I as  yet  a fault  to  find  with  any  of  my
staff.  They  appear  to  me  to  understand  my  point  of  view
and  the  conditions  on  which  they  accompany  me.  They
entirely  devote  themselves  to  my  reputation.  For  the  future,
if  the  proverb  “ like  mistress  like  dog  ” ^ holds  good,  they  will
certainly  stick  to  this  line  of  conduct.  For  they  will  not  see
me  doing  anything  to  give  them  an  excuse  for  malpractices.
But  if  that  does  not  prove  sufficient,  I shall  have  to  take
some  stronger  measure.  For  at  present  I am  all  smiles  and
indulgence,  and,  as  I hope,  am  making  considerable  progress.
But  I have  only  studied  the  part  of  “ tolerator  ” — as  our
friends  the  Sicilians  call  it^ — for  a single  year.  Therefore
fight  your  best,  lest,  if  any  addition  is  made  to  my  time,

I should  turn  out  a scoundrel.

Now  to  return  to  your  commands ; prcefecii  are  excused  t
jury  service : offer  the  position  to  whom  you  choose.  I
will  not  be  so  high  and  mighty^  as  I was  in  the  case  of
Appuleius.  I am  as  fond  of  Xeno  as  you  are,  of  which  I
feel  sure  that  he  is  fully  aware.  With  Patron  and  the  rest
of  the  (Epicurean)  dunces  I have  established  your  reputa-

thing  for  a proconsul  to  stay  at  Rome  and  govern  by  legati,  as  he  was
doing.  Varro  was  one  of  these  legati,  and  Theophanes  was  a Greek  of
Mitylene  who  was  Pompey’s  close  friend  and  secretary.

' That  is,  without  counting  the  days  of  his  arrival  and  departure.

He  arrived  June  24th.

- A liquid  emfcwTrov,  sc.  vtiov.  This  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere
as  a substantive.  Aulus  Gell.  (x.  25,  § 5)  says  that  the  Greek  name  for
“ despatch  boats  ” {actuaries)  was  lortofcwTroi,  boats  with  sails  and  oars.

^ diaurtp  ^ dsaTToiva  roia  xv  kviov,  “ as  is  the  mistress,  so  is  her  dog.”
avsKiav,  which  is  not  a classical  word,  but  I suppose  was  used  in
Sicily,  where  the  Greek  was  not  Attic.

^ fisTEutpoi;,  “uplifted.”  ® Seep.  29.

32

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  /ET.  55

tion  well,  and,  by  Hercules,  it  is  no  more  than  you  deserve.
For  that  person  told  me  three  times  over  that  you  had
written  to  him  to  say  that  I had  taken  measures  about  his
affair  in  accordance  with  a letter  from  Memmius,  and  this
pleased  him  very  much.  But  Patron  having  urged  me  to
request  your  Areopagus  to  cancel  their  minute,  made  in  the
archonship  of  Polycharmus,^  it  seemed  best  to  Xeno,  and
afterwards  to  Patron  himself,  that  I should  write  to  Mem-
mius, who  had  started  for  Mitylene  the  day  before  my
arrival  at  Athens,  to  induce  him  to  write  to  his  agents  that
it  might  be  done  with  his  free  consent.  For  Xeno  felt  sure
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  get  this  concession  from  the
Areopagites  if  Memmius  were  unwilling.  Now  Memmius
had  laid  aside  his  design  of  building,  but  he  was  angry  with
Patron.  So  I wrote  him  a carefully  expressed  letter,  of
which  I inclose  you  a copy.

Please  comfort  Pilia  with  a message  from  me.  For  I will
tell  you,  though  don’t  tell  her.  I received  a packet  which
contained  Pilia’s  letter.  I abstracted,  opened,  and  read  it.
It  was  in  very  sympathetic  terms.  The  letters  you  got  from
Brundisium  without  one  from  me  you  must  regard  as  having
been  sent  when  I was  unwell ; ^ for  don’t  take  seriously  the
excuse  I mentioned  of  expense.®  Take  care  to  let  me  know
everything,  but,  above  all,  take  care  of  your  health.

^ Eponymus  archon  of  B.C.  54-53.

See  Letter  CXCII.

^ I venture  to  propose  to  read  nummariam  (or  nummaria  rei)  excusa-
tionem,  explaining  it  by  Cicero’s  jocose  reference  to  his  economy  in  paper,
in  Letter  CLXXXVI  (p.  10).  The  MSS.  have  some  Greek  letters,
vojjiavdpia  me.  Cicero  says,  “ My  real  excuse  for  not  writing  was  ill-
ness ; for  don’t  suppose  I was  really  stingy  about  buying  paper  and  its
cost  ! ” Both  the  excuse  and  its  withdrawal  are,  of  course,  jests  (and  not
very  good  ones).  The  mistake  may  possibly  have  arisen  from  Cicero
writing  the  Latin  word  in  Greek  letters.

A V,  II ; F II,  8 TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS

33

CC  (F  II,  8)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (AT  ROME)
Athens,  6 July

What  ! Do  you  suppose  that  I meant  you  to  send  me  an
account  of  gladiatorial  matches,  of  postponements  of  trials,
of  robberies  by  Chrestus,  and  such  things  as,  when  I am  at
Rome,  nobody  ventures  to  retail  to  me  ? See  what  a high
opinion  I have  of  you — and  not,  indeed,  undeservedly,  for  I
have  never  yet  known  anyone  with  keener  political  instincts
— I don’t  care  for  your  writing  to  me  even  the  daily  occur-
rences in  the  most  important  affairs  of  the  state,  unless  there
is  something  specially  affecting  myself.  Other  people  will
write  about  them  ; many  will  convey  news  of  them  : common
report  itself  will  bring  many  of  them  to  my  ears.  Therefore
it  is  not  things  past  or  present  that  I expect  from  you,  but
things  to  come — for  you  are  a man  who  sees  far  in  front  of
you — so  that,  having  got  a view  of  the  ground  plan  of  the
Republic  from  your  pen,  I may  satisfy  myself  as  to  what  the
future  building  is  to  be.  As  yet,  however,  I have  no  fault
to  find  with  you ; for  it  is  impossible  for  you  to  see  farther
than  any  one  of  us,  and  especially  myself,  who  have  spent
several  days  with  Pompeyin  conversation  exclusively  political,
which  neither  can  nor  ought  to  be  committed  to  writing.
Only  take  this  as  certain,  that  Pompey  is  an  admirable
citizen,  and  prepared  in  courage  and  wisdom  alike  to  meet
every  contingency  that  needs  to  be  provided  against  in  the
political  situation.  Wherefore  devote  yourself  to  him  : he
wull  receive  you,  believe  me,  with  open  arms.  For  he  takes
the  same  view,  as  we  ever  do,  as  to  who  are  good  and  bad
citizens.  After  spending  exactly  ten  days  in  Athens,  and
having  seen  a great  deal  of  our  friend  Caninius  Callus,’

^ L.  Caninius  Callus,  a strong  supporter  of  Pompey,  tribune  b.c.  56.
What  he  was  doing  at  Athens  is  uncertain  ; it  is  suggested  that  he
was  propraetor  of  Achaia,  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  such  an  officer
existed  at  this  period.

II.

D

34

CICERO'S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  /ET.  55

I am  starting  on  my  journey  to-day,  the  6th  of  July,  the  day
on  which  I send  you  this  letter.  All  interests  of  mine  I
desire  to  have  the  benefit  of  your  greatest  attention,  but
nothing  more  so  than  that  the  time  of  my  provincial  govern-
ment should  not  be  extended.  That  is  all  in  all  to  me.
When,  how,  and  by  whose  means  this  is  to  be  worked,  you
will  settle  best  for  yourself.

CCI  (a  V,  12)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

At  Sea  (about  15  July)

A SEA  voyage  is  a serious  business,  and  in  the  month  of
July  too.  We  got  to  Delos  on  the  sixth  day  from  Athens.
On  the  6th  of  July  we  got  from  the  Piraeus  to  Zoster,  with  a
troublesome  wind,  which  kept  us  there  on  the  7th.  On  the
8th  we  got  to  Ceos  with  a pleasant  voyage.  Thence  to
Gyaros  with  a violent  wind,  though  it  wasn’t  against  us.
Hence  to  Syros,  and  from  that  to  Delos ; we  in  both  cases
accomplished  the  passage  quicker  than  we  could  have
wished.  You  have  had  experience  of  Rhodian  open  vessels  :
they  are  the  worst  things  in  the  world  for  rough  water.
Accordingly,  my  intention  is  not  to  be  at  all  in  a hurry,  nor
to  stir  from  Delos  unless  I see  “ Gyrae’s  headlands  ” all
clear.  ^

I wrote  to  Messalla  at  once  from  Gyaros,  directly  I heard,
and  also  (which  was  my  own  idea)  to  Hortensius,  for  whom,
indeed,  I felt  much  sympathy.^  But  I am  very  anxious  to

^ Reading  aKpa  Vvpswv,  which  I think  Tyrrell  and  Purser  have
established.  Gyrse,  the  southern  promontory  of  Tenos,  due  north
of  Delos,  would  be  a weather  guide.  If  clear,  fair  weather  might  be
expected  ; if  cloudy,  bad.

^ For  the  acquittal  of  Messalla  and  the  hissing  that  his  uncle  and
advocate  got  for  it,  see  Letter  CXCV.  I have  translated  Madvig’s
reading,  ad  Messallam,  omitting  a: (which  by  Cicero’s  usage  should  be
de  te).  The  point  is  rather  that  Cicero  had  written  before  he  heard  from
Atticus,  on  getting  the  news  from  Cselius.

\ V,  12,  13

TO  ATTICUS

35

get  your  letter  about  what  is  said  as  to  that  verdict,  and,
indeed,  about  the  political  situation  generally — a letter
written  somewhat  more  from  the  politician’s  point  of  view,
for  you  are  now,  with  the  aid  of  Thallumetus,  studying  my
books  ^ — a letter  from  which  I may  learn  not  what  is  actually
happening  (for  that  very  “superior  person,”  your  client
Helonius,  can  do  that  for  me),  but  what  is  going  to  happen.
By  the  time  you  read  this  our  consuls  will  have  been  elected.
You  will  be  able  to  make  out  all  about  Caesar,  Pompey,  and
the  trials  themselves.  My  own  affairs,  since  you  are  staying
on  in  Rome,  pray  put  straight.  As  to  the  point  I forgot  to
mention  in  my  answer  to  you — as  to  the  brickwork,  and  as
to  the  water,  if  anything  can  be  done,  pray  shew  your
accustomed  kindness.  I think  the  latter  of  very  great
importance  from  my  own  ideas  as  well  as  from  what  you
say  about  it.  So  please  have  it  done.  Again,  if  Philippus
makes  any  application,  do  exactly  what  you  would  have
done  in  your  own  case.^  I will  write  at  greater  length  to
you  when  I have  come  to  land ; at  present  I am  well  out
at  sea.

CCII  (A  V,  13)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Ephesus  (after  22  July)

■b

We  arrived  at  Ephesus  on  the  22nd  of  July,  on  the  ^oth  day
after  the  battle  of  Bovillae.^  I accomplished  the  voyage
without  alarm  and  without  sea-sickness,  but  somewhat  slowly,
owing  to  the  crankiness  of  the  Rhodian  open  ships.  About
the  throng  of  legations  and  private  suitors,  and  about  the
extraordinary  crowd  of  people  that  met  me  even  at  Samos,
but  to  a surprising  extent  at  Ephesus,  I presume  that  you

^ His  treatise  de  Republica.  Thallumetus  is  Atticus’s  slave,  or  per-
haps freedman,  and  reader.  . •.

^ See  next  letter.  Philippus  seems  to  be  the  contractor  for  the  work.

® The  murder  of  Clodius,  18  January,  b.c.  52.  .t..,  .'

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  MT.  55

36

have  heard,  or — “ well,  what  is  all  that  to  me  ? ” ’ The  fact  is,
however,  that  the  tithe-collectors,  as  though  I had  come  with
imperium^  the  Greeks,  as  though  I were  governor  in  Ephesus,^
presented  themselves  to  me  with  eagerness.  This  will,  I
am  sure,  convince  you  that  the  professions  I have  been
making  these  many  years  past  are  now  being  put  to  the  test.
But  I shall,  I hope,  stick  to  the  principles  which  I learnt
from  you,  and  give  full  satisfaction  to  everyone,  and  with
the  less  difficulty  that  the  contracts  in  my  province  have
been  settled.^

I did  not  neglect  your  little  affairs  at  Ephesus,  and
although  Thermus^  before  my  arrival  had  been  most
courteous  in  his  promises  to  all  your  agents,  yet  I intro-
duced Philogenes  and  Seius  to  him,  and  recommended
Xeno  of  Apollonis.  In  a word,  he  undertook  to  do  every-
thing. I besides  submitted  to  Philogenes  an  account  of  the
note  of  exchange,  which  I had  negotiated  with  you.  So
enough  of  that.  I return  to  affairs  in  the  city.  In  the  name
of  fortune,  since  you  are  remaining  at  Rome,  I beg  of  you,
use  every  means  of  supporting  and  fortifying  the  position
that  I am  not  to  be  left  in  office  more  than  a year,  without
even  an  intercalation.  Next  fulfil  all  my  commissions,  and
especially  in  regard  to  that  domestic  matter  get  rid  of  the
difficulty  with  which  you  are  acquainted.®  Next  to  that  do
so  in  the  matter  of  Caesar  : it  was  on  your  advice  that  I set
my  heart  on  him,  and  I do  not  repent.  And,  as  you  well
understand  how  it  is  my  nature  to  know  and  care  for  what
is  going  on  in  public  affairs — going  on,  do  I say  ? nay,

^ These  words  Boot  and  others  suppose  to  be  put  into  Atticus’s
mouth  : “ Or  I suppose  you  will  say,  ‘ What  have  I to  do  with  that  ? ’ ”
It  is  unlike  Cicero  to  suppose  Atticus  to  be  indifferent  to  anything  that
affects  himself.  It  would  be  easier  with  Schiitz  to  alter  me  to  te.
After  the  aut  he  was  going  to  put  another  infinitive  clause,  but  breaks  off
and  dismisses  the  subject,  only  referring  afterwards  to  one  class  of  people
who  came  to  him,  i.e.,  the  ptiblicani.

^ /.^.,  proprsetor  of  Asia,  of  which  Ephesus  was  the  chief  town.

^ The  contracts  for  collecting  the  decumce  for  B.C.  51.  Those  for  the
next  year  he  had  to  superintend.

* Q.  Minucius  Thermus,  propraetor  of  Asia.  He  was  an  Optimate
and  took  the  side  of  Pompey  in  the  civil  war  of  B.C.  49-48,  which  he
survived.

® The  marriage  of  his  daughter,  and  perhaps  his  growing  dissatisfaction
with  Terentia.

A V,  13,  14

TO  ATTICUS

37

rather  what  is  going  to  happen — write  me  everything  at  full
length,  and  that  with  the  utmost  precision,  and  especially
whether  there  is  any  breakdown  in  the  trials  that  have  either
taken  place  or  are  about  to  do  so.  As  to  the  water,  if  you
are  looking  after  it,  and  if  Philippus  is  taking  any  steps,
please  attend  to  what  is  done.

CCIII  (A  V,  14)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Tralles,  28  July

Until  I have  settled  down  somewhere  you  must  not  expect
a long  letter  from  me,  nor  always  written  by  my  own  hand.
As  soon,  however,  as  I have  a moment  to  spare,  you  shall
have  both.  I am  now  journeying  along  a road  which  is
both  hot  and  dusty.  I wrote  yesterday  from  Ephesus  : this
I am  despatching  from  Tralles.^  I expect  to  be  in  my  pro-
vince^ on  the  I St  of  August.  From  that  date,  if  you  love
me,  agitate  for  my  era  to  begin.^  Meanwhile,  however,  the
following  items  of  news  of  a welcome  nature  have  reached
me : first,  that  the  Parthians  are  quiet ; secondly,  that  the
contracts  of  the  publicani  have  been  concluded  ; lastly,  that
a mutiny  among  the  soldiers  has  been  suppressed  by  Appius,
and  their  pay  discharged  up  to  the  13th  of  July.  Asia  has
given  me  an  extraordinarily  good  reception.  My  visit  there
cost  no  one  a farthing.  I trust  that  my  staff  are  respecting
my  reputation.  I am  very  nervous  about  it,  however,  yet  hope
for  the  best.  All  my  staff  have  now  joined  except  your

^ About  forty  miles  south-east  of  Ephesus,  in  Caria,  on  the  road  which
follows  the  general  direction  of  the  Maeander.

® The  province  of  Cilicia  at  this  time  comprised,  besides  Cilicia  itself
(with  Tarsus  as  capital),  Iconium,  part  of  Isauricum,  Pamphylia,  Cibyra,
Apamea,  Synnada,  Cyprus.

* Move  that  my  year’s  government  is  to  count  from  that  day.  The
Greek  words,  kviavawv  TrapdTrrjyfia,  refer  to  the  custom  of  driving  in  a
nail  as  a means  of  counting  the  years.  Cicero  did,  as  a matter  of  fact,
leave  his  province  at  the  end  of  the  following  July.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

38

friend  Tullius.  My  idea  is  to  go  straight  to  the  army,  to
devote  the  rest  of  the  summer  months  to  military  affairs,  the
winter  ones  to  judicial  business.  Pray,  as  you  know  that  I
have  no  less  curiosity  in  politics  than  yourself,  write  me  word
of  everything  occurring  or  about  to  occur.  You  can  do  me
no  greater  favour,  except,  indeed,  that  it  will  be  the  greatest
favour  of  all  if  you  fulfil  my  commissions,  especially  that  “ at
my  own  hearth,”  ^ than  which  you  must  know  I have  nothing
more  at  heart.  This  letter  reeks  of  hurry  and  dust.  Future
ones  shall  go  into  greater  details.

CCIV  (F  III,  5)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (IN  CILICIA)
Tralles,  28  July

I ARRIVED  at  Tralles  on  the  27th  of  July.  There  I found
L.  Lucilius  waiting  for  me  with  your  letter  and  message  ;
than  whom  you  could  have  sent  no  man  either  more  friendly
to  me,  or,  as  I think,  better  suited  to  give  the  information  I
wanted,  or  endowed  with  more  practical  wisdom  himself.
For  myself,  I read  your  letter  with  great  pleasure,  and  also
listened  carefully  to  Lucilius.  For  two  reasons  all  mention  of
past  services  is  now  superfluous  : first,  because  you  think  so
— for  you  say  in  your  letter  that  you  thought  what  I wrote
to  you  about  our  mutual  services,  though  gratifying  to  you,
was  unnecessary,  considering  how  far  back  they  go — and,
secondly,  because  our  friendship  is  well  established  and  our
fidelity  tried  : I will  therefore  pass  over  that  subject,  though
I will  yet  express  the  thanks  which  I owe  you.  For  I have
observed  and  learnt  from  your  letter  that  in  all  your  pro-
ceedings you  kept  in  view  the  object  of  consulting  for  my
interests,  and  of  settling  beforehand  and,  so  to  speak,  pre-
arranging everything  which  would  make  my  administration
easier  and  less  complicated.  When  I tell  you  that  this

ivSofivxov.  See  p.  36.

F III,  5

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER

39

kindness  on  your  part  excites  the  liveliest  gratitude  in  me,  it
naturally  follows  that  I wish  you  to  think  that  it  will  ever  be
and  is  now  an  object  dear  to  me,  that  first  of  all  you  and
your  friends,  and  then  all  the  rest  of  the  world  also,  should
know  that  I am  your  very  warm  friend.  If  there  are  any
people  who  are  not  clear  on  that  point  as  yet,  I think  it  is
rather  that  they  don’t  wish  us  to  entertain  such  feelings  than
that  they  are  ignorant  of  our  doing  so.  But  I am  sure  they
will  not  be  ignorant  of  it : for  the  persons  taking  part  in  our
drama  will  not  be  obscure,  nor  its  action  unimportant.  But
I wish  all  this  to  be  shewn  in  performance  rather  than  in
anything  said  or  written.

You  say  that  the  route  I have  planned  out  makes  you
somewhat  doubtful  whether  you  are  likely  to  see  me  in  the
province.  The  facts  are  these.  When  talking  to  your
freedman  Phania  at  Brundisium,  I remarked  in  the  course
of  conversation  that  I should  be  glad  to  go  to  that  part  of  the
province  first,  which  I thought  would  best  meet  your  wishes.
Whereupon  he  informed  me  that,  as  it  was  your  wish  to  leave
by  sea,  it  would  be  very  convenient  to  you  if  I approached
the  maritime  portion  of  the  province  on  board  ship.  I said
I would  do  so : and  so  I should  have  done,  had  not  our
friend  L.  Clodius  told  me  at  Corcyra  that  I must  by  no  means
do  so : that  you  would  be  at  Laodicea  to  meet  me  when  I
arrived.  That  was  a much  shorter  and  more  convenient
route  for  me,  especially  as  I thought  that  it  was  your
preference.  Your  plans  were  afterwards  changed.  In  these
circumstances  it  will  be  easiest  for  you  to  arrange  what  is  to
be  done : I will  lay  before  you  what  my  plan  is.  On  the
31st  of  July  I expect  to  be  at  Laodicea:  I shall  remain
there  for  a very  few  days  to  get  in  some  money  due  to  me
on  an  exchequer  bill  of  exchange.  I shall  then  direct  my
course  to  the  army,  so  as  to  be  at  Iconium,  as  I think,  about
the  13th  of  August.  But  if  I am  now  making  any  mistake
in  thus  writing — for  I am  at  some  distance  both  from  my
sphere  of  duty  and  the  localities — as  soon  as  I have  begun
my  farther  progress,  I will  employ  the  swiftest  messengers,
and  write  as  often  as  I possibly  can,  to  put  before  you  the
whole  scheme  of  my  days  and  routes.  I have  neither  the
courage  nor  the  right  to  lay  any  burden  upon  you.  Yet,  as
far  as  it  may  be  so  without  inconvenience  to  you,  it  is

40

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  A^.T.  55

really  of  great  importance  to  both  of  us  that  I should  see
you  before  you  leave.  If  any  accident,  however,  makes  this
impossible,  you  may  yet  feel  certain  of  all  the  services  that
I can  render  you,  exactly  as  if  I had  seen  you.  As  to  my
own  affairs,  I shall  not  give  you  any  written  commissions
until  I have  given  up  all  hope  of  a personal  interview.  You
tell  me  that  you  asked  Scaevola  ^ to  take  charge  of  the
province  in  your  absence  until  my  arrival.  I saw  him  at
Ephesus,  and  he  spent  the  three  days  of  my  stay  at  Ephesus
with  me  in  a very  cordial  manner ; but  I did  not  hear  a word
from  him  indicating  any  commission  given  him  by  you.  I
only  wish  he  could  have  obeyed  your  wishes : for  I don’t
think  he  was  unwilling  to  do  so.

CCV  (F  vni,  4)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome,  i August

1 ENVY  you : such  a budget  of  startling  news  is  con-
veyed every  day  to  you  over  there ! First,  the  acquittal
of  Messalla,  then  his  condemnation  : the  election  of  C.
Marcellus  to  the  consulship : M.  Calidius,  after  losing  his
election,  impeached  by  the  two  Gallii : P.  Dolabella  made
one  of  the  quindecimviri.  There ’s  only  one  thing  I don’t
envy  you  for — that  you  have  lost  a most  interesting  spectacle,
and  did  not  see  the  expression  on  the  face  of  Lentulus  Crus
when  he  lost.  But  what  a come  down  for  him  ! He  had
been  so  confident,  had  made  so  sure  of  it ! Dolabella  him-
self had  been  so  doubtful ! And,  by  Hercules,  if  our  friends
the  equites  had  not  been  too  sharp-eyed,  he  would  have  won
9.  almost  by  the  retirement  of  his  opponent.  The  next  item  I
don’t  think  will  surprise  you,  that  Servaeus,  after  becoming
tribune-designate,  has  been  condemned.  C.  Curio  is  can-

Perhaps  Q.  Mucius  Scaevola,  who  w'as  with  Quintus  Cicero  in  Asia.
He  was  tribune  in  B.C.  54,  and  was  therefore  possibly  a Ugatus  of
Appius.

V VIII,  4

M.  CtELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

41

didate  for  the  vacancy  thus  made  by  him.^  It  is  remarkable
how  much  alarm  he  inspires  in  many  people,  who  don’t
know  him  and  his  easy-going  character ; but,  as  I hope  and
desire,  and  to  judge  from  his  present  attitude,  he  will  prefer
to  side  with  the  loyalist  party  and  the  senate.  In  his  present
frame  of  mind  he  is  bubbling  over  with  this  intention.  The
root  and  origin  of  this  feeling  is  that  Caesar,  who  generally
spares  no  expense  in  attaching  to  himself  the  friendship
of  the  lowest  characters,  has  treated  him  with  very  marked
neglect.  And  in  this  there  does  seem  to  me  to  be  a touch
of  humour — which  has  been  noticed  also  to  a great  extent
by  the  rest — that  Curio,  who  never  acts  on  any  fixed  plan,
should  be  thought  to  be  following  a deliberate  policy  and
a deep  design  in  evading  the  counsels  of  those  who  had
exerted  themselves  to  oppose  his  election  to  the  tribuneship
— I mean  the  Laelii  and  Antonii  and  powerful  men  of  that
stamp.

There  has  been  a somewhat  longer  interval  than  usual  ^
between  this  and  my  last  letter,  because  the  successive  post-
ponements of  the  elections  kept  me  more  than  usually  busy,
and  forced  me  to  wait  day  after  day  for  their  result,  that  I
might  give  you  the  information  when  all  was  over.  I have
waited  to  the  ist  of  August.  There  have  been  some  hitches
in  the  praetorian  elections.  Moreover,  what  will  be  the
result  of  my  own  election  I do  not  know : that  of  the
plebeian  aediles’  election  indeed  has,  as  far  as  Hirrus  is
concerned,  amounted  to  a strong  expression  of  opinion  in\
my  favour.  For  that  foolish  proposition  of  his  (which  we
laughed  at  of  old),  and  the  promulgation  of  a law  for  the

^ Messalla,  convicted  (after  his  acquittal  for  ambitus)  under  the
Licinian  law  de  sodalitiis  (see  Letter  CXCV).  M.  Calidius,  praetor
B.C.  57,  accused  now  of  ambitus,  had  himself  formerly  accused  Q.
Gallius  on  the  same  charge.  P.  Cornelius  Dolabella,  afterwards  son-
in-law  of  Cicero,  but  a partisan  of  Caesar  in  the  Civil  War,  is  now  elected
as  one  of  the  quindecimviri  sacris  faciendis.  L.  Cornelius  Lentulus  Crus,
consul  in  b.c.  49,  had  been  praetor  B.C.  58,  a strong  Optimate.  Of
Servaeus  nothing  is  known  ; he  is  prosecuted  for  ambitus  between  his
election  and  the  day  of  entering  office,  and  being  condemned,  is  ipso
facto  incapable  of  taking  it  up.  C.  Curio,  of  whom  we  have  heard  so
often,  the  pupil  and  friend  of  Cicero,  of  whom  he  hoped  such  high
things,  had  ruined  himself  by  his  extravagant  funeral  games,  and  during
his  year  of  office  was  won  over  to  Caesar’s  side  by  being  relieved  by  him
from  his  enormous  debts.

42

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  .ET.  55

appointment  of  a dictator,  brought  M.  Cslius  Vinicianus
suddenly  to  the  ground,  and  caused  him  to  be  loudly  hooted
when  down.  This  was  followed  by  a general  demand  that,
after  that,  Hirrus  should  not  be  elected  curule  sedile.’  J
hope  that  you  will  speedily  hear  about  me  the  news  you
have  hoped  for,  and  about  him  what  you  have  scarcely
ventured  to  hope.

As  to  politics,  I had  by  this  time  ceased  to  hope  for  any
new  development ; but  at  a meeting  of  the  senate  in  the
temple  of  Apollo  on  the  22nd  of  July,  upon  a motion  being
brought  before  it  in  reference  to  the  pay  of  Pompey’s
soldiers,  mention  was  made  of  the  legion  with  which
Pompey  had  furnished  C.  Caesar — in  what  division  was  it
reckoned,  for  what  purpose  was  it  required  ? Pompey
having  answered  that  “it  was  in  Gaul,”  he  was  compelled  to
say  that  “ he  - would  withdraw  the  legion.”  He  didn’t  say
this  at  once,  but  only  on  the  subject  being  brought  forward
and  under  a fire  of  invective  from  his  detractors.^  He  was
then  asked  about  the  appointment  of  a successor  to  C.  Caesar;  ^
and  on  this  point  a resolution  was  passed  that  “ Cn.  Pompeius
should  return  to  the  city  as  soon  as  possible,  in  order  that
the  question  of  the  succession  to  the  provinces  might  be
debated  while  he  was  in  the  house.”  For  Pompey  was  on

* For  Hirrus,  too,  had  proposed  that  Pompey  should  be  made
dictator.  The  old  dictatorship  was  forgotten  ; what  people  remembered
was  Sulla’s  unconstitutional  dictatorship  and  the  proscriptions.

^ Pompey,  though  proconsul  of  Spain,  was  retained  on  the  plea  of  the
public  service  outside  the  city  (ad  zirdem),  as  proconsul  with  imperiiun.
As  such  he  commanded  all  troops  in  Italy  (for  the  consuls,  while  in  the
city,  had  no  military  command).  He  also,  by  the  special  terms  of  his
appointment  as  prcefectus  annonce,  had  the  right  for  five  years  from  b.c.
57  to  enlist  soldiers  in  any  province.  In  B.C.  55  he  had  enlisted  a legion
in  Cisalpine  Gaul;  but  in  B.c.  53,  in  view  of  a threatened  rebellion
throughout  Transalpine  Gaul,  Caesar  had  asked  him  to  order  this  legion
to  join  him,  and  Pompey  had  done  so.  We  shall  see  that  its  withdrawal
at  the  end  of  this  year,  under  pretext  of  a Parthian  war,  was  one  of  Caesar’s
alleged  grievances  (Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  i ; B.  C.  i.  4,  ii).  Of  the  troops
Pompey  retained  in  Italy  the  main  part  were  at  Ariminum,  the  frontier
town  of  Italy  proper  and  Gaul.  Hence,  when  Caesar  crossed  the
Rubicon  in  B.c.  49,  he  found  most  of  the  towns  on  the  eastern  coast
garrisoned  by  cohorts  under  Pompey’s  officers.

As  to  whether  Caesar  was  to  stay  in  Gaul  over  the  elections  of
B.c.  49,  or  come  home  before  the  full  term  of  his  governorship  granted
him  by  the  law  had  expired.

F VIII,  4;  A V,  15

TO  ATTICUS

43

the  point  of  starting  for  Ariminum  to  join  the  army  ; and  in
fact  did  go  at  once.  I think  that  business  will  come  on  on
the  13th  of  August.  Some  conclusion  will  be  come  _to  for
certain,  or  a scandalous  exercise  of  the  veto  will  hinder  it.
For  in  the  course  of  the  debate  Pompey  let  fall  the  expres-
sion, ‘ ‘ Everybody  QOJglit  to-b  e -obedient  to  the  senate.  ” F or
my  paffphowever,  there  is  nothing  I look  forward  to  so
much  as  to  hearing  Paullus  delivering  his  vote  first  as  consul-
elect.^

I remind  you  often  about  Sittius’s  bond,^  for  I am  anxious
that  you  should  understand  that  it  is  of  great  importance  to
me : so  also  about  the  panthers,  that  you  should  send  for
some  natives  of  Cibyra,^  and  see  that  they  are  shipped  to
me.  Besides  this,  we  have  been  told,  and  it  is  now  regarded
as  certain,  that  the  king  of  Egypt  is  dead.  Take  care  to
write  to  me  what  policy  you  recommend  to  me,  what  the
condition  of  that  kingdom  is,  and  who  has  charge  of  it.^

I August.

CCVI  (A  V,  15)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Laodicea,  3 August

I ARRIVED  at  Laodicea  on  the  31st  of  July.  From  this  day,
therefore,  count  the  beginning  of  my  year.  Nothing  could
be  more  warmly,  more  affectionately  welcomed,  than  my
arrival.  But  you  can  scarcely  believe  how  bored  I am  with
the  business.  Has  not  that  intellectual  range,  which  you
know  so  well,  wide  enough  field  ? and  is  my  splendid

‘ L.  iEmilius  Paullus,  who  had  now  been  or  would  be  elected  before
the  next  meeting  of  the  senate,  was  a strong  Optimate.  The  consuls-
designate  were  always  called  on  first  for  their  sententia  in  the  senate.

2 Letter  CXCV.

The  district  of  Pisidia  included  in  the  province  of  Cilicia.

Ptolemy,  father  of  Cleopatra,  of  whose  restoration  (b.c.  55)  we  have
heard  so  much,  left  a young  son  who,  as  king,  ordered  Pompey’s
murder  in  B.C.  48,  and  himself  perished  in  the  course  of  the  Alexandrine
war  of  B.c.  48-47.

44

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  SI,  JET.  55

industry  likely  to  rust  unemployed  ? Why,  just  look  at  this  !
That  I should  be  sitting  in  court  at  Laodicea,  while  A.  Plotius
is  doing  so  at  Rome  ! And  that,  while  our  friend  has  that
great  army,  I should  have  nominal  command  of  two  wretched
legions  ! But  the  fact  is,  that  it  is  not  such  things  as  these
that  I miss  : it  is  the  broad  daylight  of  life,  the  forum,  the
city,  my  town  house,  you  that  I miss.  But  I will  endure  it
as  best  I may,  provided  that  it  does  not  last  more  than  a
year.  If  there  is  any  extension,  I am  lost ! But  this  may
easily  be  resisted,  if  only  you  are  in  Rome.

You  ask  me  what  I am  doing.  Why,  upon  my  life,  I
am  living  at  a vast  expense.  I am  wonderfully  pleased
with  this  course.  My  disinterested  conduct,  founded  on
your  injunctions,  is  so  admirable,  that  I am  afraid  that  the
money  I took  up  from  you  will  have  to  be  paid  by  a fresh  loan.
I avoid  reopening  any  wounds  inflicted  by  Appius,  but  they
are  patent  and  cannot  be  concealed.  I am  starting  to-day,
the  3rd  of  August,  on  which  I despatch  this  letter,  from
Laodicea  to  the  camp  in  Lycaonia:  thence  I think  of  going
to  the  Taurus,  that  by  means  of  a pitched  battle  with  Moera-
genes  ^ I may,  if  possible,  settle  the  question  of  your  slave.

“ The  saddle ’s  on  the  ox  : no  load  for  us  : ”

But  I shall  put  up  with  it,  only,  as  you  love  me,  let  me  be
only  kept  a year.  Mind  you  are  in  town  at  the  right
moment,  to  keep  every  senator  up  to  the  mark.  I am  feel-
ing wonderfully  anxious,  because  I have  had  no  news  of
what  is  going  on  among  you  for  a long  time.  Wherefore,  as
I have  said  before  in  my  letters,  see  that  I am  kept
acquainted  with  politics  as  well  as  everything  else.  I know
this  letter  will  be  somewhat  long  in  reaching  you,  but  I am
intrusting  it  to  a familiar  and  intimate  friend,  C.  Andronicus
of  Puteoli.  You,  however,  will  have  frequent  opportunities
of  giving  letters  to  the  letter-carriers  of  the  publicani.,  by  the
favour  of  the  head  contractors  for  the  pasture-tax  and  harbour
dues  of  our  districts.^

^ A robber  chief,  with  whom  a runaway  slave  of  Atticus  had  taken
refuge.

^ Sciptura  is  the  money  paid  for  the  pasturing  of  cattle  on  the  public
lands  in  a'province.  Magistri  are  the  niagistri  societatum^  the  managers

A V,  15,  16

TO  ATTICUS

45

CCVII  (A  V,  16)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Cilicia,  August

Though  the  letter-carriers  of  the  publicani  are  starting
while  I am  actually  travelling  and  on  the  road,  and  though  I
am  still  engaged  on  my  progress,  yet  I thought  I must
snatch  a moment  to  prevent  your  thinking  me  forgetful  of
your  charge.  So  I have  sat  down  actually  on  the  road  to
write  you  in  brief  what  follows,  which  really  calls  for  a some-
what lengthy  essay.  Let  me  tell  you,  then,  that  with  the
highest  possible  reputation  I entered,  on  the  31st  of  July,
into  a province  in  a state  of  desolation  and  lasting  ruin ;
that  I stayed  three  days  at  Laodicea,  three  at  Apamea,  the
same  at  Synnada.^  It  was  the  same  tale  everywhere  : they
could  not  pay  the  poll-tax : everybody’s  securities  were  ^
sold : groans,  lamentations,  from  the  towns : acts  of
savagery  worthy  of  some  wild  beast,  rather  than  of  a man.  In
short,  they  are  absolutely  weary  of  their  life.^  However,  the
wretched  towns  are  somewhat  relieved  by  my  costing  them
nothing,  nor  my  legates,  nor  quaestor,  nor  anyone.  Let  me
tell  you  that  I not  only  refuse  to  accept  hay,  which  is
customarily  furnished  under  the  Julian  law,  but  that  no  one  of
us  accepts  even  firewood,  or  anything  else,  except  four  beds
and  a roof  to  cover  us  j in  many  districts  we  do  not  accept

of  the  companies  of  publicani.  Dioecesis  (which  Cicero  sometimes  writes
in  Greek  letters,  di6iKr}<nc)is  a “jurisdiction  ” or  conventus.^  a district  of
a province.  Thus  in  Fatn.  xiii.  67,  Cicero  says  that  the  province  of
Cilicia  had  three  Asiatic  “dioceses,”  viz.,  Laodicea,  Synnada,  Apamea.
The'distrTcts  here  must  include  those  south  of  the  Taurus  and  bordering
on  the  sea.

^ The  three  Asiatic  diceceses,  joined  to  the  province  of  Cilicia.

^ In  this  brief  summing-up  of  the  state  of  things  following  the  ad-
ministration of  Appius,  Cicero  perhaps  may  plead  that  he  is  only  retail-
ing what  he  has  heard  in  an  ex  parte  statement,  but  he  seems  to  confirm
it  in  subsequent  letters,  and  it  makes  one  sorry  for  the  fulsome  tone  of
his  letters  to  Appius  himself.

46

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  .CT.  55

even  a roof,  but  remain,  as  a rule,  under  canvas.  Accordingly,
we  are  greeted  by  extraordinary  throngs  from  farms,  villages,
houses,  every  sort  of  place.  By  Hercules,  on  my  mere
arrival,  the  justice,  purity,  and  merciful  heart  of  your  Cicero
seems  to  give  them  new  life : so  far  has  he  surpassed  every-
one’s hopes.  Appius,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  my  arrival,
hurried  to  the  most  distant  part  of  the  province,  right  up  to
Tarsus : there  he  is  holding  sessions.  About  the  Parthian
not  a word : but,  nevertheless,  some  who  come  from  those
parts  announce  that  some  cavalry  of  ours  have  been  cut  to
pieces.  Bibulus  even  now  is  not  so  much  as  thinking  of  ap-
proaching his  province.  People  say  that  he  is  acting  thus
because  he  wishes  to  leave  it  somewhat  later.^  We  are
making  all  haste  to  the  camp,  which  is  two  days’  journey
away.

CCVIII  (A  V,  17)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Lycaonia,  August

I HAVE  received  a packet  of  letters  from  Rome  without  one
from  you,  for  which,  granting  you  to  be  well  and  in  Rome,
I imagine  the  fault  to  be  Philotimus’s,  not  yours.  I dictate
this  letter  sitting  in  my  carriage,  on  my  way  to  the  camp,  from
which  I am  two  days’  journey  distant.  In  a fe^w  days’  time
I am  going  to  have  men  on  whom  I can  rely  to  take  letters.
Accordingly,  I reserve  myself  for  that.  However,  I will  just
say,  though  I should  prefer  your  hearing  this  from  others —
I am  so  conducting  myself  in  the  province  that  no  farthing
is  spent  on  anyone.  This  is  owing  also  to  the  careful  conduct
of  legates,  tribunes,  and  prefects.  For  one  and  all  entertain
a surprising  desire  to  vie  with  each  other  in  maintaining  my
reputation.  My  friend  Lepta  is  wonderful  in  that  respect.
But  at  present  I am  in  a hurry : I will  write  everything  in

^ Bibulus  did  not  return  till  B.C.  49,  some  months  after  Cicero.  See
Letter  CCXCIII.

A V,  17

TO  ATTICUS

47

full  to  you  in  a few  days.  The  younger  Deiotarus,^  who  has
received  the  title  of  king  from  the  senate,  has  taken  my  son
and  nephew  with  him  to  his  own  dominions.  So  long  as  I am
in  the  summer  camp,  I thought  that  the  safest  place  for  the
boys.  Sestius  has  written  me  an  account  of  his  conversation
with  you  about  my  domestic  anxiety,  which  is  a very  serious
one,  and  of  what  your  opinion  is.  Pray  throw  yourself  into  that
matter,  and  write  me  word  what  can  be  done  and  what  you
think.  He  also  told  me  that  Hortensius  had  said  something
or  other  about  the  extension  of  my  provincial  government.
He  promised  me  at  Cumae  that  he  would  most  energetically
plead  for  my  being  kept  here  only  a year.  If  you  have  any
affection  for  me,  strengthen  this  position.  I cannot  tell
you  how  against  the  grain  my  absence  from  you  is.  At  the
same  time,  too,  I hope  that  my  present  reputation  for  justice
and  purity  will  be  all  the  more  conspicuous  if  I quit  the
province  early.  This  is  what  happened  to  Scaevola,^  who
governed  Asia  only  nine  months.  Our  friend  Appius,  as
soon  as  he  saw  that  I was  on  the  point  of  arriving,  left
Laodicea  and  went  as  far  as  Tarsus.  There  he  is  holding
an  assize,  though  I am  actually  in  the  province.  However,
I do  not  make  any  fuss  about  this  slight  upon  myself ;
for  I have  enough  to  do  in  healing  the  wounds  which  have
been  inflicted  upon  the  province.  This  I am  taking  care  to
do  with  as  little  reflexion  upon  him  as  possible  : but  I should
like  you  to  tell  our  friend  Brutus  ^ that  it  was  not  very  polite
of  him  to  remove  to  the  farthest  possible  distance  on  my
arrival.

^ Son  and  successor  of  the  Deiotarus,  tetrarch  of  Galatia,  whom
Cicero  defended.  The  younger  man’s  title  was  probably  granted  him
for  money,  through  one  of  the  proconsuls  of  Cilicia  or  Asia ; some
territory  was  attached  to  it,  as  he  had  a military  force,  with  which  he
helped  Cassius  against  the  Parthians  (xi.  Phil.  § 31).

^ Quintus  Mucius  Scaevola,  ‘ ‘ the  most  eloquent  of  lawyers  and  the  best
lawyer  of  orators,”  was  consul  B.c.  95,  and  afterwards  proconsul  in  Asia,
and  Pontifex  Maximus  a few  years  afterwards.  He  fell  in  the  Marian
massacre  of  B.c.  82.

M.  Brutus,  who  had  married  a daughter  of  Appius.

48

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

CCIX  (f  VIII,  5)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome  (August)

How  far  you  are  anxious  about  the  peaceful  state  of  your
province  and  the  neighbouring  regions  I don’t  know : for
myself,  I am  in  great  suspense.  For  if  we  could  only  arrange
matters  in  such  a fashion,  that  the  war  should  just  be  of  a
magnitute  to  correspond  with  your  forces,  and  that  we
should  gain  just  enough  success  for  a triumph,  without  en-
countering the  serious  contest  awaiting  you,  then  nothing
could  be  so  much  to  be  wished.  As  it  is,  if  the  Parthian  stirs
at  all,  I know  that  the  struggle  will  not  be  a slight  one.
Moreover,  your  army  is  scarcely  large  enough  to  hold  a
single  pass.  No  one,  however,  takes  that  into  account ; but
everything  is  expected  from  a man  at  the  head  of  a public
department,  as  though  he  had  been  refused  nothing  which
was  required  to  put  him  in  the  most  absolute  state  of  pre-
paration. Added  to  this,  I don’t  see  any  chance  of  a suc-
cessor being  named  for  you,  owing  to  the  controversy  about
the  Gauls.  Although  on  this  point  I think  you  have  settled
in  your  own  mind  what  to  do,  nevertheless,  to  enable  you  to
settle  it  the  earlier,  I thought,  as  I now  ^esee  that  conting-
ency, that  I ought  to  keep  you  informed.  For  you  know  the
way  things  commonly  go  : a settlement  oT  the  Gauls  will  be
passed ; some  one  will  be  found  to  veto  it : then  up  will  get
some  one  else  to  veto  the  other  provinces,  unless  the  senate
is  allowed  to  pass  a vote  about  them  all  without  inter-
ference. This  is  the  sort  of  game  that  will  be  kept  up  briskly
and  long,  and  so  long  that  more  than  two  years  will  be  wasted
in  these  intrigues^  If  I had  any  news  in  politics  to  tell  you,
I would  have  followed  my  usual  habit  of  carefully  retailing
in  my  letter  not  only  what  had  happened,  but  also  what  I
expected  to  be  the  result  of  it.  In  point  of  fact,  everything
seems  to  have  stuck,  so  to  speak,  in  the  ditch.  Marcellus  is
trying  to  push  that  same  motion  about  the  provinces,  but  has

F VIII,  5,  9 M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

49

not  as  yet  succeeded  in  getting  a quorum^  If,  after  this  year
is  over,  Curio  as  tribune,  and  fhe  same  motion  about  the
provinces  come  upon  the  stage,  you  cannot  fail  to  see  how
easy  it  will  be  to  stop  all  business,  and  how  much  Caesar,
and  those  who  care  nothing  for  the  Republic 'wKe“h  Their
own  interests  are  involved,  hope  that  it  may  be  s^.

CCX  (F  VIII,  9)

M.  C^:LIUS  l^UFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome,  2 September

“Is  that  the  way  you  have  treated  Hirrus  ?”  quoth  you.  Nay,
if  you  only  knew  how  easy  it  was,  what  an  absence  of  even
the  shadow  of  a struggle,  you  would  be  ashamed  that  he
ever  ventured  to  come  forward  as  a rival  candidate  with
you."  However,  after  his  defeat,  he  keeps  a smiling  face,
plays  the  honest  citizen,  and  delivers  his  votes  against
Caesar ; blames  the  delay ; attacks  Curio,  too,  with  consider-
able violence ; has  quite  changed  his  habits  since  his  defeat.
Besides,  he  who  has  hitherto  never  shewn  his  face  in  the
forum,  and  has  had  little  to  do  with  the  law  courts,  now
pleads  cases  of  slaves  claiming  freedom,^  though  seldom  after
midday.  I told  you  in  one  of  my  letters  that  the  business  of
the  provinces  was  to  be  settled  on  the  13th  of  August :
well,  the  trial  of  Marcellus,  consul-designate,  interfered  with

' See  Letter  CCV.  The  motion  of  Marcellus  about  the  provinces
was  to  come  on  the  13th  of  August.  According  to  Willem’s  Le  Shtat  (ii.
pp.  167,  589)  the  lex  Pompeia  de  provinciis  enacted  a minimum  number
of  senators  for  the  passing  of  a decree  as  to  the  provinces.

^ /.(?.,  for  the  augurship.

® Liberates  causas.  This  phrase  does  not  occur  in  Cicero,  though  it
does  in  Terence  and  in  Quintilian.  Some  of  the  editors,  therefore,
have  doubted  as  to  its  genuineness  or  its  meaning  here.  The  point  seems
to  be  that  Hirrus,  to  gain  popularity,  now  took  up  the  cases  of  the
humblest  clients,  but  yet  did  not  exert  himself  to  come  to  the  courts
in  the  afternoons.  Law  business  would  generally  end  between  twelve
and  one,  but  sometimes  cases  were  renewed  after  the  midday  rest  and
meal.

50

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  /ET.  55

that.  The  matter  was  postponed  till  the  ist  of  September.
They  haven’t  even  been  able  to  make  a house.  I send  this
letter  on  the  2nd  of  September,  up  to  which  date  nothing
has  been  decided  any  more  than  before.  As  far  as  I can  see
this  question  will  be  transferred  to  next  year  unsettled,  and,
as  well  as  I can  guess,  you  will  have  to  leave  some  one  behind
you  to  take  charge  of  the  province.^  For  the  appointment
of  a successor  is  not  freed  from  difficulties,  now  that  it  is
sought  to  put  the  Gauls,  the  assignment  of  which  is  vetoed,
under  the  same  category  as  the  rest  of  the  provinces.^  I
have  no  doubt  of  this  being  the  case : and  it  has  made  me
the  more  determined  to  write  to  you,  that  you  might  prepare
yourself  for  this  eventuality.

In  nearly  every  letter  I have  mentioned  the  subject  of  the
panthers  to  you.  It  will  be  a disgrace  to  you  that  Patiscus
has  sent  ten  panthers  to  Curio,  and  that  you  should  not  send
many  times  more.  And  these  very  beasts,  as  well  as  ten  more
from  Africa,  Curio  has  presented  to  me,  lest  you  should  think
that  he  does  not  knowhow  to  make  any  presents  except  landed
estates.  If  you  will  only  not  forget,  and  send  for  some  men  of
Cibyra,  and  also  transmit  a letter  to  Pamphylia — for  it  is  there
that  they  are  said  to  be  mostly  captured — you  will  effect  what
you  choose.  I am  all  the  more  earnest  about  this  now,  because
I think  I shall  have  to  furnish  the  exhibition  entirely  apart
from  my  colleague.  Pray  lay  this  injunction  upon  yourself.
It  is  your  way  to  take  much  trouble  willingly,  as  it  is  mine  for
the  most  part  to  take  none.  In  this  business  you  have
nothing  to  do  but  speak — that  is,  to  give  an  order  and  a
commission.  For  as  soon  as  the  beasts  have  been  captured,
you  have  men  to  feed  and  transport  them  in  those  whom  I
have  sent  over  on  the  affair  of  Sittius’s  bond.  I think  also
that,  if  you  give  me  any  hope  in  your  letters,  I shall  send
some  more  men  across.

^ Cicero,  as  a fact,  did  leave  his  quaestor  in  charge  of  the  province.
At  the  end  of  a year  a provincial  governor  could  do  this,  though  he
remained  responsible  through  his  nominee.

^ Up  to  this  time  the  government  of  the  Gauls  had  been  arranged  for
till  the  end  of  B.c.  49  by  a lex.  The  proposal  to  have  a successor  allotted
for  them  in  the  ordinary  way  raised  the  entire  question  of  Caesar’s  rights,
and  the  resolution  in  the  senate  to  go  on  with  allotting  the  provinces
as  usual  would  be  vetoed  ah  initio  in  order  to  cover  the  case  of  the
Gauls.

F vin,  9 ; XV,  3 TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO

51

I recommend  to  you  M.  Feridius,  a Roman  knight,  a son
of  a friend  of  mine,  a good  and  active  young  man,  who  is
about  to  arrive  in  your  province  on  business  of  his  own,  and
I beg  you  to  count  him  among  the  number  of  your  friends.
He  wishes  that  certain  lands,  from  which  their  townships
draw  revenue,  should  by  your  favour  (which  you  can  easily
and  honourably  grant)  be  relieved  from  this  burden : you
will  have  obliged  men  who  are  both  grateful  and  honest.

I would  not  have  you  think  that  Favonius  ^ owed  his
defeat  to  the  men  of  the  pavement ; all  the  most  respectable
men  abstained  from  voting  for  him.  Your  friend  Pompey
plainly  objects  to  Caesar  keeping  a province  with  an  army,
and  being  at  the  same  time  consul.  However,  the  motion
he  himself  made  in  the  senate  was  that  no  decree  ought  to
be  passed  at  this  time.  Scipio’s  ^ was,  that  the  question  of
Gallic  provinces  should  be  brought  before  the  house  on
I St  March,  and  no  other  question  combined  with  it.^  This
motion  made  Cornelius  Balbus  ^ pull  a long  face,  and  I
know  that  he  remonstrated  with  Scipio.  Calidius,  in  con-
ducting his  defence,  was  very  eloquent ; in  bringing  his
accusation,  rather  ineffective.^

CCXI  (F  XV,  3)

TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO  (AT  ROME)
IcoNiuM,  28  August

Ambassadors  sent  to  me  by  Antiochus  of  Commagene
having  arrived  at  the  camp  at  Iconium  on  the  28th  of  August,

’ M.  Favonius,  the  admirer  and  imitator  of  Cato,  was  a good
aristocrat,  but  made  enemies  by  his  bitter  tongue.  He  was  rejected  for
the  praetorship  this  year,  but  apparently  obtained  it  in  the  following
year  (though  there  is  some  uncertainty  on  that  point).

^ Q.  Ceecilius  Metellus  Pius  Scipio,  Pompey’s  father-in-law  and
colleague  in  b.c.  52.

® not  the  other  provinces.

* Caesar’s  friend  and  agent.  See  Letter  CXCVIII.

® Calidius,  accused  by  the  Gallii  (Letter  CCV),  in  his  turn  accused
C.  Claudius  Marcellus,  the  consul-designate.

52

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

and  having  announced  to  me  that  the  son  of  the  king  of  the
Parthians,  whose  wife  was  the  sister  of  the  king  of  the
Armenians,  had  arrived  on  the  Euphrates  with  a very  large
force  of  Parthians,  and  a great  host  of  other  nations  besides,
and  had  actually  begun  the  passage  of  the  Euphrates,  and
that  it  was  reported  that  the  Armenian  king  was  about  to
make  a raid  upon  Cappadocia — I thought  that,  considering
our  close  friendship,  I ought  to  write  and  tell  you  this  news.  I
have  sent  no  public  despatch  for  two  reasons:  first,  because  the
ambassadors  said  that  the  Commagenian  himself  had  at  once
sent  messengers  and  a despatch  to  the  senate ; and,  secondly,
because  I believed  that  M.  Bibulus,  proconsul  of  Syria,  who
started  thither  by  sea  from  Ephesus  about  the  13th  of  August,
seeing  that  he  had  had  the  wind  in  his  favour,  had  by  this
time  arrived  in  his  own  province,  and  I thought  that  the
senate  was  sure  to  get  more  definite  information  on  all  points
in  a despatch  from  him.  For  myself,  considering  the  cir-
cumstances and  the  gravity  of  the  war,  my  chief  anxiety  is
to  retain  by  my  own  leniency  and  purity,  and  the  loyalty  of
our  allies,  what  I can  scarcely  hope  to  retain  by  the  amount
of  my  forces  and  material  resources.  I would  beg  you,  on
your  part,  to  continue  your  habitual  affection  for  me  and
the  defence  of  me  in  my  absence.^

CCXII  (F  III,  6)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  TARSUS)

With  the  Army  in  Cappadocia  (29  August)

When  I compare  my  course  of  action  with  yours,  though  in
maintaining  our  friendship  I do  not  allow  myself  greater
credit  than  I do  you,  yet  I am  more  satisfied  with  my  conduct

^ The  object  of  this  letter  addressed  to  the  head  of  the  Optimate
party,  as  far  as  it  had  a head,  seems  to  be  to  induce  Cato  to  propose  a
reinforcement  for  Cicero,  or  to  prepare  Cato  to  defend  him  in  case  of
failure.  Cato  was  not  in  any  office  at  this  time  ; but  as  an  ex-praetor
he  would  have  a fairly  early  opportunity  of  delivering  a sententia  in  the
senate.

V III,  6

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER

53

than  with  yours.  For  at  Brundisium  I asked  Phania — and  I
imagined  that  I saw  clearly  his  fidelity  to  you  and  knew  what  a
high  place  he  had  in  your  confidence — to  tell  me  to  what  part
of  the  province  he  thought  you  would  like  me  to  come  in  taking
over  the  succession.  Having  been  answered  by  him  that  I
could  not  please  you  more  than  by  going  by  sea  to  Sida,^
although  the  arrival  there  was  not  very  dignified  “ and  much
less  convenient  for  me  on  many  accounts,  I yet  said  that  I
would  do  so.  Again,  having  met  L.  Clodius  in  Corcyra — a
man  so  closely  attached  to  you,  that  in  talking  to  him  I
seemed  to  be  talking  to  you — I told  him  that  I meant  to
arrange  for  my  first  arrival  to  be  at  the  point  at  which
Phania  had  requested  that  it  should  be.  Thereupon,  after
thanking  me,  he  begged  me  very  strongly  to  go  straight
to  Laodicea  : that  you  wished  to  be  on  the  very  frontier  of
the  province,  in  order  to  quit  it  at  the  first  moment ; nay,
that,  had  I not  been  a successor  whom  you  were  anxious  to
see,  you  would  most  likely  have  quitted  before  you  were  re-
lieved. And  this  last  agreed  with  the  letter  which  I had
received  in  Rome,  from  which  I thought  that  I perceived
how  much  in  a hurry  you  were  to  depart.  I answered  Clodius
that  I would  do  so,  and  with  much  greater  pleasure  than  if  I
had  had  to  do  what  I had  promised  Phania.  Accordingly,
I changed  my  plan  and  at  once  sent  a letter  in  my  own  writing
to  you  ; and  this,  I learnt  from  your  letter,  reached  you
in  very  good  time.  With  my  conduct  I am,  for  my  part,
quite  satisfied ; for  nothing  could  be  more  cordial.  Now,
on  the  other  hand,  consider  your  own.  Not  only  were  you
not  at  the  place  where  you  might  have  seen  me  earliest,  but
you  had  gone  such  a distance  as  made  it  impossible  for  me
to  overtake  you  even,  within  the  thirty  days  fixed  by,  I think,
the  Cornelian  law.“  Such  a course  of  action  on  your  part

^ In  Pamphylia,  modern  Esky  Adalia,  then  possessing  a good  harbour,
much  used  by  the  pirates  before  Pompey’s  war.

- An  arrival  by  sea  must  necessarily  prevent  much  of  the  state  and
outward  show  that  the  governor  would  like  to  have  round  him  on  enter-
ing his  province.  Caesar  had  the  same  thought  apparently,  when  he  gives
as  a motive  for  building  his  bridge  on  the  Rhine  that  crossing  by  boats
was  hardly  consonant  with  the  “ dignity  ” of  the  Roman  people.

^ The  lex  Cornelia  of  Sulla  de  ordinandis provinciis,  one  of  the  pro-
visions of  which  was  that  a retiring  governor  must  leave  his  province
within  thirty  days  of  the  arrival  of  his  successor.

54

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  /ET.  55

must  appear  to  those  who  are  ignorant  of  our  feelings  to
each  other  to  indicate  one  who,  to  put  it  at  the  mildest,  is  a
stranger  and  desirous  of  avoiding  a meeting,  while  mine
must  seem  that  of  the  most  closely  united  and  affectionate
of  friends.  And,  after  all,  before  reaching  my  province,  I
received  a letter  from  you,  in  which,  though  you  informed
me  that  you  were  starting  for  Tarsus,  you  yet  held  out  no
uncertain  hope  of  my  meeting  you.  Meanwhile,  certain
persons,  I am  ready  to  believe  out  of  spite — for  that  is  a
vice  widely  spread  and  to  be  found  in  many — yet  who  had
managed  to  get  hold  of  some  plausible  grounds  for  their
gossip,  being  unacquainted  with  the  constancy  of  my  feelings,
tried  to  alienate  my  affection  from  you,  by  saying  that  you
were  holding  an  assize  at  Tarsus,  were  issuing  many  enact-
ments, deciding  actions,  delivering  judgments,  though  you
might  have  guessed  that  your  successor  had  by  this  time
taken  over  your  province — things  (they  remarked)  not  usually
done  even  by  those  who  expect  to  be  relieved  shortly.  I was
not  moved  by  the  talk  of  such  persons  ; nay,  more,  I assure
you,  that  if  you  performed  any  official  act,  I was  prepared
to  consider  myself  relieved  from  trouble,  and  to  rejoice  that
from  being  a government  of  a year,  which  I regarded  as  too
long,  it  had  been  reduced  nearly  to  one  of  eleven  months,  if
in  my  absence  the  labour  of  one  month  were  subtracted.
One  thing,  however,  to  speak  candidly,  does  disturb  me —
that,  considering  the  weakness  of  my  military  force,  the  three
cohorts  which  are  at  their  fullest  strength  should  be  absent,
and  that  I should  not  know  where  they  are.  But  what  causes
me  most  annoyance  of  all  is  that  I do  not  know  where  I
am  likely  to  see  you,  and  have  been  the  slower  to  write
to  you,  because  I was  expecting  you  in  person  from  day  to
day ; and  meanwhile  I did  not  receive  so  much  as  a letter
to  tell  me  what  you  were  doing  or  where  I was  to  see  you.
Accordingly,  I have  sent  you  the  commander  of  my  reserve-
men,  Decimus  Antonius,  a gallant  officer  and  possessed  of
my  fullest  confidence,  to  take  over  the  cohorts,  if  you  think
well,  in  order  that,  before  the  suitable  season  of  the  year  is
gone,  I may  be  able  to  accomplish  something  practical.  It
was  in  that  department  that  I had  hoped,  both  from  our
friendship  and  your  letter,  to  have  the  advantage  of  your
advice,  of  which  I do  not  even  now  despair.  But  the  truth

Fill,  6;  XV,  7 TO  GAIUS  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS  55

is  that,  unless  you  write  to  me,  I cannot  even  guess  when  or
where  I am  to  see  you.  For  my  part,  I will  take  care  that
friends  and  enemies  alike  understand  that  I am  most  warmly
attached  to  you  : of  your  feelings  towards  me  you  do  appear
to  have  given  the  ill-disposed  some  grounds  for  thinking
differently : if  you  will  put  that  straight  I shall  be  much
obliged  to  you.  That  you  may  also  be  able  to  calculate  at
what  place  you  may  meet  me  without  a breach  of  the
Cornelian  law,  note  this — I entered  the  province  on  the  last
day  of  July  : I am  on  my  way  to  Cilicia  through  Cappa-
docia : I break  up  the  camp  from  Iconium  on  this  last  day
of  August.^  With  these  facts  before  you,  if  you  think  by
reckoning  days  and  routes  you  may  meet  me,  please  settle
at  what  place  that  may  be  most  conveniently  done,  and  on
what  day.^

CCXin  (F  XV,  7)

TO  GAIUS  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS"  (CONSUL-
DESIGNATE)

(Lycaonia,  September)

I WAS  exceedingly  rejoiced  to  hear  of  your  election  as
consul,  and  pray  that  the  gods  may  bless  your  office  to  you,
and  that  it  may  be  administered  by  you  in  a manner  worthy
of  your  own  and  your  father’s  position.  For  I have  always
loved  and  regarded  you,  as  well  as  having  had  reason  to
know  your  exceeding  affection  for  myself  in  all  the  course  of
my  chequered  fortunes.  Moreover,  having  by  numerous
acts  of  kindness  from  your  father  been  both  defended  in

' Going  to  Cybistra,  in  Cappadocia,  where  he  pitched  his  camp.

- As  the  thirty  days  within  which  the  outgoing  governor  was  required
by  the  law  to  quit  his  province  were  now  expired,  it  is  difficult  to  see
any  sincerity  in  this  suggestion.

^ Consul  B.c.  50,  and  cousin  of  C.  Claudius  Marcellus,  consul  B.c.
49.  He  is  son  of  C.  Claudius  Marcellus  (augur),  to  whom  the  next
letter  is  addressed.

56

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  .^T.  55

times  of  adversity  and  honoured  in  times  of  prosperity,  I not
only  am,  but  am  bound  to  be,  devoted  to  your  family,
especially  as  from  your  most  revered  and  excellent  mother
I have  been  fully  aware  of  having  received  greater  services
in  support  of  my  safety  and  position  than  were  to  be  expected
from  a lady.  Wherefore  I beg  you  with  more  than  common
earnestness  to  continue  to  regard  and  support  me  in  my
absence.

CCXIV  (F  XV,  8)

TO  GAIUS  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS  (AUGUR)
(Lycaonia,  September)

That  your  son  Marcellus  has  been  elected  consul,  and  that
you  have  experienced  the  joy  which  you  above  all  things
desired,  give  me  extraordinary  pleasure,  and  that  both  for
his  own  sake,  and  because  in  my  opinion  you  richly  deserve
every  success  of  the  best  sort : for  I have  had  reason  to
know  your  unexampled  goodness  to  me  both  in  weal  and
woe ; in  fact,  I have  experienced  the  greatest  kindness  and
the  most  eager  support  from  your  whole  family,  whether  it
were  a question  of  my  civil  existence  or  official  advancement.
Wherefore  I shall  be  much  obliged  if  you  will  congratulate
for  me  that  most  revered  and  excellent  lady,  your  wife  lunia.
From  yourself  I ask  your  habitual  regard  and  support  in
my  absence.

CCXV  (F  XV,  9)

TO  M.  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS  (CONSUL)
(Lycaonia,  September)

I am  exceedingly  glad  that  by  the  election  of  Gains  Mar-
cellus to  the  consulate  you  haYe  reaped  the  reward  of  your

F XV,  8,  9,  7

TO  L.  ^MILIUS  PAULLUS

57

loyalty  to  your  friends,  your  patriotic  spirit,  and  your  own  most
brilliant  and  excellent  consulship.  I have  no  doubt  about
the  feelings  of  those  at  home  : for  myself,  indeed,  distant  as
I am  and  sent  by  your  own  action  to  the  other  end  of  the
earth,  I am  praising  you,  by  Hercules,  up  to  the  skies  with
the  most  sincere  and  well-deserved  compliments.  For  as  I
have  had  from  boyhood  a singular  affection  for  you,  while
you  have  ever  wished  and  judged  me  to  be  a man  of  the
widest  influence,  so  by  this  achievement,  whether  due  to
yourself  or  the  favourable  judgment  of  the  Roman  people
concerning  you,  my  affection  for  you  has  become  warmer
and  stronger,  and  I feel  the  greatest  delight  when  I am  told
by  people  of  the  greatest  wisdom  and  men  of  the  highest
character,  that  in  word  and  deed,  in  tastes  and  principles,  I
am  like  you  or  you  are  like  me.  If  you  will  add  one  thing
to  the  eminent  achievements  of  your  consulship— the  securing
of  some  one  to  succeed  me  at  the  earliest  possible  opportunity,
or  the  prevention  of  any  addition  being  made  to  the  time
which  you  defined  in  virtue  both  of  a senatorial  decree  and
of  the  law^ — I shall  consider  that  I shall  owe  you  every-
thing. Take  care  of  your  health  and  let  me  have  your
regard  and  support  in  my  absence.  The  news  that  has
reached  me  about  the  Parthians,  as  I do  not  think  it  neces-
sary at  present  to  send  an  official  despatch  about  them,  I
have  resolved  not  to  communicate  to  you  as  my  intimate
friend,  for,  as  I was  addressing  a consul,  it  might  be  con-
sidered that  I was  writing  officially.

CCXVI  (F  XV,  7)

TO  L.  .FMILIUS  PAULLUS  (CONSUL-DESIGNATE)
(Lycaonia,  September)

'I'hough  I never  doubted  that  the  Roman  people,considering
your  eminent  services  to  the  Republic  and  the  splendid  posi-

' The  senatorial  decree  assigning  Cilicia  to  Cicero  would  mention  the
term  of  one  year,  but  so  would  the  lex^  which  it  was  necessary  to  pass  in

58

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  -ET.  55

tion  of  your  family,  would  enthusiastically  elect  you  consul
by  a unanimous  vote,  yet  I had  a feeling  of  intense  exulta-
tion when  the  news  reached  me ; and  I pray  the  gods  to
render  your  official  career  fortunate,  and  that  your  office
may  be  administered  by  you  in  a manner  worthy  of  your
own  and  your  ancestors’  position.  And  would  that  it  had
been  in  my  power  to  have  been  at  home  to  see  that  most
wished-for  day,  and  to  have  rendered  you  the  service  and
support  which  your  magnificent  services  and  kindness  to
me  deserved ! But  since  the  unexpected  and  unlooked-for
accident  of  my  having  to  take  a province  has  deprived  me
of  that  opportunity,  yet,  that  I may  be  enabled  to  see  you
as  consul  actually  administering  the  state  in  a manner  worthy
of  your  position,  I earnestly  beg  you  to  take  care  to  prevent
my  being  treated  unfairly,  or  any  additional  time  being  added
to  my  year’s  term  of  office.  If  you  do  that,  you  will  abund-
antly crown  your  former  kindnesses  to  me.

CCXVII  (A  V,  18)

TO  ATTICUS  (IN  EPIRUS)

Cybistra,  September

How  I wish  you  were  in  Rome,  if  by  chance  you  are  not
there  ! For  I have  nothing  to  go  upon  except  having  received
a letter  from  you  dated  19th  July,  in  which  you  said  that
you  intend  going  to  Epirus  about  the  ist  of  August.  But
whether  you  are  in  Rome  or  Epirus,  the  Parthians  have
crossed  the  Euphrates  under  Pacorus,  son  of  the  Parthian
king  Orodes,  with  nearly  all  his  forces.  I have  not  yet  heard
of  the  arrival  of  Bibulus  in  Syria.  Cassius  is  in  the  town  of
Antioch  with  the  whole  army ; ^ I am  in  Cappadocia,  close  to

order  to  give  him  impeHum  ; it  is  to  this  lex,  and  not  to  the  lex  Pompeia
of  B.C.  52,  that  he  seems  here  to  refer.  See  Willem,  Le  Senat,  vol.  ii.,
p.  590 ; cp.  ib.,  p.  167.

‘ C.  Cassius  Longinus  (the  future  assassin  of  Csesar)  had  been  quaestor
under  Crassus,  and  since  his  death  in  B.C.  53  had  been  holding  the
province  of  Syria  as  proquaestor.  He  decisively  defeated  the  Parthians

A V,  l8

TO  ATTICUS

59

the  Taurus,  with  my  army  near  Cybistra : the  enemy  is  in  Cyr-
rhestica,  which  is  the  part  of  Syria  next  to  my  province.  On
these  subjects  I have  sent  a despatch  to  the  senate.  This
despatch  please  look  at,  if  you  are  in  Rome,  and  consider
whether  you  think  it  ought  to  be  delivered ; and  so  with
many  other  things,  or  rather  with  all,  chief  of  which  is  that
there  be  no  “ slip  betwixt  the  cup  and  the  lip  ” ^ — as  the  say-
ing is — to  add  additional  burden  upon  me,  or  an  extension  of
my  time.  For,  considering  the  weakness  of  my  army,  and
the  short  supply  of  allies,  especially  faithful  ones,  my  most
trustworthy  support  is  winter.  If  that  has  once  come,  and
they  have  not  first  crossed  into  my  province,  the  only
thing  I fear  is  that  the  senate  will  not  allow  Pompey  to  leave
Rome,  owing  to  the  alarming  state  of  affairs  in  the  city.  But
if  it  sends  some  one  else  next  spring,  I do  not  trouble  my-
self, always  providing  that  my  term  of  office  is  not  prolonged.'^
So  much  for  you  if  you  are  at  Rome.  But  if  you  are  out  of
town,  or  even  if  you  are  not,  the  state  of  affairs  here  is  this  :
we  are  in  good  spirits ; and  since,  as  it  seems,  our  plans  are
well  laid,  we  cherish  the  hope  that  we  are  strong  enough  also
to  carry  them  out.  We  have  pitched  our  camp  in  a safe  spot,
well  supplied  in  the  matter  of  corn,  almost  commanding  a view
of  Cilicia,  convenient  for  shifting  quarters,  and  with  an  army
which,  although  small,  is  yet,  I hope,  entirely  loyal  to  me';
and  we  are  about  to  double  its  numbers  by  the  arrival  of
Deiotarus  in  full  force.  I have  found  the  allies  much  more
loyal  than  anyone  has  ever  done : and  they  can  scarcely  believe
their  eyes  when  they  see  the  mildness  of  my  administration

before  Bibulus  arrived.  He  was  born  irt  B.c.  85,  and  was  married  to  a
half-sister  of  Brutus.

^ The  Latin  proverb  is  inter  ceesa  et  porrecta,  between  the  killing  of
the  victim  and  the  examining  of  its  entrails  and  placing  them  on  the
altar,  thus  completing  the  sacrifice.  Something  ill-omened  might  happen
in  the  interval  preventing  the  completion ; so  Cicero  fears  something  may
crop  up  to  prevent  the  naming  of  his  successor.

^ Cicero  appears  to  think  the  Parthian  danger  so  grave,  that  the  idea
might  be  entertained  of  sending  Pompey  in  command  of  an  army.  This
would  supersede  himself  in  his  military  capacity,  but  he  is  prepared  to
welcome  him,  though  no  one  else,  till  the  following  spring,  when  he  shall
have  ceased  to  care  for  anything  but  the  certainty  of  an  early  departure
from  his  province.  As  a matter  of  fact,  the  sending  of  Pompey  or
Caesar  was  talked  of  at  Rome,  but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been
seriously  contemplated.

6o

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  .-ET.  55

and  the  purity  of  my  conduct.  A levy  of  Roman  citizens  is
being  held ; corn  is  being  carted  from  the  country  to  places
of  safety.  If,  then,  occasion  arises,  we  shall  defend  ourselves
by  force ; if  not,  by  the  strength  of  our  position.  Wherefore
do  not  be  alarmed.  For  I have  you  before  my  eyes,  and  I
perceive,  as  though  you  were  present,  your  affectionate  solici-
tude for  me.

Now  I beg  you,  if  it  is  in  any  way  possible,  supposing  my
affair  to  remain  undecided  up  to  the  ist  of  January,  to  be
in  Rome  in  January.  I am  quite  certain  of  receiving  no
unfair  treatment  if  you  are  on  the  spot.  The  consuls  are  my
friends,  the  tribune  Furnius  is  wholly  devoted  to  me.  Still
there  is  need  of  your  persistence,  good  sense,  and  popularity.
It  is  a momentous  crisis.  But  it  is  not  decent  for  me  to  press
you  at  greater  length.

Our  two  Ciceros  are  staying  with  Deiotarus,  but,  if  it  shall
be  necessary,  they  will  be  transferred  to  Rhodes.^  Do  you,
if  in  Rome,  with  your  accustomed  punctuality,  and  anyhow,
even  if  you  are  in  Epirus,  send  one  of  your  servants  with
letters,  that  both  you  may  know  what  I am  doing,  and  I
what  you  are  doing  or  about  to  do.  I am  doing  your  friend
Brutus’s  business  for  him  better  than  he  would  have  done  it
himself.  But  I now  produce  my  ward,  and  do  not  attempt
to  defend  him.  For  they  are  a dilatory  lot,  and  there  is
nothing  to  be  got  out  of  them.  However,  I will  satisfy  you,
which  is  more  difficult  than  satisfying  Brutus  himself.  But
in  truth,  I will  satisfy  you  both.^

His  son  and  nephew,  the  young  Marcus  and  Quintus.  See  Letter
CCVIII.

^ This  refers  to  money  owed  to  Brutus  by  Ariobarzanes,  king  of
Cappadocia.  Cicero  calls  him  “my  ward”  because,  as  shewn  in  the
next  letter,  he  had  been  specially  charged  to  protect  him.  Exhibeo  is  a
legal  term  for  “ producing  in  court,”  “ handing  over  to  justice.”

A V,  1 8 ; F XV,  2 TO  THE  MAGISTRATES,  ETC.

6l

CCXVIII  (F  XV,  2)

TO  THE  MAGISTRATES  AND  SENATE
Cybistra  (September)

M.  Tullius  Cicero,  son  of  Marcus,  greets  the  consuls,
praetors,  tribunes,  and  senate.  If  you  are  well,  I am  glad.
I and  the  army  are  well.

Having  entered  the  province  on  the  last  day  of  July,
not  having  been  able  to  arrive  earlier  owing  to  the  diffi-
culty of  the  journey  both  by  land  and  sea,  I thought  the
thing  most  suitable  to  my  office,  and  most  conducive  to
the  public  welfare,  was  to  provide  everything  affecting  the
army  and  its  active  service.  These  arrangements  having
been  made  by  me  with  more  care  and  energy  than  means
or  sufficient  supplies,  and  messages  and  letters  reaching
me  nearly  every  day  concerning  an  invasion  of  the  pro-
vince of  Syria  by  the  Parthians,  I thought  that  I ought
to  direct  my  march  through  Lycaonia,  the  Isaurians,  and
Cappadocia.  For  there  was  very  strong  reason  to  conjecture
that,  should  the  Parthians  endeavour  to  quit  Syria  and
invade  my  province,  they  would  march  through  Cappadocia,
as  being  most  completely  open  to  them.  Accordingly,  I
marched  with  the  army  through  that  part  of  Cappadocia
which  borders  on  Cilicia,  and  pitched  my  camp  at  Cybistra,
which  is  a town  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Taurus,  in  order  that
Artavasdes,  the  Armenian  king,  whatever  his  disposition,
might  know  that  an  army  of  the  Roman  people  was  not
far  from  his  frontier;  and  that  I might  have  in  as  close
contact  as  possible  king  Deiotarus,  a sovereign  who  is
most  loyal  and  devoted  to  our  Republic,  since  his  advice
and  material  support  might  be  of  assistance  to  the  public
interests.  Having  my  camp  in  this  place,  and  having  sent
the  cavalry  into  Cilicia — in  order  that  my  arrival,  having  been
notified  to  the  communities  in  that  region,  might  confirm
the  loyal  dispositions  of  all,,  and  at  the  same  time  that  I
might  get  early  information  of  what  was  going  on  in  Syria —

62

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  JET,  55

I thought  I ought  to  give  the  three  days  of  my  stay  in  that
camp  to  a high  and  necessary  duty.  For,  seeing  that  a
formal  resolution  of  yours  had  imposed  upon  me  the  duty
of  protecting  king  Ariobarzanes  (surnamed  Eusebes  and
Philorhomseus),  of  defending  the  personal  safety  of  that
sovereign  and  the  integrity  of  his  dominions,  and  of  being
the  guardian  of  king  and  kingdom  alike : and  seeing  that
you  had  appended  a declaration  that  the  safety  of  that
sovereign  was  a matter  of  great  concern  to  the  people  and
senate — a decree  such  as  had  never  been  passed  by  our  house
concerning  any  king  before — I thought  myself  bound  to
report  the  expression  of  your  opinion  to  the  king,  and  to
promise  him  my  protection  and  a faithful  and  energetic  sup-
port, in  order  that,  as  his  personal  safety  and  the  integrity  of
his  dominions  had  been  commended  to  my  care,  he  might
communicate  to  me  anything  he  wished  to  be  done.  Having,
in  the  presence  of  my  council,  communicated  these  things
to  the  king,  he  began  his  reply  by  the  proper  expression  of
his  warmest  thanks  to  you  : and  then  went  on  to  thank  me
also,  saying  that  he  looked  upon  it  as  a very  great  and-
honourable  distinction  that  his  personal  safety  should  be  a
matter  of  concern  to  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome,  and
that  I should  exhibit  such  energy  as  to  put  beyond  doubt
my  own  good  faith  and  the  weight  of  your  recommendation.
And,  indeed,  at  this  first  interview,  he  also  assured  me  of
what  I was  very  delighted  to  hear,  that  he  neither  knew  nor
had  a suspicion  of  any  plots  either  against  his  own  life  or
against  his  kingdom.  After  I had  congratulated  him  and
said  that  I rejoiced  to  hear  it,  and  yet  had  advised  him  as  a
young  man  to  remember  the  disaster  of  his  father’s  death,
to  protect  himself  with  vigilance,  and,  in  accordance  with
the  injunction  of  the  senate,  to  take  measures  for  his  safety,
he  then  left  me  and  returned  to  the  town  of  Cybistra.
However,  next  day  he  came  to  visit  me  in  the  camp,  accom-
panied by  his  brother  Ariarathes  and  some  elder  men,  who
had  been  his  father’s  friends.  In  a state  of  agitation  and
with  tears  in  his  eyes — his  brother  and  friends  shewing  the
same  signs  of  distress — he  began  appealing  to  my  good  faith
and  the  charge  imposed  on  me  by  you.  On  my  asking  with
surprise  what  had  occurred,  he  said  that  “ information  of
an  undoubted  conspiracy  had  been  communicated  to  him.

F XV,  X TO  THE  MAGISTRATES,  ETC.  63

which  had  been  withheld  from  him  before  my  arrival,  because
those  who  might  have  denounced  it  to  him  had  kept  silence
through  fear,  but  that  now,  relying  upon  my  protection
several  persons  had  boldly  informed  him  of  what  they  knew :
that  among  these  his  most  devoted  brother  had  told  him  ” (a
story  which  the  latter  repeated  in  my  hearing)  “ that  he  had
been  solicited  to  aim  at  becoming  king  : that  so  long  as  his^
brother  was  alive  he  could  not  accept  that  suggestion ; but
that  from  fear  of  the  danger  he  had  never  revealed  the
circumstance.”  After  this  speech  I advised  the  king  that
he  should  take  every  precaution  to  preserve  his  life  ; and  I
exhorted  the  friends,  who  had  enjoyed  the  confidence  of
his  father  and  grandfather,  to  guard  the  life  of  their  sove-
reign with  all  care  and  vigilance,  warned  by  his  father’s
most  lamentable  murder.  Upon  the  king  asking  me  for
some  cavalry  and  cohorts  from  my  army,  though  I was  fully
aware  that  in  view  of  your  senatorial  decree  I was  not  only
authorized,  but  even  bound  to  comply,  yet,  since  the  public
interests  demanded,  owing  to  the  news  daily  arriving  from
Syria,  that  I should  lead  the  army  as  soon  as  possible  to  the
frontiers  of  Cilicia — and  since  the  king,  now  that  the  plot
had  been  denounced,  seemed  not  to  be  in  need  of  an  army
of  the  Roman  people,  but  to  be  capable  of  defending  himself
by  his  own  resources,  I urged  him  to  learn  his  first  lesson  in
the  art  of  ruling  by  taking  measures  to  preserve  his  life ;
that  upon  those  by  whom  he  had  discovered  that  a plot  was
being  laid  against  him  he  should  exercise  his  sovereign
rights  : punish  those  who  must  be  punished,  relieve  the  rest
from  fear  : use  the  protection  of  my  army  rather  to  inspire
fear  in  the  guilty^than  to  keep  up  a state  of  civil  war : the  result
would  be  no  doubt  that  all,  having  been  made  acquainted
with  the  decree  of  the  senate,  would  understand  that  in
accordance  with  your  resolution  I should  protect  the  king  if
necessary.

Having  thus  encouraged  him,  I broke  up  my  camp  there,
and  began  my  march  into  Cilicia,  leaving  behind  me  on  my
departure  from  Cappadocia  an  impression  that  by  your
policy  my  arrival,  owing  to  a strange  and  almost  providential
accident,  had  relieved  from  an  actual  plot  a sovereign  to
whom  you  had  given  unsolicited  that  title  in  most  com-
plimentary terms,  whom  you  had  intrusted  to  my  honour,

64

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  55

and  whose  safety  you  had  declared  in  a decree  to  be  a matter
of  great  concern  to  you.  I thought  it  was  not  improper
that  my  despatch  should  inform  you  of  this  circumstance,
in  order  that  you  might  learn  from  what  almost  happened
that  you  had  long  before  taken  the  precautions  necessary  to
prevent  it : and  I have  been  all  the  more  ready  to  give  you
the  information,  because  in  king  ^riobarzanes  I think  I
have  detected  such  signs  of  virtue  and“abiTrty,  a's  well  as  of
good  faith  and  loyalty  to  you,  that  you  appear  to  have  had
good  reason  for  all  the  care  and  energy  you  have  devoted
to  his  protection.

CCXIX  (A  V,  19)

TO  ATTICUS  (IN  EPIRUS)

Cilicia,  20  September

I HAD  already  sealed  the  letter  which  I presume  you  to  have
just  read,  one  in  my  own  handwriting  and  containing  an
account  of  all  occurrences,  when  suddenly,  on  the  20th  of
September,  a letter-carrier  of  Appius,  arriving  express  on  the
forty-seventh  day  from  Rome — oh  dear ! to  think  of  the
distance  I am  away  ! — delivered  me  your  letter.  From  it  I feel
no  doubt  that  you  waited  for  Pompey’s  return  from  Ari-
minum,’  and  have  by  this  time  started  for  Epirus ; and  I am
still  more  afraid  that  in  Epirus  you  may  be  having  no  less
cause  for  anxiety  than  I am  having  here.  As  to  the  debt  to
Attilius  I have  written  to  Philotimus  not  to  apply  to  Messalla
for  it.^  I am  rejoiced  that  the  fame  of  my  progress  has
reached  you,  and  I shall  rejoice  still  more  if  you  learn  the
sequel.  I am  very  glad  you  find  so  much  pleasure  in  your
little  daughter,^  and  though  I have  never  seen  her,  I yet  love

' See  Letter  CCV.

® Owing  to  Messalla’s  recent  condemnation  de  sodaliiiis  (Letter  CCV),
Cicero  desired  that  he  should  not  be  troubled  for  some  money  for  which
he  had  been  security  to  Attilius.  Philotimus  is  Terentia’s  steward.

^ Omitting,  with  Schiitz,  the  words  iam  Roma,  which  seem  unin-

A V,  19 ; F XV,  I TO  THE  MAGISTRATES,  ETC.  65

her  dearly,  and  feel  sure  that  she  is  charming.  Good-bye  !
Good-bye !

I am  glad  you  approved  of  what  I did  about  the  ruins  in
Melita^  in  connexion  with  Patron  and  your  fellow  Epicureans.
In  saying  that  you  were  glad  that  the  man  lost  his  election  who
“opposed  the  uncle  of  your  sister’s  son,”^  it  is  a great  mark
of  afection  on  your  part ! In  the  same  spirit  you  admonished
me  to  rejoice  too.  It  hadn’t  occurred  to  me ! “I  don’t
believe  it,”  quoth  you.  As  you  please  : well,  then,  I am  glad ;
since  righteous  indignation  is  not  the  same  as  spite.®

CCXX  (F  XV,  i)

TO  THE  MAGISTRATES  AND  SENATE  ^
Cilicia,  22  September

M.  Tullius  Cicero,  son  of  Marcus,  proconsul,  greets  the
consuls,  praetors,  tribunes,  and  senate.  If  you  are  well,  I am
glad.  I and  the  army  are  well.

Although  I had  undoubted  assurance  that  the  Parthians
had  crossed  the  Euphrates  with  nearly  all  their  forces,  yet,
believing  that  more  definite  information  could  be  sent  you  on
these  points  by  the  proconsul  M.  Bibulus,  I concluded  that  it
was  not  incumbent  on  me  to  mention  in  a public  despatch
reports  reaching  me  concerning  the  province  of  another.
Having  since  then,  however,  received  information  on  the  most
unquestionable  authority — from  legates,  messengers,  and  des-
patches— whether  I considered  the  importance  of  the  matter
itself,  or  the  fact  of  not  having  yet  heard  of  Bibulus’s  arrival

telligible.  Many  suggestions  have  been  made,  the  best  of  which  seems
to  be  quadrimani,  “four  years  old,”  but  none  are  certain.

^ The  ruins  of  the  house  of  Epicurus  in  Melita,  an  Attic  deme  (see
Letters  CXCVIII,  CXCIX).  The  reading  Melita  for  militia  is  due  to
Gassendi.  For  the  house  of  Epicurus,  Iv  MtXiry,  see  Diog.  Laert.
X.  10.

^ Himself,  who  had  been  opposed  by  Hirrus  in  standing  for  the
augurship.  See  Letter  CCX.

® TO  veneadv,  “ righteous  wrath ” ; to  <pQovtiv,  “envy,”  “malice.”

II.  F

66

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

in  Syria,  or  that  the  conduct  of  this  war  was  almost  as  much
my  business  as  that  of  Bibulus,  I came  to  the  conclusion  that
it  was  my  duty  to  write  you  word  of  what  had  reached  my
ears.  The  legates  of  king  Antiochus  of  Commagene  were
the  first  to  inform  me  that  large  bodies  of  Parthians  had
begun  to  cross  the  Euphrates.  On  the  receipt  of  this  report,
as  there  were  certain  persons  who  thought  that  full  credit
could  not  be  given  to  that  sovereign,  I made  up  my  mind
that  I must  wait  for  more  trustworthy  information.  On  the
1 8th  of  September,  whilst  marching  into  Cilicia  at  the  head
of  my  army,  on  the  frontier  between  Lycaonia  and  Cappa-
docia, a despatch  was  handed  to  me  from  Tarcondimotus,
who  is  considered  to  be  the  most  faithful  ally  and  the  most
devoted  friend  of  the  Roman  people  beyond  Mount  Taurus,
announcing  that  Pacorus,  son  of  Orodes,  the  king  of  the
Parthians,  had  crossed  the  Euphrates  with  a very  large  body
of  Parthian  cavalry,  and  had  pitched  his  camp  at  Tyba,  and
that  consequently  a very  serious  commotion  had  been  caused
in  the  province  of  Syria.  On  the  same  day  a despatch  on
the  same  subject  reached  me  from  lamblichus,  phylarch  of  the
Arabians,’^  who  is  generally  considered  to  be  well-disposed
and  friendly  to  our  Republic.  Though  I was  fully  aware
that,  on  receipt  of  this  information,  our  allies  were  unsettled
in  their  feelings  and  wavering  from  the  expectation  of  political
change,  I yet  hoped  that  those  whom  I had  already  visited,
and  who  had  seen  the  mildness  and  purity  of  my  adminis-
tration, had  been  made  more  devoted  to  the  Roman  people,
and  that  Cilicia,  too,  would  become  more  certainly  loyal  when
it  had  once  felt  the  advantage  of  my  equitable  rule.  Acting
at  once  from  this  motive,  and  also  with  a view  to  put  down
those  of  the  Cilicians  who  are  in  arms,  and  to  shew  the
enemy  in  Syria  that  the  army  of  the  Roman  people,  so  far
from  retiring  on  receipt  of  that  news,  was  actually  approaching
nearer,  I determined  to  lead  it  right  up  to  Mount  Taurus.
But  if  my  authority  has  any  weight  with  you — especially  in
matters  which  you  only  know  by  report,  but  which  are  all

^ Of  these  petty  princes,  Antiochus  had  been  established  in  Comma-
gene  in  B.C.  63-62  by  Pompey,  as  also  probably  Tarcondimotus  in  part
of  Cilicia.  lamblichus,  the  Bedouin  chief,  was  put  to  death  by  Antony
in  B.C.  31,  but  his  son  was  restored  by  Augustus.  He  had  also  no  doubt
owed  his  establishment  or  restoration  to  Pompey  in  B.C.  63.

F XV,

TO  THE  MAGISTRATES,  ETC.

67

but  passing  under  my  eyes — I strongly  urge  and  advise  you
to  take  measures  for  the  defence  of  these  provinces : it  is
over-late  already,  but  better  late  than  never.  For  myself,  you
are  well  aware  how  slenderly  supplied  and  how  imperfectly
furnished  with  troops,  in  view  of  the  expected  gravity  of  this
war,  you  have  despatched  me.  And  it  was  not  from  the
blindness  of  vanity,  but  from  a modest  scruple  as  to  refusing,
that  I did  not  decline  this  business.  For  I have  never  con-
sidered any  danger  so  formidable,  as  to  make  me  wish  to
avoid  it  in  preference  to  obeying  your  will.  But  at  this
moment  the  matter  is  of  such  a nature,  that  unless  you
promptly  despatch  into  these  provinces  an  army  on  the  same
scale  as  you  are  wont  to  employ  for  the  most  important  war,
there  is  the  most  imminent  danger  of  our  having  to  give  up
all  those  provinces,  on  which  the  revenues  of  the  Roman
people  depend.  Again,  there  is  this  reason  for  your  not
resting  any  hopes  on  a levy  in  the  province — that  men  are
not  numerous,  and  that  such  as  there  are  fly  in  every  direc-
tion at  the  first  alarm.  Again,  what  this  class  of  soldier  is
worth  in  his  opinion  has  been  shewn  by  that  gallant  officer,
M.  Bibulus  : for,  though  you  had  granted  him  leave  to  hold  a
levy  in  Asia,  he  has  declined  to  do  so.^  For  auxiliaries
raised  from  the  allies,  owing  to  the  harshness  and  injustice
of  our  rule,  are  either  so  weak  that  they  can  do  us  little
service,  or  so  disaffected  to  us  that  it  seems  improper  to
expect  anything  from  them  or  trust  anything  to  them.  Both
the  loyalty  and  the  forces,  whatever  their  amount,  of  king
Deiotarus  I reckon  as  being  at  our  service.  Cappadocia  has
nothing  to  give.  Other  kings  and  despots  are  not  to  be
relied  upon  either  in  regard  to  their  resources  or  their  loyalty.
For  myself,  in  spite  of  this  short  supply  of  soldiers,  I shall
certainly  shew  no  lack  of  courage,  nor,  I hope,  of  prudence
either.  What  will  happen  is  uncertain.  I pray  that  I may  be-v
able  to  secure  my  safety  ! I will  certainly  secure  my  honour.

‘ A governor  of  one  province  could  not  hold  levies  in  another  without
special  grant  of  the  senate.  An  exception  had  been  proposed  for  Pompey
in  B.c.  57>  when  he  was  appointed prcefectus  annonce^  and  apparently  was
made  in  and  after  his  consulships  of  b.c.  55  and  52.

68

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

CCXXI  (F  III,  8)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  ROME)
Cilicia,  8 October

Although,  as  far  as  I have  been  able  to  gather  from  your
letter,  I see  that  you  won’t  read  this  till  you  are  at  the  gates
of  Rome,^  when  the  extremely  reckless  gossip  of  provincials
will  have  become  quite  stale,  yet,  as  you  have  written  to  me
at  such  length  about  what  unprincipled  men  are  saying,  I
thought  I ought  to  be  careful  to  give  your  letter  a brief
answer.  Two  clauses  of  your  epistle,  however,  must  in  a
manner  be  passed  over  in  silence  : for  they  contain  nothing
that  is  definite  or  precise,  beyond  saying  that  alike  by  my
looks  and  my  silence  I had  shewn  that  I was  no  friend  to
you : and  that  this  had  been  made  unmistakable  both
on  my  judicial  seat,  when  business  was  going  on,  and  at
certain  social  parties.  I can  well  understand  that  there  is
nothing  in  all  this ; yet,  though  there  is  nothing  in  it,  I fail
to  understand  even  what  the  allegation  is.  I know  thus
much,  indeed — that  many  observations  of  a very  marked
character,  made  by  me  both  from  the  high  official  seat  and
on  the  level  of  private  intercourse,  which  were  exceedingly
complimentary  to  you,  and  indicated  an  anxious  desire  to
acknowledge  the  close  ties  between  us,  might  have  with
strict  truth  been  reported  to  you.  For  as  to  the  legates,^
what  could  I have  done  in  better  taste  or  with  greater
regard  to  equity,  than  to  diminish  the  expenses  of  states
that  were  in  great  financial  distress,  and  yet  at  the  same
time  to  detract  nothing  from  your  honour,  especially  as  it
was  in  answer  to  the  petition  of  the  states  themselves  ? For

^ Appius  remained  outside  the  gates  {ad  urbem^  not  in  urbe)  because
he  claimed  a triumph,  of  which,  however,  Dolabella  baulked  him.  See
Letter  CCXLI.

^ Legates  sent,  as  was  often  the  case,  to  commend  Appius  at  Rome
and  support  his  claim  to  a triumph.  They  were  sent  at  the  expense  of
their  own  cities,  and  the  system  was  often  much  abused  and  became  a
heavy  burden  on  the  states.

F III,  8

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER

69

I had  not  been  aware  of  the^scale  on  which  deputations  were
being  sent  on  your  account.  When  I was  at  Apamea,  the
head  men  of  many  states  informed  me  that  large  sums  were
being  voted  for  legates,  though  the  states  were  insolvent.  At
this,  many  thoughts  occurred  to  me  at  once.  First,  I did  not
think  that  you — a man  of  wisdom,  and,  to  use  the  jargon  of
the  day,  a man  of  “ culture  ” — took  any  pleasure  in  depu-
tations of  that  sort : and  I believe  I argued  to  that  effect  at
some  length  in  court  at  Synnada.  In  the  first  place  (I  said)
Appius  Claudius  was  commended  to  the  senate  and  people
of  Rome,  not  by  the  evidence  of  the  people  of  Midaeium  (for
it  was  in  that  state  that  the  subject  was  started),  but  in  the
natural  course  of  things : and,  in  the  second  place,  I had
seen  many  cases  in  which  deputations  ^ had  come  to  Rome
to  commend  certain  persons,  but  I never  remembered  any
instance  of  a hearing  being  granted  them,  to  deliver  their
panegyric  at  any  particular  time  or  place : I was  pleased
(I  said)  with  their  display  of  feeling  in  being  grateful
to  you  for  your  services;  but  their  whole  idea  appeared
to  me  quite  superfluous.  If,  however,  they  wished  by
that  measure  to  shew  their  zeal,  I should  commend  any
man  who  did  it  at  his  own  expense ; should  allow  of  it  if  the
expense  to  the  state  did  not  exceed  the  law ; should  refuse
permission  if  it  were  unlimited.  Well,  what  fault  can  be
found  with  that  ? The  only  possible  one  is  what  you  go  on
to  say — that  certain  persons  considered  my  edict  to  have
been  expressly  framed  with  a view  to  hinder  these  deputations
of  yours.  Really,  I think  it  is  not  so  much  those  who  argue
thus  who  do  me  a wrong,  as  he  who  opens  his  ears  to  such
a proposition.  I drew  up  my  edict  at  Rome  ; I never  added
a word  to  it  except  a clause  which  the  publicani^  in  their
interview  with  me  at  Samos,  asked  me  to  transfer  word  for
word  from  your  edict  to  my  own.  The  clause  referring  to
the  diminishing  the  expenses  of  the  states  was  very  carefully
worded ; and  in  that  clause  there  are  some  new  provisions
advantageous  to  the  states,  with  which  I am  greatly  pleased  :
but  this  clause,  which  has  given  birth  to  the  suspicion  of

^ These  complimentary  legationes,  he  means,  were  not  heard  in  the
senate.  Their  number  created  a certain  effect,  just  as  petitions  are  not
noticed  in  the  House  of  Commons,  though  if  numerous  they  may  form
some  ground  for  action.

70

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  .ET.  55

my  elaborating  something  meant  to  be  offensive  to  you,  is
taken  from  former  edicts.  For  I was  not  so  foolish  as  to  hold
that  men  were  being  deputed  on  their  own  private  affairs,
who  were  being  sent,  in  the  first  place,  in  your  interests
while  you  were  still  in  possession  of  imperium  ; and,  in  the
second  place,  were  being  sent  to  deliver  a vote  of  thanks,
not  in  any  private  assembly,  but  in  the  council  chamber  of
the  whole  world,  the  senate.  Nor  when  I ordered  that  no
one  was  to  go  without  my  leave,  did  I exclude  those  from
doing  so  who  might  be  unable  to  follow  me  to  the  camp  and
across  the  Taurus.  That,  in  fact,  is  the  most  ridiculous  thing
in  your  letter  : for  what  need  was  there  for  their  following
me  to  the  camp  or  crossing  the  Taurus,  when  I arranged  my
journey  from  Laodicea  as  far  as  Iconium,  with  the  express
object  of  the  magistrates  and  legates  of  all  the  dioceses
north  of  Taurus,^  and  of  all  the  states  there,  meeting
me  ? Unless  you  suppose  that  no  deputations  were  arranged
till  I had  crossed  the  Taurus ! That  is  certainly  not  so.
For  when  I was  at  Laodicea,  at  Apamea,  at  Synnada,  at
Philomelium,  at  Iconium,  in  all  of  which  towns  I made
some  stay,  there  were  ready  waiting  for  me  all  the  deputations
of  that  kind.  And  yet  I would  have  you  know  this,  that  I
made  no  decree  about  diminishing  or  wholly  remitting  the
expense  of  embassies,  except  such  as  the  head  men  of  the
states  asked  for — that  quite  unnecessary  expenses  should
not  be  added  to  the  selling  of  the  contract  for  the  tribute,^  and
the  very  galling  exaction  (as  you  know)  of  the  poll-tax  and  door-
tax.  Now,  when  at  the  instigation  not  only  of  justice  but  of
pity,  I undertook  to  relieve  from  their  distress  the  states  that
had  been  ruined,  and  ruined,  too,  chiefly  through  their  own
magistrates,  I could  not  be  indifferent  to  that  source  of  un-
necessary expense.  For  your  part,  if  observations  of  that
nature  were  reported  to  you  in  regard  to  me,  you  ought  not
to  have  believed  them.  But  if  you  like  this  way  of  attributing
to  others  whatever  occurs  to  your  own  mind,  you  are  intro-

^ He  means  the  three  dioceses — properly  belonging  to  the  province  of
Asia,  and  afterwards  reunited  to  it — Cibyra,  Apamea,  and  Synnada.
See  p.  45.

^ The  trihutum  in  Cilicia,  unlike  the  taxes  in  Asia,  was  not  sold  to
puhlicani^  but  left  to  each  state  to  collect.  If,  however,  the  states  fell
into  arrears,  a contract  for  its  collection  was  sold  to  publicani^  who  put
the  screw  on  more  tightly  than  the  local  tax-gatherers.

Fill,  8 TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  7 1

ducing  a style  of  conversation  between  friends  which  is  not
very  courteous.  Whereas  if  I had  ever  had  any  thought  of
casting  a slur  on  your  reputation  in  the  province,  I should
not  have  referred  to  your  son-in-law,  nor  to  your  freedman  at
Brundisium,  nor  to  your  prefect  of  engineers  at  Corcyra,
as  to  where  you  wished  me  to  come.^  Wherefore,  on  the
advice  of  the  greatest  philosophers,  who  have  written  most
brilliantly  on  the  conduct  of  friendship,  you  may  banish  all
expressions  such  as  “ they  argued,”  “ I maintained  in  op-
position,” “they  said  so,”  “I  denied  it.”  Do  you  suppose
that  I have  never  been  told  anything  about  you?  Not  even
this — that,  after  having  desired  me  to  come  to  Laodicea,  you
yourself  crossed  the  Taurus?  That  on  the  same  days  as
I was  holding  assizes  at  Apamea,  Synnada,  and  Philomelium
you  were  doing  so  at  Tarsus  ? I will  say  no  more,  lest  I
should  seem  to  be  doing  exactly  what  I blame  in  you.  I
will  only  say  this,  and  I feel  it : if  you  feel  in  your  own
heart  what  you  say  that  others  are  remarking,  you  are  much
to  blame : but  if  others  say  these  things  to  you,  you  are  not
entirely  without  fault  in  listening  to  them.  My  conduct  in
every  particular  of  our  friendship  will  be  found  to  be  con-
sistent and  sincere.  But  if  anyone  tries  to  make  out  that  I
had  some  ulterior  object  in  view,  could  there  be  a better
example  of  my  supposed  cunning  than  that,  having  always
defended  you  while  abroad — and  that  though  I had  no  idea
of  ever  requiring  your  defence  while  abroad  myself — I should
now  give  you  the  best  possible  excuse  for  abandoning  me
in  my  absence  from  town  ? I except  from  this  denial  one
species  of  conversation,  in  which  on  very  many  occasions
something  is  said,  such  as  I presume  you  would  prefer  not
being  said — I mean  when  any  abusive  remark  is  made  about
any  of  your  legates,  prefects,  or  military  tribunes.  But
even  in  regard  to  this  nothing,  by  Hercules,  has  occurred  in
my  hearing  of  a graver  character,  or  reflecting  on  more
persons,  than  what  Clodius  mentioned  to  me  at  Corcyra,
when  under  that  head  he  made  a very  loud  complaint  that
you  had  been  unfortunate  in  the  dishonesty  of  others.
Such  observations  as  these,  seeing  that  they  are  frequently

^ See  Letters  CCIV,  CCXII.  The  only  explanation  of  the  reference
to  Appius’s  son-in-law  must  be  that  Cicero  saw  Gnseus  Pompeius  at  his
father’s  villa  at  Tarentum.  But  most  editors  would  omit  ad generum.

72

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  ^T.  55

made,  and  do  not  reflect,  in  my  opinion,  on  your  personal
honour,  I have  never  provoked,  but  neither  have  I exerted
myself  to  repress  them.  If  there  is  anyone  who  thinks  that
no  man  is  ever  sincerely  reconciled  with  another,  he  does
not  prove  our  want  of  sincerity,  but  betrays  his  own,  and
at  the  same  time  shews  that  he  thinks  no  worse  of  me  than
he  does  of  you.  But  if,  again,  there  is  anyone  who  dislikes
my  administration  in  the  province,  and  considers  himself
injured  by  a certain  dissimilarity  between  my  arrangements
and  yours — the  fact  being  that  we  have  both  acted  con-
scientiously, though  we  took  different  lines — such  a man  I
do  not  care  to  have  for  a friend.  Your  liberality,  as  became
a great  noble,  was  on  a larger  scale  in  the  province ; if  mine
is  somewhat  more  restricted — though  your  second  year,
owing  to  the  hardness  of  the  times,  somewhat  clipped  the
wings  of  your  generous  and  bountiful  nature — men  ought
not  to  be  surprised,  since  I have  always  been  naturally  dis-
inclined to  be  lavish  at  the  expense  of  others,  and  am  in-
fluenced by  the  same  hard  times  as  others  are,

“That  I am  sour  to  them  to  keep  my  conscience  sweet.”

Your  giving  me  information  about  affairs  in  the  city  was
pleasant  to  me,  both  for  its  own  sake,  and  because  you
shewed  your  intention  of  keeping  all  my  commissions  in
mind.  Among  them  there  is  one  that  I beg  you  to  regard
as  supreme — to  see  that  to  the  business  in  which  I am  now
engaged  there  should  be  no  addition  made  either  of  respon-
sibility or  time ; and  to  ask  Hortensius,  our  fellow  augur
and  friend,  if  ever  he  has  thought  or  done  anything  for  my
sake,  to  give  up  this  two-year  proposal  of  his  also,  than
which  nothing  could  be  more  unfriendly  to  me.  To  give
you  the  information  you  want  about  my  proceedings,  I left
Tarsus  on  the  7th  of  October  for  Amanus.  I write  this  on
the  day  after  that  in  camp,  in  the  territory  of  Mopsuhestia.
Whatever  I do  I will  write  and  tell  you,  nor  will  I ever
send  a letter  home  to  my  family  without  adding  one  di-
rected to  be  delivered  to  you.  As  to  your  question  about
the  Parthians,  I think  they  were  not  Parthians  at  all.  The
Arabs,  who  were  there  with  a semi-Parthian  equipment,  are
said  to  have  all  gone  back.  People  say  that  there  is  no

F III,  8 ; VIII,  8 M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

73

enemy  in  Syria. ^ Pray  write  to  me  as  often  as  possible  about
both  your  own  and  my  affairs,  and  on  the  state  of  the  Re-
public generally.  About  the  last  I am  the  more  anxious,
because  I gather  from  your  letter  that  our  friend  Pompey  is
about  to  go  to  Spain.^

CCXXII  (F  VIII,  8)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome  (October)

Though  I have  some  political  news  for  you,  yet  I don’t
think  I have  anything  to  tell  you  that  you  will  be  more  glad
to  hear  than  this  : I have  to  inform  you  that  C.  Sempronius
Rufus — Rufus,  your  pet  darling  ! — has  been  convicted  of
vexatious  prosecution  with  universal  applause.  You  ask,  in
what  case  ? Well,  he  indicted  M.  Tuccius  (who  had  formerly
prosecuted  him)  after  the  Roman  games  for  illegal  violence
under  the  lex  Plotia.  His  object  was  this  : he  saw  that,  unless
some  defendant  were  put  on  the  list  for  trial  whose  case
could  take  priority,  he  would  have  to  stand  his  bwn  trial  this
year.  Moreover,  he  had  no  doubt  what  would  happen  to
him.®  This  prosecution  was  a small  favour  he  preferred  to
do  to  his  accuser  more  than  anyone  else  ! Accordingly,  with-
out anyone  backing  his  indictment,  he  came  down  into  the
forum  and  indicted  Tuccius.  As  soon  as  I heard  of  it,  I
hurried  without  waiting  for  a summons  to  the  defendant’s
bench.  I rose,  and  without  saying  a word  on  the  merits  of

^ Of  course  this  information  is  subsequent  to  the  public  despatch  pre-
ceding ; but  neither  that  nor  this  appears  to  be  accurate.  The
Parthians  had  crossed  the  Euphrates  and  had  been  repulsed  by  Cassius,
as  we  shall  see  ; but  Cicero  is  always  unwilling  to  give  credit  either  to
Cassius  or  Bibulus  in  this  matter.

^ To  his  province,  to  which,  however,  he  never  went.

^ A prosecution  de  vi  took  precedence  of  one  de  ambitu.  Therefore,
if  he  prosecuted  Tuccius  for  vis^  Tuccius  would  have  to  wait  before  he
could  bring  his  accusation  de  anihitu.  As  there  was  no  case  in  the
accusation  de  w,  Sempronius  was  accused  of  bringing  a vexatious  action,
i.e.,  an  action  not  sincerely  meant  to  be  what  it  pretended,  but  begun
merely  for  obstructive  purposes.  Roman  games,  4th- 19th  September.

74

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  55

the  case,  I shewed  up  his  whole  character  and  career,  even
bringing  in  the  matter  of  Vestorius,  and  telling  the  story  of
his  having  surrendered  to  you  as  a favour  “whatever
Vestorius  held  contrary  to  his  own  legal  rights.”^

2.  The  following  hotly  contested  case  is  also  at  present
taking  up  the  attention  of  the  forum. ^ M.  Servilius  had,  as
was  to  be  expected  from  his  previous  conduct,  become
utterly  bankrupt,  and  had  nothing  left  which  he  was  not
prepared  to  sell  to  anybody,  and  when  he  became  my  client
had  already  exposed  himself  to  the  most  violent  scandal.
But  when  Pausanias  initiated  proceedings  against  him  for
“ fraudulent  possession  of  the  money  ” (I  acting  as  counsel
for  the  defence),  the  praetor  Laterensis  declined  to  allow  the
action.  Then  Q.  Pilius,  the  connexion  of  our  friend  Atticus,
initiated  proceedings  against  him  for  extortion.  Much  talk
at  once  arose  about  the  case,  and  strong  remarks  began  to
be  made  about  a conviction.  Moved  by  this  storm  of
popular  feeling,  Appius  the  younger  laid  an  information  as
to  a sum  of  money  having  been  transferred  from  his  father’s
estate  to  Servilius,  and  stated  that  81  sestertia  (about
had  been  deposited  to  enable  him  to  secure  the  collusive
failure  of  the  prosecution.®  You  are  surprised  at  this

^ Reading  and  interpretation  are  doubtful.  Apparently  Cicero,  as
arbitrator  between  Sempronius  and  Vestorius,  had  decided  in  favour  of
the  latter  ; but  Sempronius,  while  refusing  to  submit,  pretended  to
yield  as  a favour  what  (as  he  alleged)  Vestorius  was  wrongfully  withhold-
ing from  him,  the  point  being  that  he  himself  is  in  the  wrong  all  the
time.

^ The  story  is  difficult  to  follow.  C.  Claudius  Fulcher,  after  his  pro-
prsetorship  of  Asia  (b.c.  56-53),  was  in  B.C.  51  condemned  for  extortion.
He  either  died  or  left  Rome,  and  his  property  was  not  sufficient  to  pay
the  damages.  Pausanias  (unknown  to  us)  asked  leave  to  prosecute  his
legahis  (or  other  official),  M.  Servilius,  for  wrongful  possession  of  money
[quo  ea  pecunia  pervenisset),  but  the  prmtor  Laterensis  decided  that  there
was  no  case  to  go  into  court.  Then  Pilius  began  a prosecution  of  him
de  repetundis^  but  this  was  anticipated  by  another  by  Appius  (son  of
C.  Claudius),  who  prosecuted  him  for  wrongful  possession,  being  able  to
make  out  a better facie  case.  The  votes  in  this  trial  were  equal,
but  Servilius  was  left  in  a questionable  position  by  an  irregularity  of  the
praetor  in  recording  the  verdict.  Caelius  says  that  he  is  now  going  to  be  pro-
secuted by  Pilius  on  the  original  charge  of  extortion.  The  young  Appius
had  made  a mess  of  it,  had  exposed  his  own  and  his  father’s  malpractices,
and  was  himself  now  being  prosecuted  by  members  of  Servilius’s  family.

^ PrcEvaricatio^  where  the  professed  prosecuters  voluntarily,  and  for
corrupt  motives,  allow  the  case  to  go  against  them.

F VIII,  8

M.  CELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

75

folly ; nay,  what  would  you  have  said  if  you  had  heard  him
conducting  the  case,  and  the  admissions  which  he  made,
foolish  in  the  extreme  as  far  as  he  was  himself  concerned,
and  positively  shameful  as  regards  his  father  ? ^ The  jury
called  upon  to  consider  their  verdict  was  the  same  as  that
which  had  assessed  the  damages  in  the  former  case.  The
votes  having  turned  out  to  be  equal,  Laterensis,  from  imper-
fect acquaintance  with  the  laws,  announced  the  verdict  of
each  of  the  decurice.  separately,  and  finally,  according  to  the
custom  of  the  praetors,  gave  the  decision  “for  the  defendant.”^
After  leaving  the  court,  Servilus  being  thenceforth  regarded
as  acquitted,  Laterensis  read  the  loist  clause  of  the  law,
which  contains  the  words  “ The  verdict  of  the  majority  of
the  jurors  shall  be  good  and  decisive.”  He  thereupon
did  not  enter  him  on  the  records  as  acquitted,  but  only
entered  a statement  of  the  verdict  of  the  several  decuricEd
Upon  Appius,  however,  applying  for  a new  trial,  he  said  that
he  had  consulted  L.  Lollius  ^ and  would  record  the  facts.  So
that  now,  being  neither  acquitted  nor  condemned,  Servilius
will  be  at  the  disposal  of  Pilius  for  an  action  for  extortion,  with
a reputation  already  damaged.  For  Appius,  though  he  had
already  sworn  that  there  was  no  collusion,  did  not  venture  to
dispute  the  right  to  prosecute^  with  Pilius,  and  has  himself  had
proceedings  begun  against  him  fpr  extortion  by  the  Servilii,
besides  having  been  indicted  for  violence  by  a creature  of
his  own,  Sextius  Tettius.®  They  are  a worthy  pair !

As  for  political  business,  for  many  days  past  nothing  at

^ Because  they  confessed  to  his  father  having  tried  to  get  off  by  col-
lusion with  the  prosecution,  thereby  acknowledging  his  guilt.

^ Non  redigam^  lit.  “ I will  not  exact  the  money,”  i.e.,  the  money
alleged  to  have  been  fraudulently  received.

Such  a record  would  not,  on  the  face  of  it,  prove  acquittal,  because
a man  might  be  acquitted  by  a small  majority  in  two  decurice  and  yet
be  condemned  by  so  large  a majority  in  the  third  as  not  to  have  a
majority  of  the  whole  jury  in  his  favour  as  required  by  law.

^ Apparently  a jurisconsult,  but  he  is  unknown.

’ Divinaiio,  a technical  name  for  the  trial  between  two  or  more  rival
claimants  for  the  conduct  of  a prosecution.

^ These  actions,  meant  to  tie  the  hands  of  Appius  and  prevent  his
farther  attacks  on  Servilius,  were  also  probably  grounded  on  his  own
revelations.  He  had,  we  may  suppose,  been  with  his  father  in  Asia  on
his  staff,  and  therefore,  under  the  Julian  law,  was  open  to  prosecution  de
repetundis.  See  Pliny,  Ep.  iii.  9.

76

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

all  has  been  done,  owing  to  the  suspense  as  to  the  arrange-
ments to  be  made  about  the  Gauls.  At  last,  however,  after
frequent  postponements  and  serious  debates,  and  when
Pompey’s  wishes  had  been  clearly  seen  to  incline  in  the
direction  of  passing  a decree  for  Caesar  quitting  his  province
after  the  ist  of  March  next,  a decree  of  the  senate  was
passed,  which  I hereby  send  you,  and  some  resolutions
which  were  reduced  to  writing.

Resolutions  of  the  Senate.

Twenty-ninth  of  September ; in  the  temple  of  Apollo  ; the
following  assisted  in  drawing  up  the  decree:  L.  Domitius
Ahenobarbus.,  son  of  GncBus^  of  the  Fabian  tribe  ; Q.  Ccecilius
Metellus  Pius  Scipio,  son  of  Quintus of  the  Fabian  tribe  ; L.
Villius  Annalis.,  son  of  Lucius.,  of  the  Pomptinian  tribe  ; C.
Septimius,  son  of  Titus,  of  the  tribe  Quirina ; C.  Lucilius
Hirrus,  son  of  Gaius,  of  the  tribe  Pupinia ; C.  Scribonius
Curio,  son  of  Gaius,  of  the  tribe  Popilia  ; L.  Atteius  Capito,
son  of  Lucius,  of  the  tribe  Aniensis;  M.  Eppius,  son  of  Marcus,
of  the  tribe  Terentina.

Seeing  that  M.  Marcellus,  the  consul,  has  made  mention  of
the  consular  provinces,  on  that  subject  the  senators  have  voted
as  follows : L.  Paullus,  C.  Marcellus,  the  consuls,  shall,  when
they  have  entered  on  their  office,  on  the  first  of  the  month  of
March  that  is  about  to  fall  within  their  year  of  office,  bring
the  matter  of  the  consular  provinces  before  the  senate,  and  shall
not  from  the  first  of  March  bring  any  motion  before  the  senate
in  preference  thereto  ; nor  shall  anything  be  brought  before  the
senate  in  conjunction  therewith  by  the  consuls.  And  for  the
sake  of  that  business  they  shall  hold  meetings  of  the  senate,
comitial  days  notwithstanding ; and  shall  draw  up  decrees  of
the  senate.  And  when  that  business  is  being  brought  before
the  senate  by  the  consuls,  they  may  bring  into  the  house  those
of  the  senators  who  are  among  the  three  hundred  and  sixty
jurors  without  incurring  penalties  thereby.  Lfon  that  matter  it
is  necessary  to  bring  any  resolution  before  the  people  or  plebs,
Ser.  Sulpicius  and  M.  Marcellus,  the  consuls,  the  prcetors,  and
the  tribunes  of  the  plebs,  to  whichever  of  them  it  seems  good,
shall  bring  it  before  the  people  or  plebs.  But  if  they  shall  fail

I F VIII,  8 M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  77

I to  bring  it,  whosoever  are  next  in  office  shall  bring  it  before
' people  or  plebs.

No  one  vetoed.

Twenty-ninth  of  September ; in  the  temple  of  Apollo  ; the
|i  following  assisted  at  drawing  up  the  decree : L.  Domitius
Ahenobarbus,  son  of  Gnceus,  of  the  Fabian  tribe  ; Q.  Ccecilius
Metellus  Pius  Scipio,  son  of  Quintus  of  the  Fabian  tribe ;

' L.  Villius  Annalis,  son  of  Lucius,  of  the  Pomptinian  tribe  ;

II  C.  Septimius,  son  of  Titus,  of  the  tribe  Quirina  ; C.  Lucilius
Hirrus,  son  of  Gaius,  of  the  tribe  Pupinia  ; C.  Scribonius
Curio,  son  of  Gaius,  of  the  tribe  Popilia  ; L.  Atteius  Capito,
son  of  Lucius,  of  the  tribe  Aniensis ; M,  Eppius,  son  of
Marcus,  of  the  tribe  Terentina.

Seeing  that  M.  Marcellus,  the  consul,  has  made  mention  of
the  consular  provinces,  on  that  subject  the  senators  voted  as
follows : The  senate  is  of  opinion  that  none  of  those  who  have
the  power  of  vetoing  or  staying  proceedings  ought  to  offer  any
hindrance  to  a motion  being  brought  before  the  house  concern-
ing the  Republic  of  the  Roman  people,  the  Quirites,  or  a decree
of  the  senate  ^eing  made : whoso  shall  have  so  hindered  or
prohibited,  the  senate  is  of  opinion  that  he  has  acted  against
the  Republic.  Lf  anyone  shall  veto  this  decree,  the  senate
orders  that  its  resolution  shall  be  C07nmitted  to  writing,  and
that  the  matter  shall  thereupon  be  brought  before  the  senate
{and  people).

C.  Ccelius,  L.  Vinicius,  P.  Cornelius,  C.  Vibius  Pansa,
tribunes,  vetoed  this  decree.

Ordered  also  by  the  senate  concerning  the  soldiers  now  in
the  army  of  Gaius  Ccesar : as  to  those  of  them  who  have  served
their  full  time  or  have  pleas  to  allege  whereby  they  ought  to  be
discharged,  a motion  shall  be  brought  before  the  house  to  take
cognizance  of  them  and  to  look  into  their  cases.  Lf  anyone
vetoes  this  decree,  ordered  that  the  resolution  be  reduced  to
writing,  and  a motion  brought  before  this  house  thereon.

C.  Ccelius,  C.  Pansa,  tribunes,  vetoed  this  decree  of  the
senate.

Ordered  also  by  the  senate  that  into  the  province  of  Cilicia,
into  the  eight  remaining  provinces  administered  by  ex-prcetors

78

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

with  authority  of  prc^tor^  those  who  have  been  prcetors  and
have  not  been  to  a province  with  imperium^  such  of  t^m  as  in
accordance  with  tlu  decree  of  the  senate  are  due  to  be  sent  into
province  as  proprcetors^  shall  be  sent  into  provinces  as  by  lot
shall  be  assigned.  If  from  the  category  of  these,  thus  due  to
be  sent  into  provinces,  there  be  not  sujficient  in  number  to  go
into  the  said  provinces,  then  from  whichever  in  each  case  is
the  senior  college  of  prcetors  who  have  not  been  to  provinces,
they  shall  in  like  manner  go  to  provinces  by  lot : if  they  are
not  sujficient  to  make  up  the  number,  then  the  members  of  the
college  next  in  order  shall  have  their  names  put  into  the
lottery,  until  such  time  as  the  number  is  made  up  to  such
nuniber  as  is  due  to  be  sent  into  provinces.  If  anyone  vetoes
this  decree  of  the  senate,  let  the  resolution  be  reduced  to  writing.

C.  Ccelius,  C.  Fansa,  tribunes,  vetoed  this  decree  of  the
senate.

The  following  observation  also  of  Cn.  Pompeius  attracted
attention,  and  gave  people  a very  great  feeling  of  security,
when  he  said  that  he  could  not,  without  unfairness,  settle
anything  about  Caesar’s  provinces  before  the  ist  of  March,
but  that  after  the  ist  of  March  he  would  not  hesitate.
When  asked,  what  if  anyone  on  that  date  vetoed  it,  he  said
that  it  made  no  difference  whether  Caesar  refused  to  obey  the
senate,  or  secured  some  one  to  prevent  the  senate  passing  a
decree.  “ What  if,”  said  some  one  else,  “ he  shall  determine
both  to  be  consul  and  to  keep  his  army  ? ” To  which  he
answered — with  what  mildness  ! — “ What  if  my  son  should
choose  to  strike  me  with  his  stick  ? ” By  such  words  as  these
he  has  made  people  think  that  some  negptiation^was  going
on  between  Pompey  and  Caesar.  And  so  I think  Caesar  is
minded  to  adopt  one  of  two  alternatives — either  J;o  remain
in  his  province,  and  not  be  a candidate  this  next  year,  or,
if  he  succeeds  in  getting  elected,  to  leave  his  province.
Curio  is  preparing  to  oppose  him  at  every  point.  What  he
can  do  I don’t  know.  I clearly  see  this,  that  if  Curio  keeps
his  wits  about  him,  even  though  he  effects  nothing,  he  cannot
possibly  come  utterly  to  grief.  Curio  treats  me  in  a very
gentlemanly  way,  and  has  forced  a troublesome  business  on
me  by  his  present.  For  if  he  had  not  given  me  those  African
beasts,  which  had  been  imported  for  him  to  use  at  his  games,

F VIII,  8;  11,9  TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS

79

the  thing  might  have  been  omitted.  Now,  however,  since
give  games  I must,  I would  beg  you,  as  I have  often  asked
you  before,  to  see  that  I have  some  beasts  from  your  parts.
I also  commend  to  your  attention  the  bond  held  by  Sittius.
I am  sending  my  freedman  Philo  and  the  Greek  Diogenes
to  Cilicia,  to  whom  I have  intrusted  a message  and  a letter
to  you.  Pray  be  so  good  as  to  give  them,  and  the  business
on  which  I have  sent  them,  your  special  attention.  For  in
the  letter,  which  I have  given  them  for  you,  I have  stated
in  detail  how  extremely  important  it  is  to  me.

CCXXIII  (F  II,  9)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (AT  ROME)
Cilicia  (November)

M.  Cicero,  proconsul,  greets  M.  Caelius,  curule  aedile
elect.  First  of  all,  as  in  duty  bound,  I congratulate  you
and  express  my  delight  at  the  rank  which  you  have  already
attained,  and  your  hopes  of  advancement  in  the  future.  It
is  somewhat  late  in  the  day  : that,  however,  does  not  arise
from  my  negligence,  but  from  my  ignorance  of  everything
that  is  going  on.  For  I am  in  a district  where,  partly  from
its  distance,  and  partly  from  brigandage,  all  news  is  as
late  as  possible  in  arriving.  Besides  congratulating  you,  I
can  scarcely  find  words  to  thank  you  for  having  had  an
election  calculated,  as  you  said  in  your  letter,  to  give  us  an
endless  fund  of  laughter.  And  so,  as  soon  as  I heard  the
news,  I imagined  myself  in  that  man’s  skin — you  know
whom  I mean — and  personified  to  myself  all  that  rising
generation  ” about  which  he  is  always  talking  so  big.  “ ’Tis
hard  to  say  ” — looking  at  you  in  my  mind’s  eye  the  while,
though  far  away,  and  as  though  I were  talking  to  you  face
to  face —

“ By  heaven,  how  great,

How  grand  the  feat ! ”

8o

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  JET.  55

But  since  it  had  surpassed  my  expectation,  I began  the
quotation :

“ A glad  surprise

Before  my  eyes.”

In  fact,  I all  on  a sudden  stepped  out  “gay  as  gay  can
be,”  and  when  I was  rebuked  for  being  all  but  silly  from
excess  of  joy,  I quoted  in  my  defence,  “ Beyond  all  measure
to  express  delight,”  etc.^  In  short,  while  laughing  at  him,  I
almost  became  another  like  him.  But  I will  write  more
about  this,  and  much  else  besides  about  you  and  to  you,  as
soon  as  I have  got  a minute  to  spare.  Meanwhile,  however,
my  dear  Rufus,  I am  deeply  attached  to  you — you  whom
fortune  gave  me  to  be  the  promoter  of  my  dignity,  and  such
a scourge,  not  of  my  enemies  only,  but  of  my  jealous  rivals
also,  that  they  had  reason  to  be  sorry  in  some  cases  for  their
evil  deeds,  and  in  others  even  for  their  stupidities.

CCXXIV  (F  II,  10)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (AT  ROME)
PiNDENissus,  26  November

M.  Cicero,  imperator^  greets  M.  Cselius,  curule  aedile  elect.
Just  see  how  letters  fail  to  reach  me  ! For  I cannot  be  in-
duced to  believe  that  you  have  not  sent  me  any  letter  since
your  election  to  the  aedileship,  considering  the  importance  of
the  fact  and  the  congratulation  for  which  it  called  : on  your
account,  because  it  was  what  I was  hoping  for,  on  that  of
Hillus  ^ (you  see  I lisp)  because  it  was  what  I had  not

^ Ego  voluptatem  animi  nimia^n  smnmum  esse  errorem  arbitror —

I think  the  height  of  exultation  the  height  of  error  ” (Traben  ap  Tusc.
iv.  § 35).  This  is  only  a “ defence  ” ironically.

^ Cicero  calls  himself  imperator,  as  having  been  greeted  by  that
title  by  his  soldiers  in  the  field.  This  was  a special  usage  of  the  title,
to  be  distinguished  from  the  same  word  applied  to  a magistrate  with
imperium.  This  title  by  acclamation  could  only  be  given  once  in  the
same  war.  It  always  comes  after  the  name.  The  chief  authority  on
this  subject  is  Dio,  43,  44  ; cp.  70,  21.

® Hillus  for  Hirrus.  It  doesn’t  seem  much  of  a jest.

F II,  10

TO  M.  CT:LIUS  RUFUS

8i

expected.  However,  be  assured  that  I have  received  no
letter  from  you  since  that  glorious  election,  which  trans-
ported me  with  delight.  This  makes  me  fear  that  the  same
may  happen  to  my  letter.  For  my  part,  I have  never  sent  a
single  packet  home  without  an  inclosure  for  you,  and  nothing
can  be  more  delightful  and  beloved  than  you  are  to  me.  But
let  us  return  (not  “ weturn,”  for  I have  lost  my  lisp)  to  business.

It  is  as  you  desired.  For  you  could  have  wished  me,  you
say,  to  have  no  more  trouble  than  just  enough  for  the  laurel.
You  are  afraid  of  the  Parthians,  because  you  have  no  con-
fidence in  the  forces  at  my  disposal.  Well,  the  course  of
affairs  has  been  as  follows.  On  the  announcement  of  a
Parthian  invasion,  relying  on  certain  difficulties  in  the  country
and  on  the  natural  features  of  the  mountains,  I led  my  army

to  Amanus,  supported  by  a fairly  good  contingent  of  auxiliary

forces,  and  by  a certain  prestige  attaching  to  my  reputation  W
among  populations  who  had  no  personal  knowledge  of  me.

For  one  often  hears  in  these  parts,  “Is  that  the  man  by  whom

the  city , whom  the  senate ?”  You  can  imagine  the

rest.  By  the  time  I had  arrived  at  Amanus,  which  is  a
mountain  common  to  me  and  Bibulus,  the  dividing  line
being  the  watershed,  our  friend  Cassius,  to  my  great  joy,  had
repulsed  the  enemy  from  Antioch ; Bibulus  had  taken  over
his  province.  Meanwhile,  with  my  full  forces  I harassed  the
population  of  Amanus,  our  immemorial  foes.  Many  were
killed  and  taken  prisoners,  the  rest  were  scattered : the  fortified
strongholds  were  taken  by  surprise  and  burnt.  Accordingly,
after  a complete  victory,  having  been  acclaimed  imperator  at
Issus — in  which  place,  as  I have  often  been  told  by  you,
Clitarchus  related  to  you  that  Darius  was  conquered  by
Alexander — I drew  off  my  army  to  the  most  disturbed  part
of  Cilicia.  There  for  the  past  twenty-five  days  I have  been
assailing  a very  strongly  fortified  town  called  Pindenissus
with  earthworks,  pent-houses,  towers,  and  with  such  great  re-
sources and  energy,  that  the  only  thing  now  wanting  to  the
attainment  of  the  most  glorious  renown  is  the  credit  of
taking  the  town ; and  if,  as  I hope,  I do  take  it,  I will  then
at  once  send  an  official  despatch.  For  the  present  I content
myself  with  writing  this  to  you,  to  give  you  hope  of  attaining

^ For  a triumph.
G

II.

82

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  ^T.  55

your  wish.  But  to  return  to  the  Parthians,  the  present
summer  has  had  the  fairly  fortunate  result  I have  men-
tioned : for  the  next,  there  is  much  cause  for  alarm.  Where-
fore, my  dear  Rufus,  be  vigilant : in  the  first  place,  that  I
may  have  a successor  : but  if  that  shall  turn  out  to  be,  as  you
write,  too  much  of  a business,  then,  what  is  easy  enough,
that  no  additional  period  be  imposed.  About  politics  I
expect  in  your  letters,  as  I have  said  before,  current  events
and,  even  more,  conjectures  of  the  future.  Wherefore  I beg
you  earnestly  to  write  me  an  account  of  everything  in  the
greatest  detail.

CCXXV  (F  VIII,  10)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome,  15  November

I HAVE  been  much  disturbed  by  the  despatches  of  C.  Cassius
and  Deiotarus.  For  Cassius  has  written  to  say  that  the
forces  of  the  Parthians  are  across  the  Euphrates  : Deiotarus
that  they  started  for  Qur  province  by  way  of  Commagene.
For  my  part,  my  chief  alarm  has  been  on  your  account,
knowing  as  I do  what  your  state  of  preparation  in  the  way  of
an  army  is,  lest  this  inroad  should  in  any  way  endanger  your
prestige.  For  I should  have  had  some  fear  for  your  life,
even  if  you  had  had  a more  adequate  army : as  it  is,  the
slenderness  of  your  forces  made  me  forbode  a retreat,  not  a
battle,  on  your  part.  What  view  people  would  take  of  that,
and  how  far  what  you  were  compelled  to  do  would  be  likely
to  be  considered  satisfactory — about  this  I am  still  feeling
anxious,  and  shall  not  cease  to  be  alarmed  till  I hear  of
your  having  reached  Italy.  But  the  news  of  the  passage  of
the  Parthians  has  given  rise  to  various  suggestions.  One
man  is  for  sending  Pompey,  another  against  Pompey’s  re-
moval from  the  city,  another  for  sending  Caesar  with  his
own  army,  another  the  consuls ; no  one,  however,  is  for
sending  any  who  are  in  Rome  without  office  by  a senatorial

F VIII,  lO

M.  C.ELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

83

decree.^  The  consuls,  moreover,  for  fear  of  this  decree
being  passed  for  their  leaving  Rome  in  military  uniform,  or
of  the  business  being  transferred  to  some  one  else,  which
would  involve  a slight  upon  themselves  as  having  been
passed  over,  are  so  unwilling  to  have  any  meeting  of  the
senate  at  all,  that  they  are  getting  a reputation  for  a want  of
energy  in  public  business.  But  whether  it  is  carelessness,  or
slackness,  or  the  fear  which  I have  suggested,  behind  this
pretence  of  moderation  there  is  concealed  a disinclination  to
a province.  No  despatch  has  arrived  from  you,  and  had
not  that  of  Deiotarus  followed  his,  it  was  beginning  to  be
believed  that  Cassius,  in  order  to  represent  devastation
caused  by  himself  as  the  work  of  the  Parthians,  invented
the  war,  sent  some  Arabs  into  the  province,  and  told  the
senate  that  they  were  Parthians.  Wherefore  I advise  you  to
describe  minutely  and  cautiously  the  state  of  things  in  your
part  of  the  world,  whatever  it  is,  that  you  may  not  be  said  either
to  have  been  filling  some  particular  person’s  sails,  or  to  have
kept  back  what  it  was  important  to  know.  We  have  now  come
to  the  last  period  of  the  year : for  I write  this  letter  on  the
15th  of  November.  I see  plainly  that  nothing  can  be  done
before  the  ist  of  January.  You  know  how  slow  and  in-
effective Marcellus  is,  and  how  dilatory  Servius.  What  sort
of  men  do  you  suppose  they  are,  or  how  can  they  possibly
do  what  is  against  their  inclination,  when  things  which  they
do  wish  they  yet  carry  on  so  languidly  as  to  give  the  impres-
sion of  not  wishing  them  ? Again,  when  the  new  magistrates
come  into  office,  if  there  is  a Parthian  war,  this  question
will  take  up  their  first  months.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,
there  turns  out  to  be  no  war,  or  only  one  such  as  you  or
your  successors  can  manage  with  a small  reinforcement,  I
perceive  that  Curio  will  bestir  himself  with  two  objects  : first,
to  take  something  away  from  Caesar ; and,  secondly,  to  bestow
something  on  Pompey,  however  insignificant  and  valueless
the  contribution  may  be.  Moreover,  Paullus  talks  about  the
province  with  irrational  violence.  His  intemperance  will  be
resisted  by  our  friend  Furnius : about  several  others  I can-
not form  an  opinion.  This  is  all  I know : other  possible
events  I cannot  yet  decipher.  I know  that  time  brings

' Which  was  regarded  as  unconstitutional,  and  only  to  be  justified  by
extreme  circumstances.  See  Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  6,  § 5.

84

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  .ET.  55

many  developments  and  upsets  many  arrangements : but
whatever  is  going  to  happen  will  be  confined  within  these
limits.  I have  this  addition  to  make  to  the  proceedings  of
Curio — his  proposal  as  to  the  Campanian  land  : as  to  which
they  say  that  Caesar  is  indifferent,  but  that  Pompey  is  much
opposed,  lest  it  should  be  unoccupied  and  at  Caesar’s  disposal
when  he  returns.  As  to  your  leaving  your  province,  I cannot
promise  to  take  measures  to  get  a successor  appointed  : but
I will  at  least  pledge  myself  that  your  time  is  not  prolonged.
It  is  for  you  to  consider  whether,  if  the  state  of  affairs,  if  the
senate  urge  you  to  stay,  if  a refusal  on  our  part  cannot
decently  be  made,  you  choose  to  persevere  in  your  deter-
mination. My  only  business  is  to  remember  with  what
solemnity  at  your  departure  you  laid  the  injunction  on  me
not  to  allow  of  its  happening.

CCXXVI  (F  II,  7)

TO  C.  SCRIBONIUS  CURIO  (IN  ROME)

^ Cilicia,  10  December

It  is  not  usual  to  find  fault  with  a tardy  congratulation,
especially  if  it  has  been  omitted  by  no  negligence  : for  I am
far  off,  and  news  reaches  me  slowly.  However,  I both  con-
gratulate you  and  heartily  wish  that  your  tribunate  may
redound  to  your  lasting  reputation ; and  I exhort  you  to
direct  and  control  everything  by  your  own  good  sense,  and
not  allow  yourself  to  be  carried  away  by  suggestions  of  others.
There  is  no  one  who  can  give  you  wiser  advice  than  you  can
give  yourself : you  will  never  make  a slip,  if  you  listen  to
your  own  heart.  I don’t  write  this  inconsiderately  : I am
fully  conscious  to  whom  I am  writing  : I know  your  courage,
I know  your  good  sense.  I am  not  afraid  of  your  acting
timidly  or  foolishly,  if  you  maintain  what  you  feel  in  your
own  heart  to  be  right.  To  what  a political  situation  you
have,  I don’t  say  fallen,  but  come — for  it  is  by  your  own
deliberate  choice  and  not  by  chance  that  you  have  brought

F n,  7

TO  C.  SCRIBONIUS  CURIO

85

your  tribuneship  into  the  very  midst  of  a crisis — -you,  of  course,
perceive.  I do  not  doubt  that  you  are  considering  how
decisive  in  politics  is  the  choice  of  seasons,  how  rapidly
events  shift,  how  uncertain  are  results,  how  pliable  are  men’s
wills,  what  treachery,  what  falseness,  there  is  in  life.  But  I
beseech  you.  Curio,  give  your  whole  heart  and  mind,  not  to
any  new  principle,  but  to  that  which  I mentioned  at  the
beginning  of  my  letter  : commune  with  your  own  thoughts,
take  your  own  self  into  council,  listen  to  yourself,  obey  your-
self. It  is  not  easy  to  find  anyone  capable  of  giving  better
advice  to  another  than  you  are : to  yourself,  at  any  rate,  no
one  will  give  better.  Good  heavens  ! why  am  I not  there  to
be,  if  you  will,  the  spectator  of  your  glory,  or  the  sharer,  or
partner,  or  assistant  in  your  counsels  ? Although  of  this  you
do  not  in  the  least  stand  in  need,  yet,  after  all,  the  greatness
and  intensity  of  my  affection  would  have  secured  my  being
of  some  use  to  you  by  my  advice.  I will  write  at  greater
length  to  you  at  another  time  : for  within  the  next  few  days  I
intend  to  send  some  letter-carriers  frommyown  establishment,
that,  since  I have  performed  a public  service  with  good  results
and  to  my  own  satisfaction,  I may  in  one  despatch  give  an
account  to  the  senate  of  the  events  of  the  whole  summer.  As
to  your  election  to  the  priesthood,  you  will  learn  from  the  letter
which  I delivered  to  your  freedman  Thraso  how  much  trouble
I have  taken,  and  how  difficult  a matter  it  has  been  to  deal
with  and  maintain.  For  yourself.  Curio,  in  the  name  of  your
uncommon  affection  for  me,  and  my  own  unparalleled  one
for  you,  I beg  you  not  to  allow  any  extension  of  time  to  be
made  in  my  case  to  this  burden  of  a province.  I urged  this
on  you  when  I was  with  you,  and  when  I had  no  idea  that
you  were  going  to  be  tribune  this  year,  and  I have  often
made  the  same  request  by  letter ; but  then  it  was  made  to
you  as  a member  of  the  senate,^  who  was  yet  a young  man
of  the  highest  rank  and  the  greatest  popularity,  now  it  is  to
a tribune,  and  that  tribune  a Curio : not  to  get  any  novel

• Reading  senatore  with  the  MSS.  It  seems  to  me  evidently  right.
Cicero  says  that  when  he  first  appealed  to  Curio,  he  was  only  a private
member  of  the  senate,  with  only  such  influence  as  his  rank  and  popularity
gave  him — now  he  is  a tribune  who  could  veto  any  such  measure,  and
therefore  had  as  great  power  in  the  matter  as  any  man  could  have.  I
do  not  think  that  Cicero  would  have  called  Curio  his  sectator,  especially
when  wishing  to  secure  his  services.

86

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  MT.  55

decree — which  is  usually  somewhat  more  difficult — but  to
prevent  any  novelty  : to  support  both  a decree  of  the  senate
and  laws,  and  to  allow  the  terms  under  which  I left  Rome  to
remain  as  they  are.  This  I earnestly  beg  of  you  again  and
again.

CCXXVII  (A  V,  20)

TO  ATTICUS  (IN  EPIRUS)

In  camp  at  Pindenissus,  19  December

f On  the  morning  of  the  Saturnalia  (17th  December)  the  Pin-
denissetae  surrendered  to  me,  on  the  fifty-seventh  day  from  the
beginning  of  our  investment  of  them.  “ Who  the  mischief  are
your  Pindenissetae  ? who  are  they  ?”  you  will  say  : “I  never
heard  their  name.’’  Well,  what  am  I to  do?  Could  I turn
Cilicia  into  an  ^tolia  or  a Macedonia  ? Let  me  tell  you  this,
that  with  an  army  such  as  mine,  and  in  a place  like  this,
such  a big  business  was  impossible.  You  shall  have  it  all
en  ab7ege^  as  you  agreed  in  your  last  letter  to  take  it.
You  know  about  my  arrival  at  Ephesus,  for  you  have  con-
gratulated me  on  my  enthusiastic  reception  on  that  day,
which  gave  me  as  much  pleasure  as  anything  ever  did  in  my
life.  Thence,  after  a surprising  reception  in  such  towns  as
lay  on  my  road,  I arrived  at  Laodicea  on  the  31st  of  July.
I remained  there  two  days  in  the  midst  of  great  enthusiasm,
and  by  my  conciliatory  language  removed  the  rankling  in-
juries of  the  last  four  years.  I did  the  same  afterwards  during
my  five  days  stay  at  Apamea  and  three  days  at  Synnada,  five
at  Philomelium,  ten  at  Iconium.  Nothing  could  be  more
impartial,  mild,  or  dignified,  than  my  administration  of  justice
there.  Thence  I came  to  the  camp  on  the  24th  of  August ;
on  the  28th  I inspected  the  army  at  Iconium.  From  this
camp,  on  receipt  of  serious  news  as  to  the  Parthians,  I started
for  Cilicia  by  way  of  that  part  of  Cappadocia  which  borders
on  Cilicia,  with  the  design  of  impressing  upon  the  Armenian
Artavasdes  and  the  Parthians  themselves  that  they  were  pre-
cluded from  entering  Cappadocia.  After  having  been  en-
camped for  five  days  at  Cybistra  in  Cappadocia,  I got

A V,  20

TO  ATTICUS

87

intelligence  that  the  Parthians  were  at  a long  distance  from
that  entrance  into  Cappadocia,  and  were  rather  threatening
Cilicia.  I therefore  marched  rapidly  into  Cilicia  by  the
“ Gates  ” of  Taurus.  I arrived  at  Tarsus  on  the  5 th  of
October.  Thence)!  pressed  on  to  Mount  Amanus,  which
divides  Syria  from  Cilicia  by  the  line  of  its  watershed — a
mountain  full  of  immemorial  enemies.  Here,  on  the  13th
of  October,  we  cut  a large  number  of  the  enemy  to  pieces.
We  took  some  very  strongly  fortified  posts  by  a night  attack
of  Pomptinus’s,  and  by  one  led  by  myself  in  the  morning,
and  burnt  them.  I was  greeted  as  imperator  by  the  soldiers.
For  a few  days  we  were  encamped  on  the  very  spot  which
Alexander  had  occupied  against  Darius  at  Issus,  a com-
mander not  a little  superior  to  either  you  or  me  ! Having
stayed  there  five  days,  and  having  ravaged  and  devastated
Amanus,  we  evacuated  that  place.  For  you  know  that  there
are  things  called  “panics,”  called  also  “ war’s  idle  rumours.”  ^
From  the  report  of  our  arrival  encouragement  was  at  once
given  to  Cassius,  then  confined  to  Antioch,  and  alarm
inspired  in  the  Parthians.  Accordingly,  as  they  were  retiring
from  that  town,  Cassius  pursued  them  and  gained  a hand-
some victory.  In  the  course  of  this  retreat  the  Parthian
leader,  Osaces,  a man  in  high  authority,  received  a wound  of
which  a few  days  afterwards  he  died.  My  name  became
very  popular  in  Syria.  Meanwhile  Bibulus  arrived.  I sup-
pose he  wanted  to  be  on  an  equality  with  me  in  the  matter
of  this  vain  acclamation  of  imperator.  In  this  same  Mount
Amanus  he  begins  “looking  for  a bay-leaf  in  awedding  cake.”^
But  he  lost  the  whole  of  his  first  cohort  and  the  centurion
of  the  first  line,  a man  of  high  rank  in  his  own  class,  Asinius
Dento,  and  the  other  centurions  of  the  same  cohort,  as  well
as  a military  tribune,  Sext.  Lucilius,  son  of  T.  Gavius  Caepio,
a man  of  wealth  and  high  position.  It  was  really  a very
galling  blow  both  in  itself  and  in  the  time  of  its  reception.

I was  at  Pindenissus,  the  most  strongly  fortified  town  of  X
Eleutherocilicia,^  never  peaceful  within  living  memory.  The

^ TctTraviKO.,  TO.  Ktva  rov  TroXsfiov.  See  Polyb.  xxix.  6,  ttoWo,  k^vu

TOV  TToXkflOV.

^ An  easy  feat.  Wedding  cakes  were  baked  on  bay-leaves.

^ The  Eleutherocilices  were  the  mountain  tribes  that  had  not  been
completely  subjected  to  the  Roman  province.

88

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  /ET.  55

people  were  fierce  and  brave,  and  furnished  with  everything
necessary  for  standing  a siege.  We  surrounded  it  with
stockade  and  ditch,  with  a huge  earthwork,  pent-houses,  an
eixceedingly  lofty  tower,  a great  supply  of  artillery,  a large  body
of  archers.  After  great  labour  and  preparation  I finished
the  business  without  loss  to  my  army,  though  with  a large
number  of  wounded.  I am  spending  a merry  Saturnalia,  and
so  are  my  soldiers,  to  whom  I have  given  up  all  spoil  except
captives : the  captives  were  sold  on  the  third  day  of  the
Saturnalia  (19th  December),  the  day  on  which  I write  this.
The  sum  realized  at  the  tribunal  is  12,000  sestertia  (about
^96,000).  I intend  to  hand  over  the  army  to  my  brother
Quintus  to  lead  hence  into  winter  quarters  in  the  disturbed
districts.  ^ I am  myself  going  back  to  Laodicea.

So  much  for  this.  But  to  return  to  points  omitted.  As  to
what  you  urge  upon  me  most  warmly,  and  which  in  fact  is
more  important  than  anything  else,  namely,  your  anxiety  that
I should  satisfy  my  carping  Ligurian  critic,^  may  I die  if  any-
thing could  be  more  fastidious  than  my  conduct.  And  I do
not  now  speak  of  it  as  “ self-restraint,”  which  is  a virtue  con-
sidered capable  of  resisting  pleasure  : while  the  fact  is  that  I
never  in  all  my  life  felt  such  pleasure  as  I do  at  my  own  in-
tegrity. And  it  is  not  so  much  the  reputation  I get  by  it —
though  that  is  of  the  highest — as  the  thing  itself  that  de-
lights me.  In  short,  it  was  worth  the  trouble  : I never  ap-
preciated myself  or  knew  fully  of  what  I was  capable  in  this
direction.  I have  good  reason  for  being  puffed  up.  Nothing
could  be  more  splendid.  Meanwhile,  here ’s  a score  for  me  !
Ariobarzanes  is  alive  and  a king  all  owing  to  me.  By  my
prudence  and  prestige,  and  by  refusing  to  receive  even  the
visits,  to  say  nothing  of  the  bribes,  of  the  conspirators
against  his  life,  I have,  merely  en  passant^  saved  a king  and
a kingdom.  In  the  meantime  from  Cappadocia  not  the
value  of  a hair  ! I have  recovered  Brutus  from  his  dejec-
tion, whom  I love  no  less  than  you  do,  I had  almost  said,
than  I do  you.  And  I almost  hope  that  throughout  my  year
of  office  not  a farthing’s  expense  will  be  caused  to  my  pro-
vince. There ’s  the  whole  story  for  you.

^ Supposed  to  refer  to  P.  /Elius  Ligur,  tribune  in  b.c.  57,  and  a
bitter  opponent.

A 20

TO  ATTICUS

89

I am  now  composing  an  official  despatch  to  send  to  Rome.
It  will  be  somewhat  fuller  of  matter  than  if  I had  sent  it  from
Amanus.  But  to  think  that  you  won’t  be  at  Rome  ! And
yet  everything  depends  on  the  ist  of  March.  For  I am
afraid,  if,  on  the  question  of  the  province  coming  up,  Caesar
shall  refuse  compliance,  I may  be  kept  here.  If  you  were
there  when  this  was  going  on,  I should  not  have  been  at  all
afraid.  I return  to  the  city  news,  which,  after  a long  interval
of  ignorance,  I have  at  length  learnt  from  your  most  delight-
ful letter  received  on  the  i6th  of  December.  This  was  con-
veyed by  your  freedman  Philogenes  after  a very  long  and
far  from  safe  journey.  For  the  letter  you  say  that  you  de-
livered to  the  slaves  of  Laenius  I have  not  received.  I am
delighted  about  Caesar,  and  the  decrees  of  the  senate,  and  at
what  you  expect  to  happen.  If  he  gives  way  to  these  we  are
safe.  That  Seius  got  scorched  in  Plaetorius’s  fire  does  not
grieve  me  much.^  I long  to  know  why  Lucceius  has  been
so  hot  about  Q.  Cassius,  and  what  has  been  done  about  it.
For  myself,  as  soon  as  I arrive  at  Laodicea  I am  bidden  to
invest  Quintus,  your  sister’s  son,  with  the  toga  virilis,  and  I
will  keep  a more  than  usually  careful  eye  upon  him.  Deio-
tarus,  who  has  been  of  great  assistance  to  me,  is,  according
to  a letter  received  from  him,  about  to  come  to  Laodicea
with  our  two  boys.^  I am  expecting  another  letter  from
you  from  Epirus,  that  I may  get  a notion  not  only  of  your
business  life,  but  of  your  holiday  also.  Nicanor  serves  me
well  and  receives  liberal  treatment  at  my  hands.  I think  I
shall  send  him  to  Rome  with  my  official  despatch,  to  secure
its  being  conveyed  with  more  than  common  promptitude,
and  that  he  may  also  bring  me  trustworthy  intelligence  about
you  and  from  you.  That  your  Alexis  so  often  puts  in  a
greeting  to  me  is  gratifying.  But  why  does  he  not  treat  me
to  a letter  of  his^own,  as  my  Alexis  does  you.^  I am  looking
out  for  a horn  for  Phsemius.  But  enough  of  this.  Take

^ M.  PIsetorius  Cestianus,  condemned  for  extortion ; M.  Seius  (sedile
B.C.  75)  had  in  some  way  been  involved.

His  son  Marcus  and  nephew  Quintus,  who  had  been  on  a visit  to
the  younger  Deiotarus.  See  Letters  CCVIII,  CCXVII.

’ “ My  Alexis  ” means  Cicero’s  secretary  Tiro.  Tiro  writes  letters
to  Atticus  : Alexis  only  adds  a complimentary  postscript  in  those  of
Atticus  to  Cicero.

90

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  51,  .^T.  55

care  of  your  health,  and  let  me  know  when  you  think  of  going
to  Rome.  Good-bye  ! good-bye  !

I have  recommended  your  interests  and  your  agents  in
very  warm  terms  to  Thermus,  both  in  a personal  interview  at
Ephesus  and  now  by  letter,  and  I gathered  that  he  was  himself
very  anxious  to  serve  you.  Pray,  as  I have  often  mentioned
before,  see  about  the  house  of  Pammenes,^  and  take  care
that  the  boy  is  not  deprived,  by  any  means,  of  what  he  now
possesses  through  our  joint  support.  I not  only  think  that
this  concerns  the  honour  of  us  both,  but  it  will  also  gratify
me  personally  very  much.

CCXXVIII  (F  VII,  32)

TO  P.  VOLUMNIUS  EUTRAPELUS  (AT  ROME)
Cilicia  (December)

Owing  to  your  having  in  familiar  style,  as  you  were  quite
entitled  to  do,  dropped  your  prcBJiomen  in  your  letter  to  me,
I was  at  first  doubtful  whether  it  did  not  come  from  Volum-
nius  the  senator,  with  whom  I am  very  intimate,  but  pre-
sently the  evTpaTreXia  of  the  letter  itself  convinced  me  that  it
was  yours. ^ In  that  letter  I was  delighted  with  everything
except  this  : you  are  not  shewing  yourself  a very  energetic
agent  in  maintaining  my  rights  in  my  mines  of  (Attic)  salt.
For  you  say  that,  ever  since  my  departure,  everybody’s  bans
mots,  and  among  those  even  Sestius’s,^  are  fathered  on  me.

^ Pammenes,  an  Athenian  rhetorician,  of  about  the  same  age  as  Cicero,
mentioned  in  Orat.  § 105,  as  a great  admirer  of  Demosthenes.  It  does
not  seem  certain  that  this  is  the  same  man.  At  any  rate,  whoever  he
was,  he  seems  to  have  died,  and  his  son  to  have  had  some  difficulty  in
maintaining  his  right  to  his  house,  in  which  Cicero  and  Atticus  had  helped
him.

^ evTpaTreXia,  “gracious  playfulness,”  suggesting  his  friend’s  cognomen
Eutrapelus.

^ Though  it  cannot  be  proved,  there  is  no  reason  why  this  may  not
refer  to  P.  Sestius,  Cicero’s  client  of  b.c.  56,  and  also  the  author  of  the
speech  which  it  gave  Catullus  a fit  of  the  colic  to  read  or  hear  read

F VII,  32  TO  P.  VOLUMNIUS  EUTRAPELUS

91

What ! do  you  allow  that  ? Don’t  you  stand  up  for  me?  Don’t
you  protest  ? Why,  I did  hope  that  I had  left  my  bans  mots
with  such  a clear  stamp  on  them,  that  their  style  might  be
recognized  at  a glance.  But  as  there  is  so  much  scum  in  the
city,  that  nothing  can  be  so  graceless  as  not  to  seem  graceful  ^
to  some  one,  do  your  best,  an  you  love  me,  to  maintain,  on
your  solemn  affidavit,^  that  they  are  none  of  mine,  unless
sharp  double  meaning,  subtle  hyperbole,  neat  pun,  laugh-
able TTopa  'KpoaloKiav — unless  everything  else,  in  fact,  which  I
set  forth  in  the  person  of  Antonius  in  my  second  book
de  Oratore^  shall  appear  en  regie  and  really  witty.  For  as
to  your  complaints  about  the  law  courts  I care  much  less.
Let  all  the  defendants,  for  what  I care,  go  hang  ! If  Selius
himself  is  eloquent  enough  to  establish  his  freedom,  I don’t
trouble  myself.  But  my  prerogative  of  wit,  please  let  us  defend
by  any  amount  of  injunctions.  In  that  department  you  are
the  only  rival  I fear  : I don’t  think  anything  of  the  rest.  Do
you  suppose  I am  laughing  at  you  ? I never  knew’  before
that  you  were  so  sharp ! But,  by  Hercules,  joking  apart,  I
did  think  your  letter  very  witty  and  neatly  turned.  But
those  particular  stories,'^  laughable  as  they  in  fact  were,  did
not,  all  the  same,  make  me  laugh.  For  I am  anxious  that
the  friend  to  whom  you  refer  should  have  as  much  weight
as  possible  in  his  tribuneship,  both  for  his  own  sake — for,  as

(Cat.  44).  Though  Cicero  may  have  had  every  respect  for  him,  he  may
also  have  thought  poorly  of  his  style  of  wit.  Cicero’s  own  faculty  for  wit-
ticisms is  often  referred  to,  and  at  times  got  him  into  trouble,  as  in  the
camp  of  Pompey  in  B.C.  49-48  (2  Phil.  § 30).  For  the  poor  style  of
Sestius’s  writing  see  Letter  CCCXIV.

^ He  uses  two  words,  ciKvOrjpov  and  venustum^  which  involve  a play  on
words — “without  Cytherea”  and  “Venus-like” — which  cannot  well
be  represented  in  English.

^ Sacramento^  properly  the  deposit  paid  into  court  by  the  parties  to  a
suit  as  security.

® De  Oratore.,  ii.  § 235  seq.,  where,  however,  the  speaker  is  not
Antonius,  but  C.  lulius  Caesar  Strabo  Vopiscus.  The  de  Oratore  was
composed  in  b.c.  55.

^ Ilia.  Editors  generally  wish  to  insert  some  word  here,  such  as
Curionis  or  extrema,  to  make  the  meaning  clear.  But  we  must  re-
member that  Cicero  is  answering  a letter,  and  his  correspondent  would
have  no  doubt  of  his  meaning,  though  we  are  left  to  guess  it.  The
next  sentence  shews  that  the  reference  is  to  Curio,  of  whose  election
Cicero  therefore  knows,  which  dates  the  letter  as  not  earlier  than
December.  See  Letter  CCXXV.

92

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

you  know,  he  is  a great  favourite  of  mine — and  also,  by
Hercules,  for  that  of  the  Republic,  which,  however  un-
grateful to  myself  it  may  be,  I shall  never  cease  to  love.
You,  however,  my  dear  Volumnius,  since  you  have  begun
doing  so,  and  now  see  also  that  it  gives  me  pleasure,  write
to  me  as  often  as  possible  about  affairs  in  the  city,  about
politics.  I like  the  gossiping  style  of  your  letter.  Farther-
more,  speak  seriously  to  Dolabella,  whom  I see  and  believe
to  be  very  anxious  for  my  regard,  and  to  be  most  aftectionately
disposed  towards  me  : encourage  him  in  that  disposition,
and  make  him  wholly  mine ; not,  by  Hercules,  that  there
is  anything  lacking  in  him,  but  as  I am  very  much  set  upon
it,  I don’t  think  I am  shewing  too  much  anxiety.

CCXXIX  (F  XIII,  53)

TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS  (PROPRHlTOR
IN  ASIA^)

Cilicia

I HAVE  long  been  very  intimate  with  L.  Genucilius  Curvus,
who  is  a very  excellent  man  and  of  an  exceedingly  grateful
disposition.  I recommend  him  to  you  without  reserve,  and
introduce  him  to  you,  in  the  first  place,  that  you  may  give
him  facilities  generally  in  all  his  affairs,  so  far  as  your
honour  and  position  will  allow — and,  indeed,  that  will  be
in  everything,  for  he  will  never  ask  anything  of  you  in-
consistent with  his  own  character,  or,  indeed,  with  yours.

^ Thermus  was  propraetor  in  Asia  b.c.  52-50.  He  was  a strong
Optimate,  and  we  find  him  in  arms  for  Pompey  in  B.c.  49  (Caes.  B.  C.
i.  12).  Caesar  calls  him  praetor  in  B.c.  49,  but  that  is  probably  a loose
expression  for  prcetorius.  This  and  the  rest  of  the  letters  for  this  year
are  formal  letters  of  introduction  or  recommendation.  Their  chief
interest  is  the  light  they  throw  upon  the  financial  position  and  dealings
of  a province.  Cicero  prided  himself  upon  the  composition  of  such
letters,  but  it  will  be  remembered  that  he  warned  his  friends  that  they
were  not  to  be  taken  too  seriously  unless  he  gave  special  indications  to
that  effect.

F XIII,  53,  56  TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMOS

93

But  in  a special  manner  also  I commend  to  your  protection
his  business  concerns  in  Hellespontus  : first,  to  enable  him
to  maintain  the  privilege  in  regard  to  land-holding,  which
the  state  of  Parium  gave  him  by  decree,  and  which  he  has
always  maintained  without  dispute ; and,  in  the  second  place,
that  you  should,  in  case  of  his  being  involved  in  a suit  with
a Hellespontian,  refer  it  to  that  diocesed  However,  I do
not  think  that,  having  recommended  him  with  the  utmost
earnestness  to  you  in  general,  I need  go  into  particular
cases  affecting  him.  The  upshot  is  this  : whatever  attention,
kindness,  or  mark  of  honour  you  bestow  on  Genucilius,
I shall  consider  that  you  have  bestowed  on  me  and  my
interests.

CCXXX  (F  XIII  56)

TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS  (IN  ASIA)
Cilicia

Cluvius  of  Puteoli  is  very  attentive  to  and  intimate  with
me.  He  believes  that,  having  business  in  your  province,
unless,  during  your  governorship,  he  has  secured  it  by  a
letter  of  recommendation  from  me,  he  will  have  to  put  it
down  as  lost  and  hopeless.  Well,  now,  since  so  heavy  a
burden  is  laid  on  me  by  a very  kind  friend,  I will  also  lay  a
burden  on  you,  warranted  by  your  eminent  services  to  me ;
and  yet  in  doing  so  I am  unwilling  to  be  troublesome  to
you.  The  people  of  Mylasa  and  Alabanda  owe  Cluvius
money.  Euthydemus  told  me,  when  I was  at  Ephesus,  that
he  would  see  that  ecdicP  were  sent  from  Mylasa  to  Rome.

^ 6ioiKTj(Tiv,  i.e.y  the  administrative  district  of  Hellespontus,  the  district
along  the  Hellespont  and  Propontis  {Dardanelles  Sea  of  Marmora).
The  chief  town  was  Cyzicus.  Parium  was  about  sixty  miles  to  the  west
of  it,  mod.  Kamares.

^ M.  Cluvius  was  a banker  of  Puteoli.  He  afterwards  made  Cicero
heir  to  part  of  his  property  {Alt.  xiii.  46).

^ Commissioners  in  a province  authorized  to  settle  a money  or  other
claim,  which  could  be  heard  at  Rome,  whereas  legati  could  only  petition
the  senate  for  some  grant  or  order.

94

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

That  has  not  been  done.  I hear  that  legates  have  been
sent ; but  I prefer  ecdici^  in  order  that  some  settlement  may
be  made.  Therefore  I beg  you  to  order  them  and  the
Alabandians  to  send  ecdici  to  Rome.  Besides  this,  Philocles
of  Alabanda  has  mortgaged  some  property  to  Cluvius.  The
time  of  the  mortgage  has  expired.  I would  like  you  to  see
that  he  either  gives  up  possession  of  the  property  mortgaged
and  surrenders  it  to  Cluvius’s  agents,  or  pays  the  money ;
and  farther,  that  the  people  of  Heraclea  and  Bargylia,  who
are  also  in  his  debt,  should  either  pay  the  money  or  give
him  a lien  on  their  revenues.  The  people  of  Caunus  also
owe  him  money,  but  they  allege  that  they  have  placed  the
money  on  deposit.  I should  like  you  to  investigate  that,
and,  if  you  ascertain  that  they  have  not  deposited  the  money,
either  by  edict  or  decree,  to  see  that  Cluvius’s  claim  to
interest  is  secured  to  him  by  your  decision.^  I am  the  more
anxious  on  these  points,  because  the  interests  of  our  friend
Cn.  Pompeius  is  involved  also,  and  because  he  appears  to
me  to  be  even  more  anxious  about  it  than  Cluvius  himself."
I am  very  desirous  that  he  should  be  satisfied  with  my
exertions  on  his  behalf.  On  these  matters  I earnestly  and
repeatedly  ask  your  assistance.

CCXXXI  (F  XIII,  55)

TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS  (IN  ASIA)
Cilicia

Although,  when  I spoke  to  you  at  Ephesus  of  the  business
of  my  legate  M.  Anneius,  I gathered  that  you  were  strongly
inclined  to  do  anything  for  his  own  sake,  nevertheless,  I
value  M.  Anneius  so  highly,  and  think  that  you  value  me
so  highly,  that  I do  not  hesitate  to  allow  my  recom-
mendation to  be  added  as  a finishing  stroke  to  your  exist-

^ If  the  money  was  duly  deposited  at  a bank  or  temple,  interest  would
not  be  any  longer  payable.

^ Cluvius  appears  to  be  acting  for  Pompey,  and  some  suppose  that
Pompey  was  the  real  creditor  in  all  these  cases.

F XIII,  55,  6i

TO  P.  SILIUS  NERVA

95

ing  willingness  to  serve  him.  For,  though  I have  long  been
attached  to  M.  Anneius — as  I have  practically  shewn  by  offer-
ing him  a legation  unasked,  after  having  refused  many  who
asked  for  it — yet,  since  he  has  been  associated  with  me  in  war
and  the  conduct  of  military  affairs,  I have  come  to  know  that
his  courage,  good  sense,  honour,  and  loyalty  to  myself  are  so
eminent,  that  I now  value  him  as  highly  as  anyone  in  the
world.  You  know  that  he  has  a suit  with  the  people  of
Sardis  : I explained  the  merits  of  the  case  to  you  at  Ephesus  :
but  you  will,  nevertheless,  inquire  into  it  more  easily  and  satis-
factorily on  the  spot.  As  to  the  rest,  by  Hercules,  I long
hesitated  what  exactly  to  write  to  you.  For  your  manner  of
deciding  questions  at  law  is  justly  celebrated,  and  known  to
your  high  credit.  We,  again,  have  no  need  of  anything  in
this  case,  but  that  you  should  decide  the  question  according
to  your  usual  principles.  But  yet,  since  I am  fully  aware
how  great  the  influence  of  a praetor  is — especially  a praetor
whose  character  for  honesty,  firmness,  and  equity  is  ac-
knowledged on  all  hands — I do  ask  of  you,  in  the  name  of
our  very  close  intimacy  and  of  the  many  mutual  good  ser-
vices, which  have  benefited  us  both  equally,  by  a display  of
cordiality,  by  an  exercise  of  influence,  and  by  an  exertion  of
zeal  to  convince  M.  Anneius,  not  only  that  you  are  his  friend
(this  he  does  not  doubt,  for  he  has  often  remarked  it  to  me),
but  that  you  have  been  made  much  more  his  friend  by  this
letter  of  mine.  Finally,  I don’t  think  you  feel  any  hesitation
as  to  how  well  you  will  be  investing  your  kindness  with  a
man  of  the  most  grateful  disposition  and  most  excellent
principles.

CCXXXII  (F  XIII,  6i)

TO  P.  SILIUS  NERVA  (PROPRHiTOR  OF
BITHYNIA  AND  PONTUS)

Cilicia

I THINK  you  know  that  I was  very  intimate  with  T.  Pinnius.
This  fact  he  testified  by  his  will,  for  he  appointed  me  both  a

96

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  JET.  55

guardian  and  an  heir  in  the  second  degree.  To  his  son,  who
is  attached  to  me  and  is  a man  of  learning  and  good  char-
acter, the  people  of  Nicsa  owe  a large  sum  of  money,
amounting  to  eight  million  sesterces  (about  ;3^64,ooo),  and,
as  I am  informed,  they  are  especially  anxious  to  pay  him.
I shall  be  much  obliged  therefore — for  not  only  the  other
guardians,  who  know  how  highly  you  value  me,  but  the  boy
himself  also  are  convinced  that  you  wdll  do  anything  for  me —
if  you  will  take  the  trouble  to  see,  as  far  as  your  honour  and
position  will  allow',  that  as  large  a part  of  the  money  as
possible  is  paid  to  Pinnius  on  account  of  the  people  of
Nicaea.

CCXXXIII  (F  XIII,  62)

TO  P.  SILIUS  NERVA  (IN  BITHYNIA)
Cilicia

I WAS  very  much  obliged  to  you  in  the  business  of  Atilius —
for  though  I was  late  in  the  field  I managed  by  your  kind-
ness to  save  a respectable  Roman  knight — and,  iDy  Hercules,
I always  did  believe  that  you  were  one  on  whom  I could
rely,  owing  to  the  attachment  to  and  rare  friendship  with
Lamia  common  to  us  both.  Accordingly,  first  of  all  I offer
you  my  thanks  for  having  freed  me  from  all  annoyance ;
then  I follow  this  up  with  a piece  of  impudence — but  I will
make  up  for  it : for  I will  always  pay  you  attention  and
stand  up  for  you  with  the  utmost  energy.  Pray,  if  you  care
for  me,  be  sure  you  hold  my  brother  Quintus  in  the  same
regard  as  you  do  me.  By  so  doing  you  will  crown  your
kindness  and  greatly  enhance  it.

F XIII,  62,  64

TO  P.  SILIUS  NERVA

97

CCXXXIV  (F  XIII,  64)

TO  P.  SILIUS  NERVA  (IN  BITHYNIA)
Cilicia

AIy  friend  Nero  ^ thanks  me  in  terms  of  quite  astonishing  and
incredible  warmth,  saying  that  no  mark  of  honour  which
could  have  been  given  him  was  omitted  by  you.  You  will
be  richly  rewarded  by  him,  for  he  is  the  most  grateful  young
fellow  in  the  world.  But,  by  heaven,  I too  am  exceedingly
obliged  to  you  : for  of  all  our  men  of  rank  I value  none  more
than  him.  And  so,  if  you  do  what  he  wished  me  to  ask  of
you,  I shall  be  supremely  obliged : first,  in  the  matter  of
Pausanias  of  Alabanda,  if  you  would  keep  the  business  back
till  Nero  arrives — I have  gathered  that  he  is  very  interested
in  him,  and  so  I put  this  request  strongly — and  next  if  you
would  regard  as  specially  commended  to  your  care  the
people  of  Nysa,^  whom  Nero  regards  as  his  special  friends
and  is  most  energetic  in  protecting  and  defending,  so  that
this  city  may  feel  that  its  best  protection  consists  in  Nero
being  its  patron.  I have  often  recommended  Servilius
Strabo  ^ to  you  : I now  do  so  with  the  greater  earnestness  that
Nero  has  taken  up  his  case.  I only  ask  you  to  push  on  the
business,  so  as  not  to  leave  an  innocent  man  a prey  to  the  greed
of  some  governor  unlike  yourself.  This  will  be  a favour  to
me ; but  I shall  also  consider  it  an  instance  of  your  natural
kindness.  The  upshot  of  this  letter  is  that  you  should  ad-
vance Nero  in  all  possible  ways,  as  you  have  started  doing

^ T.  Claudius  Nero,  the  future  husband  of  Livia.  He  seems  to  have
visited  Cicero  with  a view  to  marrying  Tullia,  but  was  too  late,  Terentia
having  already  betrothed  her  to  Dolabella.  See  Letter  CCLXXV.

^ Nysa,  in  Caria,  was  known  at  this  time  for  several  eminent  philo-
sophers and  rhetoricians,  and  was  therefore  probably  visited  by  Roman
youths,  and  had  need  of  a patronus  (Strabo,  xiv.  2,  §§  43-48).

^ Nothing  is  known  of  this  man,  apparently.  He  seems  to  be  a
Carian  Greek,  a freedman  of  some  Servilius.  It  is  a curious  coincidence
that  the  geographer  Strabo  studied  at  Nysa,  and  probably  not  long  after
this  time.

II.

H

98

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  ^T.  55

and  have  done.  Your  province,  unlike  this  of  mine,  offers
a wide  theatre^  for  displaying  the  glorious  reputation  of  a
young  man  of  high  birth,  genius,  and  disinterested  conduct.
Wherefore,  if  he  enjoys  your  support,  as  I am  sure  he  will
do  and  has  done,  he  will  be  enabled  to  secure  and  bind  to
his  interests  most  respectable  bodies  of  clients  which  are  a
heritage  from  his  ancestors.  In  this  respect,  if  you  give  him
your  assistance,  with  the  man  himself  you  will  have  made  a
splendid  investment  of  your  kindness,  but  you  will  also  have
exceedingly  obliged  me.

CCXXXV  (F  XIII,  65)

TO  P.  SILIUS  NERVA  (PROPR^TOR  OF
BITHYNIA  AND  PONTUS)

Cilicia

I AM  very  intimate  and  in  constant  communication  with  P.
Terentius  Hispo,  who  is  engaged  in  the  collection  of  the
pasture-dues  as  deputy-manager,  and  many  important  services,
equally  advantageous  to  us  both,  have  been  interchanged
between  us.  It  is  of  capital  importance  to  his  reputation  to
settle  the  contracts  with  the  remaining  states.  I don’t
forget  that  we  tried  to  do  that  at  Ephesus,  but  were  quite
unable  to  get  the  assent  of  the  Ephesians.  But  since,  as  is
the  general  opinion,  and,  as  I understand,  you  have  secured
as  well  by  your  singular  uprightness,  as  by  your  kindness
and  gentleness,  that  the  slightest  expression  of  your  wish
meets  with  the  readiest  consent  of  the  Greeks  to  any  object
you  have  in  view,  I beg  you  with  more  than  common

‘ What  Cicero  means  by  calling  Bithynia  a ‘ ‘ theatre  ” is  explainer
by  reference  to  vol.  i.,  p.  85.

^ On  the  public  pastures  the  inhabitants  fed  cattle,  paying  a fixed
sum  (scHptura)  for  the  privilege.  In  Asia  this  scriptura  was  collected
by  companies  of publicani,  who  payed  a fixed  sum  to  the  treasury,  and
then  covenanted  with  each  state  as  to  the  amount  payable.  The  head
of  such  a company  (consisting  of  equites)  was  called  viagister^  the  local
agent  pro  magistrOy  on  the  analogy  of  pro  cofisttky  pro  prcetorcy  etc. ,

F XIII,  65,  9

TO  P.  FURIUS  CRASSIPES

99

earnestness,  for  the  sake  of  my  credit,  to  determine  that
Hispo  shall  gain  this  distinction.^  I may  add  that  I am
closely  connected  with  the  partners  in  the  pasture  company,
not  only  because  that  company  as  a body  is  my  client,  but
also  because  I am  very  intimate  with  most  of  the  individual
partners.  By  acting  thus  you  will  not  only  have  assisted
my  friend  Hispo  in  consequence  of  a recommendation  of
mine,  and  given  the  company  still  greater  confidence  in
me,  but  you  will  yourself  also  receive  the  most  ample
reward  from  the  regard  of  this  most  gratefully  disposed
man,  as  well  as  the  thanks  of  the  partners,  who  are  men  of
the  highest  position,  and  you  will  have  done  me  personally
a very  great  kindness.  Pray  be  assured  that  in  your  whole
province  and  the  whole  sphere  of  your  government  there  is
nothing  that  you  can  do  that  could  gratify  me  more.

CCXXXVI  (F  XIII,  9)

TO  P.  FURIUS  CRASSIPES"  (QU^STOR  OF
BITHYNIA)

Cilicia

Although  in  a personal  interview  I recommended  as
earnestly  as  I could  to  you  the  publicani  of  Bithynia,  and
though  I gathered  that  by  your  own  inclination,  no  less  than
from  my  recommendation,  you  were  anxious  to  promote  the
advantage  of  that  company  in  every  way  within  your  power,
yet,  since  those  interested  thought  it  of  great  importance  to
them  that  I should  inform  you  by  letter  what  my  feeling
towards  them  was,  I have  not  hesitated  to  write  you  this.
For  I wish  you  to  believe  that,  while  I have  ever  had  the

^ As  agent  for  his  company.  The  smoother  things  went,  no  doubt,
the  better  for  the  agent,  as  in  all  businesses.

For  Crassipes,  who  was  betrothed,  if  not  married,  to  Tullia  as  her
second  husband,  see  Letter  CVII.  The  breaking  off  the  betrothal
{discidium)  or  the  divorce  {divortium)^  we  don’t  know  which,  had
evidently  not  left  him  at  enmity  with  Cicero.

100

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  51,  JET.  55

greatest  pleasure  in  doing  as  much  as  possible  for  the
order  of  this  particular  company  of

Bithyma  has  my  special  good  wishes.  The  company,  owing
to  the  rank  and  birth  of  its  members,  constitutes  a very
important  section  of  the  state ; ^ for  it  is  made  up  of  members
of  the  other  companies;  and  it  so  happens  that  a very
large  number  of  this  compar^  are  on  extremely  intimate
terms  with  me,  and  especially  the  man  who  is  at  the  present
time  at  the  head  of  the  business,  P.  Rupilius,  son  of
Publius,  of  the  tribe  Menenia,  the  master  of  that  company.
Such  being  the  case,  I beg  you  with  more  than  common
earnestness  to  protect  Cn.  Pupius,  who  is  an  employe  of
this  company,  by  every  sort  of  kindness  and  liberality
within  your  power;  and  to  secure,  as  you  easily  may,  that  his
services  shall  be  as  satisfactory  as  possible  to  the  company,
while  at  the  same  time  determining  that  the  property  and
interests  of  the  partners — as  to  which  I am  well  aware  how
much  power  a quaestor  possesses — should  be  secured  and
promoted.  While  you  will  in  this  be  doing  me  a very  great
favour,  I can  at  the  same  time  from  personal  experience
give  you  my  promise,  and  pledge  my  word  for  it,  that  you
will  find  the  partners  of  the  Bithynia  company  mindful  of
and  grateful  for  any  service  you  have  rendered  them.

CCXXXVII  (F  XV,  4)

Cicero  remained  in  his  province  till  the  end  of  July,  and  did  not  reach
Italy  till  the  25th  November,  nor  Rome  till  the  beginning  of  the  follow-
ing year.  He  was  therefore  absent  from  the  struggle  that
was  going  on,  but  was  kept  informed,  though  imperfectly,
by  letters.  Pompey’s  illness  occurred  at  the  beginning  of
the  year,  and  outwardly  things  seemed  quieter.  But  the
storm  was  brewing,  and  the  first  symptom  of  it  was
Curio’s  change  of  parties,  influenced  by  an  enormous
bribe.  As  tribune  he  stood  in  the  way  of  the  senatorial  decree  for
Caesar’s  recall,  and  on  going  out  of  office  (loth  December)  went  straight
to  Caesar  at  Ravenna  and  urged  him  to  march  on  Rome.  The  letters
of  the  year  (barren,  of  course,  of  speeches  or  literature)  give  perhaps
the  most  lively  picture  extant  in  antiquity  of  a political  movement.  It

B. C.  50.  Coss.
L.  >Emilius
Paullus,

C.  Claudius
Marcellus.

Or,  leaving  out  J>arsy  “ is  the  most  important  in  the  city.”

F XIII,  9;  XV,  4 TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO  lOI

is  the  nearest  thing  to  the  modern  special  correspondent  that  we  have,
yet  in  the  more  fascinating  shape  of  letters,  spontaneous,  unconscious,
and  touched  with  passion.

TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO  (AT  ROM^

Cilicia  (January)

Your  own  immense  prestige  and  my  unvarying  belief  in
your  consummate  virtue  have  convinced  me  of  the  great
importance  it  is  to  me  that  you  should  be  acquainted  with
what  I have  accomplished,  and  that  you  should  not  be
ignorant  of  the  equity  and  disinterestedness  with  which  I
protected  our  allies  and  governed  my  province.  For  if  you
knew  these  facts,  I thought  I should  with  greater  ease  secure
your  approval  of  my  wishes.

Having  entered  my  province  on  the  last  day  of  July,  and
seeing  that  the  time  of  year  made  it  necessary  for  me  to
make  all  haste  to  the  army,  I spent  but  two  days  at  Laodicea,
four  at  Apamea,  three  at  Synnada,  and  the  same  at  Philo-
melium.^  Having  held  largely  attended  assizes  in  these
towns,  I freed  a great  number  of  cities  from  very  vexatious
tributes,  excessive  interest,  and  fraudulent  debt.  Again,  the
army  having  before  my  arrival  been  broken  up  by  something
like  a mutiny,^  and  five  cohorts — without  a legate  or  a
military  tribune,  and,  in  fact,  actually  without  a single  cen-
turion— having  taken  up  its  quarters  at  Philomelium,  while
the  rest  of  the  army  was  in  Lycaonia,  I ordered  my  legate
M.  Anneius  to  bring  those  five  cohorts  to  join  the  main
army  ; and,  having  thus  got  the  whole  army  together  into
one  place,  to  pitch  a camp  at  Iconium  in  Lycaonia.  This
order  having  been  energetically  executed  by  him,  I arrived
at  the  camp  myself  on  the  24th  of  August,  having  meanwhile,
in  accordance  with  the  decree  of  the  senate,  collected  in  the
intervening  days  a strong  body  of  reserve  men,  a very

^ These  times  do  not  exactly  agree  with  those  given  in  Letters  CCVII
and  CCXXVII,  but  the  differences  are  unimportant  and  might  easily
be  accounted  for  by  lapse  of  memory.

^ Seditione  quadam.  He  qualifies  seditione,  as  he  doesn’t  wish  to  say
that  there  was  a downright  mutiny;  quadam  might  be  translated  *‘so
to  speak.  ” He  had  heard  of  these  difficulties  in  the  army,  but  hoped
that  they  had  been  put  right  by  Appius  Claudius.

102

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  MT.  56

adequate  force  of  cavalry,  and  a contingent  of  volunteers
from  the  free  peoples  and  allied  sovereigns.  While  this  was
going  on,  and  when,  after  reviewing  the  army,  I had  on  the
28th  of  August  begun  my  march  to  Cilicia,  some  legates
sent  to  me  by  the  sovereign  of  Commagene  announced,  with
every  sign  of  panic,  yet  not  without  some  foundation,  that
the  Parthians  had  entered  Syria.  On  hearing  this  I was
rendered  very  anxious  both  for  Syria  and  my  own  province,
and,  in  fact,  for  all  the  rest  of  Asia.  Accordingly,  I made
up  my  mind  that  I must  lead  the  army  through  the  district
of  Cappadocia,  which  adjoins  Cilicia.  For  if  I had  gone
straight  down  into  Cilicia,  I could  easily  indeed  have  held
Cilicia  itself,  owing  to  the  natural  strength  of  Mount
Amanus — for  there  are  only  two  defiles  opening  into  Cilicia
from  Syria,  both  of  which  are  capable  of  being  closed  by
insignificant  garrisons  owing  to  their  narrowness,  nor  can
anything  be  imagined  better  fortified  than  is  Cilicia  on  the
Syrian  side — but  I was  disturbed  for  Cappadocia,  which  is
quite  open  on  the  Syrian  side,  and  is  surrounded  by  kings,
who,  even  if  they  are  our  friends  in  secret,  nevertheless  do
not  venture  to  be  openly  hostile  to  the  Parthians.  Accord-
ingly, I pitched  my  camp  in  the  extreme  south  of  Cappa-
docia at  the  town  of  Cybistra,  not  far  from  Mount  Taurus,
with  the  object  at  once  of  covering  Cilicia,  and  of  thwarting
the  designs  of  the  neighbouring  tribes  by  holding  Cappa-
docia. Meanwhile,  in  the  midst  of  this  serious  commotion
and  anxious  expectation  of  a very  formidable  war,  king
Deiotarus,  who  has  with  good  reason  been  always  highly
honoured  in  your  judgment  and  my  own,  as  well  as  that  of
the  senate — a man  distinguished  for  his  goodwill  and  loyalty
to  the  Roman  people,  as  well  as  for  his  eminent  courage
and  wisdom — sent  legates  to  tell  me  that  he  was  on  his  way
to  my  camp  in  full  force.  Much  affected  by  his  zeal  and
kindness,  I sent  him  a letter  of  thanks,  and  urged  him  to
hasten.  However,  being  detained  at  Cybistra  five  days  while
maturing  my  plan  of  campaign,  I rescued  king  Ariobar-
zanes,  whose  safety  had  been  intrusted  to  me  by  the  senate
on  your  motion,  from  a plot  that,  to  his  surprise,  had  been
formed  against  him  : and  I not  only  saved  his  life,  but  I
took  pains  also  to  secure  that  his  royal  authority  should  be
respected.  Metras  and  Athenaeus  (the  latter  strongly  com-

F XV,  4

TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO

103

mended  to  me  by  yourself),  who  had  been  exiled  owing  to
the  persistent  enmity  of  queen  Athenais,  I restored  to  a
position  of  the  highest  influence  and  favour  with  the  king.
Then,  as  there  was  danger  of  serious  hostilities  arising  in
Cappadocia  in  case  the  priest,^  as  it  was  thought  likely  that
he  would  do,  defended  himself  with  arms — for  he  was  a young
man,  well  furnished  with  horse  and  foot  and  money,  and
relying  on  ^ those  all  who  desired  political  change  of  any  sort
— I contrived  that  he  should  leave  the  kingdom  : and  that  the
king,  without  civil  war  or  an  appeal  to  arms,  with  the  full
authority  of  the  court  thoroughly  secured,  should  hold  the
kingdom  with  proper  dignity.  Meanwhile,  I was  informed
by  despatches  and  messengers  from  many  sides,  that  the
Parthians  and  Arabs  had  approached  the  town  of  Antioch
in  great  force,  and  that  a large  body  of  their  horsemen,
which  had  crossed  into  Cilicia,  had  been  cut  to  pieces  by
some  squadrons  of  my  cavalry  and  the  praetorian  cohort
then  on  garrison  duty  at  Epiphanea.  Wherefore,  seeing
that  the  forces  of  the  Parthians  had  turned  their  backs
upon  Cappadocia,  and  were  not  far  from  the  frontiers  of
Cilicia,  I led  my  army  to  Amanus  with  the  longest  forced
marches  I could.  Arrived  there,  I learnt  that  the  enemy
had  retired  from  Antioch,  and  that  Bibulus  was  at  Antioch.
I thereupon  informed  Deiotarus,  who  was  hurrying  to  join
me  with  a large  and  strong  body  of  horse  and  foot,  and
with  all  the  forces  he  could  muster,  that  I saw  no  reason  for
his  leaving  his  own  dominions,  and  that  in  case  of  any  new
event,  I would  immediately  write  and  send  to  him.  And  as
my  intention  in  coming  had  been  to  relieve  both  provinces,
should  occasion  arise,  so  now  I proceeded  to  do  what  I had
all  along  made  up  my  mind  was  greatly  to  the  interest  of
both  provinces,  namely,  to  reduce  Amanus,  and  to  remove
from  that  mountain  an  eternal  enemy.  So  I made  a feint
of  retiring  from  the  mountain  and  making  for  other  parts
of  Cilicia:  and  having  gone  a day’s  march  from  Amanus
and  pitched  a camp,  on  the  12  th  of  October,  towards  evening,

^ The  priest  of  the  temple  of  Bellona  at  Comana,  who  had  command
over  a large  body  of  slaves  of  the  temple  and  its  dependencies.  It  was
a position  of  quasi-royal  power.  Pompey  had  confirmed  or  restored  a
certain  Archelaus  in  this  position.

^ I venture  to  read  et  fretus  Us,  for  Tyrrell’s  ego  tuto  Us,  “ with  safety
to  those,”  which  is  a very  doubtful  construction.

104

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

at  Epiphanea,  with  my  army  in  light  marching  order  I
effected  such  a night  march,  that  by  dawn  on  the  13th  I
was  already  ascending  Amanus.  Having  formed  the  cohorts
and  auxiliaries  into  several  columns  of  attack — I and  my
legate  Quintus  (my  brother)  commanding  one,  my  legate
C.  Pomptinus  another,  and  my  legates  M.  Anneius  and
L.  Tullius  the  rest — we  surprised  most  of  the  inhabitants,
who,  being  cut  off  from  all  retreat,  were  killed  or  taken
prisoners.  But  Erana,  which  was  more  like  a town  than  a
village,  and  was  the  capital  of  Amanus,  as  also  Sepyra  and
Commons,  which  offered  a determined  and  protracted  re-
sistance from  before  daybreak  till  four  in  the  afternoon —
Pomptinus  being  in  command  in  that  part  of  Amanus — we
took,  after  killing  a great  number  of  the  enemy,  and  stormed
and  set  fire  to  several  fortresses.  After  these  operations  we
lay  encamped  for  four  days  on  the  spurs  of  Amanus,  near  the
Arce.  Alexandria  and  all  that  time  we  devoted  to  the  destruc-
tion of  the  remaining  inhabitants  of  Amanus,  and  devastating
their  lands  on  that  side  of  the  mountain  which  belongs  to
my  province.  Having  accomplished  this,  I led  the  army
away  to  Pindenissus,  a town  of  the  Eleutherocilices.
And  since  this  town  was  situated  on  a very  lofty  and
strongly  fortified  spot,  and  was  inhabited  by  men  who  have
never  submitted  even  to  the  kings,  and  since  they  were
offering  harbourage  to  deserters,  and  were  eagerly  expecting
the  arrival  of  the  Parthians,  I thought  it  of  importance  to
the  prestige  of  the  empire  to  suppress  their  audacity,  in
order  that  there  might  be  less  difficulty  in  breaking  the
spirits  of  all  such  as  were  anywhere  disaffected  to  our  rule.
I encircled  them  with  a stockade  and  trench  : I beleaguered
them  with  six  forts  and  huge  camps  : I assaulted  them  by
the  aid  of  earthworks,  pent-houses,  and  towers  : and  having
employed  numerous  catapults  and  bowmen,  with  great  per-
sonal labour,  and  without  troubling  the  allies  or  costing
them  anything,  I reduced  them  to  such  extremities  that,
after  every  region  of  their  town  had  been  battered  down  or
fired,  they  surrendered  to  me  on  the  fifty-seventh  day.
Their  next  neighbours  were  the  people  of  Tebara,  no  less

^ Some  columns  put  up  near  the  field  of  the  battle  of  Issus  by
Alexander,  or  to  mark  the  line  of  his  march.

^ That  is,  movable  towers  pushed  up  on  rollers  to  the  wall.

F XV,  4

TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO

lOS

predatory  and  audacious  : from  them  after  the  capture  of
Pindenissus  I received  hostages.  I then  dismissed  the  army
to  winter  quarters ; and  I put  my  brother  in  command,
with  orders  to  station  the  men  in  villages  that  had  either
been  captured  or  were  disaffected.

Well  now,  I would  have  you  feel  convinced  that,  should  a
motion  be  brought  before  the  senate  on  these  matters,  I
shall  consider  that  the  highest  possible  compliment  has
been  paid  me,  if  you  give  your  vote  in  favour  of  a mark  of
honour  ^ being  bestowed  upon  me.  And  as  to  this,  though  I
am  aware  that  in  such  matters  men  of  the  most  respectable
character  are  accustomed  to  ask  and  to  be  asked,  yet  I think
in  your  case  that  it  is  rather  a reminder  than  a request  which  is
called  for  from  me.  For  it  is  you  who  have  on  very  many
occasions  complimented  me  in  votes  which  you  delivered,
who  have  praised  me  to  the  skies  in  conversation,  in  panegyric,
in  the  most  laudatory  speeches  in  senate  and  public  meeting :
you  are  the  man  to  whose  words  I ever  attached  such  weight
as  to  hold  myself  in  possession  of  my  utmost  ambition,  if
your  lips  joined  the  chorus  of  my  praise.  It  was  you  finally,
as  I recollect,  who  said,  when  voting  against  a supplicatio  in
honour  of  a certain  illustrious  and  noble  person,*  that  you
would  have  voted  for  it,  if  the  motion  had  related  to  what  he
had  done  in  the  city  as  consul.  It  was  you,  too,  who  voted
for  granting  me  a supplicatio^  though  only  a civilian,^  not  as
had  been  done  in  many  instances,  “ for  good  services  to
the  state,”  but,  as  I remember,  “for  having  saved  the
state.”  ^ I pass  over  your  having  shared  the  hatred  I excited,

^ What  Cicero  wants  is  a supplicatio  of  as  many  days  as  the  senate
will  grant,  i.e.^  days  of  solemn  thanksgiving  such  as  had  been  voted  in
honour  of  Caesar’s  Gallic  victories  and  on  many  other  occasions.

Probably  P.  Cornelius  Lentulus  Spinther,  consul  b.c.  57,  who  did
much  to  secure  Cicero’s  recall.  He  asked  in  vain  for  a supplicatio^  or
perhaps  even  a triumph,  for  his  achievements  in  Cilicia  B.c.  56-54.  See
Letter  CXXV.

^ Togato.  The  consul  in  Rome,  though  he  had  iinperium,  was  a
civilian,  and  wore  the  toga^  not  i'hQ  paludamentum.  The  difference  has
been  expressed  by  distinguishing  the  iniperium  domi  and  imperium
militice,  which  latter  he  had  if  he  commanded  an  army,  and  which  a
proconsul  had  when  in  a province.  Thus,  in  his  poem  on  his  own
times,  Cicero  had  a line  which  he  was  fond  of  quoting  :

“Cedant  arma  togse,  concedat  laurea  laudi.”

^ See  vol.  i.,  p.  64,  and  2 Phil.  § 2.  In  2 Phil.  § 13,  he  says  the  motion

I06  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  50,  ^t.  56

the  dangers  I ran,  all  the  storms  that  I have  encountered,
and  your  having  been  entirely  ready  to  have  shared  them
much  more  fully  if  I had  allowed  it ; and  finally  your  having
regarded  my  enemy  as  your  own ; of  whose  death  even —
thus  shewing  me  clearly  how  much  you  valued  me — you
manifested  your  approval  by  supporting  the  cause  of  Milo  in
the  senate.  On  the  other  hand,  I have  borne  a testimony
to  you,  which  I do  not  regard  as  constituting  any  claim  on
your  gratitude,  but  as  a frank  expression  of  genuine  opinion  :
for  I did  not  confine  myself  to  a silent  admiration  of  your
eminent  virtues — who  does  not  admire  them  ? But  in  all
forms  of  speech,  whether  in  the  senate  or  at  the  bar ; in  all
kinds  of  writing,  Greek  or  Latin ; in  fine,  in  all  the  various
branches  of  my  literary  activity,  I proclaimed  your  superiority
not  only  to  contemporaries,  but  also  to  those  of  whom  we
have  heard  in  history.

You  will  ask,  perhaps,  why  I place  such  value  on  this  or
that  modicum  of  congratulation  or  compliment  from  the
senate.  I will  be  frank  with  you,  as  our  common  tastes  and
mutual  good  services,  our  close  friendship,  nay,  the  intimacy
of  our  fathers  demand.  If  there  ever  was  anyone  by  natural
inclination,  and  still  more,  I think,  by  reason  and  reflexion,
averse  from  the  empty  praise  and  comments  of  the  vulgar,  I
am  certainly  the  man.  Witness  my  consulship,  in  which,  as
in  the  rest  of  my  life,  I confess  that  I eagerly  pursued  the
objects  capable  of  producing  true  glory : mere  glory  for  its
own  sake  I never  thought  a subject  for  ambition.  Accord-
ingly, I not  only  passed  over  a province  after  the  votes  for  its
outfit  had  been  taken,  but  also  with  it  an  almost  certain
hope  of  a triumph  ; ^ and  finally  the  priesthood,  though,  as
I think  you  will  agree  with  me,  I could  have  obtained  it
without  much  difficulty,  I did  not  try  to  get.  Yet  after  my  un-
just disgrace — always  stigmatized  by  you  as  a disaster  to  the
Republic,  and  rather  an  honour  than  a disaster  to  myself — I
was  anxious  that  some  very  signal  marks  of  the  approbation
of  the  senate  and  Roman  people  should  be  put  on  record.

for  a supplicatio  after  the  execution  of  the  conspirators  in  December,
B.c.  63,  was  made  by  L.  Aurelius  Cotta  and  passed  unanimously.

^ The  province  of  Gallia  Cisalpina,  to  which  Metellus  Celer  went
in  his  place  and  won  some  victories  over  the  Saiassi.  See  vol.  i.,  pp.
21,  62.

F XV,  4

TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO

107

Accordingly,  in  the  first  place,  I did  subsequently  wish  for
the  augurship,^  about  which  I had  not  troubled  myself
before ; and  the  compliment  usually  paid  by  the  senate  in
the  case  of  success  in  war,  though  passed  over  by  me  in  old
times,  I now  think  an  object  to  be  desired.  That  you  should
approve  and  support  this  wish  of  mine,  in  which  you  may  trace
a strong  desire  to  heal  the  wounds  inflicted  upon  me  by  my
disgrace,  though  I a little  while  ago  declared  that  I would  not
ask  it,  I now  do  earnestly  ask  of  you  : but  only  on  condition
that  you  shall  not  think  my  humble  services  paltry  and  in-
significant, but  of  such  a nature  and  importance,  that  many  for
far  less  signal  successes  have  obtained  the  highest  honours
from  the  senate.  I have,  too,  I think,  noticed  this — for  you
know  how  attentively  I ever  listen  to  you — that  in  granting
or  withholding  honours  you  are  accustomed  to  look  not  so
much  to  the  particular  achievements  as  to  the  character,  the
principles  and  conduct  of  commanders.  Well,  if  you  apply
this  test  to  my  case,  you  will  find  that,  with  a weak  army,
my  strongest  support  against  the  threat  of  a very  formidable
war  has  been  my  equity  and  purity  of  conduct.  With  these
as  my  aids  I accomplished  what  I never  could  have  accom-
plished by  any  amount  of  legions  : among  the  allies  I have
created  the  warmest  devotion  in  place  of  the  most  extreme
alienation ; the  most  complete  loyalty  in  place  of  the  most
dangerous  disaffection ; and  their  spirits  fluttered  by  the
prospect  of  change  I have  brought  back  to  feelings  of  affec-
tion for  the  old  rule.

But  I have  said  too  much  of  myself,  especially  to  you,  in
whom  singly  the  grievances  of  all  our  allies  alike  find  a
listener.  You  will  learn  the  truth  from  those  who  think
themselves  restored  to  life  by  my  administration.  And  while
all  with  nearly  one  consent  will  praise  me  in  your  hearing  as
I most  desire  to  be  praised,  so  will  your  two  chief  client
states — the  island  of  Cyprus  and  the  kingdom  of  Cappadocia  ^

^ A vacancy  was  made  in  the  college  of  augurs  in  b.c.  59  by  the  death
of  Metellus  Celer,  which  Cicero  would  have  liked  to  fill  (see  vol.  i.,
p.  90).  But  he  was  not  nominated  as  one  of  the  two  candidates,  as  was
necessary.  He  filled  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of  P.  Crassus  B.C.  53.

Cato,  to  get  him  out  of  Rome,  had  been  sent  in  b.c.  58  on  the
motion  of  Clodius  to  take  over  Cyprus  ; he  therefore  (as  usual)  became
its  patron.  It  is  not  known  why  he  was  specially  connected  with
Cappadocia  and  Deiotarus,  but  client  kings  generally  selected  some

io8

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

— have  something  to  say  to  you  about  me  also.  So,  too,  I ^

think,  will  Deiotarus,  who  is  attached  to  you  with  special  1

warmth.  Now,  if  these  things  are  above  the  common  run,  a
and  if  in  all  ages  it  has  been  rarer  to  find  men  capable  of
conquering  their  own  desires  than  capable  of  conquering  an  T
enemy’s  army,  it  is  quite  in  harmony  with  your  principles,
when  you  find  these  rarer  and  more  difficult  virtues  com-  m
bined  with  success  in  war,  to  regard  that  success  itself  as  1
more  complete  and  glorious.

I have  only  one  last  resource — philosophy : and  to  make  m
her  plead  for  me,  as  though  I doubted  the  efficacy  of  a mere  a
request : philosophy,  the  best  friend  I have  ever  had  in  all  my  ^
life,  the  greatest  gift  which  has  been  bestowed  by  the  gods  upon  I
mankind.  Yes  ! this  common  sympathy  in  tastes  and  studies
— our  inseparable  devotion  and  attachment  to  which  from  .j
boyhood  have  caused  us  to  become  almost  unique  examples  ^
of  men  bringing  that  true  and  ancient  philosophy  (which
some  regard  as  only  the  employment  of  leisure  and  idleness)  J
down  to  the  forum,  the  council  chamber,  and  the  very  camp  8
itself  ^ — pleads  the  cause  of  my  glory  with  you  : and  I do  not  m

think  a Cato  can,  with  a good  conscience,  say  her  nay.  I

Wherefore  I would  have  you  convince  yourself  that,  if  my  1
despatch  is  made  the  ground  of  paying  me  this  compliment  “ 1

with  your  concurrence,  I shall  consider  that  the  dearest  wish  ■ '
of  my  heart  has  been  fulfilled  owing  at  once  to  your  influence  r
and  to  your  friendship.  y

prominent  Roman  to  represent  their  interests.  It  has  been  suggested
that  Ariobarzanes’  indebtedness  to  Cato’s  nephew  Brutus  had  something
to  do  with  it.  But  we  cannot  be  sure.  Brutus,  it  may  be  observed,  was
also  a friend  of  Deiotarus,  and  defended  him  before  Caesar  in  b.c.  47,
when  charged  with  attempting  to  poison  Caesar.  ^

^ Cicero  applies  to  himself  and  Cato  what  he  elsewhere  repeated  from
Greek  sources  of  Socrates — that  he  “ brought  down  philosophy  from  the
sky  to  the  earth  and  to  common  life”  {Acad.  i.  § 15;  Tusc.  v.  § 10).

His  appeal  to  their  common  love  of  philosophy  should  be  compared  with
his  chaff  of  Cato’s  impracticable  Stoicism  twelve  years  before  in  the  '
pro  Mur.  § 61  seq.^  which  Cato  must  have  well  remembered.  The  ^
contemptuous  view  of  philosophy  taken  by  many  serious  persons  at
Rome,  and  Cicero’s  early  passion  for  it,  are  commented  upon  at  greater
length  in  the  de  Off.  ii.  § 2.

^ Ex  Uteris  meis,  i.e.^  Cicero’s  public  despatch  to  magistrates  and
senate.  Ex  Uteris  was  the  regular  phrase  on  these  occasions.  See  Cses.

B.  G.  ii.  35  ; iv.  38.  !

F XV,  4,  10  TO  L.  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS

109

CCXXXVIII  (F  XV,  10)

TO  L.  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS  (CONSUL)
Cilicia  (January)

Since  the  dearest  wish  of  my  heart  has  come  to  pass,  that  of
all  the  Marcelli  and  even  the  Marcellini — for  the  good  feeling
of  your  whole  family  and  name  towards  me  has  ever  been
extraordinary — since,  I say,  it  has  come  to  pass  that  your
possession  of  the  consulship  enables  you  to  satisfy  the  views
of  all  your  family,  that  consulship  in  which  it  also  happens
that  my  public  services  and  the  glory  and  distinction  accom-
panying them  have  fallen,  I ask  you  a favour  which  it  is
very  easy  for  you  to  grant,  since  the  senate,  I believe,  is
not  averse,  namely,  to  see  to  a senatorial  decree  being
passed  in  as  complimentary  terms  as  possible  when  my
despatch  is  read/  Had  the  ties  between  you  and  me  been
less  than  those  between  me  and  all  the  members  of  your
family,  I would  have  made  those  my  spokesmen  to  you,
by  whom  you  know  well  that  I am  regarded  with  special
affection.  The  kindnesses  done  me  by  your  father  are  very
eminent,  nor  could  anyone  have  been  a warmer  friend  to  my
personal  safety  or  my  political  position.  As  for  your  brother,
I don’t  think  that  there  is  anyone  who  does  not  know  how
much  he  values  and  has  ever  valued  me.  In  fact,  your  whole
house  has  always  honoured  me  with  the  most  important
services  of  every  kind.  Nor,  indeed,  have  you  yielded  to
any  of  your  family  in  affection  for  me.  Wherefore  I ask  you,
with  more  than  common  earnestness,  to  determine  that,  as
far  as  you  are  concerned,  I shall  receive  the  highest  possible
compliment,  and  to  consider  that  in  voting  a sitpplicatio
and  in  all  other  matters  you  have  sufficient  motive  for  de-
fending my  reputation.

^ The  public  despatch  referred  to  in  this  and  the  previous  and  sub-
sequent letters  has  not  been  preserved  ; but  no  doubt  its  substance  was
the  same  as  the  letter  to  Cato.

no

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

CCXXXIX  (F  XV,  13)

TO  L.  ^MILIUS  PAULLUS  (CONSUL)
Cilicia,  January

It  has  been  one  of  the  strongest  wishes  of  my  heart  to  be  in
Rome  with  you  on  many  accounts,  but  especially  that  you
might  have  clearly  before  your  eyes,  both  during  your  canvass
and  your  actual  administration,  how  eager  I was  to  fulfil  my
obligation  to  you.  And,  indeed,  as  far  as  your  canvass  was
concerned,  it  always  seemed  to  me  to  be  plain  sailing,  yet
I nevertheless  wished  to  give  some  actual  aid.  In  your
consulship  truly  I am  anxious  that  you  should  have  still  less
difficulty,  yet  I am  vexed  to  think  that  I,  as  consul,  had  a full
view  of  your  zealous  kindness  when  you  were  a young  man,
whilst  you  cannot  have  one  of  mine  now  that  I am  so  far  ad-
vanced in  life.  But  there  has  been,  I think,  a kind  of  fatality
ordaining  that  you  should  always  have  the  opportunity  of  ad-
vancing my  honour,  while  I never  had  anything — except  the
wish — enabling  me  to  repay  you.  My  consulship  and  my  re-
storation alike  you  honoured  by  your  support.  It  has  happened
that  the  occasion  for  my  performing  active  public  service
has  fallen  in  your  consulship.  Accordingly,  though  your  bril-
liant position  and  high  rank,  as  well  as  my  own  great  office  and
high  reputation,  would  seem  to  demand  that  I should  urge  you,
and  beg  you  at  some  length,  to  see  to  a decree  of  the  senate
being  passed  on  the  subject  of  my  services  in  as  compli-
mentary terms  as  possible,  yet  I do  not  venture  to  put  it
strongly  to  you,  lest  I should  appear  to  have  forgotten  your
habitual  kindness  to  me,  or  should  admit  the  thought  of
your  having  forgotten.  Accordingly,  I will  do  as  I think  you
would  wish,  and  confine  my  petition  to  a few  words,  when  it
is  made  to  a man  that  all  the  world  knows  has  done  me
eminent  service.  If  others  had  been  consuls,  you  are  the
man  of  all  others,  Paullus,  to  whom  I should  have  sent  asking
you  to  secure  for  me  their  warmest  support.  As  it  is,  the
chief  power  and  greatest  influence  being  in  your  hands,  and
our  close  connexion  being  known  to  everybody,  I do  beg  you

F XV,  13,  14

TO  C.  CASSIUS  LONGINUS

III

warmly,  that  you  should  see  to  a decree  being  passed  in
regard  to  my  services  in  as  complimentary  terms  and  as
speedily  as  possible.  That  these  services  deserve  honour
and  congratulation  you  will  learn  from  the  despatch  which
I have  addressed  officially  to  you,  your  colleague,  and  the
senate.  I would  further  beg  you  to  undertake  the  support  of
my  other  interests  of  every  kind,  and  above  all  of  my  reputa-
tion. And  let  it  be  among  your  first  concerns,  as  I asked
you  in  a previous  letter  also,  to  prevent  any  extension  of
time  in  my  tenure  of  office.  I am  eager  to  see  you  while
you  are  still  consul,  and  to  gain  all  I hope  for  in  your  con-
sulship, whether  here  or  at  home.  Farewell.

CCXL  (f  XV,  14)

TO  C.  CASSIUS  LONGINUS  (PROQU^STOR  IN
SYRIA)

Cilicia,  January

M.  Cicero,  imperator^  greets  C.  Cassius,  ^ proquaestor.  You
introduce  M.  Fadius  to  me  as  a friend,  but  I make  no  fresh
acquisition  in  him ; for  it  is  now  many  years  since  he  has
been  among  my  cherished  possessions,  and  valued  by  me  for
his  exceeding  kindness  and  attentions.  Nevertheless,  the
discovery  of  his  attachment  to  you  has  made  him  still  dearer
to  me.  So,  though  your  letter  did  some  good,  yet  a still  more
powerful  recommendation  was  my  clear  perception  and  re-
cognition of  his  own  warm  feeling  for  you.  However,  I will
take  every  pains  to  do  for  Fadius  what  you  ask.  It  is  your-
self that  I could  wish  for  many  reasons  had  been  able  to  visit

‘ C.  Cassius  Longinus,  the  future  assassin  of  Csesar,  had  gone  to  Syria
as  quaestor  with  M.  Licinius  Crassus  in  B.c.  54.  On  the  death  of
Crassus  near  Carrhae  (b.c.  53)  he  had  managed  to  lead  off  the  main  body
of  the  Roman  army  to  Antioch,  and  had  remained  in  charge  of  the
province  as  pro  quastore  ever  since  (defeating  a weak  attack  of  the
Parthians  in  b.c.  52),  till  the  arrival  of  Bibulus  in  September,  b.c.  51.
Just  before  the  arrival  of  Bibulus  he  had  again  defeated  the  attack
of  the  Parthians  near  Antioch  and  handed  over  his  province  in  a state
of  comparative  safety.  He  is  now  on  the  point  of  returning  to  Italy.

12

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  -«T.  56

me : in  the  first  place,  that  I might  see  you  after  so  long  a
separation — a man  whom  I have  long  valued  so  highly ; in
the  second  place,  that  I might  offer  my  personal  congratu-
lations, as  I have  already  done  by  letter ; thirdly,  that  we
might  consult  together  on  whatever  matters  we  wished,  you
on  yours,  I on  mine ; and  lastly,  that  our  friendship,  which
has  been  kept  up  by  the  interchange  of  signal  services  on
both  sides,  but  has  had  its  continuity  interrupted  by  periods
of  separation,  might  be  greatly  strengthened.  Since  this
was  not  to  be,  we  will  avail  ourselves  of  what  letters  can  do
for  us,  and  shall,  though  separated,  attain  almost  the  same
objects  as  we  should  have  done  if  we  had  met  face  to  face.
One  satisfaction,  of  course,  that  which  arises  from  the  actual
sight  of  you,  cannot  be  obtained  by  the  help  of  letters : the
other,  the  pleasure,  I mean,  of  congratulating  you,  though
more  meagre  than  it  would  have  been,  if  I could  have  seen
your  face  while  offering  my  congratulations,  I have  never-
theless already  experienced  and  now  give  myself  again  : and
I do  indeed  congratulate  you  both  on  the  splendour  of  your
services,  and  also  for  their  opportuneness,  in  that  at  the
moment  of  your  departure  from  it  you  have  been  followed  by
the  loudest  praises  and  the  liveliest  gratitude  of  your  pro-
vince. My  third  point — that  we  might  have  consulted  each
other  about  our  affairs — that  let  us  do  equally  by  letter.  On
every  other  account  I am  strongly  of  opinion  that  you  ought
to  hasten  your  return  to  Rome.  For  things  there,  as  I left
them,  shewed  no  signs  of  a storm  as  far  as  you  are  con-
cerned,^ and  owing  to  your  recent  very  splendid  victory  I
imagine  that  your  arrival  will  be  attended  by  great  eclat.  But
if  the  difficulties  under  which  your  relations  are  labouring  ^
are  no  more  than  you  can  combat,  hasten  home : nothing
could  be  nobler  or  more  popular : but  if  they  are  more
serious,  take  care  that  your  return  does  not  fall  at  a most
inopportune  moment.  You  are  the  sole  judge  on  this  point,
for  you  alone  know  your  powers.  If  you  are  strong  enough
to  do  it,  you  are  sure  of  praise  and  popularity : if  you  are
clearly  not  strong  enough,  it  will  be  easier  for  you  to  support
popular  remark  by  staying  away.  For  myself,  however,  the

^ He  is  referring  to  a danger  of  prosecution  for  extortion  in  Syria.

^ His  brother  or  cousin  Quintus  Cassius  was  being  attacked  for  mal-
versation as  quaestor  in  Spain  (b.c.  54-52).  See  Letter  CCXXVH.

FXV,  14;  VIII,  6 M.  C/ELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  II3

request  I make  to  you  in  this  letter  is  the  same  as  that  in
my  previous  one — that  you  should  exert  yourself  to  the  utter-
most to  prevent  any  extension  of  time  being  made  to  my
provincial  government,  which  both  by  decree  of  the  senate
and  by  the  law  was  to  be  of  one  year’s  duration.  I press  this
upon  you  with  warmth,  because  I consider  my  entire  fortunes
to  depend  upon  it.  You  have  Paullus  to  support  you — my
friend,  and  a very  warm  one  : you  have  Curio  and  Furnius.
I beg  you  to  exert  yourself,  with  the  assurance  that  it  is  every-
thing in  the  world  to  me.  My  last  point  was  the  strengthen-
ing of  our  friendship.  On  that  there  is  no  need  of  more
words.  You  sought  my  society  in  your  boyhood  : I for  my
part  ever  thought  that  you  would  be  a credit  to  me.  You
were,  moreover,  a protection  to  me  in  the  darkest  hour  of
my  fortunes.  To  these  facts  I may  now  add  the  very  close
intimacy  which  has  sprung  up  since  you  left  town  between
me  and  your  relative  Brutus.^  Therefore,  in  the  talents  and
high  character  which  distinguish  you  both,  I believe  that  I
have  a very  great  reserve  of  pleasure  and  honour  in  store.
I beg  you  earnestly  to  ratify  this  expectation,  and  also  to
write  to  me  at  once,  and  as  often  as  possible  after  your  arrival
at  Rome.

CCXLI  (F  VIII,  6)

M.  c Lius  rufus  to  cicero  (in  cilicia)

Rome,  February

I HAVE  no  doubt  the  news  has  reached  you  of  Appiu|(,^bgin^
impeached  by  Dolabella,  But  there  is  by  no  means  the
feeling  against  him  wFich  I had  expected.  For  the  truth  is,
Appius  acted  with  a good  deal  of  sense.  No  sooner  did
Dolabella  appear  at  the  tribunal,  than  he  entered  the  city
and  gave  up  his  demand  for  a triumph.  By  thus  acting  he
at  once  took  the  edge  off  popular  talk,  and  shewed  himself
also  to  be  better  prepared  than  his  accuser  had  expected.

^ Cassius,  who  was  some  twenty  years  younger  than  Cicero,  had
married  Tertia,  half-sister  to  Brutus.

II.  I

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  MT.  56

I 14

His  chief  hope  is  now  in  you.  I know  you  don’t  dislike
him.  It  is  now  in  your  power  to  attach  him  to  you  as
strongly  as  you  choose.  If  you  had  never  had  a quarrel
with  him,  you  would  now  have  had  a freer  hand  in  the  whole
business : as  it  is,  if  you  push  legality  to  the  proverbial
extreme,^  you  must  be  on  your  guard  against  being  thought
not  to  have  been  quite  candid^  and  sincere  in  renouncing
your  hostility.  In  this  respect  you  will  certainly  be  on
safe  ground  in  doing  him  a favour,  if  so  minded ; for  no  one
will  say  that  you  have  been  debarred  frofti  doing  a duty  by
the  influence  of  intimacy  and  friendship.^  It  occurs  to  my
mind  that,  between  the  application  to  the  prsetor  and  the
formal  notice  of  impeachment,  Dolabella’s  wife  has  divorced
him.  I remember  the  commission  you  gave  me  as  you  were
leaving  : ^ I think  you  have  not  forgotten  what  I wrote  to  you.
It  is  not  as  yet  the  time  for  entering  into  farther  details.  I
can  only  give  you  this  hint : if  you  like  the  suggestion,  do
not,  nevertheless,  at  the  present  moment  betray  your  senti-
ments, but  wait  to  see  how  he  comes  o\it  of  this  case.  Take
care  that  it  does  not  bring  discredit  on  you  if  it  leaks  out :
assuredly,  if  any  expression  of  your  feeling  were  to  crop  up
now,  it  would  gain  a greater  notori^y  than  is  either  decent
or  expedient.  Nor  will  he  be  able  to  hold  his  tongue  on  a
circumstance  which  chimed  in  so  pat  with  his  hopes,  and
which  will  reflect  so  much  additional  lustre  upon  him  in
conducting  the  prosecution : especially  as  he  is  the  sort  of
man  to  be  scarcely  able  to  refrain,  even  though  he  knew  it  was
ruinous  to  himself  to  mention  the  fact.  Pompey  is  said  to  be
very  anxious  on  Appius’s  behalf,  so  much  so  that  it  is  even
thought  that  he  means  to  send  one  or  other  of  his  sons  to  you.'*

' lllain.  Referring  to  the  proverb,  suinmu7nms  summa  iniuria  (Cic.

Off>  i.  § 33);

The  point  is  this  : in  old  times  Cicero  was  at  enmity  with  Appiug
(as  supporting  his  brother  Clodius).  If  that  had  never  been  the  case  he
might  have  taken  the  purely  legal  view  of  the  matter  ; but  if  he  does  so
now,  people  will  say  his  reconciliation  with  Appius  was  all  pretence,
whereas,  if  he  supports  him,  nobody  can  say  that  he  does  so  from  any
special  feeling  of  friendship.  Cicero  is  said  to  have  the  power  of  helping
Appius  because,  being  governor  of  the  province,  in  connexion  with
which  Appius’s  conduct  is  impugned,  he  would  doubtless  facilitate  or
make  difficult  the  sending  of  witnesses  against  him.

^ To  think  of  a suitable  husband  for  Tullia.

^ Gnaeus  or  Sextus  Pompeius.

F viii,  6 M.  CiELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  1 1 5

Here  we  are  all  for  his  acquittal,  and,  by  Hercules,  every
disclosure  that  could  reflect  disgrace  or  dishonour  on  him
lias  been  carefully  barred.  Our  consuls  are  indeed  energetic  :
they  haven’t  been  able  to  get  a single  decree  through  the  senate,
except  the  one  for  the  Latin  festival ! Our  friend  Curio’s
tribuneship  is  deadly  dull — as  cold  as  ice.  In  short,  I can
hardly  express  to  you  the  flatness  of  everything  at  Rome.
If  it  had  not  been  for  a good  fight  I am  having  with  the
shopkeepers  and  water  companies,^  a lethargy  would  have
settled  upon  the  state.  If  the  Parthians  don’t  make  it  warm
for  you,  we  here  are  stiff  with  cold.  However,  Bibulus  has
done  his  best : without  the  help  of  the  Parthians  he  has
managed  to  lose  a poor  cohort  or  two  in  Amanus.  So  it  is
reported  here.

I said  just  now  that  Curio  was  much  in  the  cold  : well,  he
is  now  getting  warm  ! for  he  is  being  pulled  to  pieces  with  a
hot  fire  of  criticism.^  For,  just  because  he  did  not  get  his
way  about  intercalation,^  he  has  with  the  most  outrageous
levity  ratted  to  the  popular  party,  and  begun  speaking  up  for
Cassar,  and  has  made  a great  parade  of  a road  law,^  not
much  unlike  Rullus’s  agrarian  law,  and  another  about  the
sale  of  provisions,  which  enacts  that  the  aediles  should  measure
goods.  He  had  not  done  this  when  I wrote  the  first  part
of  my  letter.  Pray,  if  you  render  any  assistance  to  Appius,
let  me  have  some  of  the  credit.  I advise  you  not  to  commit
yourself  in  regard  to  Dolabella ; that  is  the  course  most

^ As  aedile,  in  which  office  he  had  the  superintendence  of  the  water
supply,  state  of  the  streets,  fire  preventives,  etc.  The  point  was  that  the
shopkeepers  had  been  drawing  off  public  water  by  private  pipes.  A
speech  of  Cselius  de  Aquis  was  once  extant  on  the  subject  (Frontinus,
de  Aqticeduct.  §§  75,  76).

The  metaphor  is  mixed,  but  so  is  Cselius’s.

The  intercalation  of  a month  of  twenty-one  or  twenty-three  days
(between  the  23rd  and  24th  of  February  every  other  year).  The
decision  as  to  the  proper  time  for  doing  this  was  in  the  hands  of  the
college  of  pontifices,  of  which  Curio  was  a member.  He  apparently
tried  to  induce  the  pontifices  to  intercalate  this  year,  which  was  not  the
right  year.  His  object  was  presumed  to  be  to  further  postpone  the
decision  as  to  Caesar’s  province,  which  was  to  come  on  in  the  senate  on
the  1st  of  March  (Dio,  40,  61).

* For^a  wholesale  repair  of  the  great  roads,  which  would  require
commissioners  with  a lengthened  term  of  office,  of  which  he  would  be
one.

ii6

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  MT.  56

conducive  at  once  to  the  proposal  to  which  I am  referring,
to  your  own  position,  and  to  your  reputation  for  fairness.
It  will  be  a disgrace  to  you  if  I have  no  Greek  panthers.

CCXLII  (f  VIII,  7)

M.  C.^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome  (February)

How  soon  you  want  to  quit  your  province  I don’t  know ;
for  myself,  the  greater  your  success  up  to  now,  the  more
shall  I be  tormented  by  the  danger  of  a Parthian  war,  as
long  as  you  remain  where  you  are,  for  fear  some  alarm
should  dissipate  the  laughter  in  which  I usually  indulge.
This  letter  is  shorter  than  usual,  but  the  letter-carrier  of  the
publicani  was  in  a hurry,  and  I was  suddenly  called  upon  for
it.  I had  already  delivered  a longer  one  to  your  freedman.
“Uloreover,  absolutely  nothing  new  has  happened,  unless  you
would  like  my  letter  to  be  filled  with  such  anecdotes  as  the
following  (and  I am  sure  you  would):  The  younger  Corni-
ficius  has  betrothed  himself  to  Orestilla’s  daughter.  Paulla
Valeria,  sister  of  Triarius,  has  divorced  her  husband  without
cause  alleged,  on  the  very  day  he  was  to  arrive  from  his
province.  She  is  going  to  marry  D.  Brutus.  She  has  yet
given  no  notice  to  the  pontifices.^  Servius  Ocella  would
never  have  convinced  anybody  that  he  was  an  adulterer,  if
he  had  not  been  twice  caught  in  three  days.  You  will  ask
where  ? In  the  last  place,  by  Hercules,  I should  have
I wished ! I leave  you  something  to  find  out  from  others.
And  I rather  like  the  idea  of  an  imperator  questioning  one
person  after  another  with  what  woman  so-and-so  has  been
caught.

^ Nondiim  rettulerat.  The  meaning  of  these  words  is  uncertain.
Some  would  read  mundum  rettulerat^  “ she  has  sent  back  her  dress  and
ornaments.”  In  case  of  a divorce  by  the  woman  without  cause,  the
husband  retained  the  dos^  or  a large  part  of  it ; but  there  is  no  authority
for  the  practice  of  the  wife  giving  up  her  wardrobe.

F VIII,  7 ; III,  7

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  II/

CCXLIII  (F  III,  7)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  ROME)
Laodicea  (February)

I WILL  write  to  you  at  greater  length  when  I have  got  more
leisure.  I write  this  in  haste,  Brutus’s  messengers  having
come  to  me  at  Laodicea  and  told  me  that  they  are  hurrying
off  to  Rome.  Accordingly,  I am  giving  them  no  letters
except  for  you  and  Brutus.  Commissioners  from  Appia
have  handed  me  in  a roll  from  you  full  of  most  ill-founded
complaints  of  my  having  hindered  their  building  by  a
rescript.  Moreover,  in  the  same  letter  you  ask  me  to  grant
them  permission  to  go  on  building  as  soon  as  possible,  lest
they  should^be  stopped  by  winter ; and  at  the  same  time  you
complain  of  my  forbidding  them  to  raise  a tax  till  I granted
them  leave  to  do  so  after  investigation  : for  you  say  that  it
was  tantamount  to  stopping  the  work,  seeing  that  I could
not  hold  such  investigation  till  after  my  return  from  Cilicia
at  winter  time.^

Hear  my  answer  to  all  these  charges,  and  see  how  much
fairness  there  is  in  your  expostulation.  In  the  first  place,  on
my  being  approached  by  persons  professing  that  unbearable
exactions  were  being  made  upon  them,  what  unfairness  was
there  in  my  writing  to  forbid  their  proceeding  till  I had
investigated  the  facts  and  the  merits  of  the  case  ? In  my  not
being  able  to  do  so  till  winter  ? For  that  is  what  you  say  in
your  letter.  As  though  for  purposes  of  investigation  I must
go  to  them,  and  not  they  come  to  me  ! “ Such  a long  way

off,”  you  say.  What ! at  the  time  you  delivered  that  letter
to  them,  in  which  you  remonstrated  with  me  against  prevent-
ing them  from  finishing  their  building  before  winter,  did  you

^ Appia  or  Apia  was  in  Phrygia  in  the  ‘ ‘ diocese  ” of  Synnada.  The
control  thus  exercised  by  the  proconsul  on  local  expenditure  in  build-
ing, etc.,  is  well  illustrated  by  Pliny’s  letters  to  Trajan  {see  ad  Trai.  37,
38,  etc.).  The  “ tax  ” {tributd)  here  alluded  to  is  not  the  tributum  to
Rome,  but  a local  tax  or  rate  for  the  public  work  mentioned.

Il8  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  50,  jlt.  56

suppose  that  they  would  not  come  to  me?  However,  on
that  point,  at  least,  they  made  a ridiculous  blunder : for  the
letter  they  brought  with  them  asking  to  be  allowed  to  carry
on  the  work  in  the  summer,  they  delivered  to  me  after  mid-
winter. But  let  me  tell  you,  first,  that  the  number  of  those
appealing  against  the  tax  is  far  in  excess  of  those  who  wish
it  levied ; and,  second,  that  I will,  nevertheless,  do  what  I
may  suppose  you  to  wish.  So  much  for  the  Appiani.

I have  been  informed  by  Pausanias,  Lentulus’s  freedman
and  my  marshal,  that  you  had  complained  to  him  of  my  not
having  gone  to  meet  you.  I treated  you  with  contempt,
you  think,  and  my  conduct  was  the  height  of  arrogance  !
Your  servant  having  come  to  me  nearly  at  midnight  and
announced  that  you  intended  coming  to  meet  me  at  Iconium
before  daybreak,  and  it  being  uncertain  by  which  of  the  two
roads  (for  there  were  two),  I sent  your  most  intimate  friend
Varro  to  meet  you  by  one,  and  Q.  Lepta,  my  captain  of
engineers,  by  the  other.  I charged  them  both  to  hasten  back
to  me  first,  in  order  that  I might  start  to  meet  you.  Lepta
came  hurrying  back  and  told  me  that  you  had  already  passed
my  camp.  I came  in  all  haste  to  Iconium.  The  rest
you  already  know.  Was  I likely  not  to  try  and  meet
you  ? You — an  Appius  Claudius — an  imperator — in  spite  of
immemorial  custom — lastly  (and  this  is  the  strongest  point
of  all)  a friend  ! Considering,  too,  that  in  such  matters  of
etiquette  I am  usually  even  too  precise  for  my  official  rank
and  position.  But  enough  of  this.- f Pausanias  also  told  me
that  you  said,  “ What ! an  Appius J^ent  to  meet  a Lentulus,
a Lentulus  an  Ampius,  and  a Ckero  refuse  to  meet  an
Appius  ? ” Heavens  ! do  even  you — a man,  in  my  opinion,
of  supreme  good  sense,  of  great  learning,  of  the  widest  know-
ledge of  affairs,  and  I may  add  a man  of  politeness  (which  the
Stoics  are  quite  right  in  counting  among  the  virtues) — do
you,  I say,  suppose  that  any  Appiusism  or  Lentulusism  has
more  influence  with  me  than  the  distinctions  bestowed  by
virtue  ? Before  I had  earned  what  are  held  by  mankind  to
be  the  most  splendid  honours,  I yet  was  never  dazzled  by
those  high-sounding  names  of  yours : it  was  the  men  who
had  bequeathed  them  to  you  that  I regarded  as  great.  But
when  I had  so  obtained  and  so  administered  the  highest  offices
of  state,  as  to  make  me  think  that  there  was  nothing  left  for

F III,  7 ; II,  14

TO  M.  Cy^LIUS  RUFUS

II9

me  to  acquire  in  furtherance  of  my  honour  or  glory,  I hoped
that  I had  become,  never  indeed  the  superior,  but  at  least
the  equal  of  you  nobles.  Nor,  by  Hercules,  did  I perceive
that  Pompey,  whom  I put  above  anybody  who  has  ever
lived,  nor  P.  Lentulus,  whom  I put  above  myself,  take  any
other  view.  If  you  think  otherwise,  you  will  not  go  wrong
if,  in  order  to  understand  what  high  birth  and  nobility  are,
you  would  study  somewhat  more  carefully  what  Atheno-
dorus.d  son  of  Sardon,  says  on  this  subject. \ But  to  return
to  the  point — I would  have  you  believe  tk9^  am  not  only
your  friend,  but  your  very  warm  friend.  I will  assuredly  by
every  act  of  kindness  in  my  power  make  it  possible  for  you
to  judge  that  to  be  unmistakably  the  case.  As  for  yourself,
however,  if  your  object  is  to  be  thought,  in  my  absence,  to
be  under  a less  heavy  obligation  to  me,  I free  you  from  that
anxiety :

“For  by  my  side  are  those
To  honour  me,  and,  chief,  right-counselling  Zeus.”“

If,  however,  you  are  by  nature  prone  to  spy  out  faults,
you  will  not,  indeed,  succeed  in  making  me  less  zealous  for
you ; but  you  will  succeed  in  making  me  rather  more  in-
different as  to  how  you  take  my  goodwill.  I write  this  to
you  with  some  candour,  relying  on  the  consciousness  of
my  services  and  my  friendly  feeling,  which,  as  it  was  de-
liberately adopted,  I shall  preserve  as  long  as  you  are  willing
that  I should  do  so.

CCXLIV  (F  II,  14)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (AT  ROME)
Laodicea  (February)

I AM  very  intimate  with  M.  Fadius,  a most  excellent  man
and  most  accomplished  scholar,  and  I am  wonderfully

^ A Stoic  philosopher  of  Tarsus,  one  of  the  teachers  of  Augustus.
Horn.  II.  i.  174  :

Trap’  s/ioi  yc  Kui  aXXoi,
oV  Ki  fie  TifilftTovai,  fiaXiara  re  firfriera  Zevg,

120

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  56

attached  to  him,  as  well  for  his  great  talents  and  consum-
mate learning,  as  for  the  singular  modesty  of  his  behaviour.
Pray  take  up  his  business  as  though  it  were  my  own.  I know
you  distinguished  advocates : one  must  commit  a murder  if
one  wishes  the  benefit  of  your  services : but  in  the  case  of
this  man  I will  accept  no  excuse.  You  will  throw  up  every
other  engagement,  if  you  love  me,  when  Fadius  desires  your
services.  I am  eagerly  looking  out  and  longing  for  news
from  Rome,  and  before  all  I desire  to  know  how  you  are :
for,  owing  to  the  severity  of  the  winter,  it  is  now  a long
time  since  any  news  found  its  way  to  us.

CCXLV  (F  IX,  25)

TO  L.  PAPINIUS  P^TUS  (AT  ROME)
Laodicea  (February)

Your  letter  has  made  me  a consummate  general : I had
really  no  idea  that  you  were  so  accomplished  a tactician.  I
see  you  have  been  poring  over  the  treatises  of  Pyrrhus  and
Cineas.  So  I am  thinking  of  obeying  your  maxims  : more
than  that,  I mean  to  have  some  light  vessels  on  the  coast :
against  your  Parthian  horse  they  say  that  no  better  equip-
ment can  be  discovered.  But  why  jest  ? You  don’t  know
what  a great  general  you  are  talking  to  ! The  Cyropaedeia,
which  I had  well  thumbed  over,  I have  thoroughly  exem-
plified throughout  my  command.  But  we  will  have  our
joke  out  when  we  meet,  and  that  I hope  before  very  long.
Now  listen  to  the  word  of  command,  or  rather  “ attention  ! ”
as  they  used  to  say  in  old  times.  With  M.  Fadius,  as  I
think  you  know,  I am  very  intimate,  and  I am  much  at-
tached to  him,  as  well  from  his  extreme  honesty  and  singular
modesty  of  behaviour,  as  from  the  fact  that  I am  accus-
tomed to  find  him  of  the  greatest  help  in  the  controversies
which  I have  with  your  fellow  tipplers  the  Epicureans.  He
came  to  see  me  at  Laodicea,  and  I wanted  him  to  stay  with
me,  but  he  was  suddenly  agitated  by  a most  distressing

F IX,  25  ; XIII,  59  TO  C.  CURTIUS  PEDUC^ANUS  I2I

letter  containing  the  announcement  that  an  estate  near
Herculaneum,  of  which  he  is  joint  owner,  had  been  adver-
tised for  sale  by  his  brother  Q.  Fadius.  M.  Fadius  was
exceedingly  annoyed  at  this,  and  thought  that  his  brother
(who  is  not  a wise  man)  had  taken  that  extreme  step  at  the
instigation  of  his  own  private  enemies.  In  these  circumstances,
my  dear  Psetus,  as  you  love  me,  take  the  whole  case  in  hand
and  free  Fadius  from  his  distress.  We  want  you  to  use
your  influence,  to  offer  your  advice,  or  even  to  make  it  a
matter  of  personal  favour.  Don’t  let  brothers  go  to  law
and  engage  in  a suit  discreditable  to  both.  Two  of  Fadius’s
enemies  are  Mato  and  Pollio.  Need  I say  more  ? I really
cannot,  by  Hercules,  express  in  writing  how  much  I shall  be
obliged  to  you  if  you  put  Fadius  at  his  ease.  He  thinks
that  this  depends  on  you,  and  makes  me  think  so  also.

CCXLVI  (F  XIII,  59)

TO  C.  CURTIUS  PEDUC^ANUS  (PR.^TOR)
Laodicea  (February)

I AM  particularly  attached  to  M.  Fadius  and  see  a very  great
deal  of  him,  and  my  intimacy  with  him  is  of  very  old  stand-
ing. In  the  suit  in  which  he  is  engaged  I don’t  ask  for  your
decision — you  will,  as  your  honour  and  position  demand,
stand  by  your  edict  and  the  principles  of  administration  you
have  established — but  only  that  he  may  have  as  ready  an
approach  to  you  as  possible,  may  obtain  his  just  rights
without  reluctance  on  your  part,  and  may  find  by  experience
that  my  friendship,  even  though  I am  far  away,  is  of  use  to
him,  especially  with  you.  This  much  I do  earnestly  and
repeatedly  ask  of  you.

122

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  50,  56

CCXLVII  (F  XIII,  58)

TO  C.  TITUS  RUFUS  (PRyETOR  URBANUS)
Laodicea  (February)

L.  CusTiDius  is  my  fellow  tribesman,  fellow  townsman,  and
intimate  friend.  He  has  a suit  at  law,  which  he  is  about  to
bring  before  you.  I limit  my  recommendation  of  him  to  you —
as  your  honour  and  my  modesty  demand — to  asking  for  him
a ready  access  to  you  : that  in  all  just  demands  he  may  be
successful  without  any  reluctance  on  your  part,  and  may
have  reason  to  know  that  my  friendship,  though  I am  very
far  away,  is  of  service  to  him,  especially  with  you.

CCXLVIII  (F  III,  9)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  ROME)
Laodicea,  February

At  last  ! A letter  worthy  of  Appius  Claudius,  full  of  kind-
ness, cordiality,  and  consideration  ! No  doubt  the  sight  of
the  city  restored  your  old  city-bred  courtesy.  For  the  letters
which  you  sent  me  on  your  journey  before  leaving  Asia —
one  about  my  forbidding  legates  to  start  for  Rome,  the  other
about  stopping  the  building  operations  at  Appia — were  very
unpleasant  reading  for  me.  Accordingly,  conscious  of  my
unbroken  friendliness  to  you,  I wrote  back  with  some  little
irritation.  However,  when  I read  the  letter  you  gave  to  my
freedman  Philotimus,  I saw  and  understood  that  there  were
many  persons  in  the  province  who  did  not  wish  us  to  enter-
tain the  feelings  towards  each  other  which  we  actually  were
, entertaining ; but  that  as  soon  as  you  approached  the  city,
or  rather  as  soon  as  you  saw  your  relatives,  you  ascertained

F XIII,  58;  III,  9 TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  123

from  them  how  loyal  I had  been  to  you  in  your  absence,
how  careful  and  unremitting  in  fulfilling  all  my  obligations
to  you.  Accordingly,  you  can  imagine  how  much  I value
that  sentence  in  your  letter,  “ If  anything  occurs  affecting
your  position,  though  that  is  hardly  possible,  yet,  if  it  does,
I will  return  your  favours  in  full.”  That,  however,  will  be
an  easy  task  for  you  : for  there  is  nothing  impossible  for
zeal  and  kindness,  or  rather  affection.  For  my  part,  though
I always  myself  thought  that  it  would  be  so,  and  was  fre-
quently assured  of  it  in  letters,  I yet  was  extremely  delighted
by  the  announcement  in  your  letter  of  your  strong,  or  rather
certain,  hope  of  a triumph.  And,  indeed,  it  was  not  because
it  made  it  the  easier  foi  me  to  obtain  one — for  that  would
be  a motive  truly  Epicurean  ’ — but,  by  Hercules,  because
the  splendour  of  your  position  is  dear  to  me  in  itself  and  for
itself  Wherefore,  as  you  have  more  people  than  others
have  whom  you  know  to  be  starting  for  this  province — for
they  nearly  all  come  to  you  to  ask  if  you  have  any  com-
mands— you  will  very  greatly  oblige  me  if  you  will  send  me
a letter,  as  soon  as  you  have  obtained  what  you  confidently
expect  and  I heartily  wish.  If  the  process  of  making  up  their
minds  and  the  dilatory  proceedings  of  the  long  bench, ^ as
our  friend  Pompey  calls  it,  deprive  you  of  this  or  that  par-
ticular day  (for  what  more  can  they  do  ?),  yet  your  high
claims  will  hold  the  field.  But  if  you  care  for  me,  if  you
wish  me  to  care  for  you,  write  to  me,  that  I may  enjoy  the
delight  as  soon  as  possible.  I should  wish  you  also  to  pay
me  the  promised  addition  to  your  former  present.®  I am
both  anxious  to  complete  my  knowledge  of  augural  law.

^ For  friendship,  according  to  the  Epicureans,  was  founded  on  utility,
it  was  cultivated  for  its  advantages — though  in  practice  their  friendships
were  particularly  close.  How  they  made  their  theory  square  with  their
practice  cannot  be  discussed  here.

^ Probably  the  bench  of  the  tribunes,  who  might  veto  the  proposal
(Willems,  Le  Senat,  ii.  173).  Mommsen  objects  that  a special  bench
of  the  tribunes  is  not  mentioned  till  imperial  times  ; but  as  one  of  the
first  honours  voted  to  lulius,  as  to  Augustus,  was  that  he  should  sit  on
the  tribunician  bench,  this  implies  the  existence  of  such  a bench  before.
See  Dio,  xlii.  20;  lix.  15,  £7rt  Ta)v  avrojv  (3d9p(jjv.

^ Appius’s  work  on  the  ms  azigurale,  referred  to  before  (see  p.  20).
Apparently  it  was  only  a first  part  that  had  come  out,  and  more  was
expected.

124

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

and  am  also,  by  Hercules,  incredibly  delighted  with  atten-
tions and  presents  from  you.  As  for  the  wish  you  express
for  something  of  the  same  sort  from  me,  I certainly  must
consider  the  best  style  of  composition  to  repay  you  for  your
gift : for  it  is  assuredly  not  my  way — putting  as  I do,  and
as  you  often  observe  with  surprise,  so  much  energy  into  the
task  of  writing — to  let  myself  be  thought  to  have  been  slack
about  it,  especially  in  a case  involving  a charge  not  simply  of
slackness,  but  of  ingratitude  as  well.  However,  I will  see
about  it.  The  promise  you  make,  I beg  you,  in  the  name
of  your  good  faith  and  energetic  character,  as  well  as  in
that  of  our  friendship — no  affair  of  yesterday,  but  now  a
thoroughly  established  fact — to  take  measures  to  fulfil,  and
to  exert  yourself  to  secure  a supplicatio  being  voted  in  my
honour  in  as  complimentary  terms  and  at  as  early  a date  as
possible.  I certainly  sent  my  despatch  later  than  I could  have
wished,  in  regard  to  which  the  difficulty  of  navigation  was
not  the  only  irritating  circumstance : I believe,  in  fact,  that
my  despatch  arrived  just  when  the  senate  was  in  vacation.^
But  this  I did  under  your  influence  and  by  your  advice,  and
I think  I was  quite  right  not  to  send  a despatch  the  very
moment  I was  greeted  as  imperator^  but  only  when  other
services  had  been  performed  and  the  summer  campaign  was
concluded.  You  will  then,  I hope,  see  to  these  matters,  as
you  profess  your  intention  of  doing,  and  will  regard  myself,
my  affairs,  and  my  friends  as  recommended  to  your  care.

^ Though,  according  to  Willems  (ii.  148),  there  were  no  regular  days
for  the  meeting  of  the  senate  (though  some  on  which  it  could  not  meet),
yet  the  Kalends  and  Ides  seem  to  have  been  the  days  on  which  there
generally  was  such  a meeting  ; but  April  was  a month  full  of  holidays,
and  we  have  seen  that  Cicero  and  others  were  generally  out  of  town
during  that  month,  during  which  the  consuls  from  custom  (though  not
from  law)  generally  did  not  summon  the  senate.

F III,  9;  A V,  21

TO  ATTICUS

125

CCXLIX  (A  V,  21)

U

TO  ATTICUS  (IN  EPIRUS)
Laodicea,  13  February

I AM  very  glad  to  hear  of  your  safe  arrival  in  Epirus,  and
that,  as  you  say,  you  had  a pleasant  voyage.  I am  a little
annoyed  at  your  not  being  in  Rome  at  a crisis  of  great  im-
portance to  me,  but  I console  myself  with  the  one  reflexion,
that  you  are  having  a pleasant  winter  there  and  are  enjoying
your  rest.^  Gaius  Cassius,  brother  of  your  friend  Quintus
Cassius,  had  sent  a despatch — of  which  you  ask  me  the
meaning — written  in  a more  modest  strain  than  the  later  one
in  which  he  says  that  he  had  made  an  end  of  the  Parthian  war.
It  is  true  that  the  Parthians  had  retired  from  Antioch  before
the  arrival  of  Bibulus,  but  it  was  from  no  success  of  our  arms.
At  this  present  moment  they  are,  as  a matter  of  fact,  winter-
ing in  Cyrrhestica,^  and  a most  serious  war  is  impending.
For  the  son  of  the  Parthian  king  Orodes  is  within  the
Roman  province,  and  Deiotarus,  to  whose  son  the  daughter
of  Ariovasdes  is  betrothed — so  he  ought  to  know — has  no
doubt  of  the  king  himself  intending  to  cross  the  Euphrates
in  full  force  at  the  beginning  of  summer.  Besides,  on  the
day  on  which  Cassius’s  victorious  despatch  was  read  in  the
senate  (dated  the  7 th  of  October)  one  was  read  from  me  also,
announcing  an  alarm  of  war.  My  friend  Axius  says  that  my
despatch  made  a great  impression,  that  his  was  not  credited.
That  of  Bibulus  had  not  yet  been  received,  which  I am  quite
sure  will  be  thoroughly  alarmist.  The  result  of  this,  I fear,
will  be  that,  as  Pompey  is  not  allowed  to  be  sent  anywhere
for  fear  of  a revolution,  and  no  attenTion'is  paid  bylhe  senate

^ Reading  hoc  me  tamen  consolor  uno  : spero^  etc.,  for  non  spero.  If
the  latter  is  retained,  it  would  mean,  “I  don’t  expect  you  are  having
a pleasant  winter,”  i.e.,  and  so  will  come  back  to  Rome,  where  I want
you.  Uno  is  Madvig’s  emendation,  which  deserves  to  be  right,  if  it  is
not.

^ That  is,  within  the  province  of  Syria,  immediately  north  of  An-
tioch.

126

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  .•ET.  56

to  Caesar’s  demands,  while  this  knot  remains  to  be  untied,
the  senate  will  not  think  that  I ought  to  quit  my  province  till
a successor  has  arrived,  and  that  in  such  troublous  times
legates  should  not  be  left  in  charge  of  two  such  important
provinces.  In  view  of  this  I tremble  lest  my  tenure  should
be  prolonged,  without  even  a tribune  being  able  to  stop  it,
and  all  the  more  so  that  you  are  not  in  town  to  interpose,  as
you  might  have  done  in  many  cases  by  your  advic'e",  your
personal  influence  and  activity.  But  you  will  say  I am-'
piling  up  anxiety  for  myself  with  my  own  hands.  I can’t
help  it : I wish  that  it  may  be  so.  But  everything  causes
me  alarm.  Though  your  letter  that  you  wrote  at  Buthrotum
in  your  sickness  had  a charming  finale : “ As  I see  and
hope,  there  will  be  nothing  to  delay  your  departure  from
your  province.”  I should  have  preferred  that  you  had
confined  yourself  to  “as  I see ” : there  was  no  need  to  add
“ and  hope.”

Again,  I have  received  a letter  written  just  after  the  triumph
of  Lentulus,  which  came  with  great  celerity  by  the  hands  of
the  postmen,  of  the  publicani.  In  this  you  reiterate  the  same
“bitter-sweet,”  first  saying  that  there  will  be  no  delay  of  my
return,  and  then  adding,  “ If  anything  goes  wrong  you  will
come  to  me.”  Your  doubts  torture  me  : at  the  same  time  you
may  see  which  of  your  letters  I have  received.  For  the  one
which  you  say  yourself  that  you  delivered  to  the  centurion
Hermon’s  servant  I have  not  receix^ed.  You  have  often
mentioned  having  given  a letter  to  Laenius’s  servants.  That
one  Laenius  did  deliver  to  me  at  last,  on  my  arrival  at
Laodicea,  the  i ith  of  February,  dated  the  21st  of  September.

I will,  at  once  by  what  I say  to  him,  and  by  deeds  hereafter,
give  Laenius  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  your  recommenda-
tion. That  letter  had  much  news  that  was  stale,  one  thing
that  was  new — about  the  panthers  from  Cibyra.  I am  much
obliged  to  you  for  telling  M.  Octavius  that  you  didn’t
think  I would  do  it.  But  pray  henceforth,  in  any  case  of
doubt,  give  a direct  negative.  The  fact  is  that,  supported  by
a spontaneous  resolution  of^my  own,  and  also,  by  Hercules,
from  the  inspiration  of  your  influence,  I have  surpassed
everybody  (and  you  will  find  this  to  be  the  case)  in  preserv-
ing clean  hands,  no  less  than  in  justice,  courtesy,  and  mild-
ness. Don’t  imagine  that  anything  has  ever  surprised

A V,  21

TO  ATTICUS

127

people  more  than  the  fact  that  not  a farthing  of  expense  has
been  caused  to  the  province  during  my  goveriiorship,  either
for  my  public  establishment  or  for  any  individual  on  my  staff,
except  L.  Tullius.  He,  who  in  other  respects  is  clean-handed
enough,  did  take  something  on  the  road  in  virtue  of  the
Julian  law,  not  as  others  do  at  every  hamlet,  but  once  only
and  for  the  day’s  journey.^  He  is  the  only  one  who  has
done  so : and  he  forces  me  to  make  an  exception  when  I
say  that  not  a farthing  of  expense  has  been  caused.  No  one
except  him  has  taken  anything.  This  blot  I owe  to  our
friend  Q.  Titinius.^

At  the  end  of  the  summer  campaign  I put  my  brother
Quintus  in  charge  of  the  winter  quarters  and  of  Cilicia.  I
have  sent  your  friend  Tiberius’s  son-in-law  Quintus  Volusius
— not  only  a safe  man,  but  also  wonderfully  disinterested — to
Cyprus,  with  orders  to  stay  some  few  days  there,  to  prevent
the  few  Roman  citizens  who  are  in  business  there  from  saying
that  they  have  no  means  of  legal  redress  : for  it  is  illegal  for
Cyprians  to  be  cited  in  courts  out  of  the  island.^  I myself
started  for  Asia  from  Tarsus  on  the  5th  of  January,  accom-
panied by  an  admiration,  which,  by  heaven,  it  is  difficult  to
describe,  from  the  cities  in  Cilicia,  and  specially  from  the
people  of  Tarsus.  As  soon,  however,  as  I had  crossed  the
Taurus  I found  our  dioceses  in  Asia  on  the  tiptoe  of  expecta-
tion : for  in  the  six  months  of  my  administration  Asia  had
not  received  a single  letter  of  injunction  from  me,  nor  had  had
a single  official  to  entertain.  Now  before  my  time  that  parti-
cular period  had  been  each  year  a source  of  gain,  by  the
richer  states  paying  large  sums  of  money  to  be  exempted
from  furnishing  the  soldiers  with  winter  quarters.  The
Cyprians  used  to  pay  200  Attic  talents,  from  which  island —
I am  not  speaking  in  hyperbole,  but  the  simple  truth — not  a
single  farthing  is  exacted  under  my  administration.  For  these
benefits,  which  they  regard  with  speechless  astonishment,  I
allow  no  honours,  except  verbal  ones,  to  be  decreed  to  me :
statues,  temples,  marble  charigts  I forbid ; nor  am  I a

^ The  lex  lulia^  while  limiting  the  rapacity  of  governors,  did  allow
certain  supplies,  such  as  hay,  etc.  (see  p.  25),  to  be  demanded  from
towns  in  the  provinces.

Apparently  for  recommending  Tullius.

^ See  vol.  i.,  p.  57.

128

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

nuisance  to  the  states  in  any  other  respect — though  I may  be
to  you  by  thus  blowing  my  own  trumpet.  But,  an  you  love
me,  put  up  with  it ! It  was  you  who  wished  me  to  act  thus.
My  progress  through  Asia  was  of  such  a nature  that  even
the  famine,  which  prevailed  in  my  part  of  Asia  at  the  time —
the  most  distressing  thing  there  is — has  been  in  a manner  a
welcome  event.  Wherever  I went,  without  using  force,  legal
compulsion,  or  strong  language,  I induced  both  the  Greeks
and  Roman  citizens,  who  had  cornered  the  wheat,  to  promise
large  quantities  to  the  communities.  On  the  13th  of  Feb-
ruary— the  day  I am  despatching  this  letter — I have  arranged
to  hold  a court  at  Laodicea  for  the  district  of  Cibyra  and
Apamea : from  the  15th  of  March  at  the  same  place  for  the
districts  of  Synnada,  Pamphylia  (when  I will  look  out  for  a
horn  for  Phemius),  Lycaonia,  Isauria.  After  the  15th  of
May  I start  for  Cilicia,  with  the  view  of  spending  June  there —
I hope  without  trouble  from  the  Parthians.  July,  if  all  goes
as  I wish,  will  be  needed  for  my  return  journey  through  the
province.  I entered  the  province  at  Laodicea  in  the  consul-
ship of  Sulpicius  and  Marcellus  on  the  31st  of  July.  I am
due  to  leave  it  on  the  30th  of  July.  I shall  first  of  all  press  my
brother  Quintus  to  allow  himself  to  be  left  in  charge,  which
will  be  very  much  against  the  wishes  of  us  both.  But  that  is
the  only  respectable  arrangement  possible,  especially  as  I
cannot  even  now  keep  the  excellent  Pomptinus : for  Pos-
tumius  hurries  him  back  to  Rome,  and  perhaps  Postumia  *
also.

Now  you  know  my  plans.  Next,  let  me  enlighten  you
about  Brutus.  Your  friend  Brutus  has  among  his  intimates
certain  creditors  of  the  people  of  Salamis  in  Cyprus,  M.
Scaptius  and  P.  Matinius,  whom  he  has  recommended  to
me  with  more  than  common  earnestness.  I have  not  made  the
acquaintance  of  Matinius  ; Scaptius  came  to  the  camp  to  see
me.  I promised  for  the  sake  of  Brutus  to  see  that  the  Sala-
minians  paid  him  the  money.  He  thanked  me,  and  asked  for  a

’ Wife  of  Ser.  Sulpicius.  We  have  no  knowledge  as  to  why  Pos-
tumius  (see  Letter  CCCX)  was  able  to  hurry  the  return  of  Pomptinus.
Cicero  seems  to  hint  that  Postumia  was  his  mistress,  yet  we  hear  of
her  afterwards  as  living  with  her  husband  and  son.  She  is,  however,
credited  by  Suetonius  with  having  intrigued  with  Cresar  (Suet.  Cas.

50).

A V,  21

TO  ATTICUS

129

prefecture.  I said  that  I never  granted  one  to  a man  engaged
in  buSines^  a rule  of  which  I have  already  informed  you.
When  Cn.  Pompeius  asked  me  he  accepted  the  propriety  o£L
this  rule — I need  not  mention  Torquatus  when  he  asked  for
your  friend  M.  Laenius,  and  many  others.  But  (I  said)  if  he
wanted  to  be  z.  prce.fectus  on  account  of  the  bond,  I would
see  to  his  recovering  t^  money.  He  thanked  me  and  went
away.  Our  friend  Afeus  had  granted  certain  squadrons  of
cavalry  to  tETs~Scaptius  to  coerce  the  Salaminians,  and  had
also  given  him  rank  as  prcefectus.  He  was  harrying  the
Salaminians.  I ordered  the  cavalry  squadrons  to  quit
Cyprus.  Scaptius  felt  aggrieved.  In  ^hort,  to  keep  faifr
witli^him  I commanded  the  Salaminians,  when  they  cam^  to
see  me  at  l arsus"'an3'Bcaptms*'wi!iriElTI^  pay  the  money.

They  had  a great  deal  to  say  about  the  bond,  a great  deal
about  the  wrongs  inflicted  upon  them  by  Scaptius.  I de-
clined to  hear  it.  I urged  them,  I even  asked  them  as  a
favour,  in  consideration  of  my  good  services  to  their  state,  to
settle  the  business  : finally  I said  that  I would  use  compul-
sion. The  men^not  only  di_d_jiQt- refuse,  but  even  said  thatj
they  would  be  paying  out  of  my  pocket : for  that,  since  1/
had  declined  the  money  they  had  been  accustomed  to  pay
the  praetor,  they  would  in  a sense  be  paying  out  of  my  pocket,
and  ind^d  the  debt  to  Scaptius^mounted  to  considerably
lessJtham^ihe-pFieEQJiaTrcOntribution.  I warmly  commended
them:  “All  right,”  said  Seaptius,  “but  let  us  reckon  the
total.”  Then  there  arose  this  question  : One  of  the  clauses
in  my  customary  edict  was  a declaration  that  I would  not
recognize  more  than  twelve  per  cent,  interest,  besides  the
yearly  addition  to  the  capital  of  interest  accrued,^  whereas  he
demanded  in^virtue  of  the  deed  forty-eight  per  cent.  “ What
do  you  mean  ? ” said  I.  “ Can  I go  against  my  own  edict  ? ”
He  then  produced  a decree  of  the  senate  made  in  the  consul-
ship of  Lentulus  and  Philippus.  “ Th,e  governor  of  Cilicia
shall  recognize  that  bond  in  giving  judgmerjf.”^  I was  at

^ Cum  anatocismo  anniversario.  The  interest  being  due  at  the  end
of  each  month,  if  it  was  not  paid,  the  creditor  might  at  the  end  of  the
year  add  it  to  the  capital,  and  thenceforth  charge  interest  on  the  increased
capital.  It  was  compound  interest,  but  reckoned,  not  every  month,  but
every  year.

^ B.c.  56.  This  was  probably  when  the  senate  was  confirming  the

II.  K

130

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

first  horrified,  for  it  meant  the  ruin  of  the  town.  I find  there
are  two  decrees  of  the  senate  in  the  same  year  about  this
bond.  When  the  Salaminians  wished  to  raise  money  at
Rome  to  pay  off  a debt,  they  were  prevented  from  doing  so
by  the  Ga'bmmnr-iaw~  -^Xhen..it.was-.thal-Rxu.tus’s  friends,
relying  on  his  influence,  offered  to  advance  the  money  if  they
were  secured  by  a senatorial  decree.  A decree  is  passed  by
Brutus’s  influence  “That  the  Salaminians  and  those  who
lent  the  money  should  be  indemnified.”  They  paid  the  money.
Afterwards  it  occurred  to  the  lenders  that  this  senatorial  decree
would  not  secure  them,  because  the  Gabinian  law  forbade  a
legal  decision  being  based  on  the  bond.  So  the  other
senatorial  decree  (“that  this  bond  be  recognized  in  giving
judgment  ”)  is  passed  : not  giving  that  particular  bond  more
legal  validity  than  others,  but  the  same.^  When  I had  ex-
pounded this  view,  Scaptius  took  me  aside  and  said  that  he
had  nothing  to  say  against  it,  but  that  those  men  were  under
the  impression  that  their  debt  was  200  talents,- and  he  was
willing  to  accept  that  sum,  whereas  it  really  amounted,  to
somewhat  less ; he  begs  me  to  induce  them  to  agree  on  the
200.  “ Very  well,”  said  I.  I summon  them  without  the

presence  of  Scaptius.  “What  do  you  say,”  said  I,  “how
much  is  your  debt  ? ” They  answered,  “ One  hundred  and
six.”  I refer  back  to  Scaptius.  He  exclaimed  loudly.
“ What  is  the  use  of  this  ? ” said  I.  “ Check  each  other’s
additions.”  They  sit  down,  they  make  their  calculations  :
they  agree  to  a penny.  They  declare  themselves  willing  to
pay:  and  beg  him  to  accept  the  money.  Scaptius  again
takes  me  aside  : asks  me  to  leave  the  matter  as  it  is,  un-
decided. I gave  in  to  the  fellow’s  shameless  request.  When
the  Greeks  grumbled,  and  demanded  that  they  might  deposit

acia  of  Cato,  who  had  been  sent  out  in  58  b.c.  to  take  over  and  organize
Cyprus.  The  real  creditor — at  any  rate  in  part — was  doubtless  Brutus,
who  had  been  left  in  charge  of  Cyprus  for  some  time  by  his  uncle  Cato
(Plut.  Cat.  ?nin.  36).

^ The  lex  Gabinia^  B.C.  68,  forbade  loans  to  provincial  towns.

^ The  first  decree  merely  relieved  borrowers  and  lenders  from  penalties
of  the  law,  the  second  allowed  a debt  to  be  recoverable  under  the  bond,
i.e.t  it  placed  the  bond  in  the  same  position  as  other  bonds;  but,  says
Cicero,  by  my  edict  (taken  from  my  predecessors)  only  twelve  per  cent,
can  be  recovered  on  a bond  : and  nothing  the  senate  has  done  gives  any
special  force  to  this  particular  bond.

A V,  21

TO  ATTICUS

I3I

the  money  in  a temple/  I did  not  assent.  Everybody  in
court  exclaimed  that  Scaptius  was  the  greatest  knave  in  the
world  for  not  being  content  with  twelve  per  cent,  plus  the
compound  interest : others  said  that  he  was  the  greatest  fool.
In  my  opinion  he  was  more  knave  than  fool.  For  either  he
was  content  with  twelve  per  cent,  on  a good  security,  or  he
hoped  for  forty-eight  per  cent,  with  a bad  one.^  That  is  my
case  ; and  if  Brutus  is  not  satisfied  with  it,  I cannot  see  why
I should  regard  him  as  a friend  f I am  sure  that  his  uncle  at
any  rate  will  accept  it,  especially  as  a senatorial  decree  has  just
been  passed — I think  since  you  left  town — in  the  matter  of
money-lenders,  that  twelve  per  cent,  simple  interest  was  to  be
the  rate.  What  a wide  difference  this  implies  you  will  certainly
be  able  to  reckon,  if  I know  your  fingers."  And  in  this
regard,  by  the  way,  L.  Lucceius,  son  of  Marcus,  writes  me  a
grumbling  letter  asserting  that — thanks  to  the  senate — there
is  the  utmost  danger  of  these  decrees  leading  to  a general
repudiation.  He  recalls  what  mischief  C.  lulius  ® once  did
by  slightly  enlarging  the  time  for  paymept : “ public  credit
never  received  such  a blow.” — But  to  return  to  the  matter
in  hand  : turn  over  my  case  in  your  mind  as  against  Brutus,
if  it  may  be  called  a case,  against  which  nothing  can  be
decently  urged : especially  as  I have  left  it  and  its  merits
undecided.

Now  for  family  matters.  As  to  our  “home  secret,”  I am
of  your  opinion — Postumia’s  son  : ^ since  Pontidia  is  playing
fast  and  loose.  But  I could  have  wished  you  had  been  there.
Don’t  expect  anything  from  my  brother  Quintus  for  some
months;  for  Taurus  is  impassable  before  June,  owing  to
the  snow.  I am  backing  up  Thermus,  as  you  ask  me  to  do,
by  a great  number  of  letters.  ^ As  for  P.  Valerius,  Deiotarus
says  that  he  has  nothing,  and  is  being  supported  by  himself.

^ For  money  so  deposited,  pending  a legal  decision,  interest  was  not
payable.  See  p.  94.

^ In  the  one  case  he  was  impudens  for  refusing  the  proper  sum  of
money  offered  in  payment,  in  the  other  he  was  impudens  for  embarking
in  such  a usurious  transaction.

® There  is  no  record  of  Csesar  having  done  this,  either  as  praetor  or  in
his  first  consulship,  and  Boot  is  probably  right  in  referring  it  to  a
C.  lulius  who  was  killed  in  the  time  of  Marius.

^ Servius  Sulpicius  as  husband  for  Tullia.  We  don’t  know  who
Pontidia  was,  or  whom  she  recommended  : perhaps  Dolabella.

132

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

As  soon  as  you  know  whether  there  is  to  be  an  intercalation  at
Rome  or  not,  please  write  me  word  definitely  on  what  day
the  mysteries  are  to  take  placed  I am  a little  less  eager  for
your  letters  than  if  you  were  at  Rome ; but  yet,  after  all,  I
am  eager  for  them.

CCL  (f  XIII,  63)

TO  P.  SILIUS  NERVA  (PROPR^TOR  OF  BITHYNIA
AND  PONTUS)

Laodicea,  February

I NEVER  thought  that  I could  possibly  be  at  a loss  for  words,
but  I certainly  am  so  in  writing  a letter  of  commendation  for
M.  Laenius.  I will,  therefore,  state  the  case  to  you  in  a few
words,  yet  enough  to  shew  you  my  feelings.  Both  I and  my
dearest  brother  have  a value  for  M.  Laenius  which  passes
belief.  This  arises,  indeed,  from  his  very  numerous  services
to  us,  but  also  from  his  extreme  honesty  and  the  eminent
correctness  of  his  conduct.  It  is  with  the  greatest  reluctance
that  I am  parting  with  him,  as  well  on  account  of  our  close
intimacy  and  the  charm  of  his  society,  as  because  I am  glad
to  have  the  advantage  of  his  candid  and  sound  advice.  But
I am  afraid  that  you  will  be  thinking  that  the  words,  for
which  I said  that  I was  at  a loss,  are  already  more  than
enough.  I commend  him  to  you  with  all  the  warmth  you
perceive  that  I am  bound  to  feel  for  one  of  whom  I use
such  language  as  the  above : and  I ask  you  earnestly  and
repeatedly  to  facilitate  his  business  in  your  province,  and

^ The  mysteries  of  the  Bona  Dea  were  held  on  the  1st  of  May  (Ovid,
F.  V.  147) ; if  there  was  an  intercalary  month,  the  ist  of  May  would  be
twenty-three  days  later.  Why  did  Cicero  care  to  know  this  ? Perhaps
that  he  might  not  risk  doing  anything  important — especially  of  a military
nature — on  a day  that  was  nefastus.  Thus  Scipio  delayed  crossing  the
Hellespont  for  many  days  in  the  war  with  Antiochus,  because  it  was  the
time  of  the  festival  of  Mars,  when  the  sacred  shields  were  carried  in  pro-
cession (Polyb.  xxi.  13;  Livy,  xxxvii.  33).  Now  that  Cicero  was  an
augur,  he  might  feel  doubly  bound  to  respect  such  scruples.

F XIII,  63;  A VI,  I

TO  ATTICUS

133

to  give  him  personally  any  information  you  think  you  fairly
can.  You  will  find  him  most  reasonable  and  gentlemanlike.
Therefore  I beg  you  to  send  him  back  to  me  as  soon  as
possible,  disembarrassed  and  free,  with  his  business  accom-
plished as  far  as  it  lies  in  your  hands.  You  will  very  greatly
oblige  me  and  my  brother  by  so  doing.

CCLI  (A  VI,  i)

TO  ATTICUS  (IN  EPIRUS)

Laodicea,  22  February

I RECEIVED  your  letter  on  the  fifth  day  before  the  Terminalia
(19th  of  February)  at  Laodicea.  I was  delighted  to  read  it,
for  it  teemed  with  affection,  kindness,  and  an  active  and
obliging  temper.  I will,  therefore,  answer  it  sentence  by
sentence  ^ — for  such  is  your  request — and  I will  not  intro-
duce an  arrangement  of  my  own,  but  will  follow  your  order.

You  say  that  the  last  letter  you  had  of  mine  was  from
Cybistra,  dated  21st  September,  and  you  want  to  know  which
of  yours  I have  received.  Nearly  all  you  mention,  except
the  one  that  you  say  that  you  delivered  to  Lentulus’s
messengers  at  Equotuticus  and  Brundisium.  Wherefore
your  industry  has  not  been  thrown  away,  as  you  fear,  but
has  been  exceedingly  well  laid  out,  if,  that  is  to  say,  your
object  was  to  give  me  pleasure.  For  I have  never  been
more  delighted  with  anything.  I am  exceedingly  glad  that
you  approve  of  my  self-restraint  in  the  case  of  Appius,  and
of  my  independence  even  in  the  case  of  Brutus : and  I had
thought  that  it  might  be  somewhat  otherwise.  For  Appius,
in  the  course  of  his  journey,  had  sent  me  two  or  three  rather
querulous  letters,  because  I rescinded  some  of  his  decisions.
It  is  exactly  as  if  a doctor,  upon  a patient  having  been  placed
under  another  doctor,  should  choose  to  be  angry  with  the

^ Some  words  are  missing  in  the  text.  Boot  fills  up  the  gap  by  Kara
fiiTov.  It  gives  the  sense  required,  and  is  perhaps  better  than  the  words
introduced  by  Wesenberg  from  the  latter  part  of  the  letter  {non
Xa\KHO)v)^  which  come  in  rather  awkwardly  here.

134

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

latter  if  he  changed  some  of  his  prescriptions.  Thus  Appius,
having  treated  the  province  on  the  system  of  depletion,  bleed-
ing, and  removing  everything  he  could,  and  having  handed
it  over  to  me  in  the  last  state  of  exhaustion,  he  cannot  bear
seeing  it  treated  by  me  on  the  nutritive  system.  Yet  he  is
sometimes  angry  with  me,  at  other  times  thanks  me;  for
nothing  I ever  do  is  accompanied  with  any  reflexion  upon
him.  It  is  only  the  dissimilarity  of  my  system  that  annoys
him.  For  what  could  be  a more  striking  difference — under
his  rule  a province  drained  by  charges  for  maintenance  and
by  losses,  under  mine,  not  a penny  exacted  either  from  private
persons  or  public  bodies  ? Why  speak  of  his  prce.fecti.^  staff,
and  legates  ? Or  even  of  acts  of  plunder,  licentiousness,  and
insult  ? While  as  things  actually  are,  no  private  house,  by
Hercules,  is  governed  with  so  much  system,  or  on  such  strict
principles,  nor  is  so  well  disciplined,  as  is  my  whole  province.
Some  of  Appius’s  friends  put  a ridiculous  construction  on
this,  holding  that  I wish  for  a good  reputation  to  set  off  his
bad  one,  and  act  rightly,  not  for  the  sake  of  my  own  credit,
but  in  order  to  cast  a reflexion  upon  him.  But  if  Appius,  as
Brutus’s  letter  forwarded  by  you  indicated,  expresses  gratitude
to  me,  I am  satisfied.  Nevertheless,  this  very  day  on  which
I write  this,  before  dawn,  I am  thinking  of  rescinding  many
of  his  inequitable  appointments  and  decisions.

I now  come  to  Brutus,  whose  friendship  I embraced  with
all  possible  earnestness  on  your  advice.  I had  even  begun
to  feel  genuine  affection  for  him — but  here  I pull  myself  up
short,  lest  I should  offend  you  : for  don’t  imagine  that  there
is  anything  I wish  more  than  to  fulfil  his  commissions,  or
that  there  is  anything  about  which  I have  taken  more
trouble.  Now  he  gave  me  a volume  of  commissions,  and
you  had  already  spoken  with  me  about  the  same  matters.
I have  pushed  them  on  with  the  greatest  energy.  To  begin
with,  I put  such  pressure  on  Ariobarzanes,  that  he  paid  him
the  talents  which  he  promised  me.  As  long  as  the  king
was  with  me,  the  business  was  in  excellent  train : later  on
he  began  to  be  pressed  by  countless  agents  of  Pompey.
Now  Pompey  has  by  himself  more  influence  than  all  the
rest  put  together  for  many  reasons,  and  especially  because
there  is  an  idea  that  he  is  coming  to  undertake  the  Parthian
war.  However,  even  he  has  to  put  up  with  the  following

A VI,

TO  ATTICUS

135

scale  of  payment : on  every  thirtieth  day  thirty-three  Attic
talents  (£^,920),  and  that  raised  by  special  taxes : nor  is  it
sufficient  for  the  monthly  interest.  But  our  friend  Gnaeus
is  an  easy  creditor : he  stands  out  of  his  capital,  is  content
with  the  interest,  and  even  that  not  in  full.  The  king  neither
pays  anyone  else,  nor  is  capable  of  doing  so  : for  he  has  no
treasury,  no  regular  income.  He  levies  taxes  after  the
method  of  Appius.  They  scarcely  produce  enough  to
satisfy  Pompey’s  interest.  The  king  has  two  or  three  very
rich  friends,  but  they  stick  to  their  own  as  energetically  as
you  or  I.  For  my  part,  nevertheless,  I do  not  cease  sending
letters  asking,  urging,  chiding  the  king.  Deiotarus  also  has
informed  me  that  he  has  sent  emissaries  to  him  on  Brutus’s
business  : that  they  have  brought  him  back  word  that  he
has  not  got  the  money.  And,  by  Hercules,  I believe  it  is '
the  case ; nothing  can  be  stripped  cleaner  than  his  kingdom,
or  be  more  needy  than  the  king.  Accordingly,  I am  think-
ing either  of  renouncing  my  guardianship,  or,  as  Scaevola  did
on  behalf  of  Glabrio,  of  stopping  payment  altogether — prin-
cipal and  interest  alike.  However,  I have  conferred  the'J^'
prefectures  which  I promised  Brutus  through  you  on  M.
Scaptius  and  L.  Gavius,  who  were  acting  as  Brutus’s  agents
in  the  kingdom : for  they  were  not  carrying  on  business  in
my  own  province.  You  will  remember  that  I made  that
condition,  that  he  might  have  as  many  prefectures  as  he
pleased,  so  long  as  it  was  not  for  a man  in  business.  Ac-
cordingly, I have  given  him  two  others  besides : but  the
men  for  whom  he  asked  them  had  left  the  province.  Now
for  the  case  of  the  Salaminians,  which  I see  came  upon  you
also  as  a novelty,  as  it  did  upon  me.  For  Brutus  never  told  me
that  the  money  was  his  own.  Nay,  I have  his  own  document
containing  the  words,  “The  Salaminians  owe  my  friends
M.  Scaptius  and  P.  Matinius  a sum  of  money.”  He  recom-
mends them  to  me : he  even  adds,  as  though  by  way  of  a
spur  to  me,  that  he  had  gone  surety  for  them  to  a large
amount.  I had  succeeded  in  arranging  that  they  should
pay  with  interest  for  six  years  at  the  rate  of  twelve  per
cent.,  and  added  yearly  to  the  capital  sum.^  But  Scaptius
demanded  forty-eight  per  cent.  I was  afraid,  if  he  got  that,

^ That  is,  compound  interest  for  six  years  at  twelve  per  cent.  See
p.  129.

136

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

you  yourself  would  cease  to  have  any  affection  for  me.  For
I should  have  receded  from  my  own  edict,  and  should  have
utterly  ruined  a state  which  was  under  the  protection  not
only  of  Cato,  but  also  of  Brutus  himself,  and  had  been  the
recipient  of  favours  from  myself.  When  lo  and  behold  ! at
this  very  juncture  Scaptius  comes  down  upon  me  with  a
letter  from  Brutus,  stating  that  his  own  property  is  being
imperilled — a fact  that  Brutus  had  never  told  either  me  or
you.  He  also  begged  that  I would  confer  a prefecture  on
Scaptius.  That  was  the  very  reservation  that  I had  made
to  you — “ not  to  a man  in  business  ” : and  if  to  anyone,  to
such  a man  as  that — no  ! For  he  has  been  a prcefectus  to
Appius,  and  had,  in  fact,  had  some  squadrons  of  cavalry,
with  which  he  had  kept  the  senate  under  so  close  a siege  in
their  own  council  chamber  at  Salamis,  that  five  senators
died  of  starvation.  Accordingly,  the  first  day  of  my  entering
my  province,  Cyprian  legates  having  already  visited  me  at
Ephesus,  I sent  orders  for  the  cavalry  to  quit  the  island  at
once.  For  these  reasons  I believe  Scaptius  has  written
some  unfavourable  remarks  about  me  to  Brutus.  However,
my  feeling  is  this : if  Brutus  holds  that  I ought  to  have
decided  in  favour  of  forty-eight  per  cent.,  though  through-
out my  province  I have  only  recognized  twelve  per  cent,
and  had  laid  down  that  rule  in  my  edict  with  the  assent
even  of  the  most  grasping  money-lenders ; if  he  complains
of  my  refusal  of  a prefecture  to  a man  in  business,  which  I
refused  to  our  friend  Torquatus  in  the  case  of  your  protege
Laenius,  and  to  Pompey  himself  in  the  case  of  Sext.  Statius,
without  offending  either  of  them ; if,  finally,  he  is  annoyed
at  my  recall  of  the  cavalry,  I shall  indeed  feel  some  dis-
tress at  his  being  angry  with  me,  but  much  greater  distress
at  finding  him  not  to  be  the  man  that  I had  thought  him.
Thus  much  Scaptius  will  own — that  he  had  the  opportunity
in  my  court  of  taking  away  with  him  the  whole  sum  allowed
by  my  edict.  I will  add  a fact  which  I fear  you  may  not
approve.  The  interest  ought  to  have  ceased  to  run  (I  mean
the  interest  allowed  by  my  edict),  but  I induced  the  Sala-
minians  to  say  nothing  about  that.^  They  gave  in  to  me,  it  is

’ The  interest  would  cease  to  run  if  the  money  were  deposited  in  a
temple.  See  p.  94.

A VI,  I

TO  ATTICUS

137

true,  but  what  will  become  of  them  if  Paullus  comes  here  ? ^
However,  I have  granted  all  this  in  favour  of  Brutus,  who
writes  very  kind  letters  to  you  about  me,  but  to  me  my-
self, even  when  he  has  a favour  to  ask,  writes  usually  in
a tone  of  hauteur,  arrogance,  and  offensive  superiority.
You,  however,  I hope  will  write  to  him  on  this  business,
in  order  that  I may  know  how  he  takes  what  I have  done.
For  you  will  tell  me.  I have,  it  is  true,  written  you  a full
and  careful  account  in  a former  letter,  but  I wished  you
clearly  to  understand  that  I had  not  forgotten  what  you  had
said  to  me  in  one  of  your  letters  : that  if  I brought  home
from  this  province  nothing  else  except  his  goodwill,  I should
have  done  enough.  By  all  means,  since  you  will  have  it  so  :
but  I assume  my  dealings  with  him  to  be  without  breach  of
duty  on  my  part.*  Well,  then,  by  my  decree  the  payment  of  the
money  to  Statius  is  good  at  law  : whether  that  is  just  you
must  judge  for  yourself — I will  not  appeal  even  to  Cato.  But
don’t  think  that  I have  cast  your  exhortations  to  the  winds :
they  have  sunk  deeply  into  my  mind.  With  tears  in  your
eyes  you  urged  me  to  be  careful  of  my  reputation.  Have  I
ever  got  a letter  from  you  without  the  same  subject  being
mentioned  ? So,  then,  let  who  will  be  angry,  I will  endure
it : “ for  the  right  is  on  my  side,”  ^ especially  as  I have  given
six  books  as  bail,  so  to  speak,  for  my  good  conduct.  I am
very  glad  you  like  them,  though  in  one  point — about  Cn.
Flavius,  son  of  Annius — you  question  my  history.  He,  it
is  true,  did  not  live  before  the  decemvirs,  for  he  was  curule
sedile,  an  office  created  many  years  after  the  decemvirs.
What  good  did  he  do,  then,  by  publishing  the  Fasti  ? It  is
supposed  that  the  tablet  containing  them  had  been  kept
concealed  up  to  a certain  date,  in  order  that  information
as  to  days  for  doing  business  might  have  to  be  sought  from
a small  coterie.  And  indeed  several  of  our  authorities
relate  that  a scribe  named  Cn.  Flavius  published  the  Fasti
and  composed  forms  of  pleading — so  don’t  imagine  that  I,

^ L.  ^milius  Paullus,  consul  this  year.  His  brother  M.  iEmilius
Lepidus  (the  future  triumvir)  was  married  to  lunia,  half-sister  of  Brutus.
Cicero  assumes  that  family  interest  will  influence  his  decision  on  the
debt  to  Brutus.

^ TO  yap  tv  fitr  tfxov  (Arist.  Acharn.  659).  The  “six  books”  are
those  on  the  Republic.

138  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  50, /et.  56

or  rather  Africanus  (for  he  is  the  spokesman),  invented  the
fact.  So  you  noticed  the  remark  about  the  “ action  of  an
actor,”  did  you?  You  suspect  a malicious  meaning:^  I
wrote  in  all  simplicity.

You  say  that  Philotimus  told  you  about  my  having  been
saluted  imperator.  But  I feel  sure  that,  as  you  are  now  in
Epirus,  you  have  received  my  two  letters  on  the  whole  sub-
ject, one  from  Pindenissus  after  its  capture,  another  from
Laodicea,  both  delivered  to  your  own  messengers.  On  these
events,  for  fear  of  accidents  at  sea,  I sent  a public  despatch
to  Rome  in  duplicate  by  two  different  letter-carriers.

As  to  my  Tullia,  I agree  with  you,  and  I have  written  to
her  and  to  Terentia  giving  my  consent.  For  you  have  already
said  in  a previous  letter  to  me,  “ and  I could  wish  that  you
had  returned  to  your  old  set.”  There  wa^  no  occasion  to
alter  the  letter  you  sent  by  Memnius : for  I much  prefer  to
accept  this  man  from  Pontidia,  than  the  other  from  Servilia.^
Wherefore  take  our  friend  Saufeius  into  council.  He  was
always  fond  of  me,  and  now  I suppose  all  the  more  so  as  he
is  bound  to  have  accepted  Appius’s  affection  for  me  with  the
rest  of  the  property  he  has  inherited.  Appius  often  shewed
how  much  he  valued  me,  and  especially  in  the  trial  of  Bursa.
Indeed  you  will  have  relieved  me  of  a serious  anxiety.

I don’t  like  Furnius’s  proviso.  For,  in  fact,  there  is  no
state  of  things  that  alarms  me  except  just  that  of  which  he
makes  the  only  exception.®  But  I should  have  written  at
great  length  to  you  on  this  subject  if  you  had  been  at  Rome.
I don’t  wonder  that  you  rest  all  your  hope  of  peace  on
Pompey  : I believe  that  is  the  truth,  and  in  my  opinion  you
must  strike  out  your  word  ‘‘insincerity.”  If  my  arrangement
of  topics  is  somewhat  random,  blame  yourself : for  I am
following  your  own  haphazard  order.

My  son  and  nephew  are  very  fond  of  each  other.  They
take  their  lessons  and  their  exercise  together  ; but  as  Isocrates

^ As  though  a hit  at  the  mannerism  of  Hortensius.

^ Cicero  did  not  like  Servilia  (mother  of  Brutus),  who  apparently
wished  Ser.  Sulpicius  Rufus  to  marry  Tullia.  See  p.  8.

^ Furnius,  a tribune,  seems  to  have  proposed  in  the  senate  or  in  the
comitia  that  the  governors  of  Syria  and  Cilicia  might  quit  their  provinces
at  the  end  of  their  year,  provided  that  the  Parthians  were  not  making
any  movement.

A VI,

TO  ATTICUS

139

said  of  Ephorus  and  Theopompus,  the  one  wants  the  rein,
the  other  the  spur.  I intend  giving  Quintus  the  toga  virilis
on  the  Liberalia.^  For  his  father  commissioned  me  to  do
so.  And  I shall  observe  the  day  without  taking  intercalation
into  account.  I am  very  fond  of  Dionysius  : the  boys,  how-
ever, say  that  he  gets  into  mad  passions.  But  after  all  there
could  not  be  a man  of  greater  learning,  purer  character,  or
more  attached  to  you  and  me.  The  praises  you  hear  of
Thermus  and  Silius  are  thoroughly  deserved  : ^ they  conduct
themselves  in  the  most  honourable  manner.  You  may  say
the  same  of  M.  Nonius,  Bibulus,  and  myself,  if  you  like.  I
only  wish  Scrofa  had  had  an  opportunity  to  do  the  same  : for
he  is  an  excellent  fellow.  The  rest  don’t  do  much  honour  to
Cato’s  policy.  Many  thanks  for  commending  my  case  to
Hortensius.  As  for  Amianus,  Dionysius  thinks  there  is  no
hope.  I haven’t  found  a trace  of  Terentius.  Mceragenes  has
certainly  been  killed.  I made  a progress  through  his  district,
in  which  there  was  not  a single  living  thing  left.  I didn’t
know  about  this,  when  I spoke  to  your  man  Democritus.^
I have  ordered  the  service  of  Rhosian  ware.^  But,  hallo  !
what  are  you  thinking  of  ? You  generally  serve  us  up  a dinner
of  herbs  on  fern-pattern  plates,  and  the  most  sparkling  of
baskets  : what  am  I to  expect  you  to  give  on  porcelain  ? ® I
have  ordered  a horn  for  Phemius : one  will  be  sure  to  turn
up  j I only  hope  he  may  play  something  worthy  of  it.

There  is  a threat  of  a Parthian  war.  Cassius’s  despatch
was  empty  brag  ; that  of  Bibulus  had  not  arrived  : when  that
is  read  I think  the  senate  will  at  length  be  roused.  I am
myself  in  serious  anxiety.  If,  as  I hope,  my  government  is
not  prolonged,  I have  only  June  and  July  to  fear.  May  it
be  so  ! Bibulus  will  keep  them  in  check  for  two  months.

^ The  festival  of  Liber  (Bacchus),  17  March.  It  was  generally  selected
for  the  bestowal  of  the  liberior  toga,  from  the  good  omen  conveyed  by  its
name.

^ Thermus  was  governing  Asia,  Silius  Bithynia  and  Pontus.  Cn.
Tremellius  Scrofa,  a friend  of  Cicero  and  Atticus  (m  Verrem,  i.  § 30),
had  apparently  failed  to  obtain  office  and  consequently  a province.

^ He  seems  to  refer  to  various  debtors  of  Atticus.  Mceragenes  was
a robber  chief  in  the  district  of  the  Taurus.  See  Letter  CCVII.

* Porcelain  from  Rhosus  on  the  gulf  of  Issus.

Atticus  was  economical,  and  Cicero  laughs  at  him  for  his  “ simple
dinner  ” and  affectation  of  poverty  before.  See  vol.  i.,  p.  234.

140

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

What  will  happen  to  the  man  I leave  in  charge,  especially  if
it  is  my  brother  ? Or,  again,  what  will  happen  to  me,  if  I don’t
leave  my  province  so  soon  ? It  is  a great  nuisance.  However,
I have  agreed  with  Deiotarus  that  he  should  join  my  camp  in
full  force.  He  has  thirty  cohorts  of  four  hundred  men  apiece,
armed  in  the  Roman  fashion,  and  two  thousand  cavalry.
That  will  be  sufficient  to  hold  out  till  the  arrival  of  Pompey,
who  in  a letter  he  writes  to  me  indicates  that  the  business
will  be  put  in  his  hands.  The  Parthians  are  wintering  in  a
Roman  province.  Orodes  is  expected  in  person.  In  short,
it  is  a serious  matter.  As  to  Bibulus’s  edict  there  is  nothing
new,  except  the  proviso  of  which  you  said  in  your  letter,
“ that  it  reflected  with  excessive  severity  on  our  order.”  I,
however,  have  a proviso  in  my  own  edict  of  equivalent  force,
but  less  openly  expressed  (derived  from  the  Asiatic  edict  of
Q.  Mucius,’  son  of  Publius) — “ provided  that  the  agreement
made  is  not  such  as  cannot  hold  good  in  equity.”  ^ I have  fol-
lowed Scaevola  in  many  points,  among  others  in  this — which
the  Greeks  regard  as  a charta  of  liberty — that  Greeks  are  to
decide  controversies  between  each  other  according  to  their
own  laws.  But  my  edict  was  shortened  by  my  method  of
making  a division,  as  I thought  it  well  to  publish  it  under
two  heads : the  first,  exclusively  applicable  to  a province,
concerned  borough  accounts,  debt,  rate  of  interest,  contracts,
all  regulations  also  referring  to  the  puhlicani ; the  second,  in-
cluding what  cannot  conveniently  be  transacted  without  an
edict,  related  to  inheritances,  ownership  and  sale,  appointment
of  receivers,^  all  which  are  by  custom  brought  into  court  and
settled  in  accordance  with  the  edict ; a third  division,  em-
bracing the  remaining  departments  of  judicial  business,  I left
unwritten.  I gave  out  that  in  regard  to  that  class  of  business  I
should  accommodate  my  decisions  to  those  made  at  Rome  : I
accordingly  do  so,  and  give  general  satisfaction.  The  Greeks,
indeed,  are  jubilant  because  they  have  non-Roman  jurors.

^ Q.  Mucius  Scaevola,  consul  b.c.  86,  proconsul  of  Asia.

^ Some  clause  in  Bibulus’s  customary  provincial  edict  which  excepted
from  debts  recoverable  in  the  propraetorial  court  those  that  were  usurious
or  inequitable.  The  puhlicani  and  negotiatores  being  equites,  Atticus
thinks  it  a reflexion  on  that  order.

^ Magistri,  “sale-masters,”  who  presided  over  sales  of  the  property
of  insolvents.  See  vol.  i.,  p.  15.

A VI,  I

TO  ATTICUS

I4I

“ Yes,”  you  will  say,  “ a very  poor  kind.”  What  does  that
matter  ? They,  at  any  rate,  imagine  themselves  to  have  ob-
tained “ autonomy.”  You  at  Rome,  I suppose,  have  men  of
high  character  in  that  capacity — Turpio  the  shoemaker  and
Vettius  the  broker  ! .You  seem  to  wish  to  know  how  I treat
the publicani.  I pef^ indulge,  compliment,  and  honour  them  :
I contrive,  however,  that  they  oppress  no  one.  The  most
surprising  thing  is  that  even  Servilius  ’ maintained  the  rates  of
usury  entered  on  their  contracts.  My  line  is  this  : I name
a day  fairly  distant,  before  which,  if  they  have  paid,  I give
out  that  I shall  recognize  only  twelve  per  cent. : if  they  have
not  paid,  the  rate  shall  be  according  to  the  contract.  The
result  is  that  the  Greeks  pay  at  a reasonable  rate  of  interest,
and  the  publicani  are  thoroughly  satisfied  by  receiving  in  full
measure  what  I mentioned — complimentary  speeches  and
frequent  invitations.  Need  I say  more?  They  are  all  on
such  terms  with  me  that  each  thinks  himself  my  most  in7
timate  friend.  However,  ixy\llv  avToig — you  know  the  rest.®
As  to  the  statue  of  Africanus — what  a mass  of  confusion  !
But  that  was  just  what  interested  me  in  your  letter.  Do
you  really  mean  it  ? Does  the  present  Metellus  Scipio  not
know  that  his  great-grandfather ® was  never  censor?  Why,
the  statue  placed  at  a high  elevation  in  the  temple  of  Ops
had  no  inscription  except  cens,  while  on  the  statue  near  the
Hercules  of  Polycles  there  is  also  the  inscription  cens,  and
that  this  is  the  statue  of  the  same  man  is  proved  by  attitude,
dress,  ring,  and  the  likeness  itself.^  But,  by  Hercules,  when

^ P.  Servilius  Vatia  Isauricus,  who  conquered  and  organized  Cilicia
B.c.  78-74.

" Unfortunately  we  do  not  know  the  rest.  Some  word  or  words  are
to  be  supplied  that  convey  the  idea  of  not  yielding  anything  material  in
spite  of  politeness.

^ The  great-grandfather  of  Metellus  Scipio  (father-in-law  of  Pompey
and  his  colleague  in  B.c.  52)  was  P.  Cornelius  Scipio  Nasica  Serapio,
who  killed  Tiberius  Gracchus,  and  was  descended  from  Gnaeus  Scipio
(uncle  of  Africanus),  who  fell  with  his  brother  in  Spain  B.c.  212.

^ Apparently  Metellus  had  mistaken  one  of  the  two  statues  for  that
of  his  great-grandfather  Nasica,  and  had  had  a replica  made  of  it ;
whereas  Cicero  says  that  they  are  evidently  both  of  the  same  man,  and
that  man  Africanus,  not  Nasica  : so  that  Metellus  has  had  a statue  of
Africanus  reproduced  as  that  of  Nasica  ; yet  he  might  have  known  from
the  word  Cens  that  it  could  not  be  Nasica.  Africanus  (the  younger)
was  censor  B.c.  142.

142

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  so,  ^T.  56

I observed  in  the  group  of  gilded  equestrian  statues,  placed  by
the  present  Metellus  on  the  Capitol,  a statue  of  Africanus  with
the  name  of  Serapio  inscribed  under  it,  I thought  it  a mis-
take of  the  workman.  I now  see  that  it  is  an  error  of
Metellus’s.  What  a shocking  historical  blunder  ! For  that
about  Flavius  and  the  Fasti^  if  it  is  a blunder,  is  one  shared
in  by  all,  and  you  were  quite  right  to  raise  the  question.  I
followed  the  opinion  which  runs  through  nearly  all  his-
torians, as  is  often  the  case  with  Greek  writers.  For
example,  do  they  not  all  say  that  Eupolis,  the  poet  of  the
old  comedy,  was  thrown  into  the  sea  by  Alcibiades  on  his
voyage  to  Sicily  ? Eratosthenes  disproves  it : for  he  pro-
duces some  plays  exhibited  by  him  after  that  date.  Is  that
careful  historian,  Duris  of  Samos,  laughed  out  of  court
because  he,  in  common  with  many  others,  made  this  mis-
take ? ^ Has  not,  again,  every  writer  affirmed  that  Zaleucus
drew  up  a constitution  for  the  Locrians  ? Are  we  on  that
account  to  regard  Theophrastus  as  utterly  discredited,
because  your  favourite  Timseus  attacked  his  statement  ? ^ But
not  to  know  that  one’s  own  great-grandfather  was  never
censor  is  discreditable,  especially  as  since  his  consulship  no
Cornelius  was  censor  in  his  lifetime.

As  to  what  you  say  about  Philotimus  and  the  payment  of
the  20,600  sestertia,  I hear  that  Philotimus  arrived  in  the
Chersonese  about  the  ist  of  January : but  as  yet  I have  not
had  a word  from  him.  The  balance  due  to  me  Camillus  writes
me  word  that  he  has  received ; I don’t  know  how  much  it  is,
and  I am  anxious  to  know.  However,  we  will  talk  of  this  later
on,  and  with  greater  advantage,  perhaps,  when  we  meet  ? ^

According  to  the  account  of  Suidas,  Eupolis  perished  at  Cynossema
(b.C.  41  i)  or  yEgospotami  (b.c.  405),  and  it  is  just  possible  that  in  the
former  case  Alcibiades  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  it.  But
there  is  no  proof.  The  voyage  of  Alcibiades  to  Sicily  was  in  B.c.  415.

^ For  Zaleucus  at  Locri,  see  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  6 ; Aristotle,  Politics,  ii.
12  ; Polybius,  xii.  16  ; and  for  a discussion  as  to  whether  there  ever  was
such  a person,  see  Bentley’s  Phalaris{&d.  1770),  pp.  241  ff.  The  common
account  of  him  is  derived  from  a quotation  of  Aristotle  in  the  Scholiast
to  Pindar,  Olymp.  x.  10,  where  he  is  said  to  have  been  originally  a
shepherd  or  slave.

^ There  is  nothing  to  shew  to  what  money  this  refers,  but  Philotimus,
a freedman  of  Terentia’s,  had  had  something  to  do  with  the  sale  of  Milo’s
property,  and  therefore  it  is  supposed  that  the  allusion  is  to  that  (Letters
CLXXXVII,  CXCIII).

A VI,

TO  ATTICUS

143

But,  my  dear  Atticus,  that  sentence  almost  at  the  end  of
your  letter  gave  me  great  uneasiness.  For  you  say,  “ What
else  is  there  to  say  ? ” and  then  you  go  on  to  entreat  me  in
most  affectionate  terms  not  to  forget  my  vigilance,  and  to
keep  my  eyes  on  what  is  going  on.  Have  you  heard  any-
thing about  anyone?  I am  sure  nothing  of  the  sort  has
taken  place.  No,  no,  it  can’t  be ! It  would  never  have
eluded  my  notice,  nor  will  it.  Yet  that  reminder  of  yours,
so  carefully  worded,  seems  to  suggest  something.

As  to  M Octavius,  I hereby  again  repeat  that  your  answer
was  excellent : I could  have  wished  it  a little  more  positive
still.  For  Caelius  has  sent  me  a freedman  and  a carefully
written  letter  about  some  panthers  and  also  a grant  from  the
states.’  I have  written  back  to  say  that,  as  to  the  latter,  I
am  much  vexed  if  my  course  of  conduct  is  still  obscure,  and
if  it  is  not  known  at  Rome  that  not  a penny  has  been
exacted  from  my  province  except  for  the  payment  of  debt ;
and  I have  explained  to  him  that  it  is  improper  both  for  me
to  solicit  the  money  and  for  him  to  receive  it ; and  I have
advised  him  (for  I am  really  attached  to  him)  that,  after
prosecuting  others,  he  should  be  extra-careful  as  to  his  own
conduct.  As  to  the  former  request,  I have  said  that  it  is
inconsistent  with  my  character  that  the  people  of  Cibyra
should  hunt  at  the  public  expense  while  I am  governor.

Lepta^  jumps  for  joy  at  your  letter.  It  is  indeed  prettily
written,  and  has  placed  me  in  a very  agreeable  light  in  his
eyes.  I am  much  obliged  to  your  little  daughter  for  so
earnestly  bidding  you  send  me  her  love.  It  is  very  kind  of
Pilia  also;  but  your  daughter’s  kindness  is  the  greater,
because  she  sends  the  message  to  one  she  has  never  seen.
Therefore  pray  give  my  love  to  both  in  return.  The  day  on
which  your  letter  was  dated,  the  last  day  of  December,
reminded  me  pleasantly  of  that  glorious  oath  of  mine,  which
I have  not  forgotten.®  I was  a civilian  Magnus  on  that  day.

There ’s  your  letter  completely  answered  ! Not  as  you

^ We  have  often  heard  of  the  panthers  before,  but  no  extant  letter  of
Caelius  mentions  his  wish  for  a grant  from  the  provinces  for  his  games
as  aedile,  for  which  custom  see  vol.  i. , p.  80.

^ Cicero’s  prcefectus  fabrwn.  See  Letter  CCIX.

^ The  oath  taken  on  his  laying  down  his  consulship.  See  vol.  i.,
p.  22.

144

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  MT.  56

were  good  enough  to  ask,  with  “gold  for  bronze,”  ^ but  tit
for  tat.  Oh,  but  here  is  another  little  note,  which  I will  not
leave  unanswered.  Lucceius,  on  my  word,  could  get  a good
price  for  his  Tusculan  property,  unless,  perchance,  his  flute-
player  is  a fixture  (for  that ’s  his  way),  and  I should  like  to
know  in  what  condition  it  is.^  Our  friend  Lentulus,  I hear,
has  advertised  everything  for  sale  except  his  Tusculan  pro-
perty. I should  like  to  see  these  men  cleared  of  their
embarrassments,  Cestius  also,  and  you  may  add  Caelius,  to
all  of  whom  the  line  applies,

“ Ashamed  to  shrink  and  yet  afraid  to  take.”  ®

I suppose  you  have  heard  of  Curio’s  plan  for  recalling
Memmius.  Of  the  debt  due  from  Egnatius  of  Sidicinum  I am
not  without  some  hope,  though  it  is  a feeble  one.  Pinarius,
whom  you  recommended  to  me,  is  seriously  ill,  and  is  being
very  carefully  looked  after  by  Deiotarus.  So  there’s  the
answer  to  your  note  also.

Pray  talk  to  me  on  paper  as  frequently  as  possible  while
I am  at  Laodicea,  where  I shall  be  up  to  the  15th  of  May :
and  when  you  reach  Athens  at  any  rate  send  me  letter-
carriers,  for  by  that  time  we  shall  know  about  the  business
in  the  city  and  the  arrangements  as  to  the  provinces,  the
settlement  of  all  which  has  been  fixed  for  March.

’ og  TTpbg  Tvds'idrjv  AiojjLrjdea  rivxe'  dpufttv  xpvaea  xaX/c£twv,  (KaronfSovg
kvvealSo'nov  (Horn.  //.  vi.  235).  ,

* It  is  perhaps  hopeless  to  explain  this  passage.  But,  understanding
vendere  after  potuit^  we  may  perhaps  say  that  Cicero,  thinking  that  he
would  like  to  buy  property  in  Tusculum,  remarks  that  it  will  probably
go  at  a good  price  unless  Lucceius  in  some  way  makes  it  unattractive.
Whether  the  tibicen  was  some  musical  slave  with  whom  Lucceius  bored
his  friends,  and  Cicero  jestingly  fears  may  go  with  the  house  (thus  lower-
ing its  value,  as  the  presence  of  bores,  he  says,  would  that  of  his  own  at
Formiae,  vol.  i.,  p.  103),  or  whether  tibicen  is  to  have  the  sense  of  a
“ prop  ” (as  it  has  in  Horace  and  Juvenal),  indicating  that  the  house  is
in  bad  repair,  I must  leave  to  my  readers  to  determine.  Lucceius
seems  to  have  sold  ; for  in  B.C.  55  Cicero  refers  to  their  being  neigh-
bours at  Tusculum  as  a thing  of  the  past  {Fam.  v.  15).

^ diSsaQev  fiiv  dvr]vaaQai,  Selaav  8’  (Horn.  II.  vii.  93),  de-

scribing the  feelings  of  the  Greeks  in  answer  to  Hector’s  challenge.

But  the  exact  application  cannot  be  pressed.  It  merely  describes  j
irresolution.  These  bankrupt  nobles  cannot  make  up  their  minds  either
to  retrench  their  expenses  or  to  part  with  their  property.  Their  pride
won’t  let  them  do  the  one,  or  their  inclination  the  other.

A VI,

TO  ATTICUS

145

But  look  here  ! Have  you  yet  wrung  out  of  Caesar  by  the
agency  of  Herodes  the  fifty  Attic  talents  ? In  that  matter
you  have,  I hear,  roused  great  wrath  on  the  part  of  Pompey.
For  he  thinks  that  you  have  snapped  up  money  rightly  his,
and  that  Caesar  will  be  no  less  lavish  in  his  building  at  the
Nemus  Dianaed

I was  told  all  this  by  P.  Vedius,  a hare-brained  fellow
enough,  but  yet  an  intimate  friend  of  Pompey’s.  This
Vedius  came  to  meet  me  with  two  chariots,  and  a carriage
and  horses,  and  a sedan,  and  a large  suite  of  servants,  for
which  last,  if  Curio  has  carried  his  law,  he  will  have  to
pay  a toll  of  a hundred  sestertii  apiece.^  There  was  also
in  a chariot  a dog-headed  baboon,  as  well  as  some  wild
asses.  I never  saw  a more  extravagant  fool.  But  the  cream
of  the  whole  is  this.  He  stayed  at  Laodicea  with  Pompeius
Vindullus.  There  he  deposited  his  properties  when  coming
to  see  me.  Meanwhile  Vindullus  dies,  and  his  property  is
supposed  to  revert  to  Pompeius  Magnus.^  Gaius  Vennonius
comes  to  Vindullus’s  house  : when,  while  putting  a seal  on  all
goods,  he  comes  across  the  baggage  of  Vedius.  In  this  are
found  five  small  portrait  busts  of  married  ladies,  among
which  is  one  of  the  wife  of  your  friend — “brute,”  indeed,  to
be  intimate  with  such  a fellow  ! and  of  the  wife  of  Lepidus —
as  easy-going  as  his  name  to  take  this  so  calmly ! I wanted
you  to  know  these  historiettes  by  the  way;  for  we  have
both  a pretty  taste  in  gossip.  There  is  one  other  thing  I
should  like  you  to  turn  over  in  your  mind.  I am  told  that

’ Atticus  had  no  doubt  lent  Caesar  large  sums  of  money,  and  with  his
usual  good  luck  got  paid.  Pompey,  we  may  suppose,  had  also  lent
Caesar  money,  which  he  did  not  see  a good  chance  of  getting  back,  if
Caesar  squandered  his  money  on  paying  his  debts  to  Atticus,  and  also  on
his  new  palace  at  Aricia,  near  the  lago  de  Nemi.  Whether  this  debt  to
Pompey  had  anything  to  do  with  the  marriage  to  lulia  we  don’t  know.
I think  we  must  read  nec  Ccesarem,  etc.  Herodes  is  a freedman  of
Atticus.

We  have  heard  of  Curio’s  laws — a lex  viaria  and  a lex  alimentaria
(Letter  CCXLII),  but  neither  of  these  would  refer  to  a tax  on  slaves.
Some  have  supposed  that  the  reference  is  to  the  lex  viaria,  and  that  in
virtue  of  it  a heavy  toll  would  be  payable  for  the  carriages,  etc.  But
the  singular  pro  qua  can  only  refer  to  the  familia.  We  must  suppose,
therefore,  that  some  other  law  is  referred  to  taxing  domestic  servants.

’ As  his  patronus,  who  succeeded  in  case  of  a failure  of  heirs.  Ven-
nonius comes  to  his  house  to  make  an  inventory  in  Pompey’s  interest.

II.  L

146

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  MT.  56

Appius  is  building  a propylcEum  at  Eleusis.  Should  I be
foolishly  vain  if  I also  built  one  at  the  Academy  ? “I  think
so,”  you  will  say.  Well,  then,  write  and  tell  me  that  that  is
your  opinion.  For  myself,  I am  deeply  attached  to  Athens
itself.  I would  like  some  memorial  of  myself  to  exist.  I loathe
sham  inscriptions  on  statues  really  representing  other  people.
But  settle  it  as  you  please,  and  be  kind  enough  to  inform
me  on  what  day  the  Roman  mysteries  fall,  and  how  you
have  passed  the  winter.  Take  care  of  your  health.  Dated
the  765th  day  since  the  battle  of  Leuctra  ! ^

CCLII  (f  XIII,  54)

TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS  (PROPR^TOR  OF

ASIA)

Laodicea  (March)

I AM  obliged  to  you  for  many  instances  of  your  attention  to
my  recommendations,  but  above  all  for  your  very  courteous
treatment  of  M.  Marcilius,  son  of  my  friend  and  interpreter.

He  has  arrived  at  Laodicea,  and  in  an  interview  with  me  has
expressed  great  gratitude  to  you,  and  to  myself  on  your  1
account.  I therefore  ask  you  as  a farther  favour,  that,  as
you  find  your  kindness  well  laid  out  and  meeting  with  grati-
tude from  those  persons,  you  would  be  still  more  ready  to
oblige  them,  and  would  endeavour,  as  far  as  your  honour
shall  permit,  to  prevent  the  young  man’s  mother-in-law  from
being  prosecuted.  I recommended  Marcilius  to  you  before
with  some  earnestness : I do  so  now  with  still  greater,  be-
cause, in  a long  course  of  his  service  as  apparitor,  I have
found  his  father  Marcilius  to  be  peculiarly  and  almost  in-
credibly trustworthy,  disinterested,  and  scrupulous.

^ The  killing  of  Clodius,  which  he  had  before  called  the  “battle  of
Bovillse”  (Letter  CCII).  It  took  place  18  January,  B.c.  52.  Allow-
ing for  an  intercalated  month  of  twenty-three  days  in  one  of  these  years,
this  dates  the  letter  22  February.

F XIII,  54,  57  TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS

147

CCLIII  (F  XIII,  57)

TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS  (PROPR^TOR  IN

ASIA)

Laodicea,  March

The  more  I am  assured  every  day  by  letters  and  messages
that  a serious  war  is  on  foot  in  Syria,  the  more  earnest  am  I
in  my  request  to  you,  in  the  name  of  our  close  friendship,
that  you  would  send  back  my  legate  M.  Anneius  to  me  at
the  earliest  possible  moment.  For  by  his  activity,  wisdom,
and  knowledge  of  military  affairs  I well  know  that  both  I
and  the  state  can  receive  the  most  important  assistance.
Indeed,  had  it  not  been  of  such  urgent  importance  to  him,
he  would  never  have  been  induced  to  quit  me,  nor  I to  let
him  go.  I think  of  starting  for  Cilicia  about  the  ist  of
May.  Before  that  day  M.  Anneius  is  bound  to  rejoin  me.
The  request  which  I pressed  upon  you  very  earnestly,  both
in  a personal  interview  and  by  letter,  I now  reiterate — that
you  should  take  pains  to  enable  him  to  settle  the  business
he  has  with  the  Sardians  as  the  justice  of  his  case  and  the
dignity  of  his  character  demand.  I gathered  from  your
remarks,  when  I conversed  with  you  at  Ephesus,  that  you
were  ready  to  do  anything  for  the  sake  of  M.  Anneius  him-
self. Yet  I should  wish  you  to  think  that  you  could  not
oblige  me  more  than  by  letting  me  see  that  he  has  settled
his  business  to  his  satisfaction  owing  to  your  support,  and  I
beg  you  again  and  again  to  see  that  done  at  the  earliest
possible  time.

148

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

CCLIV  (F  II,  II)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (CURULE  ^DILE)
Laodicea,  4 April

Would  you  have  supposed  that  words  could  possibly  fail
me,  and  not  only  oratorical  words,  such  as  you  advocates
use,  but  even  this  common  vernacular  which  I employ
Still,  fail  me  they  do,  and  for  this  reason — I am  surprisingly
anxious  as  to  what  decree  may  pass  about  the  provinces.
An  astonishing  yearning  for  the  city  possesses  me,  an  in-
credible longing  for  my  friends  and  for  you  among  the  first,
and  at  the  same  time  a weariness  of  a province,  either  because
I seem  to  have  gained  so  much  reputation,  that  an  accession
fo  it  is  now  not  so  much  to  be  sought,  as  some  change  of
fortune  to  be  feared ; or  because  the  whole  business  is  one
unworthy  of  my  powers,  able  and  accustomed  as  I am  to
sustain  more  important  burdens  in  the  public  service ; or,
again,  because  an  alarm  of  a serious  war  is  hanging  over  us,
which  I seem  likely  to  avoid  by  quitting  my  province  on  the
day  appointed^The  panthers  are  being  energetically  attended
to  by  the  ordinary  hunters  in  accordance  with  my  orders  : but
there  is  a great  scarcity  of  them,  and  such  as  there  are,  I am
told,  complain  loudly  that  they  are  the  only  things  for  which
traps  are  set  in  all  my  province,  and  they  are  said  in  con-
sequence to  have  resolved  to  quit  our  province  for  Caria.
However,  the  business  is  being  pushed  on  zealously,  and
especially  by  Patiscus.  All  that  turn  up  shall  be  at  your  service,
but  how  many  that  is  I don’t  in  the  least  know.  I assure
you  I am  much  interested  in  your  aedileship : the  day  itself
reminds  me  of  it ; for  I am  writing  oh  the  very  day  of  the  Mega-
lensia.^  Please  write  the  fullest  particulars  as  to  the  state  of
politics  in  general : for  I shall  Ipok  on  information  from  you
as  the  most  trustworthy  t get.

^ The  festival  of  Cybele,  the  fieyaXr)  firjTrjp,  began  on  the  4th  of  April,
It  and  the  hidi  Romani  were  under  the  charge  of  the  aediles.

F II,

; A VI,  2

TO  ATTICUS

149

CCLV  (A  VI,  2)

TO  ATTICUS  (IN  EPIRUS)

Laodicea,  May  (between  i and  7)

Your  freedman  Philogenes  having  come  to  call  on  me  at
Laodicea,  and  telling  me  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  setting
sail  to  join  you,  I intrust  him  with  this  letter,  in  answer  to
the  one  which  I received  by  Brutus’s  letter-carrier.  And  first
I will  answer  your  last  page,  which  gave  me  great  uneasiness
— that  is,  the  account  sent  you  by  Cincius  of  his  conversa-
tion with  Statius,  in  which  what  annoyed  me  most  was
Statius  saying  that  the  plan  had  my  approbation.^  Appro-
bation, indeed  ! I need  say  no  more  than  this  : I wish  the
bonds  uniting  -our  close  friendship  to  be  as  numerous  as
possible,  though  none  can  be  so  close  as  those  of  personal
affection.  So  far  am  I from  wishing  that  any  one  tie  between
us  should  be  rQj[axed.  He,^  however,  I have  often  found  by
actual  e^^erience,  is  accustomed  to  speak  with  some  asperity
on  the  subjects  you  mention,  and  I have  also  often  succeeded
in  pacifying  his  anger.  That  I think  you  know.  In  the
course  of  our  recent  progress,  or  campaign,  if  I may  call  it
so,  I have  often  seen  him  fly  into  a rage,  and  often  calm
down  again.  What  he  has  written  to  Statius  I don’t  know.
Whatever  he  meant  to  do  in  such,^  matter,  he  certainly
ought  not  to  have  written  to  a freedman.  I will  take  the
greatest  care  to  prevent  anything  occurring  contrary  to  our.
wishes  and  to  what  is  proper.  And  in  a case  of  this  kind  it
is  not  enough  that  each  should  answer  for  himself : for
instance,  the  most  important  role  in  the  kindly  work  of  this
reconciliation  is  that  of  the  boy,  or  young  man,  I should  say,
Quintus : and  this  I am  in  the  habit  of  impressing  upon
him.  He  seems  to  me,  indeed,  to  be  strongly  attached  to
his  mother,  as  he  ought  to  be,  and  wonderfully  so  to  you.

^ Philogenes  is  a freedman  or  agent  of  Atticus ; Statius  is  the  freed-
man of  Quintus,  of  whose  manumission  we  have  heard  already.

^ Quintus.  The  reference  is  to  a divorce  from  Pomponia.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

150

But  the  boy’s  character,  though  certainly  a lofty  one,  has
yet  many  complications,  and  gives  me  enough  to  do  to
guide  it.

Having  thus  in  my  first  answered  your  last  page,  I will
now  return  to  your  first.  That  all  the  Peloponnesian  states
possessed  a seaboard  is  a fact  that  I accepted  on  the
authority  of  the  maps  of  Dicaearchus,^  a respectable  writer,
and  one  who  has  even  received  your  approbation.  In  his
account  of  Trophonius — put  into  the  mouth  of  Chaerrin —
he  criticises  the  Greeks  on  many  accounts  for  their,  per-
sistent clinging  to  the  sea,  and  he  does  not  except  any  place
in  the  Peloponnesus.  Though  I thought  well  of  him*  as  an
authority — for  he  was  a most  careful  inquirer,^  and  had  lived
in  Peloponnesus — I was  yet  surprised  at  the  statement,  and
feeling  scarcely  convinced  of  its  truth,  consulted  Dionysius.^
He  was  at  first  taken  aback ; but  presently,  as  he  thought
no  less  well  of  Dicaearchus,  than  you  do  of  C.  Vestorius,
and  I of  M.  Cluvius,^  entertained  no  doubt  that  we  should
believe  him.  His  conclusion  was  that  Arcadia  had  a sea-
port called  Lepreon ; while  Tenea,  Aliphera,  and  Tritia  he
thought  were  more' recent  foundations ; and  that  view  he
backed  up  by  Homer’s  “ Catalogue  of  the  Ships,”  where
there  is  no  mention  of  them.  Accordingly,  I translated
that  passage  from  Dicaearchus  word  for  word.  I know  the
form  usually  employed  is  “Phliasii,”  and  so  take  care  to
have  it  in  your  copies  : that  is  the  form  I now  have  in  mine.
But  at  first  1 was  deceived  by  the  analogy  of  ’Ottovc
’Ottovvtloi,  ^LTTovg^nrovvTiot  (sO  ^Xiovi/rioi  Phliuntii\

but  I have  at  once  corrected  this.

I see  that  you  rejoice  at  my  equitable  and  disinterested
administration : you  would  have  done  so  still  more,  if  you
had  been  here.  Why,  in  these  very  sessions  which  I have
been  holding  at  Laodicea  from  the  13th  of  February  to  the

^ See  vol.  i.,  p.  67.  The  reference  here  is  to  criticisms  on  Cicero’s
books  de  Republica.

^ i(TTopiK<oTaTog.

^ A learned  freedman  and  tutor  of  young  Cicero.  See  vol.  i.,  p.
282.

A friend  of  Cicero’s  from  Puteoli.  Vestorius  was  also  a banker
of  Puteoli.  It  is  pointed  out  that  the  name  of  Diccearchus  suggests
these  two  men  of  business  of  Puteoli,  the  ancient  name  of  which  was
Dicsearchia.

A VI,  2

TO  ATTICUS

151

I St  of  May  for  all  the  dioceses  except  that  of  Cilicia,  I have
effected  astonishing  results.  A great  number  of  states  have
been  entirely  released  from  debt,  and  many  very  sensibly
relieved  : all  have  enjoyed  their  own  laws,  and  with  this
attainment  of  autonomy  have  quite  revived.  I have  given
them  the  opportunity  of  freeing  themselves  from  debt,  or
lightening  their  burdens,  in  two  ways  : first,  in  the  fact  that
no  expense  has  been  imposed  upon  them  during  my  govern-
ment— and  when  I say  “ no  expense  ” I do  not  speak  hyper-
bolically,  but  I mean  none^  not  a farthing.  It  is  almost
incredible  how  this  fact  has  helped  them  to  escape  from
their  difficulties.  The  other  way  is  this.  There  was  an
astonishing  amount  of  peculation  in  the  states  committed
by  the  Greeks  theniselves — I mean  their  own  magistrates.
I personally  questioned  those  who  had  been  in  office  in
the  course  of  the  last  ten  years.  They  openly  confessed
it : and  accordingly,  without^eing  punished  by  any  mark
of  disgrace,  repaid  the  sums  of  money  to  the  communities
out  of  their  own  pockets.  The  consequence  is  that,  whereas
the  communities  had  paid  the  publicani  nothing  for  the
present  quinquennium,  they  have  now,  without  any  signs  of
distress,  paid  them  the  arrears  of  the  last  quinquennium  also.
So  I am  the  apple  of  their  eye  to  the  publicani — “A  grateful
set,”  quoth  you.  Yes,  I have  found  it  so.  The  rest  of  my
administration  of  justice  has  not  been  without  skill,  while
its  lenity  has  been  enhanced  by  a marvellous  courtesy.  The
ease  with  which  I have  admitted  men  to  my  presence  is  a
new  thing  in  the  provinces.  I don’t  employ  a chambeH^in.
Before  da;)'break  I walk  up  and  down  in  my  house,  as  I
used  to  do  in  old  times  as  a candidate.  This  is  very  popular
and  a great  convenience,  nor  have  I found  it  as  yet  fatiguing
to  me,  being  an  old  campaigner  in  that  respect.  On  the
.15th  of  May  I am  thinking  of  going  to  Cilicia:  having
spent  the  month  of  June  there — pray  heaven,  in  peace  !
for  a serious  war  on  the  part  of  the  Parthian s is  threaten-
ing— I mean  to  devote  July  to  my  return  jourpey.  For  my
year  of  service  is  finished  on  the  30th  of  July : and  I am  in
great  hopes  that  there  will  be  no  extension  of  my  time.  I
have  the  city  gazette  up  to  the  15  th  of  March,  from
which  I gather  that,  owing  to  the  persistence  of  my  friend
Curio,  every  kind  of  business  is  coming  on  rather  than  that

152  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  50,  .et.  56

of  assigning  the  provinces.^  Therefore,  as  I hope,  I shall
see  you  before  long.

I now  come  to  your  friend  Brutus,  or  rather  our  friend,
since  you  will  have  it  so.  Indeed,  I have  on  my  side  done
everything  that  I could  accomplish  in  my  province,  or
attempt  in  Cappadocia.  Thus  I have  urged  the  king  in
every  possible  way,  and  continue  to  do  so,  that  is  to  say,
by  letter — for  I have  only  had  him  with  me  three  or  four
days,  and  in  the  midst  of  political  troubles,  from  which  I
relieved  him.  But,  alike  in  our  personal  interviews,'  and
afterwards  by  very  frequent  letters,  I have  never  ceased
begging  and  beseeching  him  for  my  sake,  and  advising  him
for  his  own.  I have  had  considerable  effect,  but  how  much
I do  not,  at  this  distance  from  him,  know  for  certain.  The
Salaminians,  however — for  upon  them  I could  put  pressure
— I have  brought  to  consent  to  pay  the  entire  debt  to
Scaptius,  but  with  interest  calculated  at  one  per  cent,  per
month,  and  not  added  to  the  capital  each  month,  but
only  at  the  end  of  each  year.  The  money  was  actually
paid  down  : Scaptius  would  not  take  it.  What  do  you
mean,  then,  by  saying  that  Brutus  is  willing  to  lose  some-
thing? He  had  forty-eight  per  cent,  in  his  bond.  It
could  not  be  paid,  nor,  if  it  could,  could  I have  allowed  it.
I hear,  after  all,  that  Scaptius  repents  his  refusal.  For  as
to  the  decree  of  the  senate  which  he  quoted — “that  the
money  should  be  recoverable  on  the  bond  ” — its  intention
was  to  cover  the  case  of  the  Salaminians  having  borrowed
money  contrary  to  the  lex  Gabinia.  For  Aulus’s  law  for-
bade the  recovery  of  money  so  borrowed.  The  senate
accordingly  decreed  that  it  should  be  recoverable  on  that
particular  bond.  Npw- -this  bond  has  exactly  the  same
validity  as-ail 'other  bonds,  not  a bit  rnore.^  I think  Brutus
will  acknowledge  that  my  conduct  has  been  quite  regular
and  correct.  I don’t  know  about  you,  Cato  certainly  will.

But  now  I return  to  yourself.  Do  you  really,  Atticus,
mean  to  say — you,  the  panegyrist  of  my  integrity  and  punc-

Curio  resisted  any  measures  as  to  assigning  the  provinces,  in  Caesar’s
interests,  because  it  was  proposed  to  nominate  a successor  to  him  among
the  rest,  and  not  to  Pompey.

^ And  therefore  only  twelve  per  cent,  can  be  recovered  under  it.  See
Letter  CCXLIX.

A VI,  2

TO  ATTICUS

153

tilious  honour — “ do  you  venture  out  of  your  own  mouth  ”
(to  quote  Ennius)  to  ask  me  to  give  Scaptius  cavalry  to
help  him  to  exact  the  money?  Would  you,  if  you  were
with  me — and  you  say  in  your  letter  that  you  are  sometimes
sore  at  heart  to  think  that  you  are  not  with  me — would  you
have  suffered  me  to  do  so,  even  if  I had  wished  it?  “Not
more  than  fifty,”  you  say.  There  were  fewer  than  that  with
Spartacus  at  first. ^ What  misery  would  they  not  havfe
inflicted  in  so  weak  an  island?  “They  would  not  have\
done  it,”  do  you  say  ? Nay,  what  did  they  not  do  before
my  arrival  ? They  kept  the  Salaminian  senators  shut  up  iii
their  chamber  for  so  many  days,  that  some  of  them  died  of
hunger.  For  Scaptius  was  a prcBfectus  of  Appius,  and
Appius  allowed  him  some  squadrons.  Well,  then,  do  you
ask  me — you,  whose  face,  by  heaven  ! is  ever  before  my  eyes
when  I think  of  duty  and  honour — do  you,  I say,  ask  me  to
allow  Scaptius  to  be  prcefectiis  of  mine?  To  let  alone  the
fact  that  I had  resolved  that  no  man  in  business  should  be
one,  and  with  Brutus’s  approval  of  the  rule — is  such  a fellow
as  that  to  have  squadrons  ? Why  rather  than  cohorts  of  the
legions  ? Oh,  Scaptius  is  spending  his  money,  and  is  now
cutting  a great  figure  ! The  chief  men  of  Salamis,  says  he,
wish  it.  I know  all  about  that : for  they  came  to  see  me
even  at  Ephesus,  and  with  tears  in  their  eyes  told  me  of  the
abominable  conduct  of  the  cavalry  and  of  their  own
miseries.  Accordingly,  I at  once  sent  a letter  ordering  the
cavalry  to  quit  Cyprus  by  a fixed  day,  and  for  that,  among
other  reasons,  the  Salaminians  have  praised  me  to  the  skies
in  their  decrees.  But  where  was  the  need  of  cavalry  ? The
Salaminians  offer  payment — unless,  by  heaven,  we  choose  to
use  armed  force  to  compel  the  payment  of  forty-eight  per
cent,  interest ! And  shall  I ever  dare  to  read  or  even  to
touch  those  books  again  which  you  compliment  so  highly,^
if  I have  committed  such  an  act  as  that?  You  have  in-
dulged your  affection  for  Brutus  too  far  in  this,  too  far  I
repeat,  my  dearest  Atticus.  Perhaps  I have  not  done  so
enough  : and  so  I have  told  Brutus  that  you  have  written
in  this  sense  to  me.

^ Spartacus,  the  leader  of  the  revolted  gladiators,  B.c.  73-71.
^ His  own  treatise  de  Republica.

154

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

Now  for  the  rest.  I do  all  I can  here  for  Appius,  yet
only  so  far  as  my  duty  allows,  though  with  a right  good  will.
For  I don’t  dislike  him,  while  to  Brutus  I am  warmly
attached,  and  Pompey  is  surprisingly  urgent,  of  whom,  by
heaven,  I grow  fonder  and  fonder  every  day.  You  have
heard  that  C.  Cselius  is  coming  here  as  quaestor.  I don’t
know  what  it  is,  but  I don’t  like  that  business  of  Pammenes.^
I hope  to  be  at  Athens  in  September.  I should  much
like  to  know  the  dates  of  your  tours.  I understood  the  silly
conduct  of  C.  Sempronius  Rufus  from  your  letter  written  in
Corcyra.^  In  short,  I am  jealous  of  the  influence  of
Vestorius.  I wanted  to  go  on  chatting,  but  the  day  is
breaking ; the  crowd  is  coming  in ; Philogenes  is  in  a hurry.
So  good-bye,  and  give  my  love  to  Pilia,  when  you  write,  and
to  our  dear  Caecilia,  and  accept  the  same  from  my  son.

CCLVI  (F  II,  13)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (CURULE  ^DILE)
Laodicea,  May

/ Though  your  letters  are  rare  (perhaps  they  don’t  all  reach
me),  yet  I always  receive  them  with  delight.  For  instance,
the  last  received — how  sensible  it  is  ! How  kind  and  in-
structive ! Though  in  all  points  I had  made  up  my  mind
that  I must  act  as  you  advise,  yet  my  plans  are  confirmed
when  I see  that  farseeing  and  faithful  advisers  agree  with
me.  I am  very  fond  of  Appius,  as  I have  often  remarked
to  you  in  the  course  of  conversation,  and  I perceived  that
the  moment  our  quarrel  was  at  an  end  he  began  to  like
me.  For  when  consul  he  shewed  me  great  respect,  and
as  a friend  he  has  made  himself  agreeable,  and  has  taken
great  interest  in  my  pursuits.  That  good  services  on  my
side  were  in  truth  not  wanting  you  are  witness,  and  are  sup-
ported now,  I think,  by  Phania  coming  in  pat,  like  a

' See  Letter  CCXXVII,  end.
2 Letter  CCXXII.

F II,  13

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS

155

character  in  a farce ; ^ and,  by  heaven  ! I valued  him  still
more  from  perceiving  that  he  was  attached  to  you.  You
know  that  I am  now  wholly  Pompey’s  : you  understand  that
Brutus  is  the  object  of  my  warm  affection.  What  is  there
to  prevent  my  wishing  to  embrace  a man  who  has  all  th|e
advantages  of  youth,  wealth,  honours,  genius,  children,  rela-
tions, marriage  connexions,  and  friends  : especially  as  he  is
my  colleague,^  and  in  regard  even  to  the  reputation  and  learn-
ing of  the  college  shews  great  value  for  me  ? I write  at  the
greater  length  on  this  subject,  because  your  letter  hints  a,
kind  of  doubt  as  to  my  feelings  towards  l^im.  I suppose
you  have  been  told  something  : it  is  false,  believe  me,  if  you
have.  My  official  principles  and  policy  present  certain
points  of  contrast  with  his  method  of  administering  the
province.  From  that  circumstance,  perhaps,  people  have
suspected  that  this  contrast  arises  from  estrangement  of
feeling,  not  mere  difference  of  opinion.  I have,  however,
never  done  or  said  anything  with  the  object  of  lessening  his
reputation.  Moreover,  since  this  trouble  that  has  come
upon  him  from  the  rash  act  of  our  Dolabella,^  I am  putting
myself  forward  as  his  apologist  and  defender.

Your  letter  mentioned  “ a lethargy  on  the  state.”  I am
very  glad  to  hear  it,  and  rejoice  th^t  our  friend  ^ has  been
frozen  by  the  public  tranquillity.  Your  last  page,  in  your
own  handwriting,  was  like  a dagger  in  my  heart.  What !
Curio  now  standing  up  for  Csesar  ? Who  had  ever  expected
it?  No  one  but  myself!  For,  as  I live,  I thought  that
would  happen.’  Immortal  gods  ! How  I yearn  for  the
laugh  we  should  have  over  it  together  ! JMy  intention  is,
since  I have  finished  hearing  my  cases,  have  enriched  the

^ /cwjuiKOf  fidpTvg.  Phania  is  a freedman  of  Appius  Claudius,  whom
Cicero  trusts  to  speak  well  of  his  feelings  towards  Appius.  Cicero  is
fond  of  illustrating  such  convenient  or  sudden  events  by  the  incidents
of  a play.  Cp.  2 Phil.  § 65,  Exultabat  gaudio  persona  de  mimo  “ modo
egens  repente  dives.

^ In  the  college  of  augurs.

^ His  prosecution  of  Appius  for  maiestas.  See  Letter  CCXLI.

^ Curio.  See  same  letter.

® Soon  after  Curio  entered  on  his  tribuneship  (loth  December,  B.C.  51)
it  became  evident  that  he  had  changed  sides.  Caesar  had  bought  him
by  relieving  him  of  his  debts,  incurred  by  his  extravagant  funeral  games
and  other  ways.

156  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  50,  56

states,  have  secured  for  the  publicani  even  the  arrears  of  the
last  quinquennium  without  a murmur  from  the  allies,  and
have  made  myself  agreeable  to  private  persons  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  to  start  for  Cilicia  on  the-r^h  of
May,  and,  as  soon  as  I have  reached  the  summer  quarters
and  have  got  the  troops  established  in  them,  to  quit  the
province  in  accordance  with  the  senatorial  decree.  I desire
to  see  you  while  still  aedile ; ^ and  the  city,  as  well  as  all  my
friends,  and  you  among  the  first,  inspire  me  with  extra-
ordinary longing.

CCLVII  (F  II,  18)

TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS  (PROPR^TOR
OF  ASIA)

Laodicea  (May)

I AM  exceedingly  glad  that  such  services  as  I have  rendered
to  Rhodon,  and  any  other  kindnesses  I have  done  you  and
yours,  have  pleased  you,  the  most  grateful  of  men  ; and  let
me  assure  you  that  I feel  greater  interest  every  day  in  pro-
moting your  position,  though,  indeed,  you  have  yourself  so
enhanced  it  by  the  purity  and  lenity  of  your  administration,
that  it  seems  scarcely  to  admit  of  any  increase.  But  as  I
think  over  your  plans,  I am  more  and  more  convinced  every
day  of  the  soundnesis  of  the  advice  which  I originally  gave
our  friend  Ariston,  when  he  came  to  see  me,  that  you  would
be  incurring  dangerous  enmity,  if  a young  man " of  power-
ful connexions  and  high  birth  received  a slight  from  you.
And,  by  heaven  ! it  certainly  will  be  a slight : for  you  have

^ By  the  time  Cicero  reached  Italy,  Cselius  too  had  become  a
Caesarian.

^ Gains  Antonins  (brother  of  Marcus),  now  quaestor  in  Asia,  and
the  question  is  whether  Thermus  should  leave  him  in  charge  of  the
province.  He  was  praetor  in  b.C.  44,  and  being  assigned  the  province
of  Macedonia  for  B.c.  43,  was  taken  prisoner  by  M.  Brutus,  and  after
a time  put  to  death,  in  revenge,  it  was  said,  for  the  murder  of  Cicero.

F II,  l8

TO  Q.  MINUCIUS  THERMUS

157

no  one  with  you  of  higher  official  rank.  The  man  himself,
too,  to  say  nothing  of  his  high  birth,  has  claims  superior  to
those  of  the  excellent  and  unimpeachable  officers,  your
legates,  in  this  special  particular,  that  he  is  a quaestor  and
your  quaestor.  That  no  individual  can,  however  provoked,  do
you  any  harm  I quite  see ; yet  I would  not  like  you  to  have
three  brothers,  of  the  highest  birth,  energetic,  and  not  with-
out eloquence,  angry  with  you  at  once,  especially  on  any
good  ground  : men  too  whom  I see  will  be  successively
tribunes  during  the  next  three  years. ^ Who  knows,  again,
what  sort  of  times  await  the  Republic?  In  my  opinion,
they  will  be  stormy.  Why  should  I wish  you  to  incur  the
alarms  which  tribunes  can  cause,  especially  when,  without
exciting  remark  from  anyone,  you  can  give  the  preference  to
a quaestor  over  legates  of  only  quaestorian  rank  ? And  if  he
shews  himself  worthy  of  his  ancestors,  as  I hope  and  trust  he
may  do,  the  credit  will  to  a certain  extent  be  yours  : if,  on  the
other  hand,  he  comes  to  grief  in  any  way,  the  discredit  will  be
all  his,  not  yours  at  all.^  I thought,  as  I am  on  the  point  of
starting  for  Cilicia,  that  I ought  to  write  and  tell  you  what
occurred  to  me  as  being  for  your  interests.  Whatever  you
decide  upon  doing  I pray  heaven  to  prosper.  But  if  you
will  listen  to  me,  you  will  avoid  enmities,  and  take  measures
for  your  tranquillity  in  the  future.

^ M.  Antonius  was  tribune  in  B.c.  50-49,  L.  Antonius  in  B.C.  44,
but  Gaius  does  not  appear  to  have  been  tribune.  The  three  brothers
were  all  in  ofhce  together  in  B.c.  44,  as  consul,  tribune,  and  praetor.

^ Because  Thermus  would  only  have  followed  the  regular  course  in
appointing  his  quaestor  to  take  charge  of  his  province  in  the  interval
between  his  departure  and  the  arrival  of  his  successor.  It  is  an  irony
of  destiny,  somewhat  pathetic,  that  Cicero  should  be  writing  in  Antony’s
favour,  and  should  speak  of  the  brothers  as  fion  indisertos,  considering
the  charges  of  ignorance  and  every  vice  which  he  afterwards  flung  at
Marcus  Antonius,  to  whom  also  he  was  to  owe  his  own  death.

158

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

CCLVIII  (F  XIII,  2)

TO  GAIUS  MEMMIUS^  (IN  MITYLENE)
(Laodicea,  May  ?)

I AM  very  intimate  with  C.  Avianius  Evander,  who  is  at
present  lodging  in  your  treasure-chamber,^  as  well  as  with
his  patron  M.  ^milius.  I ask  you,  therefore,  with  more
than  common  earnestness,  to  give  him  any  accommodation
you  can,  without  causing  yourself  inconvenience,  as  to  his
place  of  residence.  For  owing  to  his  having  many  orders
on  hand  for  a number  of  people,  it  would  hurry  him  very
much  if  he  were  forced  to  quit  your  house  on  the  ist  of
July.  My  modesty  will  not  allow  me  to  use  more  words  in
preferring  my  request : yet  I feel  sure  that,  if  it  is  not  incon-
venient, or  not  very  much  so,  you  will  feel  as  I should  have
felt  if  you  had  asked  a favour  of  me.  I,  at  any  rate,  shall  be
extremely  obliged  to  you.

CCLIX  (F  XIII,  3)

TO  GAIUS  MEMMIUS  (IN  MITYLENE)
(Laodicea,  May  ?)

Aulus  Fufius  is  an  intimate  friend  of  mine,  and  most  at-
tentive and  attached  to  me.  He  is  a good  scholar,  a very

1 See  Letter  CXCVIII.

2 Sacrarium  is  not  a temple  or  chapel,  i.e.^  a place  consecrated,  but
a place  where  sacred  objects  {sacra)  are  kept ; and  Memmius  (in  exile
in  Mitylene)  has  allowed  the  freedman  C.  Avianius  Evander,  who  was
a sculptor,  to  use  the  sacrarium  of  the  Memmii  as  a studio  and  lodging,
it  may  be,  while  he  was  doing  work  for  him.  Perhaps  Memmius  ex-
pected to  be  soon  returning  to  Rome,  as  there  was  a talk  of  his  recall
(Letter  CCLI),  and  had  therefore  written  to  Avianius  giving  him  notice
that  he  must  quit  by  the  ist  of  July.

F XIII,  2,  3;  III,  10  TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  1 59

good-natured  man,  and  in  the  highest  degree  worthy  of  your
friendship.  Pray  treat  him  as  you  promised  me  personally
you  would.  It  will  oblige  me  in  the  very  highest  degree
possible.  You  will  also  bind  him  to  you  himself  for  ever  by
the  strongest  ties  of  affection  and  respect.

CCLX  (F  III,  10)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  ROME)
Laodicea,  May

When  information  reached  me  of  the  rash  measure  of  those
who  were  causing  you  trouble,^  although  I was  at  first
greatly  disturbed  at  the  news,  since  nothing  could  have
happened  more  contrary  to  my  expectation,  yet  when  I had
collected  my  thoughts,  the  sequel  seemed  to  me  to  present
no  difficulty,  because  I felt  great  confidence  in  you  and  your
friends,  and  many  reasons  occurred  to  me  for  thinking  that
this  trouble  would  redound  to  your  honour.  One  thing  I
was  really  sorry  for,  when  I saw  that  a most  certain  and
most  thoroughly  deserved  triumph  had  been  snatched  from
you  by  this  step  on  the  part  of  your  jealous  rivals.  But  if
you  rate  it  at  the  value  which  I have  always  thought  should
be  put  upon  it,  you  will  be  acting  wisely  and  will  come  off
victorious,  the  chagrin  of  your  enemies  furnishing  you  with
the  most  complete  of  triumphs.  For  I see  clearly  that  the
effect  of  your  energy,  power,  and  wisdom  will  be  to  make
your  enemies  bitterly  repent  their  ill-considered  measure.
As  for  myself,  I solemnly  promise  and  vow  before  heaven
that  in  support  of  your  dignity — I prefer  that  word  to
“ safety  ” — I will  in  this  province,  which  you  once  governed,
undertake  and  carry  through  the  duties  and  role  of  an  inter-
cessor by  my  entreaties,  of  a relation  by  my  exertions,  of  a
man  beloved  (I  hope)  among  the  states  by  the  exertion  of
my  influence,  of  an  imperator  by  using  the  full  weight  of  my

^ His  prosecution  by  Dolabella.

l60  CICERO’S  LETTERS  B.c/50,  ^t.  56

office.  I would  have  you  both  demand  and  expect  every-
thing of  me : I shall  surpass  your  expectations  by  my
services.  Q.  Servilius  delivered  me  a very  short  letter
from  you,  which  yet  seemed  to  me  unnecessarily  long : for  I
think  myself  wronged  in  being  asked.  I could  have  wished
that  no  such  occasion  had  arisen  for  you  to  see  how  highly
I,  how  highly  Pompey  (who,  as  is  only  right,  is  ever  the
first  of  men  to  me),  how  highly  Brutus  values  you  : though
you  might  have  perceived  it  in  our  daily  intercourse,  as  you
will  now.  But  since  the  occasion  has  arisen,  if  I omit
anything  in  my  power,  I shall  confess  to  a crime  and  a dis-
grace. Pomptinus,  who  has  been  treated  by  you  with  eminent
and  exemplary  good  faith,  and  of  whose  obligations  to  you  I
am  a witness,  has  shewn  that  he  remembers  you  with  all  the
affection  which  you  can  justly  claim.  He  left  me,  much
against  my  will,  under  the  pressure  of  urgent  private  affairs,
yet,  when  he  saw  that  it  was  of  importance  to  you,  though
on  the  point  of  embarking  at  Ephesus,  he  returned  to
Laodicea.  When  I see  that  you  are  likely  to  command
innumerable  instances  of  similar  zeal  in  your  service,  I can
have  no  manner  of  doubt  that  your  present  anxiety  will
eventually  strengthen  your  position.  If,  indeed,  you  succeed
in  getting  censors  elected,  and  if  you  conduct  your  censor-
ship as  you  both  ought  and  can,  I am  convinced  that  you
will  be  for  all  time  a tower  of  strength  not  only  to  your-
self, but  to  all  your  family.  Pray  fight  and  strive  that
there  be  no  prolongation  of  my  office,  so  that,  when  I
have  done  all  you  want  for  you  here,  I may  have  the
opportunity  there  also  of  giving  practical  expression  to
my  goodwill  to  you.  What  you  tell  me  of  the  support
offered  you  by  all  men  and  all  ranks  does  not  at  all
surprise  me,  and  is  exceedingly  grateful  to  my  feelings  : the
same  account  has  reached  me  from  my  various  friends.
Accordingly,  it  gives  me  great  satisfaction,  not  only  that  a
proper  tribute  is  paid  to  you — whose  friendship  to  me  is  a
source  of  pleasure  as  well  as  honour — but  also,  in  truth,  that
there  is  still  left  in  our  country  an  almost  unanimous  feeling
of  affection  for  gallant  and  energetic  men  : which  in  my
eyes  has  ever  been  the  one  reward  for  my  own  days  of  labour
and  nights  of  toil.  It  has,  I confess,  caused  me  great  sur-
prise that  this  young  man — whom  I have  twice  defended  to

Fill,  lo  TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  l6l

the  utmost  of  my  power  on  capital  charges — should  be  so
headstrong  as,  when  entering  on  a course  of  hostility  to  you,
to  forget  the  patron  of  his  fortunes  and  whole  career ;
especially  considering  that  you  had  enough  and  to  spare  of
every  kind,  whether  of  honour  or  material  support,  while  he
himself,  to  put  it  at  the  lowest,  has  large  deficiencies  in
these  respects.  Some  silly  and  childish  talk  of  his  had  been
already  reported  to  me  by  our  friend  M.  Caelius  ; about
which  talk  also  I have  had  many  communications  from
you.  For  myself,  I should  have  been  much  more  inclined
to  break  off  an  old  connexion  with  a man  who  had  entered
on  a course  of  hostility  to  you,  than  to  make  a new  one.  For
you  ought  not  to  doubt  the  warmth  of  my  feelings  towards
you  ; it  is  notorious  to  everyone  in  the  province,  and  was
not  less  so  in  Romey^^evertheless,  a certain  suspicion  is
hinted  at  in  your  letter,  and  a doubt  on  your  part,  in  regard
to  which  the  present  is  not  a suitable  time  to  remonstrate
with  you,  yet  the  occasion  requires  that  I should  clear  my-
self. For  when,  pray,  did  I hinder  any  embassy  being  sent
to  Rome  to  convey  an  encomium  upon  you  ? Or,  sup-
posing me  to  be  your  declared  enemy,  how  could  I have
done  anything  less  likely  to  injure  you,  or  how,  if  your
secret  enemy,  have  more  openly  betrayed  my  hostility  ? But
if  I had  been  as  perfidious  as  those  who  attribute  these
motives  to  us,  yet  I at  least  should  not  have  been  such  a
fool  as  to  betray  either  an  enmity  which  I wished  to  con-
ceal, or  a burning  desire  to  wound  where  it  was  impossible
to  damage  you.  I remember  certain  persons  coming  to  me
from  Phrygia  Epictetos,  to  inform  me  that  some  excessive
sums  were  being  voted  for  the  expenses  of  some  legates.
To  them  I expressed  an  opinion,  rather  than  gave  an  order,
that  votes  for  such  expenses  should  conform  as  closely  as
possible  to  the  lex  Cornelia.  And  that  I did  not  insist  even
on  that  is  testified  by  the  accounts  of  the  boroughs,  in
which  each  entered  as  paid  to  your  legates  what  they
severally  chose.  But  what  a pack  of  lies  has  been  foisted
on  you  by  a set  of  the  most  untrustworthy  of  men  ! Not
only  that  the  votes  were  cancelled,  but  that,  when  the
legates  had  actually  started,  the  money  was  demanded  and
forcibly  recovered  from  their  agents,  and  that  many  were
thus  prevented  from  going  at  all  ! I should  have  expressed

II.  M

i62

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

some  discontent  and  expostulated  with  you,  had  it  not
been,  as  I before  observed,  that  I preferred  at  the  present
juncture  to  clear  myself  rather  than  accuse  you,  and  thought
this  the  more  proper  course.  So  not  a word  about  you  and
your  having  believed  it : but  about  myself  I will  say  a few
words  as  to  why  you  ought  not  to  have  believed  it.  For  if  you
hold  me  to  be  a good  man,  if  you  hold  me  to  be  worthy  of
the  studies  and  philosophy  to  which  I have  devoted  myself
from  boyhood,  if  you  hold  it  proven  in  circumstances  of  the
greatest  gravity  that  my  courage  is  fairly  high  and  my
wisdom  none  of  the  worst,  you  ought  to  know  that  there  is
nothing  in  my  conduct  as  a friend — I don’t  say  treacherous,
designing,  or  deceitful — but  even  mean  or  cold.  But  if  you
choose  to  imagine  me  to  be  dark  and  mysterious,  what
could  be  less  consonant  with  such  a character  than  to  dis-
dain the  friendship  of  a man  in  the  highest  possible  position,
or  to  attack  his  reputation  in  a province,  after  defending  his
credit  at  home  ? Or  to  display  one’s  hostility  where  it  was
impossible  to  damage  him,  or  to  select  for  an  occasion  of
treachery  what  would  give  the  clearest  indication  of  dislike,
but  would  be  the  least  effectual  in  inflicting  a blow  upon
him  ? What  reason,  moreover,  was  there  for  my  being  so
implacable  to  you,  when  my  own  brother  had  informed  me
that  you  had  not  been  really  hostile  to  me,  even  at  a time
when  the  assumption  of  such  a part  had  almost  been  forced
upon  you  ? ’ When,  however,  we  had  by  mutual  desire
renewed  our  friendship,  can  you  mention  any  request  which
you  made  to  me  during  your  consulship  ^ in  vain,  whether
it  was  something  you  wished  me  to  do,  or  a vote  you  wished
me  to  support  in  the  senate  ? What  charge  did  you  give
me  as  I was  seeing  you  off  at  Puteoli,  in  which  I have  not
more  than  fulfilled  your  expectation  by  my  energetic
exertions?  Again,  if  it  is  above  everything  the  mark  of
selfish  cunning  to  judge  everything  by  the  standard  of  one’s
own  advantage,  what  could  better  suit  my  interests  than  the
close  alliance  with  a man  of  the  highest  rank  and  greatest
official  dignity,  whose  wealth,  ability,  sons,  !?marriage  con-
nexions, blood-relations,  could  all  gr^dy  promote  my

In  taking  part  with  his  brother  Clodius  B.

J.c.  54.

58-^6.  q

? Ill,  lO  TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  163

tionour,  or,  I may  say,  my  security  ? All  these  advantages,
ifter  all,  I did  aim  at  in  seeking  your  friendship — which  I
iid  not  seek  from  any  selfish  cunning,  but  rather  because  I
bad  some  sound  sense.  Again,  how  powerful  are  those  bonds
'11  which  I am  the  most  willing  of  prisoners  ! — sympathy  of
tastes,  charm  of  social  intercourse,  the  refined  pleasures  of
3ur  life  and  its  environment,  our  interchange  of  ideas  in
conversation,  our  deeper  studies.  And  these  all  belong  to
private  life.  What  about  public  ties  between  us  ? Our
•amous  reconciliation,  in  which  any  inadvertence  even  is
mpossible  without  a suspicion  of  perfidy  ; our  colleagueship
n the  most  illustrious  priesthood — in  which,  in  the  opinion
if  our  ancestors,  not  only  was  no  breach  of  friendship  pos-
sible without  impiety,  but  no  election  even  into  the  college
vas  permissible,  if  a man  were  on  bad  terms  with  any  of  the
existing  members.  But  to  pass  over  these  ties,  numerous
md  important  as  they  are,  was  there  ever  anyone  who
/alued  another,  or  could  or  ought  to  value  another,  as  highly
IS  I do  Cn.  Pompeius,  your  daughter’s  father-in-law  ? For
f services  are  to  count — I consider  that  I owe  him  the
•estoration  of  country,  children,  life,  rank,  and,  in  a word,
)f  myself.  If  the  charm  of  social  intercourse — what  friend-
ship between  two  consulars  in  our  city  was  ever  closer  than
curs?  If  those  tokens  of  affection  and  kindness — what
confidence  has  he  ever  withheld  from  me  ? What  has  he
'ailed  to  discuss  with  me?  What  motion  affecting  himself
n the  senate  has  he  wished  should,  in  his  absence,  be
moved  by  anyone  else  ? What  marks  of  honour  has  he  not
desired  me  to  receive  in  the  most  complimentary  form?
Finally,  with  what  courtesy,  with  what  forbearance,  did  he
endure  my  vehement  pleading  for  Milo,  though  at  times
epposed  to  his  own  proposals  ! With  what  hearty  zeal  did
be  take  measures  to  prevent  my  being  reached  by  the
hostile  feelings  aroused  at  that  juncture,  protecting  me  by
bis  advice,  his  influence,  and  finally  by  his  arms  ! ^ At  that
crisis,  indeed,  such  was  his  steadfastness,  such  his  mag-
lanimity,  that,  to  say  nothing  of  crediting  some  Phrygian  or
Lycaonian,  as  you  did  in  the  case  of  the  legates,  he  would  not

^ This  is  all  very  well : Cicero  now  speaks  of  the  guard  round  the
:ourt  during  Milo’s  trial  as  meant  for  his  protection ; but  at  the  time
le  was  so  alarmed,  that  he  broke  down  utterly  in  his  speech.

164

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^,T.  56

believe  malevolent  remarks  about  me  even  from  men  of  the
highest  rank.  Therefore,  as  his  son  is  your  son-in-law,  and
as  I am  well  aware,  besides  this  connexion  by  marriage,
how  dear  you  are  to  Cn.  Pompeius,  and  how  precious  in  his
sight,  what  ought  my  feelings  towards  you  to  be  ? Especially
as  he  has  written  me  such  a letter  that,  had  I been  your
enemy,  as  I am  your  most  affectionate  friend,  I should  have
been  softened  towards  you,  and  have  surrendered  myself
to  the  wishes  and  authority  of  a man  to  whom  I owed  so
much.

But  enough  of  this : it  has  been  expressed  already,  per-
haps, at  greater  length  than  was  necessary.  Let  me  now
tell  you  what  I have  actually  done  and  arranged.^  . . . And
these  things  I am  doing,  and  shall  continue  to  do,  rather  in
support  of  your  dignity,  than  as  a means  of  averting  danger
from  you.  For  I shall  soon,  I hope,  hear  of  your  being
censor ; ^ and  the  duties  of  that  office,  which  require  the
greatest  resolution  and  tact,  I think  you  should  meditate
upon  with  greater  earnestness  and  care  than  upon  what  I
am  doing  here  on  your  behalf.

CCLXI  (F  II,  19)

TO  C.  C^LIUS  CALDUS  (APPOINTED  QUAESTOR
FOR  CILICIA)

(Cilicia,  June)

M.  Tullius  Cicero,  imperator,  son  of  Marcus,  grandson
of  Marcus,  greets  C.  Caelius  Caldus,  son  of  Lucius,  grandson
of  Gains,  quaestor.  When  I first  received  the  most  welcome
intelligence  that  the  lot  had  assigned  you  to  me  as  quaestor.

The  statement  of  the  measures  taken  by  Cicero  is  apparently
omitted,  perhaps  by  the  original  editor  of  the  letters,  though  there  does
not  seem  any  reasonable  motive  for  doing  so.

^ As  censor  he  would  be  practically,  though  not  legally,  safe  from
prosecution.

F II,  19  TO  C.  CiELIUS  CALDUS  165

I hoped  that  this  chance  would  be  a source  of  greater
pleasure  the  longer  you  were  with  me  in  the  province.  For
it  appeared  to  me  of  great  importance  that  the  connexion
between  us,  thus  formed  by  fortune,  should  be  supplemented
by  personal  intercourse.  When  subsequently  I failed  to
hear  anything  from  yourself,  or  to  receive  a letter  from  any-
one else  as  to  your  arrival,  I began  to  fear,  what  I still  fear
may  be  the  case,  that  I should  have  left  the  province  before
you  arrived  in  it.  However,  when  I was  in  camp  in  Cilicia,
I received  a letter  from  you  on  the  21st  of  June,  expressed
in  the  most  cordial  terms,  and  sufficiently  manifesting  your
kindness  and  abilities.  But  it  contained  no  indication  of
day  or  place  of  writing,  nor  of  the  time  at  which  I might
expect  you ; nor  was  the  person  who  delivered  it  to  me  the
one  to  whom  you  had  given  it ; for  then  I might  have  ascer-
tained from  him  where  and  when  it  was  despatched.  In  spite
of  this  uncertainty,  I yet  thought  that  I must  contrive  to
send  some  of  my  orderlies  and  lictors  to  you  with  a letter.  If
you  receive  it  in  anything  like  time,  you  will  be  doing  me  a
very  great  favour  if  you  will  join  me  in  Cilicia  as  soon  as  you
can.  For  though,  of  course,  what  your  cousin  Curius,  who  is,
as  you  know,  a very  great  ally  of  mine,  and  also  what  your  rela-
tive and  my  most  intimate  friend  C.  Vergilius,  have  written
to  me  about  you  with  the  greatest  earnestness  has,  of  course,
very  great  importance  in  my  eyes — as  a serious  recom-
mendation of  such  very  warm  friends  is  bound  to  have — yet
your  own  letter,  and  especially  what  you  say  about  your  own
position  and  our  connexion,  has,  to  my  mind,  the  greatest
weight  of  all.  No  quaestor  could  have  been  assigned  to  me
that  would  have  been  more  welcome.  Wherefore  whatever
marks  of  distinction  I can  shew  you,  shall  be  shewn,  de-
monstrating to  all  the  world  that  I fully  recognize  your  own
and  your  ancestors’  high  position.  I shall  be  better  able  to
do  this,  if  you  join  me  in  Cilicia,  which  I think  is  very  much
to  my  interest  and  that  of  the  state,  and  above  all  to  your
own.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

166

CCLXII  (F  II,  12)

TO  M.  CiELIUS  RUFUS  (CURULE  ^DILE)
Cilicia,  June

I AM  much  worried  by  events  in  the  city.  Such  stormy
meetings  are  reported  to  me,  such  a disturbed  Quinquatrian
holiday  : ^ for  what  has  happened  since  I have  not  yet  heard.
But  after  all  nothing  worries  me  so  much  as  the  being  de-
barred in  the  midst  of  these  troubles  from  having  a laugh
with  you  at  the  comic  points  in  them.  These  are,  in  fact,
numerous,  but  I dare  not  trust  them  to  paper.  What  annoys
me  is  that  I have  not  as  yet  received  a line  from  you  on
these  subjects.  Wherefore,  though  by  the  time  you  read
this  letter  I shall  have  finished  my  year  of  office,  pray,  never-
theless, send  a letter  to  meet  and  enlighten  me  on  all  public
affairs,  that  I may  not  arrive  home  an  utter  stranger.  No
one  can  do  this  better  than  you.  Your  friend  Diogenes,  a
steady  good  man,  has  left  me  in  company  with  Philo  for
Pessinus.  They  are  on  their  way  to  visit  Adiatorix,^  where
they  are  fully  prepared  to  find  neither  kindness  nor  a full
exchequer.

The  City,  the  City,  my  dear  Rufus — stick  to  that  and  live
in  its  full  light ! Residence  elsewhere — as  I made  up  my
mind  in  early  life — is  mere  eclipse  and  obscurity  to  those
whose  energy  is  capable  of  shining  at  Rome.  Knowing  this
thoroughly,  would  that  I had  been  true  to  my  convictions  !
Before  heaven,  I do  not  compare  all  the  advantages  of  a
province  put  together  with  one  stroll  and  one  conversation
with  you.  I hope  I have  gained  a reputation  for  integrity.
I had  that,  however,  quite  as  much  from  rejecting  ^ as  from
administering  a province.  “ But  what  about  the  hope  of  a
triumph  ? ” say  you.  I had  already  had  a sufficiently  glorious
triumph  : I never  ought  to  have  been  so  long  separated  from

^ The  qtnnqiiatrtcs  I\Hna‘va:^  March  19-23,  was  a general  holiday.

^ Son  of  a tetrarch  of  Galatia.

^ As  he  did  at  the  end  of  his  consulship.

F II,  12;  A VI,  3

TO  ATTICUS

167

all  that  I love  best.  But  I shall,  I hope,  soon  see  you.
Mind  you  send  some  letters  to  meet  me  worthy  of  your-
self.

CCLXIII  (A  VI,  3)

TO  ATTICUS  (IN  EPIRUS)

Cilicia,  June

Though  I know  of  nothing  new  having  happened  since  I
gave  a letter  for  you  to  your  freedman  Philogenes,  yet  as  I
am  sending  Philotimus  back  to  Rome,  I felt  obliged  to
write  you  something.  And  first  on  the  subject  which  causes
me  most  anxiety — not  that  you  can  help  me  at  all,  for  the
matter  is  actually  in  hand,  and  you  are  far  away  in  another
part  of  the  world  :

‘ ‘ And  in  the  gulf  between

Full  many  a wide  sea’s  wave  the  south  wind  rolls.”  ^

The  time  is  creeping  on,  as  you  see — for  I am  bound  to
leave  the  province  on  the  30th  of  July — and  no  successor
is  named.  Whom  shall  I leave  in  command  of  the  province  ?
Sound  policy  and  public  opinion  demand  my  brother.  First,
because  it  is  regarded  as  an  honour  : next,  because  no  one
is  fitter : thirdly,  because  he  is  the  only  ex-prsetor  I have.
For  Pomptinus,  in  accordance  with  an  agreement  and  bar-
gain— for  he  accompanied  me  on  that  condition — has  already
left  me.  No  one  thinks  my  quaestor  fit  for  the  post.^  For
he  is  unsteady,  loose,  and  has  an  itching  palm.  However,
in  regard  to  my  brother,  the  first  point  is,  that  I do  not
think  I could  persuade  him  to  do  it : for  he  dislikes  a pro-
vince. And,  by  heaven,  nothing  can  be  more  disagreeable
and  tiresome.  Then  again,  suppose  him  not  to  like  to  say
no  to  me,  what  about  my  own  duty  to  him  ? Seeing  that  a

^ TToXXd  d'  kv  nsraixfi'ifp

voTOg  KvXivdei  (cu/xar’  evpeirfg  a\6g.

The  author  is  unknown.

^ Mescinius  Rufus.  See  p.  178.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

168

serious  war  is  believed  to  be  actually  going  on  in  Syria,  and
is  thought  likely  to  spread  into  this  province,  while  there  is
here  no  adequate  protection,  and  the  ordinary  supplies  for
the  year  only  have  been  voted,  would  it  seem  consistent  with
natural  affection  to  leave  my  brother,  or  with  proper  prudence
to  leave  some  faineant!  You  see,  therefore,  that  I am  in
great  anxiety,  and  much  at  a loss  as  to  the  course  to  take.
In  short,  I never  ought  to  have  undertaken  the  business  at
all.  What  a much  better  “province”  is  yours!  You  will
leave  it  whenever  you  choose,  if  indeed  you  have  not  already
done  so,  and  you  can  put  anyone  you  choose  in  charge  of
Thesprotia  and  Chaonia  ! ^ However,  I have  not  yet  seen
Quintus,  so  as  to  be  quite  sure,  if  I made  up  my  mind  to  it,
whether  he  could  be  induced ; nor,  if  he  could,  am  I certain
what  my  real  wishes  are.  That  is  how  this  matter  stands.
The  rest  is  as  yet  all  praise  and  thanks — worthy  of  the  books
you  praise  so  highly.  Communities  have  been  put  on  a
sound  footing,  the  publicani  have  been  thoroughly  satisfied,
no  one  has  been  insulted,  some  few  have  suffered  by  a
judicial  edict,  at  once  just  and  strict,  yet  in  no  case  does
anyone  venture  to  complain ; there  has  been  a campaign
deserving  of  a triumph,  but  in  this  matter  too  I shall  do
nothing  in  a spirit  of  self-seeking,  nothing  at  all  indeed
without  your  advice.  The  last  word  of  the  play — the  hand-
ing over  of  my  province — is  the  difficulty.  But  this  some
god  will  direct.

About  events  in  the  city  you,  of  course,  know  more  than
I : your  news  are  more  frequent  and  more  authentic.  I am
myself  vexed  not  to  get  information  by  a letter  from  you.
For  reports  of  an  unpleasant  nature  reach  me  here  about
Curio  and  about  Paullus  ^ — not  that  I see  anything  to  fear
as  long  as  Pompey  can  stand  or  even  sit : if  he  only  recover
his  health ! But,  by  heaven  ! I am  vexed  for  Curio  and
Paullus,  my  own  familiar  friends  1 Please,  therefore,  send
me,  if  you  are  in  Rome  or  when  you  get  there,  a sketch-plan
of  the  whole  position  of  public  affairs  to  meet  me  on  my  way,

^ The  country  round  Atticus’s  house  in  Epirus.

^ As  to  Curio,  see  p.  155.  Paullus  is  L.  Almilius  Paullus,  the  consul
who  had  been  also  bribed  by  Caesar.

^ Pompey’s  serious  illness  at  Naples  this  year  caused  great  excite-
ment (see  p.  182  ; Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  28;  Plut.  Pomp.  57).

A VI,  3

TO  ATTICUS

169

by  which  I may  mould  my  conduct,  and  consider  beforehand
in  what  spirit  to  approach  the  city.  For  it  is  something
that  a man  on  his  arrival  should  not  be  a foreigner  and
stranger.

And  then — what  I had  almost  forgotten  to  mention — about
your  friend  Brutus.  I have  done  everything  I could  for
him,  as  I often  mentioned  to  you  in  my  letters.  The
Cyprians  were  ready  to  pay  the  money.  But  Scaptius  was
not  content  with  twelve  per  cent,  and  compound  interest
reckoned  yearly.  Ariobarzanes  was  not  more  inclined  to
accommodate  Pompey  for  his  own  sake,  than  Brutus  for
mine.  But  I cannot  pledge  myself  for  him,  for  he  is  a very
poor  sovereign,  and  I am  at  so  great  a distance  from  him,
that  my  only  weapons  are  letters,  and  with  these  I have  not
ceased  to  ply  him.  The  upshot  is  this  : Brutus,  in  propor-
tion to  the  amount  of  the  debt,  has  been  treated  more
liberally  than  Pompey.  For  Brutus  this  year  there  has
been  secured  about  a hundred  talents  ; Pompey  has  had
two  hundred  promised  in  six  months.  Again,  in  the  business
of  Appius  I can  scarcely  express  the  extent  of  my  concessions
to  Brutus.^  Why  should  I trouble  myself,  then?  His
friends  are  men  of  straw — Matinius  and  Scaptius — the
latter  of  whom,  because  he  did  not  get  some  squadrons  of
cavalry  from  me  wherewith  to  bully  Cyprus,  as  he  had  done
before  my  governorship,  is  perhaps  angry  with  me;  or  because
he  is  not  a prafectus^  an  office  which  I bestowed  on  no  one
engaged  in  business,  not  even  on  C.  Vennonius,  who  was
my  intimate  friend,  or  on  M.  Lsenius,  who  was  yours.  To  this
principle,  which  I communicated  to  you  at  Rome,  I have
stuck.  But  of  what  has  a man  to  complain,  who,  when
he  might  have  taken  the  money,  refused  to  do  so?  The
other  Scaptius  (who  is  in  Cappadocia)  I think  I have  fully
satisfied.  Having  received  the  office  of  military  tribune  from
me,  which  I had  offered  him  in  consequence  of  a letter  from
Brutus,  he  afterwards  wrote  me  word  that  he  did  not  wish  to
avail  himself  of  it.  There  is  a certain  Gavius,  who,  after  my
offering  him  a prczfectura  on  the  request  of  Brutus,  said  and
did  a good  deal  meant  to  reflect  upon  me — one  of  Publius
Clodius’s  sleuth-hounds ! He  neither  paid  me  the  compliment

^ See  Letter  CCLV,  p.  153.

I/O  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  50,  ^T.  56

of  joining  my  escort  when  I was  quitting  Apamea,  nor  on  his
subsequently  visiting  the  camp  and  being  about  to  leave  it
did  he  ask  me  “ whether  I had  any  commands,”  and  made
no  secret  of  being,  I don’t  know  why,  no  friend  to  me.  If
I had  regarded  such  a fellow  as  one  of  my  prcefecti^  what
would  you  have  thought  of  me  ? Was  I,  who,  as  you  know,
never  would  put  up  with  insolence  from  the  most  powerful
of  men,  to  endure  it  from  this  led-captain?  Yet  it  is
more  than  “putting  up  with”  a man  to  bestow  on  him  a
place  of  profit  and  honour.  So,  then,  this  Gavius,  when  he
saw  me  at  Apamea,  as  he  was  starting  for  Rome,  addressed
me  in  a tone  I should  scarcely  have  ventured  to  adopt  to
Culleolus  : “ Will  you  be  good  enough  to  tell  me,”  said  he,
“ where  I am  to  look  for  the  allowances  of  a prcefectus  ? ” I
answered  more  mildly  than  those  present  thought  I should
have  done,  that  it  was  not  my  practice  to  give  allowances  to
those  whom  I had  not  actually  employed.  He  went  off  in  a
rage.  If  Brutus  can  be  affected  by  the  talk  of  such  a wind-
bag as  this,  you  may  love  him  all  to  yourself,  you  will  have
no  rival  in  me.  But  I think  he  will  behave  as  he  ought.
However,  I wished  you  to  be  acquainted  with  the  facts  of
the  case,  and  I have  told  Brutus  the  story  with  the  greatest
minuteness.  Generally  speaking  (between  ourselves),  Brutus
has  never  written  me  a letter,  not  even  the  last  one  about
Appius,  in  which  there  was  not  something  haughty  and
distant.  But  you  often  have  on  your  lips  (from  Lucilius) :

“ Then  Granins  ^ too

Thinks  highly  of  himself  and  loathes  proud  kings.”
However,  in  that  matter  he  usually  stirs  my  laughter  rather
than  my  bile ; but  he  evidently  doesn’t  sufficiently  consider
what  he  is  writing,  and  to  whom.  The  young  Quintus,  I
think,  and  indeed  I am  sure,  read  your  letter  addressed  to
his  father.  For  he  is  accustomed,  and  that  by  my  advice,
to  open  his  father’s  letters,  in  case  there  is  anything  that
ought  to  be  known.  Now  in  that  letter  there  was  the  same
remark  about  your  sister  as  in  your  letter  to  me.  Imagine
the  boy’s  distress  ! He  told  me  of  his  sorrow  with  tears  in
his  eyes.  In  short,  he  shewed  me  clearly  how  dutiful,  sweet-
tempered,  and  kind  he  was,  which  makes  me  the  more  hope

^ A praco^  or  marshal,  who  gave  himself  airs.

A VI,  3;  F III,  II  TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  I/I

that  nothing  unbecoming  will  occur.  So  I wished  you  to
know  it.  I will  not  omit  the  following  either.  Young
Hortensius,  at  the  time  of  the  gladiatorial  exhibition  at
Apamea,  behaved  in  a scandalous  and  disgraceful  manner.
For  his  father’s  sake  I asked  him  to  dinner  the  day  he
arrived,  and  for  his  father’s  sake  also  went  no  farther.  He
remarked  that  he  would  wait  for  me  at  Athens,  that  we
might  leave  the  country  together.  “ All  right,”  said  I : for
what  could  I say  ? After  all,  I don’t  think  he  meant  what
he  said.  I hope  not,  indeed,  lest  I should  offend  his
father,  of  whom,  by  heaven,  I am  exceedingly  fond.  But  if
he  is  to  be  in  my  suite,  I will  so  manage  him  as  to  avoid
giving  offence  where  I least  wish  to  do  so.  That ’s  all : no,
there  is  this — please  send  me  the  speech  of  Quintus  Celer
against  M.  Servilius.  Send  me  a letter  as  soon  as  possible.
If  there  is  no  news,  let  me  know  there  is  none  at  least  by
a letter-carrier  of  yours.  Love  to  Pilia  and  your  daughter.
Take  care  of  your  health.

CCLXIV  (F  III,  II)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  ROME)
Cilicia,  June

M.  Cicero  to  Appius  Pulcher,  (as  I hope)  censor.  Being
in  camp  on  the  river  Pyramus,^  I received  two  letters
from  you  at  the  same  time,  forwarded  by  Q.  Servilius  from
Tarsus.  One  of  them  was  dated  5th  of  April,  the  other,
which  seemed  to  me  the  more  recent,  was  not  dated.  I will
therefore  answer  the  former  first,  in  which  you  tell  me  about
your  acquittal  on  the  charge  of  lese  majeste.  I had,  indeed,
been  long  ago  informed  of  this  by  letters,  messages,  and  in
fine  by  common  rumour,  for  nothing  could  be  more  notori-
ous— not  because  anyone  had  expected  a different  result,
but  because,  as  a rule,  no  report  about  men  of  illustrious

^ The  modern  Seihun.

1/2

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

reputation  gets  out  without  making  a stir — yet  your  letter
increased  the  satisfaction  I felt  in  the  news,  not  only  because
it  spoke  in  clear  terms  and  with  greater  fullness  than  the  talk
of  the  common  people,  but  also  because  I felt  more  really
like  congratulating  you  when  I heard  your  own  story  from
yourself.  Accordingly,  I embraced  you  in  imagination,
since  you  were  not  here,  and,  kissing  the  actual  letter,  I also
congratulated  myself.  For  compliments  paid  by  the  whole
people,  the  senate,  and  the  jurors  to  ability,  energy,  and
virtue  (perhaps  I flatter  myself  in  imagining  myself  possessed
of  these)  I look  upon  as  paid  to  myself  also.  Nor  is  it  the
splendid  result  of  your  trial  so  much  as  the  perverted  in-
telligence of  your  enemies  that  excites  my  wonder.  “ Bribery
or  maiesifas,”  you  will  say,  “ what  does  it  matter  which  ? ”
Nothing  substantially : for  the  former  you  have  never  touched,
and  the  latter  you  have  promoted  rather  than  injured.  But
the  fact  is  that  maiestas  (in  spite  of  Sulla)  is  of  such  a vague
nature  as  to  permit  of  the  safe  denunciation  of  anyone :
while  bribery  is  a word  of  such  definite  meaning  that  either
the  accusation  or  the  defence  must  be  discreditable.^  For
how  can  there  be  any  doubt  as  to  whether  bribery  has  been
employed  or  not  ? Now,  who  ever  suspected  your  success-
ive elections  ? How  unlucky  that  I wasn’t  there ! What
roars  of  laughter  I would  have  caused  ! But  as  to  the  trial
for  maiestas^  there  were  two  things  that  gave  me  very  great
pleasure  in  your  letter : one  was  your  saying  that  you  were
defended  by  the  Republic  itself — for  even  if  good  and  gallant
citizens  were  as  plentiful  as  possible,  it  still  ought  to  preserve
men  like  you ; while  in  the  actual  state  of  affairs  it  is  more

^ The  first  maiestas  is  used  in  the  proper  sense  of  “ majesty  of  the
people.”  As  a crime  it  is  a wide  term,  covering  all  kinds  of  actions,
and  may  therefore  be  brought  against  anyone  without  obvious  in-
justice ; whereas  ambitus  is  a definite  charge,  which  must  either  be
groundless,  in  which  case  it  is  discreditable  to  bring  it,  or  well
grounded,  when  it  is  discreditable  to  the  defendant.  It  must  be  one
thing  or  the  other ; it  can’t  be  vague,  or  partly  true  and  partly  false,
as  maiestas  may.  Maiestas  is  used  briefly  for  cHmen  Icesce  maiestatis
populi  Romani,  and  might  include  not  only  acts  of  treason,  but  ill-
management  of  any  sort,  whereby  the  interests  of  the  people  suffered.
It  took  the  place  (with  extended  meaning)  of  the  ancient  perduellio.
It  seems  first  to  have  been  used  as  a legal  term  in  the  law  of  Saturninus
(B.C.  102),  and  it  was  afterwards  more  fully  developed  by  Sulla’s  lex
Cornelia  de  maiestate  (B.C.  80).  (Cic.  in  Pis.  § 50.)

Fill,  II  TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  1 73

bound  than  ever  to  do  so,  when  there  is  such  a dearth  of
such  men  in  every  office  and  every  age,  that  a state  so  be-
reaved ought  to  welcome  guardians  like  you  with  open  arms  ;
the  other  is  your  wonderfully  high  praise  of  the  good  faith
and  good  feeling  of  Pompey  and  Brutus.  I am  delighted  at
their  honourable  conduct  and  cordial  kindness,  both  because
they  are  your  relations  and  my  very  dear  friends,  and  also
because  one  of  them  is  the  first  of  men  of  every  age  and
country,  while  the  other  has  long  been  the  first  of  our  younger
men,  and  will  soon,  I hope,  be  first  of  all  the  citizens.  As
to  having  the  witnesses  who  took  bribes  punished  with
ignominy  by  their  several  states,  unless  something  has  already
been  done  by  the  agency  of  Flaccus,  it  shall  be  done  by
mine  on  my  return  journey  through  Asia.

Now  I come  to  your  second  letter.  You  send  me  a
sketch-plan,  so  to  speak,  of  the  state  of  things  affecting  us
both,  and  of  the  whole  condition  of  politics  : in  this  I am
much  relieved  by  the  sagacity  of  your  letter.  For  I perceive
that  the  dangers  ahead  are  at  once  less  formidable  than  I
feared,  and  the  safeguards  greater,  if,  as  you  say,  all  the  real
strength  of  the  state  has  devoted  itself  to  Pompey  as  its
leader : and  I perceived  at  the  same  time  that  your  spirit
was  alert  and  keen  in  the  defence  of  the  Republic,  and  I
experienced  a wonderful  pleasure  from  the  energy  which
made  you  determine,  in  spite  of  very  pressing  engagements,
that  the  state  of  the  Republic  should  be  known  to  me  by
your  means.  Certainly  : keep  the  books  on  the  augural
science  for  the  time  when  we  take  a holiday  together ; for
when  I wrote  dunning  you  for  the  performance  of  your
promise,  I thought  of  you  as  being  outside  the  walls  and
enjoying  the  most  complete  leisure.  As  it  is,  however,
instead  of  your  augural  books,  I shall  expect  all  your  speeches
complete.  Decimus  Tullius,  to  whom  you  gave  a message
for  me,  has  not  yet  been  to  see  me,  nor  have  I at  present
any  of  your  friends  with  me ; only  my  own,  who,  however,
are  all  yours.  I don’t  understand  what  you  mean  by  my
“ somewhat  angry  letter.”  I have  written  to  you  twice,
clearing  myself  carefully,  and  only  gently  finding  fault  with
you  for  having  been  too  ready  to  believe  things  about  me.
This  is  a kind  of  expostulation  which  seems  to  me  proper  for
a friend ; but  if  you  don’t  like  it,  I won’t  employ  it  again.

174

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

But  if,  as  you  say,  the  letter  was  ill  expressed,  be  sure  it  was
not  mine.  For  as  Aristarchus  denies  any  verse  he  doesn’t
like  to  be  Homer’s,  so  pray  do  you  (excuse  the  joke)  con-
sider nothing  that  is  ill  expressed  to  be  mine.  Farewell,
and  in  your  censorship,  if  you  are  now  censor,  as  I hope  you
are,  think  often  of  your  ancestor.^

CCLXV  (F  XV,  5)

M.  PORCIUS  CATO  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)

Rome  (June)

I GLADLY  obey  the  call  of  the  state  and  of  our  friendship,  in
rejoicing  that  your  virtue,  integrity,  and  energy,  already
known  at  home  in  a most  important  crisis,  when  you  were  a
civilian,  should  be  maintained  abroad  with  the  same  pains-
taking care  now  that  you  have  military  command.  Therefore
what  I could  conscientiously  do  jn  setting  forth  in  laudatory
terms  that  the  province  had  been  defended  by  your  wisdom  ;
that  the  kingdom  of  Ariobarzanes,  as  well  as  the  king  him-
self, had  been  preserved ; and  that  the  feelings  of  the  allies
had  been  won  back  to  loyalty  to  our  empire — that  I have
done  by  speech  and  vote.  That  a thanksgiving  was  decreed
I am  glad,  if  you  prefer  our  thanking  the  gods  rather  than
giving  you  the  credit  for  a success  ‘which  has  been  in  no
respect  left  to  chance,  but  has  been  secured  for  the  Republic
by  your  own  eminent  prudence  and  self-control.  But  if  you
think  a thanksgiving  to  be  a presumption  in  favour  of  a
triumph,  and  therefore  prefer  fortune  having  the  credit
rather  than  yourself,  let  me  remind  you  that  a triumph  does
not  always  follow  a thanksgiving ; and  that  It  is  an  honour
much  more  brilliant  than  a triumph  for  the  senate  to  declare
its  opinion,  that  a province  has  been  retained  rather  by  the
uprightness  and  mildness  of  its  governor,  than  by  the
strength  of  an  army  or  the  favour  of  heaven  : and  that  is

^ The  famous  App.  Claudius  Coecus,  censor  B.C.  312-308.

F XV,  5;  VIII,  II  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  1 75

what  I meant  to  express  by  my  vote.  And  I write  this  to
you  at  greater  length  than  I usually  do  write,  because  I wish
above  all  things  that  you  should  think  of  me  as  taking  pains
to  convince  you,  both  that  I have  wished  for  you  what  I be-
lieved to  be  for  your  highest  honour,  and  am  glad  that  you
have  got  what  you  preferred  to  it.  Farewell : continue  to
love  me ; and  by  the  way  you  conduct  your  home-journey,
secure  to  the  allies  and  the  Republic  the  advantages  of  your
integrity  and  energy.

CCLXVI  (F  VIII,  II)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome,  June

Your  “ thanksgiving  ” has  given  us  some  sharp  twinges,
though  they  have  not  lasted  long  : for  we  came  to  a serious
deadlock.  The  fact  is.  Curio,  who  is  very  fond  of  you,
finding  that  every  device  was  being  employed  to  deprive
him  of  comitial  days,  declared  that  nothing  would  induce
him  to  allow  the  thanksgiving  to  pass  the  senate,  lest  he
should  appear  to  have  thrown  away  by  his  own  blundering
the  advantage  he  had  obtained  by  the  infatuation  of  Paullus,
and  should  be  regarded  as  having  sold  the  cause  of  the
Republic.  Accordingly,  we  have  had  to  adopt  a com-
promise, and  the  consuls  have  pledged  themselves  not  to
hold  the  thanksgiving  this  year.  Plainly  you  have  reason
to  thank  both  consuls : Paullus  certainly  the  rather  of  the
two.  For  Marcellus  answered  him  that  he  did  not  build
much  on  those  thanksgivings ; ^ Paullus  said  that  in  any  case

^ I do  not  think  that  Marcellus  said  that  “he  had  very  little  hope
that  the  supplications  would  pass,”  as  Prof.  Tyrrell  interprets  him  :
for  there  was  no  doubt  about  them  if  Curio  withdrew  his  veto — and  the
remark  would  have  no  influence  with  him.  What  Marcellus  said  was
that  he  was  ‘ ‘ not  relying  on  the  supplications  in  order  to  stop  Curio
from  doing  business  with  the  coinitia^'^  while  Paullus  promised  outright
that  he  would  not  so  use  them  this  year  at  all.  The  senate  voted  a
supplication  but  it  depended  on  the  executive  magistrate,  the  consul,

1/6

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  50,  i^:T.  56

he  would  not  hold  them  this  year.  I was  told  that  Hirrus
meant  to  talk  out  the  decree.  I got  hold  of  him  : he  not
only  did  not  do  so,  but  when  the  vote  for  the  victims  was
brought  forward,^  and  he  could  have  put  a spoke  in  our
wheel,  if  he  had  called  for  a count,  he  held  his  tongue.  He
merely  signified  his  agreement  with  Cato,  who,  while  speak-
ing 1 of  you  in  complimentary  terms,  voted  against  the
thanksgiving.  Favonius  made  a third  with  them.  Where-
fore you  must  thank  everybody  according  to  his  peculiar
idiosyncrasy  and  principles : these  three,  because  they  only
shewed  their  wishes  instead  of  making  speeches,  and  be-
cause when  they  might  have  hindered  they  shewed  no  fight :
and  Curio,  because  he  deviated  from  his  own  line  of
obstructive  policy  for  your  sake.  For  Furnius  and  Lentulus,
as  in  duty  bound,  just  as  though  they  were  personally
affected,  went  round  with  me  and  took  trouble  in  the
matter.  I can  also  speak  in  high  terms  of  the  exertions  and
earnestness  of  Cornelius  Balbus.  For  he  both  spoke  in
strong  terms  to  Curio,  saying  that,  if  he  acted  otherwise,  he
would  be  inflicting  an  injury  on  Caesar,  and  also  managed
to  create  a feeling  of  mistrust  as  to  Curio’s  sincerity.  Some
voted  for  the  decree  who  really  wished  for  a decision  un-
favourable to  you — such  as  the  Domitii,  the  Scipios ; and
when  they  interposed  in  this  matter  with  the  design  of  pro-
voking his  veto,  Curio  made  a very  neat  reply.  “ He  was
all  the  more  happy,”  he  said,  “not  to  veto  the  decree,
because  he  saw  that  certain  persons  who  voted  for  it  did  not
wish  it  carried.”

As  for  politics,  every  controversy  centres  on  one  point —
the  provinces.  In  this  matter  Pompey  as  yet  seems  to  have
thrown  all  his  weight  on  the  side  of  the  senate’s  wish  that
Caesar  should  leave  his  province  on  the  13th  of  November.

when  it  was  held,  or  whether  it  was  held  at  all,  and  he  would  be  in-
fluenced by  the  convenience  of  public  business.

^ De  hosiiis,  i.e.,  as  to  the  kind  and  perhaps  number  of  victims,  as
we  find  often  in  Livy.  The  change  to  de  hostibus  makes  a considerable
ambiguity,  for  it  was  on  the  claim  of  a triumph,  not  a supplicatio^  that
the  general  had  to  make  a return  of  the  numbers  of  the  enemy  that  had
fallen.  Besides,  if  we  read  de  hostilms^  it  would  be  better  (with  Schiitz)
to  read  tit  7iu77ierarentur,  for  the  singular  number  refers  to  “counting
out  ” the  senate.

F VIII,  II  ; A VI,  4

TO  ATTICUS

177

Curio  is  resolved  to  submit  to  anything  rather  than  allow
this  : he  has  given  up  all  his  other  proposals.  Our  people,
whom  you  know  so  well,  do  not  venture  to  push  matters  to
extremes.  The  situation  turns  entirely  on  this  : Pompey,
professing  not  to  be  attacking  Caesar,  but  to  be  making  an
arrangement  which  he  considers  fair  to  him,  says  that  Curio
is  deliberately  seeking  pretexts  for  strife.  However,  he  is
strongly  against,  and  evidently  alarmed  at,  the  idea  of  Caesar
becoming  consul-designate  before  handing  over  his  army
and  province.  He  is  being  attacked  with  some  violence,
and  his  whole  second  consulship  is  being  roughly  criticised
by  Curio.^  Mark  my  words — if  they  push  their  suppression
of  Curio  to  extremes,  Caesar  will  interpose  in  favour  of  the
vetoing  tribune;  if,  as  it  seems  they  will  do,  they  shrink
from  this,  Caesar  will  stay  in  his  province  as  long  as  he
chooses.  The  vote  given  by  each  is  in  the  memorandum
of  city  events ; “ from  which  pick  out  what  is  worth  reading  :
skip  much,  especially  the  hissing  at  the  games  and  accounts
of  funerals  and  other  unimportant  gossip.  It  has  a good
deal  worth  knowing.  The  fact  is,  I prefer  erring  on  the
side  of  telling  what  you  don’t  want,  to  passing  over  any-
thing necessary.  I am  glad  that  you  have  interested  your-
self in  the  business  of  Sittius.  But  since  you  suspect  the
men  I sent  to  you  of  being  of  doubtful  fidelity,  please  act
as  my  agent  yourself.

CCLXVII  (A  VI,  4)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Tarsus,  June

I ARRIVED  at  Tarsus  on  the  5th  of  June.  There  I was  dis-
turbed on  many  accounts — a serious  war  in  Syria ; serious

^ Because  in  it  (b.c.  55)  the  legislation  was  passed  which  gave  Ccesar
his  present  claims,  i.e.^  the  law  of  Trebonius  giving  him  five  more  years
‘n  his  province.

^ Not  the  public  gazette  {acta),  but  the  private  one  which  Cselius
caused  to  be  drawn  up  for  Cicero’s  benefit.

II.  N

178

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

cases  of  brigandage  in  Cilicia ; difficulty  in  fixing  on  any  de-
finite scheme  of  administration,  considering  that  only  a few
days  remained  of  my  year  of  office  ; and,  greatest  difficulty  of
all,  the  necessity,  according  to  the  decree  of  the  senate,  of
leaving  some  one  at  the  head  of  the  province.  No  one  could
be  less  suitable  than  the  quaestor  Mescinius  ’ — for  of  Caelius
I don’t  hear  a word.  Far  the  best  course  appears  to  be  to
leave  my  brother  Quintus  with  imperium.  But  in  doing
that  many  disagreeable  consequences  are  involved — our
separation,  the  risk  of  a war,  the  ill-conduct  of  the  soldiers,"
hundreds  of  others.  What  a nuisance  the  whole  business  is  !
But  let  fortune  look  to  it,  since  any  great  exercise  of  reason
is  out  of  the  question.  As  for  you,  since  by  this  time,  I
hope,  you  are  safe  at  Rome,  you  will  as  usual  be  good
enough  to  look  after  everything  which  you  may  understand
to  affect  my  interests,  especially  in  regard  to  my  Tullia,
about  whose  marriage  I have  written  to  Terentia  my  decision,
since  you  were  in  Greece.  In  the  next  place,  see  to  the
honour  to  be  decreed  to  me : for  owing  to  your  absence
from  Rome,  I fear  that  the  motion  in  the  senate,  in  virtue
of  my  despatch,  was  not  sufficiently  pressed.  The  following
I will  write  to  you  in  a more  enigmatical  style  than  usual —
your  sagacity  will  smell  out  the  meaning  : my  wife‘s  freedmajt
— you  know  whom  I mea^t — seemed  to  me^  from  a remark  he
casually  let  fall  the  other  day,  to  have  cooked  his  accounts  as  to
the  purchase  of  the  property  of  the  Croto7iian  tyrannicide.  I
really  fear  that  you  may  have  7ioticed  somethmg.  Pray  on
your  sole  responsibility,  examine  thoroughly  into  the  7natter
and  77iake  the  remainder  completely  secure

^ See  p.  167.

2 He  has  lately  heard  of  the  murder  of  two  of  the  sons  of  Bibulus  in
a mutiny  of  Gabinius’s  soldiers  in  Egypt.  See  next  letter.

^ Written  in  Greek.  The  phrase  dtdoiKa  Sb  voriayc  can  only

mean  as  above,  “I  fear  you  have  noticed  something,”  not  as  Tyrrell
and  others  translate,  “ I fear  there  is  something  you  have  not  noticed.”
Cicero  has  apparently  been  alarmed  by  some  sentence  in  a letter  of
Atticus.  We  don’t  know  what  had  happened,  but  in  some  way  Philo-
timus,  Terentk’s  freedman,  had  dealt  with  Milo’s  (the  “ Crotonian
tyrannicide,”  in  allusion  to  Milo,  the  runner  of  Croton)  confiscated
property.  Now  we  are  told  by  Asconius  (§  159)  that,  owing  to  his
immense  debts,  Milo’s  property  was  transferred  to  the  sector  for  a
nominal  sum  {bona  mis  propter  ccHs  alieni  niagnitudinem  semuncia
veniei'unt).  When  there  is  no  balance,  the  agent  will  generally  be

A IV,  4,  5

TO  ATTICUS

179

I cannot  express  the  extent  of  my  fear.  Pray  let  a letter
from  you  fly  to  meet  me.  I write  this  in  haste,  being  on
the  march,  and  with  the  army.  Love  to  Pilia,  and  the
prettiest  of  maids,  Csecilia.

CCLXVIII  (A  VI,  5)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Tarsus,  26  June

By  this  time  you  must  surely  be  in  Rome ; and  I rejoice  at
your  safe  arrival  there,  if  it  is  so.  As  long,  in  fact,  as  you
were  absent  from  town,  you  seemed  to  me  farther  removed
from  me  than  if  you  were  at  home,  for  my  own  affairs  were
less  known  to  me,  and  so  were  those  of  the  state.  Where-
fore, though  I hope  by  the  time  you  read  this  to  be  far  ad-
vanced on  my  way  home,  pray  send  letters  frequently,  and  as
talkative  as  possible  on  every  kind  of  subject,  to  meet  me :
above  all,  on  the  subject  on  which  I wrote  to  you  before :
“ my  wife^s  freedman^  as  in  our  meetings  and  conversations  he
continually  stammered  and  seemed  at  a loss,  appeared  to  me  to
have  a little  cooked  the  accounts  of  the  CrotonianP  Please  run
that  to  earth,  as  is  your  wont ; but  still  more  the  following  :
When  leaving  the  city  of  the  seven  hills  he  handed  in  an  account
of  two  debts  of  2^  and  48  mince  due  to  Camillus  : and  entered
himself  as  liable  for  24  mince  from  the  Crotonian’s  estate,  and
48  from  the  property  in  the  Chersonese.  And  having  received
in  legacies  two  sums  of  640  mince,  of  this  he  says  that  not  a
Mnny  has  been  paid,  though  it  was  all  due  on  the  \st  of  the  2nd
month:  but  that  Mild's  freedman,  the  namesake  of  Conon's
father  (Timotheus),  had  entirely  failed  to  provide  for  the  pay-
ment of  the  money.  In  regard,  then,  to  this  money,  if  possible
secure  the  whole  amount,  and  if  not,  don't  neglect  the  interest
calculated  from  the  above-mentioned  day.  I have  felt  much

suspected.  Philotimus’s  connexion  with  the  affair  we  have  already
heard  of.  See  p.  142.

i8o

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

alarm  about  this  all  the  days  I had  to  endure  him.  For  he
visited  me  to  survey  the  situatioii.,  and  almost  with  a hope  of
something  turning  up.  But  when  he  gave  up  that  hope  he
quitted  7ne  ivithout  reason  assigned.,  and  with  the  remark:  “/
yield,

‘ ’ Twere  shame  to  linger  here.  ’ ” ^

And  he  flung  in  my  teeth  the  proverb,  “ Never  refuse  a good
offer.”  ^ See  to  the  surplus,  and  do  the  best  that  can  be  done
in  the  matter.

Although  I am  now  almost  at  the  end  of  my  year’s  full  term
of  office — for  there  are  only  thirty-three  days  left — I am  yet
overpowered  with  anxiety  for  the  province  to  the  highest
possible  degree.  For  as  Syria  is  in  a war  fever,  and  Bibulus
has  the  burden  of  an  extreme  anxiety  as  to  the  war  in  the
midst  of  such  bitter  private  sorrow,^  and  as  his  legates,
qusestor,  and  friends  write  to  me  to  come  to  his  aid,  though
I have  only  a weak  army  (the  auxiliaries  are  certainly  good,
Galatians,  Pisidians,  Lycians — for  they  are  the  flower  of  my
force),  yet  I thought  it  my  duty  to  keep  my  army  as  near  as
possible  to  the  enemy,  as  long  as  the  decree  of  the  senate
allowed  me  to  remain  governor  of  the  province.  But  what
pleases  me  most  is  that  Bibulus  is  not  importunate  ; he  writes
to  me  about  everything  rather  than  this,  and  the  day  of
my  departure  is  insensibly  creeping  on.  When  that  arrives
there  is  another  “ problem  ” — who  to  put  in  charge,  unless  my
quaestor  Caldus^  shall  have  arrived,  of  whom  as  yet  I have
had  no  certain  intelligence.  I should  like,  by  Hercules,  to
compose  a longer  letter,  but  I neither  have  anything  to  tell
you,  nor  can  I jest  for  anxiety.  Good-bye,  therefore,  and
give  my  love  to  the  little  maid  “ Atticula  ” and  our  Pilia.

^ In  Greek.  The  quotation  is  from  Horn.  11.  ii.  298,  aiaxpoif  toi
Srfpov  re  fievsiv  Keveov  re  vkecdai.

^ rd  fi'ev  diSo/xeva,  sc.  dtxov,  or  some  such  word.

^ The  murder  of  his  sons  in  Egypt.

^ See  p.  164.

A VI,  5,  7

TO  ATTICUS

l8l

CCLXIX  (A  VI,  7)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Tarsus,  June  (after  the  26th)

Quintus  the  younger  has  managed  to  reconcile  his  father
to  your  sister.  He  shewed  real  filial  feeling  in  the  matter ;
and  though  it  is  true  that  I earnestly  exhorted  him  to  do
so,  yet  my  persuasion  fell  on  willing  ears.  Your  letter
moved  us  both  very  strongly.  Well ! I feel  confident  that
things  are  as  we  wish.  I have  written  to  you  twice  about
money  matters  in  Greek,  and  enigmatically — if  the  letters
have  but  reached  you.  Of  course  no  active  step  is  to
be  taken.  Yet,  by  putting  plain  questions  to  him^  about
Milo’s  debts,  and  by  urging  him  to  fulfil  his  obligations
to  me,  you  will  do  some  good.  I have  ordered  my  quaestor
Mescinius  to  await  me  at  Laodicea,  that  I may  be  able,  in
accordance  with  the  Julian  law,  to  leave  two  copies  of  my
accounts  complete  in  two  cities.  I then  intend  to  go  to
Rhodes  for  the  sake  of  the  boys,  thence  as  soon  as  possible
to  Athens,  though  the  Etesian  winds  are  strong  against  me.
But  I wish  to  get  home  while  the  present  magistrates  are  in
office,  whose  good  disposition  to  myself  I have  experienced
in  the  matter  of  the  supplication.  Nevertheless,  be  sure
you  send  a letter  to  meet  me,  to  tell  me  whether  in  your
opinion  there  is  any  reason  on  the  score  of  politics  for  my
delaying  my  return.  Tiro  would  have  written  to  you,  only
I left  him  seriously  ill  aFlssus.  But  I have  news  that  he  is
better.  Nevertheless  I am  distressed.  For  nothing  can
exceed  that  young  man’s  purity  of  conduct  and  attention  to
business.  '

^ Philotimus.  See  the  two  previous  letters.

82

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

CCLXX  (f  VIII,  13)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (IN  CILICIA)
Rome  (June)

I CONGRATULATE  you  on  a son-in-law  who  is,  on  my  word,  the
best  of  men : for  that  is  my  opinion  of  him.  Some  other
blemishes  in  his  character,  by  which  he  has  hitherto  stood
in  his  own  light,  are  already  shaken  off  by  age ; and,  if  any
remain,  I feel  sure  that  they  will  be  quickly  removed  by
your  society  and  influence,  and  by  the  modesty  of  Tullia.
For  he  is  not  obstinate  in  vice,  nor  blunted  beyond  the
power  of  understanding  the  higher  life.  Last,  but  not  least,
I am  very  fond  of  him.

You  will  be  eager,  my  dear  Cicero,  to  hear  that  our  friend
Curio  had  a fine  conclusion  to  his  veto  of  the  decrees  con-
cerning the  provinces.  For  on  a motion  in  regard  to  the
veto  being  brought  before  the  house — a motion  ordered  by
decree  of  the  senate — and  when  M.  Marcellus  had  proposed
that  the  tribunes  should  be  remonstrated  with,  a full  senate
voted  a direct  negative.  The  fact  is  that  Pompey  is  now  so
out  of  sorts, ^ that  he  can  scarcely  find  anything  to  suit  him.
They  have  come  round  to  this — that  Caesar  is  to  be  allowed  to
stand  for  the  consulship  without  giving  up  army  or  provinces.
How  Pompey  is  likely  to  endure  this  I will  write  you  word
as  soon  as  I know.  What  is  to  happen  to  the  Republic,  if
he  resists  this  in  arms  or  ignores  it,  that  will  be  the  concern
of  you  rich  seniors.  At  the  moment  of  my  writing  Hortensius
is  dying.

^ Stomacho  ita  languenti,  referring  by  a double  entendre  to  his  illness.
See  p.  168.

F VIII,  13  ; II,  17  TO  GNyEUS  SALLUSTIUS

183

CCLXXI  (F  II,  17)

TO  GN^US  SALLUSTIUS  (PROQU^STOR  IN
SYRIA)

Tarsus,  18  July

Your  orderly  delivered  me  your  letter  at  Tarsus  on  the  17th
of  July,  and  I will  now  proceed  to  answer  it,  as  I perceive
is  your  wish,  in  detail.  About  my  successor  I have  heard
nothing,  and  I don’t  think  there  will  be  one.  There  is  no
reason  for  my  not  leaving  the  province  to  the  day,  especially
as  all  fear  from  the  Parthians  is  removed.  I am  strongly
inclined  to  stop  nowhere.  I think  I shall  go  to  Rhodes  for
the  sake  of  the  boys,  but  of  even  that  I am  not  certain.  I
wish  to  arrive  outside  the  city  as  soon  as  possible,  yet  the
course  of  politics  and  events  in  Rome  will  guide  the  course
of  my  journey.  Your  successor  cannot  in  any  case  make
such  haste  as  to  enable  you  to  meet  me  in  Asia.  As  to
delivering  the  copies  of  accounts,  your  non-delivery  of  them,
for  which  you  say  Bibulus  gave  you  licence,  is  no  incon-
venience to  me  : but  I scarcely  think  you  are  justified  in  so
doing  by  the  Julian  law,  which  Bibulus  disregards  on  a
certain  settled  principle,^  but  which  I think  you  ought  cer-
tainly to  observe.  You  say  that  the  garrison  ought  not  to
have  been  withdrawn  from  Apamea  ; I see  that  others  think
the  same,  and  I am  much  annoyed  that  rather  unpleasant
remarks  have  been  made  by  my  ill-wishers.  As  to  whether
the  Parthians  have  crossed  or  not  I perceive  that  you  are
the  only  man  who  has  any  doubt.  Accordingly,  all  the
garrisons,  which  I had  raised  to  a state  of  great  effectiveness,
I have  been  induced  by  the  positive  assertions  I hear  made
to  dismiss.  As  to  my  quaestor’s  accounts,  it  was  neither
reasonable  that  I should  send  them  to  you,  nor  were

^ Because  he  would  not  acknowledge  the  Julian  laws  of  B.C.  59,
which  he  considered  to  have  been  rendered  null  and  void  by  his  ohnun-
tiatio.

184

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

they  then  made  up.  I think  of  depositing  them  at  Apamea.
Of  the  booty  taken  by  me  no  one,  except  the  quaestors  of
the  city — that  is,  the  Roman  people — has  touched  or  will
touch  a farthing.  At  Laodicea  I think  I shall  accept  sureties
for  all  public  money,  so  that  both  I and  the  people  may  be
insured  against  loss  in  transit.  As  to  what  you  say  about
the  100,000  drachmae,  in  a matter  of  that  kind  no  conces-
sion to  anyone  is  possible  on  my  part.  For  every  sum  of
money  is  either  treated  as  booty,  in  which  case  it  is  adminis-
tered by  the  prcefecti^  or  it  is  paid  over  to  me,  in  which  case
it  is  administered  by  the  quaestor.  You  ask  me  what  my
opinion  is  as  to  the  legions  which  the  senate  has  ordered
for  Syria.  ^ I had  my  doubts  before  about  their  coming  ;
now  I feel  no  doubt,  if  news  is  received  in  time  of  there
being  peace  in  Syria,  that  they  will  not  come.  I see  that
Marius,  the  successor  to  the  province,  will  be  slow  in  coming
precisely  because  the  Senate  has  decreed  that  he  should  ac-
company the  legions.

There’s  the  answer  to  one  letter.  Now  for  the  second.
You  ask  me  to  recommend  you  as  earnestly  as  possible  to
Bibulus.  In  this  matter  inclination  on  my  part  is  not  want-
ing, but  it  seems  to  me  to  be  a proper  opportunity  for  ex-
postulating with  you : for  you  are  the  only  man  of  all
Bibulus’s  staff  who  never  informed  me  of  his  complete
and  causeless  alienation  from  me.  For  a number  of  people
reported  to  me  that,  when  there  was  a great  alarm  at  Antioch,
and  great  hopes  were  entertained  of  me  and  my  army,  he
was  accustomed  to  say  that  they  would  prefer  to  endure  any-
thing rather  than  be  thought  to  have  wanted  my  help.  I am  not
at  all  annoyed  that,  from  the  loyalty  due  from  a qujestor  to
his  praetor,  you  say  nothing  of  this  : although  I was  informed
of  the  treatment  you  are  receiving.  He,  for  his  part,  when
writing  to  Thermus  about  the  Parthian  war,  never  sent  me  a
line,  though  he  knew  that  the  danger  from  that  war  specially
affected  me.  The  only  subject  on  which  he  wrote  to  me
was  the  augurship  of  his  son  : ^ in  regard  to  which  I was  in-

^ These  are  the  two  legions,  of  which  one  was  to  be  supplied  by
Pompey,  and  one  by  Caesar,  but  which  eventually  both  came  to  Italy
from  Caesar’s  army,  and  were  not  sent  to  Syria.

^ Apparently  for  the  vacancy  which  was  filled  up  at  the  beginning  of
this  year  by  M.  Antonius  or  Q.  Cassius  Longinus.  The  surviving  son

F II,  17,  15

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS

185

duced  by  compassion,  and  by  the  friendly  feelings  I had
always  entertained  to  Bibulus,  to  be  at  the  pains  of  writing  to
him  with  the  greatest  cordiality.  If  he  is  universally  ill-
natured — which  I never  thought — I am  the  less  offended  by
his  conduct  to  me : but  if  he  is  on  special  bad  terms  with
me,  a letter  from  me  will  do  you  no  good.  For  instance,  in
his  despatch  to  the  senate,  Bibulus  took  the  whole  credit  for
matters  in  which  we  both  had  a share.  He  says  in  it  that
he  had  secured  that  the  rate  of  exchange  should  be  to  the
public  advantage.  Again — and  this  is  wholly  my  doing —
the  declining  to  employ  Transpadane  auxiliaries  he  mentions
as  a concession  of  his  own,  also  to  the  profit  of  the  people.
On  the  other  hand,  when  a thing  is  entirely  his  own  doing,
he  brings  me  into  it : “When  we  demanded  more  corn  for
the  auxiliary  cavalry  ” he  writes.  Surely,  again,  it  is  the  mark
of  a small  mind,  and  one  which  from  sheer  ill-nature  is  poor
and  mean,  that  because  the  senate  conferred  the  title  of  king
on  Ariobarzanes  through  me,  and  commended  him  to  me,
he  in  his  despatch  does  not  call  him  king,  but  the  “ son  of
king  Ariobarzanes.”  Men  of  this  temper  are  all  the  worse
if  favours  are  asked  of  them.  Nevertheless,  I have  yielded
to  your  wish,  and  have  written  him  a letter,  with  which  you
can  do  what  you  like  when  you  have  received  it.

CCLXXII  (F  II,  15)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (AT  ROME)

(Asia)  August

Nothing  could  have  been  more  correct  or  wise  than  your
dealings  with  Curio  as  to  my  supplicatio : and,  by  Hercules,
the  business  was  settled  exactly  as  I wished,  both  from  its
speed  and  because  the  person  whom  it  irritated — the  rival,  I

of  Bibulus  (L.  Calpurnius  Bibulus) — by  his  wife  Porcia,  afterwards  wife
of  M.  Brutus — lived  till  about  B.c.  31,  and  wrote  a memoir  of  his  step-
father Brutus.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

186

mean,  of  us  both  ^ — voted  with  the  man  who  complimented
my  achievements  in  terms  of  extraordinary  praise.  Where-
fore let  me  tell  you  I have  hopes  of  the  next  step  : so  be
prepared  for  it.  I am  glad  in  the  first  place  to  hear  your
compliments  to  Dolabella,  and  in  the  second  place  to  find
that  you  like  him.  For  what  you  say  of  the  possibility  of  his
being  reformed  by  Tullia’s  good  sense,  I know  to  what  letter
of  your  own  it  is  an  answer.®  What  if  you  were  to  read  the
letter  which  I wrote  to  Appius  at  the  time  after  reading  yours?
But  what  would  you  have  ? It  is  the  way  of  the  world.
What  is  done  is  done,  and  heaven  prosper  it ! I hope  I shall
find  him  an  agreeable  son-in-law,  and  in  that  respect  your
kindness  will  be  of  much  assistance.

Politics  make  me  very  anxious.  I am  fond  of  Curio  : I
wish  Caesar  to  shew  himself  an  honest  man : I could  die  for
Pompey  : but  after  all  nothing  is  dearer  in  my  sight  than  the
Republic  itself.  In  this  you  are  not  making  yourself  very
conspicuous,  for  you  seem  to  me  to  have  your  hands  tied —
by  being  at  once  a good  citizen  and  a good  friend.  On
quitting  my  province,  I have  put  my  quaestor  Caelius  in  com-
mand. “A  mere  boy,”  say  you.  Yes,  but  a quaestor,  a
young  man  of  high  rank,  and  in  accordance  with  nearly  uni-
versal precedent : for  there  was  no  one  who  had  held  higher
office  for  me  to  put  in  that  position.  Pomptinus  had  de-
parted long  ago  : my  brother  Quintus  could  not  be  induced  :
moreover,  if  I had  left  him,  enemies  would  have  said  that  I
had  not  really  left  the  province  at  the  end  of  a year,  in  ac-
cordance with  the  decree  of  the  senate,  since  I left  a second
self  behind  me.  Perhaps  they  might  even  have  added,  that
the  senate  had  ordered  that  those  should  govern  provinces
who  had  not  done  so  before;  whereas  my  brother  had
governed  Asia  for  three  years.  In  fine,  I have  now  no
anxieties : if  I had  left  my  brother  behind,  I should  have
been  afraid  of  everything.  Lastly,  not  so  much  of  my  own
initiative,  as  following  the  precedent  set  by  the  two  most

^ Hirrus,  who  stood  for  the  augur.ship  against  Cicero  in  b.c.  53,  and
for  the  sedileship  against  Curio  in  B.c.  51.

^ A triumph.

^ He  means  that  by  the  complimentary  remarks  as  to  Dolabella,
Caelius  had  tried  to  do  away  with  the  impression  likely  to  have  been
made  by  what  he  had  said  about  Dolabella  before  (Letter  CCXLI).

Fii,  i5;xv,  II  TO  C.  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS  1 87

powerful  men  of  the  day,  who  have  secured  the  allegiance  of
all  the  Cassii  and  Antonii,^  I have  not  so  much  been  desirous
to  attract  a young  man  to  myself,  as  unwilling  to  repel  him
You  must  needs  praise  this  policy  of  mine : for  it  cannot
now  be  changed.  You  did  not  write  clearly  enough  to  me
about  Ocella,  and  it  was  not  mentioned  in  the  gazette.  Your
doings  are  so  well  known,  that  even  on  the  other  side  of
Mount  Taurus  the  story  of  Matrinius  was  heard.  Unless
the  Etesian  winds  delay  me,  I shall,  I hope,  see  you  before
long.

CCLXXIII  (F  XV,  II)

TO  C.  CLAUDIUS  MARCELLUS  (CONSUL)
(Asia,  August)

How  much  trouble  you  have  taken  as  to  the  honour  to  be
bestowed  on  me,  and  how  far  your  conduct  as  consul  in
complimenting  me  and  promoting  my  dignity  has  been
exactly  the  same  as — in  common  with  your  ancestors  and
your  whole  family — it  had  always  been  before,  though  facts
spoke  for  themselves,  I have  nevertheless  been  informed  by
letters  from  all  my  friends.  Accordingly,  there  is  no  service
so  great  that  I am  not  bound  and  fully  purposed  zealously
and  gladly  to  do  in  your  interests.  For  it  makes  a great
difference  who  the  man  is  to  whom  one  is  under  an  obliga-
tion : but  there  is  no  one  to  whom  I preferred  to  be  under
an  obligation  before  yourself,  to  whom,  while  common  in-
terests and  kindnesses  received  both  from  your  father  and
yourself  had  already  closely  united  me,  there  is  now  added
what  in  my  opinion  is  the  strongest  bond  of  all,  the  fact
that  your  present  and  past  administration  of  the  Republic
(the  thing  dearest  to  me  in  the  world)  is  of  such  a nature,
that  I cannot  disown  an  obligation  to  you  in  my  single

^ Pompey  had  chosen  Cassius,  Csesar  Antonius,  as  their  quaestors.
Cicero  argues  that  he  has  done  less — for  he  has  only  employed  the
quaestor  assigned  him  by  lot  (vol.  i.,  p.  73  ; 2 Phil.  § 50).

i88

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

person  as  great  as  that  which  all  loyalists  put  together  owe
you.  Wherefore  I wish  you  the  success  which  you  deserve,
and  which  I feel  confident  you  will  have.  Unless  my
voyage,  which  falls  in  precisely  with  the  Etesian  winds,
delays  me,  I hope  to  see  you  shortly.

CCLXXIV  (F  III,  12)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  ROME)
SiDA,  3 August

I WILL  first  congratulate  you — for  that  is  what  the  order
of  events  demands  : and  then  I will  speak  of  myself.  I do
warmly  congratulate  you  on  the  result  of  the  trial  for  bribery,
and  not  on  what  nobody  ever  had  any  doubt  about — your
acquittal — but  on  the  fact  which,  the  better  citizen,  the  more
illustrious  man,  the  more  loyal  friend  you  are,  the  greater
the  marks  of  virtue  and  industry  distinguishing  you,  is  the
more  to  be  wondered  at,  namely,  that  no  secret  ill-will  was
found  lurking  even  in  the  concealment  of  the  ballot  bold
enough  to  attack  you.  It  is  a fact  scarcely  consistent  with
the  circumstances,  the  men,  and  the  morals  of  our  day.  I
have  not  been  so  much  struck  by  anything  for  a long
time  past.

Now  as  to  myself — for  a moment  put  yourself  in  my
place,  and  imagine  yourself  to  be  just  what  I am.  If  you
have  no  difficulty  in  finding  something  to  say,  don’t  excuse
my  hesitation.  I,  indeed,  would  hope  for  myself  and  my
Tullia,  as  you  most  kindly  and  politely  express  your  wishes,
that  what  has  been  done  by  my  family  without  my  know-
ledge may  turn  out  to  our  happiness.  But  that  the  marriage
happened  to  take  place  at  that  particular  time — I hope  and
desire  that  it  may  not  be  wholly  without  happiness,  yet  after
all  it  is  your  wisdom  and  kindness  which  gives  me  more
ground  for  that  hope  than  the  opportuneness  of  it.^  Ac-

^ Cicero  is  trying  to  excuse  the  fact  that  Dolabella’s  marriage  to
Tullia  was  just  at  the  time  that  he  was  prosecuting  Claudius.

Fill,  12  TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  1 89

cordingly,  I cannot  think  how  to  end  what  I have  begun  to
say ; for  I ought  not  to  make  any  gloomy  remark  on  an
event  which  you  honour  with  your  felicitations,  and  yet
after  all  there  is  something  in  it  which  stings  me.  But  in
this  matter  there  is  one  thing  of  which  I am  not  afraid  of
your  not  being  fully  aware — that  what  was  done  was  done
by  others,  to  whom  I have  left  a charge  that  during  my
absence  they  should  not  refer  to  me,  but  should  act  on  their
own  judgment.  Here  I am  met  by  the  question,  “What
would  you  have  done  if  you  had  been  at  home?”  I should
have  approved  of  the  match ; as  to  the  time,  I should  have
done  nothing  without  your  consent,  or  without  consulting
you.  You  see  how  I have  all  this  time  been  sweating  under
the  hard  task  of  finding  how  to  maintain  what  I am  bound
to  maintain,  and  yet  not  offend  you.^  Relieve  me,  then,  of
this  burden : for  I think  I have  never  handled  a more
difficult  cause.  Be  sure  of  this  in  any  case : had  I not  at
that  very  time  already  completed  the  whole  business  with
the  greatest  zeal  for  the  maintenance  of  your  highest  re-
putation— although  I think  my  old  affection  for  you  admits
of  no  addition — yet  when  this  marriage  was  announced
to  me,  I should  have  defended  your  honour,  not  indeed
with  greater  zeal,  but  more  keenly,  openly,  and  markedly.

On  my  way  from  my  province,  after  the  conclusion  of  my
year  of  command,  as  I was  approaching  Sida  on  board  ship,
accompanied  by  Q.  Servilius,  a letter  from  home  was  de-
livered to  me  on  the  3rd  of  August.  I at  once  told
Servilius — for  he  seemed  somewhat  put  out — that  he  might
expect  greater  exertions  on  my  part  in  all  ways.  In  short :
I have  not  become  at  all  better  disposed  to  you  than  I was,
but  I have  become  much  more  energetic  in  declaring  my
good  disposition.  For  as  our  old  difference  made  me  more
on  my  guard  against  giving  any  ground  for  thinking  our
reconciliation  feigned,  so  this  new  marriage  connexion  gives
me  fresh  anxiety  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  any  diminution
of  my  extreme  affection  for  you.

^ Cicero  feels  that  the  case  is  an  awkward  one ; and  his  style  be-
comes laboured  and  involved  in  trying  to  put  it  pleasantly.

90

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET.  56

CCLXXV  (A  VI,  6)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

(SiDA,  II  August?)

While  employed  in  my  province  in  doing  everything  for
the  honour  of  Appius,  I suddenly  became  his  accuser’s
father-in-law.  “ Heaven  prosper  it,”  you  say.  So  say  I,  and
I am  sure  you  wish  it.  But  believe  me,  it  was  the  last
thing  I expected : in  fact,  I had  even  sent  confidential
messengers  to  my  wife  and  daughter  in  regard  to  Tiberius
Nero,  who  had  made  proposals  to  me ; but  they  arrived  at
Rome  after  the  betrothal  had  taken  place.  However,  I
hope  this  will  be  better.  I understand  that  the  ladies  are
much  pleased  with  the  young  man’s  accommodating  temper
and  courtesy.  As  for  the  rest,  pick  no  holes  !

But  you  now  ! Corn  doles  to  Athens  ? Do  you  approve
of  this  ? However,  my  treatise  ^ at  any  rate  did  not  forbid
it : for  that  was  not  a largess  to  citizens,  but  a gift  to  hosts.
Yet  do  you  bid  me  think  about  the  “propylon”  for  the
Academy,  though  Appius  has  abandoned  his  idea  about
Eleusis  ? ^ I am  sure  you  grieve  for  Hortensius.^  I am
heart-broken  myself : for  I had  resolved  to  live  on  very
intimate  terms  with  him.  1 have  put  Caelius  in  command
of  the  province : a mere  boy,  you  will  say,  and  perhaps
empty-headed,  with  neither  solidity  nor  self-control.  I
agree : but  nothing  else  was  possible.  The  letter,  indeed,
which  I received  from  you  a good  while  ago,  in  which  you
said  that  you  “ hesitated  ” as  to  what  I ought  to  do  about
leaving  a substitute,  gave  me  a twinge,  for  I saw  your  reasons

^ De  Repuhlica.  Atticus’s  present  of  corn  to  Athens  did  not  stand
on  the  same  ground  as  the  regular  distribution  of  cheap  corn  at  Rome,
which  Cicero  had  denounced  in  his  book.

See  p.  146.  Cicero  never  carried  out  his  idea  of  erecting  a pro-
pylon for  the  Academy,  and  indeed  he  never  had  money  to  spare  for
such  things,  being  one  of  those  men  who  handle  large  sums  and  yet  are
perpetually  in  difficulties.  Appius  appears  to  have  built  his.

^ See  Letter  CLXXI.  Hortensius  died  in  June.

A VI,  6

TO  ATTICUS

191

for  your  “ hesitation, ’ and  I had  the  very  same.  Hand
over  my  province  to  a mere  boy?  Well,  to  my  brother,
then  ? The  latter  was  against  my  interest : for  there  was
no  one  except  my  brother  whom  I could  prefer  to  my
quaestor  without  casting  a slur  on  him,  especially  as  he
was  of  noble  birth.  Nevertheless,  as  long  as  the  Parthians
appeared  to  be  threatening,  I had  resolved  to  leave  my
brother,  or  even  to  remain  myself,  contrary  to  the  decree
of  the  senate,  for  the  sake  of  the  Republic.  But  when
by  incredible  good  fortune  they  had  dispersed,  all  my
hesitation  was  at  an  end.  I saw  what  people  would
say:  “What,  leave  his  brother!  is  this  what  he  calls
not  holding  his  province  more  than  a year?  Did  not  the
senate,  again,  intend  that  the  governors  of  provinces  should
be  those  who  had  not  had  them  before  ? Yet  this  man
has  held  one  for  three  years  ! ” So  here  are  my  reasons
for  the  public  ear.  What  am  I to  give  you  privately?  I
should  never  have  been  without  anxiety  as  to  something
happening  from  ill-temper,  violent  language,  or  careless-
ness,^ as  will  happen  in  this  world.  Again,  if  his  son  did
anything — a mere  lad  and  a lad  full  of  self-confidence?
What  a distress  it  would  have  been  I His  father  was  re-
solved not  to  part  with  him,  and  was  annoyed  with  you  for
expressing  an  opinion  that  he  should  do  so.  But  as  to
Caelius,  as  things  are,  I don’t  say  that  I don’t  care  about  his
antecedents,  but  at  any  rate  I care  much  less.  Then  there
is  this  consideration : Pompey — so  strong  a man  and  in  so
secure  a position — selected  Q.  Cassius  without  regard  to
the  lot;  Caesar  did  the  same  in  the  case  of  Antony:  was
I to  put  such  a slight  on  one  regularly  assigned  me  by  lot,
as  to  make  him  act  as  a spy  on  any  man  I left  in  com-
mand? No,  the  course  I adopted  was  the  better  one,  and
for  it  there  are  many  precedents,  and  certainly  it  is  more
suited  to  my  advanced  time  of  life.  But,  good  heavens  1
what  credit  I have  given  you  in  his  eyes  I I read  him  the
letter  written,  not  by  you,  but  by  your  amanuensis.

My  friends’  letters  summon  me  to  a triumph — a thing

^ iTrkx^iv,  Irroxrh  “suspense  of  judgment,”  technical  terms  of  the
academic  Agnostics.

^ The  sharp  temper  of  Quintus  is  often  referred  to.  See  vol.  i.,
pp.  183-185.

192

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  /ET.  56

which,  in  view  of  the  resuscitation  of  my  reputation,  I do
not  think  I ought  to  neglect.  Wherefore,  my  dear  Atticus,
do  begin  to  wish  it  too,  that  I may  look  somewhat  less
foolish.

CCLXXVI  (F  III,  13)

TO  APPIUS  CLAUDIUS  PULCHER  (AT  ROME)
Asia  (August)

Just  as  though  I divined  that  some  day  or  other  I should
have  to  ask  for  your  zealous  support,  I worked  hard  for  your
reputation  when  the  question  of  your  actions  was  on  the
tapis.  However,  I will  not  disguise  the  truth : you  have
given  more  than  you  got.  For  every  single  person  has
written  to  tell  me  that,  not  only  by  the  weight  of  your  elo-
quence and  your  senatorial  vote — which  from  such  a man
were  quite  enough  for  me — but  also  by  personal  exertion,  by
offer  of  advice,  by  coming  to  my  house  and  calling  on  my
friends,  you  left  nothing,  however  troublesome,  for  anyone
else  to  do.  All  this  is  a much  greater  honour  to  me  than
the  thing  itself  for  which  the  trouble  is  being  taken.  For
the  outward  rewards  of  virtue  many  have  attained  with-
out possessing  virtue  : but  such  great  zeal  from  such  men  as
you  virtue  alone  can  secure.  Accordingly,  I set  before  my-
self as  the  profit  to  be  derived  from  our  friendship  that
friendship  itself,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more  fruitful,
especially  in  those  studies  to  which  we  have  both  devoted
ourselves.  For  I profess  myself  to  be  both  your  ally  in
politics,  on  which  our  sentiments  agree,  and  closely  united
in  daily  life,  which  we  devote  to  such  accomplishments  and
studies.  I could  have  wished  that  fate  had  so  ordained  it
that  you  could  value  all  my  family  as  highly  as  I do  yours.
Even  as  to  this,  however,  I have  a sort  of  intuition  which
prevents  my  despairing.  But  this  does  not  touch  you  : the
burden  is  wholly  mine.  I wish  you  to  clearly  understand
that  in  this  change  of  circumstances  something  hasbeen  added
to  my  affection  towards  you — to  which  no  addition  seemed

Fill,  13;  XV,  6 TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO

193

possible — rather  than  anything  detracted  from  it.  When  I
write  this  I hope  you  are  already  censor.  My  letter  is
all  the  shorter  and  more  modest  as  being  addressed  to  a
“ director  of  morals.”  ^

TO  M.  PORCIUS  CATO  (AT  ROME)
(Asia,  September)  ^

“ Right  glad  am  I to  be  praised  ” — says  Hector,  I think,  in
Naevius — “by  thee,  reverend  senior,  who  hast  thyself  been
praised.”  For  certainly  praise  is  sweet  that  comes  from
those  who  themselves  have  lived  in  high  repute.  For  my-
self, there  is  nothing  I should  not  consider  jnyself  to  have
attained  either  by  the  congratulation  contained  in  your
letter,  or  the  testimony  borne  to  mein  your  senatorial  speech:
and  it  was  at  once  the  highest  compliment  and  the  greatest
gratification  to  me,  that  you  willingly  conceded  to  friendship,
what  you  transparently  conceded  to  truth,  i And  if,  I don’t
say  all,  but  If  many ' were  Catos  in  our  state|:-in  which  it  is  a
matter  of  wonder  that  there  Us  even  one — what  triumphal
chariot  or  laurel  should  I have  compared  with  praise  from
you  ? For  in  regard  to  my  feelings,,  and  in  view  of  the  ideal
honesty  and  subtilty  lof’your  judgment,  nothing  can  be  more
complimentary  "tlTah  the  speech  of  yours,  which  has  been
copied  for  me  by  my  friends.  But  the  reason  of  my  wish,
for  I will  not  call  it  desire,  I have  explained  to  you  in  a
former  letter.  And  even  if  it  does  not  appear  to  you  to
be  entirely  sufficient,  it  at  any  rate  leads  to  this  conclusion
— not  that  the  honour  is  one  to  excite  excessive  desire,
but  yet  is  one  which,  if  offered  by  the  senate,  ought
certainly  not  to  be  rejected.  Now  I hope  that  that

^ Magister  moruvi^  i.e.^  censor.  In  the  de  Prov.  Cons.  § 46,  he
describes  the  censorship  as  viagisterium  morum^  for  the  censors  had
the  right  to  inquire  in  many  respects  into  the  private  life  of  citizens.

II.  O

194

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  /ET.  56

House,  considering  the  labours  I have  undergone  on  behalf  '
of  the  state,  will  not  think  me  undeserving  of  an  honour,
especially  one  that  has  become  a matter  of  usage.  And  if  this
turns  out  to  be  so,  all  I ask  of  you  is  that — to  use  your  own
most  friendly  words — since  you  have  paid  me  what  in  your
judgment  is  the  highest  compliment,  you  will  still  “ be
glad  ” if  I have  the  good  fortune  to  get  what  I myself  have
preferred.^  For  I perceive  that  you  have  acted,  felt,  arid
written  in  this  sense : and  the  facts  themselves  shew  that
the  compliment  paid  me  of  a supplicatio  was  agreeable  to  '
you,  since  your  name  appears  on  the  decree  ; for  decrees  of  '
the  senate  of  this  nature  are,  I am  aware,  usually  drawn  out  | '
by  the  warmest  friends  of  the  man  concerned  in  the  honour,  j *
I shall,  I hope,  soon  see  you,  and  may  it  be  in  a better  state  '
of  political  affairs  than  my  fears  forbode  ! i

CCLXXVIIl  (F  VIII,  12)

M.  C.^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (ON  HIS
JOURNEY  HOME)

Rome,  September

I AM  ashamed  to  confess  to  you  and  to  complain  of  the
injuries  done  me  by  Appius — that  most  ungrateful  of  men,
who  begins  to  hate  me  because  he  is  under  great  obligations
to  me;  and  since,  in  his  avarice,  he  could  not  constrain
himself  to  pay  his  debt,  he  has  declared  a secret  war  against
me,  yet  not  so  secret  either  but  that  many  people  reported!
it  to  me,  and  I myself  observed  without  difficulty  that  hef
was  harbouring  evil  thoughts  of  me.  When,  however,  I:
discovered  that  he  had  been  tampering  with  the  college,^!
then  that  he  had  been  openly  colloguing  with  certain  persons,  i

j Cato  had  voted  against  the  supplicatio^  and  Cicero  has  to  tax  his
skill  to  appear  not  to  be  vexed  (as  he  was),  and  to  assume  that  Cato’:

He  is  answer- 1

complimentary  speech  was  as  good  as  if  he  voted  for  it
ing  Cato’s  letter.  See  Letter  CCLXV.

Apparently  the  college  of  augurs,  to  which  Caelius  wished  to  be
elected.

F VIII,  12

M.  C/ELIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

195

deliberating  with  L.  Domitius  ^ — at  present  my  bitterest
enemy — and  expressing  a wish  to  offer  this  trifling  favour  to
Cn.  Pompeius,  I could  not  prevail  on  myself  to  upbraid  him
personally,  or  to  beg  one,  whom  I considered  owed  his  life
to  me,  to  refrain  from  injuring  me.  What,  then,  could  I do  ?
However,  I spoke  to  several  of  his  friends,  who  were  ac-
quainted with  my  services  to  him.  When  I perceived  that
he  did  not  think  me  even  worth  conciliating,  I preferred
putting  myself  under  an  obligation  to  his  colleague  ^ — a man
very  much  out  of  sympathy  with  me,  and  not  likely  to  be
very  well-disposed  to  me,  owing  to  my  friendship  with  you —
rather  than  endure  the  sight  of  that  ape.  When  he  ascertained
this,  he  flew  into  a rage  and  kept  exclaiming  that  I was
looking  for  an  excuse  for  hostility,  in  order  that,  since  he
had  not  done  what  I wanted  in  regard  to  the  money,  I might
cover  my  attack  upon  him  by  this  show  of  a personal  quarrel.
Since  then  he  has  not  ceased  egging  on  Servius  Pola  to  accuse
me,  and  concerting  measures  with  Domitius.  And  when
they  were  not  successful  in  securing  anyone  to  accuse  me
under  any  law,  they  wanted  me  to  be  attacked  under  a law
which  gave  them  no  ground  for  saying  a word.  Their  im-
pudence was  so  boundless,  that  they  secured  an  information
being  laid  against  me  under  the  Scantinian  law  ^ at  the  very
height  of  the  Circensian  games,  in  which  I was  presiding.
Scarcely  had  Pola  got  the  words  out  of  his  mouth,  when  I
laid  an  information  under  the  same  law  against  the  censor
Appius.  I never  saw  a more  successful  stroke.  For  it  has
been  approved  by  the  people,  and  not  all  the  lowest  of  them,
to  such  an  extent,  that  the  scandal  has  given  Appius  greater
pain  than  the  legal  proceedings.  Besides  this,  I have  started
an  action  for  recovering  a shrine  now  within  the  walls  of  his
house.

I am  much  disturbed  by  the  detention  of  the  slave  who
takes  this  letter  to  you.  For  since  the  receipt  of  your  last
he  has  been  more  than  forty  days  in  town.  I don’t  know
what  to  say  to  you.  You  know  that  Domitius  dreads  the
day  of  election.'*  I am  looking  forward  much  to  your  return

^ L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  consul  b.c.  54  with  Appius.

^ L.  Piso,  the  other  censor.

^ Against  unnatural  crimes.

* To  the  augurship,  which  Antony  got.  See  next  letter.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  50,  56

196

and  desire  to  see  you  as  soon  as  possible.  I beg  you  to  feel
as  much  vexed  at  my  wrongs,  as  you  think  I ever  grieve  at,
and  try  to  avenge  yours.

CCLXXIX  (F  VIII,  14)

C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (ON  HIS
JOURNEY  HOME)

Rome,  September

Taking  Arsaces  prisoner  and  storming  Seleucia  was  not
worth  your  missing  the  spectacle  of  events  which  have  been
going  on  here.  Your  eyes  would  never  have  ached  again,  if
you  had  only  seen  Domitius’s  look  when  he  lost  the  ele'ction.^
It  was  a very  full  comitia^  and  the  voting  was  evidently  on
party  lines  : a very  few  voted  from  motives  of  personal  con-
nexion or  obligation.  Accordingly,  Domitius  is  most  bitterly
angry  with  me.  He  never  hated  any  one  even  of  his  own
friends  so  much  as  he  does  me : and  all  the  more  so  that
he  thinks  the  augurship  has  been  snatched  from  him  un-
fairly, and  that  I am  at  the  bottom  of  it.  Now  he  is  furious
that  people  are  so  much  rejoiced  at  his  vexation,  and  that
there  was  only  one  man  more  zealous  for  Antony  than  I was.
For  the  young  Cn.  Domitius  himself  has  given  notice  of
action  against  the  young  Cn.  Saturninus — who  is  very  un-
popular owing  to  his  past  life.  The  trial  is  now  imminent,
with  good  hope,  too,  of  an  acquittal,  after  the  acquittal  of
Sextus  Peducaeus.  As  to  high  politics — I have  often  told
you  in  my  letters  that  I see  no  chance  of  peace  lasting  a
year  ; and  the  nearer  the  struggle  comes,  which  must  come,
the  clearer  does  that  danger  appear.  The  point,  on  which
the  men  in  power  are  bound  to  fight,  is  this  : Cn.  Pompeius
has  made  up  his  mind  not  to  allow  C.  Caesar  to  become
consul,  except  on  condition  of  his  first  handing  over  his  army
and  provinces : while  Caesar  is  fully  per-suaded  that  he  can-

^ To  the  college  of  augurs  (see  preceding  letter).  L.  Domitius  vas
already  a member  of  the  college  of  sacerdotes.

F VIII,  14  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO

197

not  be  safe  if  he  quits  his  army.  He,  however,  proposes  as
a compromise  that  both  should  give  up  their  armies.  So
that  mighty  love  and  unpopular  union  of  theirs  has  not
degenerated  into  mere  secret  bickering,  but  is  breaking  out
into  open  war.  Nor  can  I conceive  what  line  to  take  in  my
own  con3uct — and  I feel  sure  that  this  doubt  will  exercise

you  a good  deal  also — for  between  myself  and  these  meri^

there  are  ties  of  affdction  and  close  connexion,  since  it  is  the  ^ 1

cause,  not  the  men,  that  I dislike.  I think  you  are  alive  to
this  rule,  that  men  ought  in  a case  of  home  differences,  so
long  as  the  contest  is  carried  on  constitutionally  without  an
appeal  to  arms,  to  follow  the  party  most  in  the  tight : when
it  comes  to  war  and  the  camp,  the  stronger  party ; ^ and  to
make  up  one’s  mind  that  the  safer  course  is  the  better.  In
this  quarrel  I perceive  that  Cn.  Pompeius  has  on  his  side  the
senate  and  the  indices : that  Caesar  will  be  joined  by  all
whose  past  life  gives  them  reason  to  be  afraid,  or  their  future  i
no  reason  to  hope : that  there  is  no  comparison  between
their  armies.  On  the  whole,  there  is  time  enough  to  weigh
the  forces  of  both,  and  to  choose  sides.

I almost  forgot  what  above  everything  else  I was  bound
to  write  to  you.  Do  you  know  that  the  censor  Appius  is
doing  marvels?  Busying  himself  about  statues,  pictures,
land-owning,  and  debt  with  the  greatest  vigour  ? He  is  per-  -C
suaded  that  his  censorship  is  a kind  of  soap  or  soda.  I
think  he  is  wrong : while  he  is  meaning  to  wash  off  stains,
he  is  really  exposing  all  his  veins  and  vitals.  Hurry  home,  /
in  the  name  of  gods  and  men  ! Come  as  quickly  as  you  can  j
to  enjoy  a laugh,  that  a trial  under  the  Scantinian  law  should. \
be  before  Drusus,  and  that  Appius  should  be  making  regula-
tions about  statues  and  pictures.^  Believe  me,  you  ought  to
make  haste.  Our  friend  Curio  is  thought  to  have  acted
prudently  in  his  concession  as  to  Pompey’s  money  for  his
troops.  In  a word,  you  want  my  opinion  as  to  the  future.
Unless  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  goes  to  the  Parthian  war,

I see  that  a violent  quarrel  is  impending,  which  the  sword
and  main  force  will  decide.  Both  are  prepared  in  resolution

^ This  is  rather  like  Mr.  Pickwick’s  rule  as  dealing  with  two  election
crowds,  “ to  shout  with  the  largest.”

^ /.<?.,  about  the  amount  of  such  things  which  it  was  legal  for  a man
to  own.

198

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

and  forces.  If  it  could  only  be  transacted  without  extreme
danger,  fortune  is  preparing  for  you  a great  and  enjoyable
spectacle.

CCLXXX  (A  VI,  8)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Ephesus,  i October

Just  as  I had  resolved  to  write  to  you  and  had  actually
taken  up  my  pen,  Batonius  came  to  me  straight  from  his
ship  to  my  house  at  Ephesus,  and  gave  me  your  letter  on
the  29th  of  September.  I am  delighted  with  the  pleasant
nature  of  your  voyage,  with  Pilia’s  opportune  appearance,
and  also,  by  Hercules,  with  her  remarks  about  Tullia’s
marriage.

Batonius,  however,  brought  news  about  Caesar  that  is
really  terrifying,  and  he  enlarged  still  more  on  the  subject
in  conversation  with  Lepta.  I hope  what  he  said  was  false,
but  it  is  certainly  alarming : that  he  would  on  no  account
dismiss  his  army ; that  of  the  magistrates-elect  the  praetors,
Cassius  the  tribune,  Lentulus  the  consul,  side  with  him  ;
that  Pompey  is  thinking  of  leaving  the  city.  But  look  here  !
are  you  very  sorry  for  the  man  ^ that  is  wont  to  think  himself
more  than  a match  for  the  uncle  of  your  sister’s  son  ? But
what  men  to  be  beaten  by  ! ^ However,  to  business.  The
Etesian  winds  have  much  retarded  me.  Exactly  twenty
days,  too,  were  swallowed  up  by  the  Rhodian  open  ship.
On  the  ist  of  October,  as  I am  embarking  to  leave  Ephesus,
I give  this  letter  to  L.  Tarquitius,  who  is  leaving  the
harbour  at  the  same  time,  but  is  sailing  faster  than  I am.
I am  forced  to  wait  for  fair  weather  owing  to  the  open  ships
and  other  war  vessels  of  the  Rhodians  ; nevertheless,  nothing

‘ Probably  M.  Calidius,  who  had  failed  in  the  consular  elections.  He
seems  to  have  criticised  Cicero  as  an  orator.

^ The  successful  candidates,  C.  Claudius  Marcellus  and  L.  Com/^Bus
Lentulus  Crus,  consuls  for  b.c.  49.

A VI,  8,  9

TO  ATTICUS

199

can  exceed  the  hurry  1 am  in.  As  to  the  payment  to  the
Puteolanian,  many  thanks.  Now  please  look  into  affairs  at
Rome,  and  see  what  steps  you  think  I ought  to  take  as  to
the  triumph,  to  which  my  friends  invite  me.  • If  it  had  not
been  that  Bibulus,  who,  as  long  as  there  was  a single  enemy
in  Syria,  never  set  foot  out  of  doors  any  more  than  he  did
out  of  his  house  at  Rome,^  was  exerting  himself  to  get  a
triumph,  I should  have  been  quite  indifferent  on  the  matter.
Now,  however,  “ ’twere  base  to  say  no  word.”  ^ But  look
into  the  whole  matter,  that  we  may  be  able  to  decide  on  our
course  the  day  we  meet.  This  is  long  enough,  considering
my  haste,  and  that  I am  giving  the  letter  to  a man  who  will
arrive  with  me,  or  only  a little  before  me.  My  son  sends
his  kindest  regards  to  you.  Pray  give  the  same  from  us
both  to  Pilia  and  your  daughter.

CCLXXXI  (A  VI,  9)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Athens,  15  October

Immediately  on  my  landing  in  the  Piraeus,  on  the  14th
of  October,  I received  your  letter  from  the  hand  of  my
slave  Acastus.  Having  been  long  looking  forward  to  it,  I
was  surprised,  as  soon  as  I looked  at  the  letter  before
breaking  the  seal,  at  its  brevity ; when  I opened  it  I was
again  surprised  at  the  cramped  handwriting,  for  your  letters
are  generally  supremely  well-written  and  clear,  and,  to  make
a long  stciry  short,  I understood  from  the  fact  of  your
writing  like  that,  that  you  had  arrived  at  Rome  on  the  19th
of  September  in  a fit  of  fever.  Much  disturbed — but  not
more  than  I was  bound  to  be — I at  once  questioned
Acastus.  He  said  that  both  you  and  he  thought,  and  his
impression  was  confirmed  by  what  your  people  at  Rome  told

^ /.A,  during  his  consulship,  B.c.  59,  when  Csesar  ignored  his  ob-
nuntiatio.

^ ai(TXPov  (Tiomav  {(Sapfiapovg  d’  kav  \kyeiv).  Eurip.  Fr.

200

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  .^iT.  56

him,  that  it  could  not  be  anything  serious.  This  appeared
to  be  supported  by  an  expression  used  by  you  at  the  end  of
your  letter,  that  you  wrote  while  suffering  from  a “ slight  touch
of  fever.”  Yet  it  roused  my  gratitude,  as  well  as  my  sur-
prise, that  you  should,  in  spite  of  it,  have  written  to  me  with
your  own  hand.  So  enough  about  this.  For  I hope,  con-
sidering your  prudence  and  temperate  life,  and,  by  heaven,  I
feel  confident — as  Acastus  bids  me — that  by  this  time  you
are  as  well  as  I could  wish.

I am  glad  you  have  got  my  letter  from  Turranius.  Keep
an  eye,  an  you  love  me,  and  a very  keen  one,  upon  the
ambition  of  that  cooker  of  accounts.^  This  legacy  again —
which  I swear  is  a source  of  great  grief  to  me,  for  I loved
the  man — this  legacy  of  Precius  don’t  let  him  lay  a single
finger  upon.  You  will  say  that  I shall  want  some  ready
money  for  the  expenses  of  the  triumph,  which,  as  you
advise,  you  shall  find  me  neither  weakly  vain  in  seeking,  nor
over-modest  in  declining.  I gather  from  your  letter  that
Turranius  told  you  that  I had  handed  over  my  province  to
my  brother.  Do  you  think  I so  entirely  failed  to  grasp  the
wise  caution  of  your  letter?  You  said  your  judgment  was
in  “suspense.”  What  could  have  called  for  your  hesitation,
if  there  had  been  any  reason  whatever  for  deciding  that  a
brother  should  be  left  in  command,  and  such  a brother  ? I
took  your  meaning  to  be  “dogmatic  rejection,”"  not  “sus-
pension of  judgment.”  You  urged  in  regard  to  the  young
Quintus,  that  I should  not  leave  him  in  any  case.  “You
tell  me  my  own  dream.”  ^ The  same  points  occurred  to  us
both,  just  as  though  we  had  talked  it  over  together.  It  was
the  only  thing  to  be  done,  and  your  “ long  suspension  of
judgment  ” relieved  me  of  all  doubt.  But  I fancy  you  have
already  a letter  on  this  subject  written  in  more  detail.  I
intend  to  send  off  letter-carriers  to-morrow,  who  1 think  will
arrive  sooner  than  our  friend  Saufeius.  But  it  was  scarcely
decent  that  he  should  arrive  without  a letter  from  me  to

^ Philotimus,  a freed  man  of  Terentia’s,  whom  Cicero  suspected  of
dishonesty.  We  shall  hear  more  of  him.  The  sentence,  like  those  in
previous  letters  referring  to  him,  is  in  Greek  : TrapatpvXa^ov  ti)v  tov
(pvparov  <pi\orifi'iav  avTorara,  with  a pun  on  the  name  of  Philotimus.

* dOeTtjtrig.  For  ettoxv.  See  p.  19 1.

® Tovfibv  (ji>Eipov  Ifioif  “ you  but  repeat  my  own  thoughts.”

A VI,  9;  F XIV,  5

TO  TERENTIA

201

you.  In  your  turn,  pray  fulfil  your  promise  of  writing  fully
to  me  of  my  Tulliola,  that  is,  of  Dolabella,  of  politics — which
I foresee  will  be  in  a very  dangerous  situation — of  the
censors,  and  especially  what  is  taking  place  about  the  statues
and  pictures,  whether  the  matter  will  be  brought  before  the
senate.  I write  this  on  the  15th  of  October,  on  which  day,
you  tell  me,  Caesar  is  going  to  bring  four  legions  to
Placentia.^  Pray,  what  is  to  become  of  us  ? My  post  on
the  Acropolis  of  Athens  seems  to  me  at  present  the
best  one.

CCLXXXII  (F  XIV,  5)

TO  TERENTIA  (AT  ROME)

Athens,  16  October

If  you  and  my  darling  Tullia  are  well,  I and  my  dearest  boy
Cicero  are  so  too.  On  the  14th  of  October  I arrived  at
Athens,  after  experiencing  unfavourable  winds  and  a slow
and  unpleasant  voyage.  As  I was  disembarking,  Acastus
met  me  with  letters,  the  21st  day  since  his  start,  which  is
very  active  travelling.  I received  one  from  you,  in  which
you  tell  me  that  you  fear  your  previous  letters  did  not  reach
me.  I got  them  all : you  have  shewn  the  greatest  energy-
in  writing  me  full  accounts  of  everything,  and  I am  exceed-
ingly obliged  to  you.  I was  not  surprised  that  the  letter
brought  by  Acastus  was  short : for  you  are  expecting  me,
or  rather  us,  immediately  in  person  : and  we  are  anxious  to
reach  you  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  though  I am  fully
aware  to  what  a state  of  public  affairs  I am  coming : for  the
letters  brought  me  by  Acastus  from  many  of  my  friends
have  shewn  me  that  things  look  warlike,  so  that  when  I do
arrive  I shall  not  be  able  to  cloak  my  sentiments.  But  since

^ This  rumour,  referred  to  again,  caused  great  alarm  at  Rome,  but
was  false  (Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  31).  It  was  in  consequence  of  it,  how-
ever, that  the  consul  Marcellus  deputed  Pompey  to  raise  troops  in
Italy.

202

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

there  is  no  shirking  fate,  I shall  make  the  more  haste,  that
I may  consider  the  whole  crisis  with  greater  ease.  Pray,  as
well  as  your  health  will  permit,  come  as  far  as  you  can  to
meet  me.  As  to  the  inheritance  from  Precius — I am  deeply
grieved  at  it,  for  I loved  the  man — I wish  you  to  see  to
this  ; if  the  auction  takes  place  before  my  arrival,  let  Pom-
ponius,  or,  if  he  can’t,  Camillus  act  for  us.  As  soon  as  I
am  safe  at  home  I will  look  after  the  rest  of  the  business
myself.  But  if  you  have  already  started  from  Rome,  still
see  that  this  arrangement  is  made.  Dearest,  sweetest
Terentia,  as  you  love  me,  take  care,  all  of  you,  of  your
health.  Gooibye.

CCLXXXIII  (A  VII,  I)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Athens  (16  October)

I DID,  in  fact,  give  L.  Saufeius  a letter,  and  to  you  alone,
because,  though  I had  not  sufficient  time  for  writing,  I
was  yet  unwilling  that  a man  so  intimate  with  you  should
reach  you  without  a letter  from  me.  But  considering  the
deliberate  pace  adopted  by  philosophers,  I think  the  present
letter  will  reach  you  first.  If,  however,  you  have  already
received  the  former,  you  are  aware  that  I arrived  at  Athens
on  the  14th  of  October  : that  on  disembarking  at  the  Piraeus,
I received  your  letter  from  the  hands  of  Acastus  : that  I was
much  disturbed  at  your  having  arrived  at  Rome  with  a fever
on  you,  but  was  reassured  by  Acastus  bringing  the  news  I
wished  for  as  to  your  convalescence ; that  I was,  however,
horrified  at  what  your  letter  told  me  of  Caesar’s  legions ; and
urged  you  to  take  care  that  the  “ (pikorifiia  ” ^ of  him  you  wot
of  does  us  no  injury.  Lastly,  on  a subject  on  which  I had
long  ago  written  to  you,  but  Turranius  had  misinformed  you
at  Brundisium — as  I learnt  from  a letter  received  from  that

^ A pun  again  on  the  name  of  the  officious  or  self-seeking  Philotimus,
as  in  Letter  CCLXXXI,  p.  200.

A VII,  I

TO  ATTICUS

203

excellent  man  Xeno — I explained  briefly  why  I had  not
placed  my  brother  at  the  head  of  my  province.  Such  was
nearly  the  substance  of  that  letter.  Now  for  the  rest.  In
the  name  of  fortune,  do  devote  all  the  affection  with  which
you  have  blessed  me,  and  all  the  wisdom  you  possess —
which  in  my  judgment  is  unrivalled  on  every  subject — to
considering  my  entire  position.  For  I think  I foresee  such
a violent  struggle — unless  the  same  god,  who  relieved  me
from  fear  of  a Parthian  war  by  a stroke  of  luck  beyond
what  I had  ventured  to  hope,  shall  now  shew  regard  for  the
Republic — such  a struggle,  I say,  as  there  has  never  been
before.  Well ! this  is  a misery  which  I share  with  all  the
world.  I don’t  bid  you  reflect  on  that.  It  is  my  own  par-
ticular “ problem  ” that  I would  beg  you  to  take  up.  Don’t
you  see  that  it  was  on  your  advice  that  I sought  the  friend-
ship of  both  ? Yes,  and  I could  wish  that  I had  listened  to
your  most  friendly  hints  from  the  beginning :

“ But  in  my  breast  my  heart  thou  couldst  not  sway.”  ^

Yet  at  length,  after  all,  you  did  persuade  me  to  embrace  the
one,  because  he  had  done  me  eminent  service,  and  the
other,  because  he  was  so  powerful.  I did  so,  therefore  : and
by  shewing  them  every  kind  of  attention  contrived  that
neither  of  them  should  regard  anyone  with  more  affection
than  myself.  My  idea,  in  fact,  was  this — if  I were  allied
with  Pompey,  I should  not  hereafter  be  compelled  to  take
any  improper  step  in  politics,  nor,  if  I agreed  with  Caesar,
have  to  fight  with  Pompey  : for  their  union  was  so  close.
Now  there  is  impending,  as  you  shew,  and  as  I see,  a
mortal  combat  between  them.  Each  of  them,  again,  re-
gards me  as  his  own,  unless  by  any  chance  one  of  them
is  playing  a part.  Pompey,  of  course,  has  no  doubt : for
he  rightly  judges  that  his  present  view  of  politics  has  my
approbation.  From  each,  however,  I received  a letter,  at
the  same  time  as  yours,  of  a kind  calculated  to  shew  that
neither  values  anyone  in  the  world  above  myself.  But
what  am  I to  do  ? I don’t  mean  in  the  last  resort  of  all —
for,  if  it  shall  come  to  downright  war,  I see  clearly  that
it  is  better  to  be  beaten  with  the  one,  than  to  conquer

^ a\X’  kfibv  ovTTOTS  Ovjxov  ivi  arijOscrmv  tTreiOeg  (Horn.  Od.  ix.  33).

204

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  .CT.  56

with  the  other — but  as  to  what  will  be  in  actual  debate
when  I arrive : that  he  be  not  a candidate  without  return-
ing to  Rome — that  he  dismiss  his  army.  “ Speak,  Marcus
Tullius  What  am  I to  say?  “Wait,  please,  till  I have
an  interview  with  Atticus?”  It  is  no  time  for  shuffling.
Against  Caesar?  What  is  to  become  of  all  our  mutual
pledges  ? For  the  fact  is  that  I helped  him  to  secure  this
privilege,  having  been  asked  by  Caesar  himself  at  Ravenna  ^
to  induce  Caelius,  the  tribune,  to  bring  in  the  bill.  By
Caesar  himself,  do  I say  ? Nay,  by  our  friend  Gnaeus  also,
in  that  immortal  third  consulship  of  his.  Shall  I change
my  opinions  ? “I  fear  to  face  ” not  only  Pompey,  but  also
“ Trojan  men  and  women.”

“ Polydamas  will  be  the  first  to  blame.”  ^

Who  is  he  ? Why,  you  yourself,  the  applauder  of  my  acts
and  writings.  So  it  seems,  then,  that  during  the  last  two
consulships  of  the  Marcelli  ^ I have  avoided  this  trap,  when
the  subject  of  Caesar’s  province  was  before  the  senate,  only
to  fall  now  into  the  very  jaws  of  the  danger.  Therefore
let  some  one  else  be  called  upon  first  for  his  vote — I am  well
pleased  to  be  busying  myself  on  something  to  secure  my
triumph,  and  to  have  an  unimpeachable  excuse  for  remain-
ing outside  the  city.  Nevertheless,  they  will  do  their  best
to  elicit  my  opinion.  You  will  perhaps  laugh  at  what  I am
now  going  to  say.  How  I wish  I were  still  lingering  in  my
province ! I clearly  had  better  have  done  so,  if  this  was
impending.  Though  nothing  could  be  less  pleasant.  For
I wish  you,  by  the  way,®  to  know  this — all  those  virtues
displayed  at  the  beginning  of  my  government,  which  you,
too,  in  your  letters,  used  to  praise  to  the  skies,  were  only
skin  deep.®  How  far  from  an  easy  thing  is  virtue ! Nay,

^ The  formula  in  the  senate  used  by  the  presiding  magistrate  in  call-
ing on  a senator  for  his  vote.

^ This  is  the  only  indication  I know  of  that  Cicero  had  an  interview
with  Ciesar  in  B.c.  52.  Caelius  is  M.  Caelius  Rufus,  Cicero’s  corre-
spondent, tribune  in  B.c.  52.

^ For  the  quotation  from  Homer  (//.  xxii.  lOO),  see  vol.  i.,  p.  90.

* B.c.  51-50,  M.  Claudius  Marcellus  and  C.  Claudius  Marcellus.  A
cousin  of  the  latter,  of  the  same  name,  was  consul-designate  for  B.c.  49.

® odov  Trdpspyov.  ® «7n'r»^cra.

A VII,  I

TO  ATTICUS

205

how  difficult  a lasting  affectation  of  it ! For  whereas  I
thought  it  equitable  and  a thing  of  which  to  be  proud,  that
out  of  the  sum  decreed  to  me  for  the  year’s  expenses,  I left
my  quaestor  C.  Caelius  enough  to  last  a year,  and  paid
back  into  the  treasury  1,000,000  sesterces  (;^8,ooo),  my
staff  grumbled,  thinking  that  the  whole  of  this  money  ought
to  have  been  divided  among  them — that  I might  be  found
a better  friend  of  the  treasuries  of  the  Phrygians  and
Cilicians  than  of  our  own.  But  they  did  not  move  me  : for
my  reputation  had  supreme  weight  with  me.  Nevertheless,
there  is  no  mark  of  honour  in  my  power  to  bestow  on  any
of  them  that  I have  omitted.  However,  all  this,  to  use  the
phrase  of  Thucydides,  is  a digression,^  though  not  without
its  point.  For  your  part,  pray  think  over  my  position  : in  the
first  place,  by  what  contrivance  I may  preserve  Caesar’s
good  will ; in  the  second,  as  to  my  triumph,  which,  unless
the  state  of  the  Republic  hinders  it,  I see  is  feasible.  I
judge  both  from  my  friends’  letters  and  from  the  supplica-
tio ; for  the  man  who  voted  against  it  really  voted  for
more,  than  if  he  had  voted  all  the  triumphs  in  the  world."
Moreover,  only  one  man  voted  with  him  who  is  my  intimate
friend — Favonius  ; and  another  who  is  annoyed  with  me —
Hirrus.  Moreover,  Cato  was  both  on  the  committee  for
drawing  out  the  decree,  and  also  sent  me  a very  gratifying
letter  as  to  his  vote.  Nevertheless,  Caesar,  in  sending  me
his  congratulations  on  the  supplicatio^  exults  over  Cato’s  vote,
and  yet  does  not  mention  what  he  really  said  in  delivering
it,  but  merely  remarks  that  he  voted  against  my  supplicatio.
To  return  to  Hirrus.  You  have  begun  softening  his  feelings
towards  me.  Complete  the  process.  You  have  Scrofa  and
Silius  with  you ; I have  already  written  to  them,  and  to  Hirrus
himself.^  For  he  had  mentioned  to  them  in  obliging  terms  that
he  could  have  hindered  the  decree,  but  was  unwilling  to  do
so  : nevertheless,  he  agreed  with  Cato — my  very  warm  friend
— when  he  delivered  his  vote  in  terms  highly  complimentary
to  me,  but  remarked  that  I had  not  written  to  him  while

^ 6fc/3o\j7  \6yov  (Thucyd.  i.  97).

^ Cato.  See  pp.  174,  193.

^ Cn.  Tremellius  Scrofa,  P.  Silius  Nerva,  C.  Lucceius  Hirrus,  all
friends  of  Atticus  and  men  of  position.  See  the  index  for  references
and  letters  to  them.

206

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  /ET.  56

writing  to  everyone  else.  It  was  quite  true : for  he  and
Crassipes  were  the  only  people  to  whom  I had  not  written.
So  much  for  public  affairs.  To  return  to  domestic  business.
I wish  to  dissociate  myself  from  that  man/  He  is  a com-
plete juggler — a regular  son  of  Laertes  :

“ But  what  is  past  I leave,  though  grieved  at  heart.”  ^

Let  US  get  what  remains  on  a sound  footing.  This  money,
coming  from  Precius  to  begin  with — which  adds  anxiety  to
my  regret — whatever  it  amounts  to,  I do  not  wish  to  be
mixed  up  with  the  accounts  of  mine  of  which  that  fellow
has  the  handling.  I have  written  to  Terentia,  and  to  Philo-
timus  himself,  to  say  that  whatever  money  I should  collect
for  the  adornment  of  my  expected  triumph  I should  deposit
with  you.  Thus  I think  there  will  be  no  feeling  of  resent-
ment ; but  as  they  choose  ! Here  is  another  task  for  you —
to  consider  how  I am  to  set  about  this  business.  You  gave
some  indication  on  this  subject  in  a letter  dated  from
Epirus  or  Athens,  and  I will  back  you  up  in  the  course  you
proposed.

CCLXXXIV  (F  XVI,  i)

TO  TIRO  (ILL  AT  PATR^)

On  the  Voyage  from  Patral  to  Alyzia®  (3  November)

Greetings  to  their  dear  lup  from  Tullius  and  my  son,
brother,  and  nephewr.'  4/1  did  not  think  I should  miss  you  so
much,  b\it  I really  cannot  do  . without  you  : and  though  it  is
of  great  consequence  to  securing  my  triumph  that  I should
arrive  at  the  city  walls  as  early  as  possible,  yet  I feel  guilty
for  having  left  you : but  as  you  seemed  to  have  made  up
your  mind  that  you  quite  determined  not  to  sail  till  you  had
recovered  your  strength,  I expressed  approval  of  your  plan,

^ Philotimus.

^ dX\d  rd  fikv  TTpoTtTvxQai  Idaofiiv,  d’xyvfitvoi  ntp  (Horn.  II.  xviii.
I12).  .

^ On  the  coast  of  Acarnanial

TO  TIRO

209

F XVI,  I,  2

or

nor  do  I now  retract  it,  if  .you  are  still  of  the  same  way
thinking.  If,  however,  after  having  taken  food,  you  thinif
you  can  overtake  me,  you  must  decide  for  yourself.  I have
sent  Marip-  to  you  with  directions  to  rejoin  me  as  soon  as
possible  with  you,  or,  if  you  are  still  delayed,  to  return  at
once.  But  pray  be  fully  assured  of  this  : if  it  is  compatible
with  your  state  of  health,  my  first  desire  is  to  have  you  with
me  : if,  however,  you  are  certain  that  a short  stay  at  Patrae
is  necessary  for  your  convalescence,  my  first  desire  is  that
you  should  be  well. y If  you  set  sail  at  once,  you  will  catch
us  up  at  Leucas : but  if  you  determine  to  stay  to  confirm
your  health,  pray  jtake  particular  care  to  secure  suitable  fellow
travellers,  weather,  and  ship;  Be  especially  careful,  dear  Tiro,
as  you  love  me,  not  to  allow  Mario’s  arrival  or  this  letter  to
inf  uence  you.  If  you  do  what  will  best  conduce  to  your
’'xovery,  you  will  be  most  strictly' obeying  my  wishes.  In
considering  these  matters  let  your  own  heart  be  your  guide.
I miss  you : yes  ! but  I also  love  you.  Love  prompts  the
wish  to  see  you  in  good  health)  the  other  motive  would
make  me  wish  to  see  you  as  soon  as  possible.  The  former
is  therefore  to  be  preferred.  ' Accprdingly,  let  your  first  care
be  to  get  well : of  the  innumerable  services  you  have ’done
me  this  will  be  the  most  acceptable.

3 November.

CCLXXXV  (F  XVI,  2)

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^:)

Alyzia,  5 November

I CANNOT  express  to  you  in  a letter,  nor  do  I wish  to  do  so,
what  my  feelings  are.  I will  merely  say,  that  the  greatest
P9ssible  pleasure  both  to  yourself  and  me  will  be  to  see  you
as  soon  as  possible  in  restored  health.  We  arrived  at  Alyzia
on  the  third  day  after  leaving  you.  That  place,  is  1 20  stades  ’
south  of  Leucas.  At  Leucas  I am  expecting  either  to

’ About  fifteen  miles.

206

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

Wceive  you,  or  a letter  from  you  by  the  hands  of  Mario.  Let
/our  efforts  to  be  well  be  as  strong  as  your  affection  for  me,
or  as  you  know  mine  to  be  for  you.

5 November,  Alyzia.

CCLXXXVI  (F  XVI,  3)

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR.^)

Alyzia,  6 November

At  Alyzia,  from  which  I sent  my  last  letter  to  you,  we  have
stayed  one  day,  because  Quintus  had  not  caught  us  up.
That  was  the  5 th  of  November.  Just  as  we  are  starting
from  thence,  before  daybreak  of  the  6th,  I despatch  this
to  you.  Pray,  as  you  love  us  all,  and  especially  me,  who
taught  you,  get  well.  I am  looking  forward  with  very  great
anxiety,  first  of  all,  of  course,  for  yourself,  in  default  of  that
for  Mario  with  a letter  from  you.  We  are  all  eager,  especially
myself,  to  see  you  as  soon  as  possible,  but  only,  dear  Tiro,
if  fully  recovered.  Wherefore  don’t  hurry  at  all.  It  will  be
enough  if  you  are  well  the  day  I see  you.  I can  get  on  with-
out your  services.  I want  you  to  be  well,  first  of  all  for  your
own  sake,  and  then  for  mine,  dear  Tiro.  Good-bye.

CCLXXXVII  (F  XVI,  4)

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^)

Leucas,  7 November

Warmest  greeting  from  Tullius,  his  son,  brother,  and  nephew
to  Tiro.  Your  letter  gave  me  varied  emotions.  I was
much  agitated  by  the  first  page,  a little  cheered  by  the
second.  So  I am  now  quite  clear  that,  until  you  are  entirely

F XVI,  3,  4

TO  TIRO

209

recovered,  you  should  not  risk  a journey  either  by  sea  or
land.  I shall  see  you  quite  soon  enough,  if  I see  you
thoroughly  restored  to  health.  Yes,  what  you  say  in  your
letter  about  the  doctor  being  well  thought  of,  I am  also  told
about  him.  Yet  I am  far  from  satisfied  with  his  treatment.
For  you  ought  not  to  have  had  soup  given  you  when  suffer-
ing from  weak  digestion.  However,  I have  written  to  him
with  great  earnestness,  as  also  to  Lyso.  To  Curius,  indeed,
that  most  agreeable,  attentive,  and  kindly  of  men,  I have
written  at  great  length.  Among  other  things  I have  asked
him  to  transfer  you  from  where  you  are  to  his  own  house,  if
you  wished  it.  For  I fear  our  friend  Lyso  is  somewhat  care-
less : first,  because  all  Greeks  are  so,  and  secondly  because,
though  he  got  a letter  from  me,  he  has  sent  me  no  answer.
However,  you  speak  well  of  him  : you  must  therefore  yourself
decide  what  is  best  to  be  done.  I do  beg  you,  dear  Tiro,
not  to  spare  expense  in  anything  whatever  necessary  for  your
health.  I have  written  to  Curius  to  honour  your  draft  to
any  amount : something,  I think,  ought  to  be  paid  to  the
doctor  himself  to  make  him  more  zealous.  Your  services
to  me  are  past  counting — at  home,  in  the  forum,  at  Rome,
in  my  province  ; in  private  and  public  business,  in  my
literary  studies  and  compositions.  But  there  is  one  service
you  can  render  me  that  will  surpass  them  all — gratify  my
hopes  by  appearing  before  me  well  and  strong  ! I think,  if
you  are  recovered,  you  will  have  a most  charming  voyage
home  with  the  quaestor  Mescinius.^  He  is  not  without
culture,  and  is,  I thought,  attached  to  you.  And  while
health  should  be  your  first  and  most  careful  considera-
tion, consider  also  how  to  secure  a safe  voyage,  dear
Tiro.  I wouldn’t  have  you  hurry  yourself  now  in  any  way
whatever.  I care  for  nothing  but  your  safety.  Be  assured,
dear  Tiro,  that  no  one  loves  me  without  loving  you ; and
though  it  is  you  and  I who  are  most  directly  concerned
in  your  recovery,  yet  it  is  an  object  of  anxiety  to  many
Up  to  this  time,  in  your  desire- never  to  leave  me  ir
the  lurch,  you  have  never  had  the  opportunity  of  getting
strong.  Now  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  you  : throw  every
thing  aside,  be  a slave  to  your  body.  I shall  consider  th(

^ See  p.  178.
P

II.

210

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

amount  of  attention  you  pay  to  your  health  the  measure  of
your  regard  for  me.  Good-bye,  dear  Tiro,  good-bye  good-
bye, and  good  health  to  you ! Lepta  and  all  the  rest  send
their  kind  regards.  Good-bye  !

Leucas,  7 November.

CCLXXXVIII  (F  XVI,  5)  ‘

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^)

Off  Leucas,  7 November

Tullius  and  his  son,  Quintus  and  his  son,  send  warm  greet-
ings to  Tiro,  gentlest  and  best  of  men.  See  what  a fascina-
tion you  possess  ! We  have  been  two  hours  at  Thyreum.^
My  host  Xenomenes  is  as  fond  of  you  as  if  he  had  been
brought  up  with  you.  He  has  promised  to  supply  you  with
everything  you  want : I think  he  will  do  so.  I should  like  him,
if  you  are  better,  to  transport  you  to  Leucas,  that  you  might
complete  your  cure  there.  See  what  Curius,  Lyso,  and  the
doctor  think  of  it.  I intended  to  send  Mario  back  to  you,  that
you  might  despatch  him  to  me  when  you  were  a little  better  :
but  I reflected  that  Mario  could  only  bring  me  one  letter,
while  I was  anxious  for  several.  So  you  will  be  able  (and
pray  do  so,  if  you  love  me)  to  make  Acastus  go  down  to  the
harbour  every  day  : there  will  be  plenty  of  people  to  whom
you  may  safely  intrust  a letter,  and  who  will  be  pleased  to
convey  it  to  me.  For  my  part,  I will  not  omit  anyone  who
is  going  to  Patrse.  I place  all  my  reliance  for  your  proper
treatment  on  Curius.  Nothing  can  be  kinder  than  he  is,  or
more  attached  to  me.  Put  yourself  entirely  in  his  hands.  I
would  rather  see  you  a little  later  strong  and  well,  than  at
once  in  a feeble  state.  Devote  yourself,  therefore,  exclusively
to  getting  well.  I will  look  after  everything  else.  Good-bye
again  and  again.

Just  starting  from  Leucas,  7 November.

^ On  the  coast  of  Acarnania.

F XVI,  5,  6,  7

TO  TIRO

2II

CCLXXXIX  (F  XVI,  6)

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^)

Actium,  7 November

Tullius  and  his  son,  Quintus  and  his  son,  send  warm
greetings  to  Tiro.  I write  this  letter,  the  third  I have  written
to  you  the  same  day,  rather  in  maintenance  of  my  rule,
having  found  some  one  to  whom  to  give  it,  than  because  I
have  anything  to  say.  The  upshot  is  this  : let  your  attention
to  yourself  be  as  great  as  your  affection  for  me.  To  your  in-
numerable services  to  me  add  this,  which  will  be  more
acceptable  to  me  than  them  all.  When  you  have  taken,  as
I hope,  full  account  of  your  health,  then  see  about  your
voyage  also.  Send  a letter  to  me  by  everyone  who  is  going
to  Italy,  and  I will  not  pass  over  anyone  going  to  Patrae.
Take  care,  good  care  of  yourself,  dear  Tiro.  Since  you
missed  the  chance  of  sailing  with  me,  there  is  no  reason  for
70ur  being  in  a hurry  or  taking  thought  for  anything  except
getting  well.  Good-bye  ! good-bye !

Actium,  7 November  (evening).

CCXC  (F  XVI,  7)

! TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^)

CoRCYRA,  1 6 November

Cicero  and  his  son  greet  Tiro.  This  is  the  seventh  day  of
my  detention  at  Corcyra,  while  Quintus — father  and  son-
are  at  Buthrotum.  I am  wonderfully  anxious  about  your
health.  But  I am  not  surprised  at  getting  no  letter  from
. vou ; for  a voyage  from  your  present  residence  requires
'vinds,  such  that,  if  they  were  blowing  now,  we  should  not  be
loitering  at  Corcyra.  So  then  take  care  of  yourself  and  get
strong,  and,  as  soon  as  your  health  and  the  time  of  year

212

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  iET.  56

allow  of  your  sailing  without  discomfort,  come  to  us  who
love  you  dearly.  No  one  loves  us  without  having  a regard
for  you.  Your  arrival  is  eagerly  expected,  and  you  will  find
an  affectionate  welcome  from  everyone.  Take  care  of  your
health.  Again  and  again,  dear  Tiro,  good-bye  !

Corcyra,  16  November.

CCXCI  (F  XVI,  9)

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^)

Brundisium,  26  November

Cicero  and  his  son  greet  Tiro  warmly.  We  parted  from
you,  as  you  know,  on  the  2nd  of  November.  We  arrived
at  Leucas  on  the  6th  of  November,  on  the  7th  at  Actium.
There  we  were  detained  till  the  8th  by  a storm.  Thence
on  the  9th  we  arrived  at  Corcyra  after  a charming  voyage.
At  Corcyra  we  were  detained  by  bad  weather  till  the  15th.
On  the  1 6th  we  continued  our  voyage  to  Cassiope,  a harbour
of  Corcyra,  a distance  of  120  stades.  There  we  were  de-
tained by  winds  until  the  22nd.  Many  of  those  who  in
this  interval  impatiently  attempted  the  crossing  suffered
shipwreck.  On  the  22nd,  after  dinner,  we  weighed  anchor.
Thence  with  a very  gentle  south  wind  and  a clear  sky,  in
the  course  of  that  night  and  the  next  day  we  arrived  in  high
spirits  on  Italian  soil  at  Hydrus,^  and  with  the  same  wind
next  day — that  is,  the  24th  of  November — at  10  o’clock  in
the  morning  we  reached  Brundisium,  and  exactly  at  the
same  time  as  ourselves  Terentia  (who  values  you  very
highly)  made  her  entrance  into  the  town.  On  the  26th,  at
Brundisium,  a slave  of  Cn.  Plancius  at  length  delivered  to
me  the  ardently  expected  letter  from  you,  dated  the  13th  of
November.  It  greatly  lightened  my  anxiety ; would  that  it
had  entirely  removed  it ! However,  the  physician  Asclapo
positively  asserts  that  you  will  shortly  be  well.  What  need
is  there  for  me  at  this  time  of  day  to  exhort  you  to  take

^ Also  called  Hydruntum  ; mod.  Otranto.

F XVI,  9 ; A VII,  2 TO  ATTICUS  213

every  means  to  re-establish  your  health  ? I know  your  good
sense,  temperate  habits,  and  affection  for  me:  I am  sure
you  will  do  everything  you  can  to  join  me  as  soon  as
possible.  But  though  I wish  this,  I would  not  have  you
hurry  yourself  in  any  way.  I could  have  wished  you  had
shirked  Lyso’s  concert,  for  fear  of  incurring  a fourth  fit  of
your  seven-day  fever.  But  since  you  have  preferred  to  con-
sult your  politeness  rather  than  your  health,  be  careful  for
the  future.  I have  sent  orders  to  Curius  for  a douceur  to
be  given  to  the  physician,  and  that  he  should  advance  you
whatever  you  want,  engaging  to  pay  the  money  to  any  agent
he  may  name.  I am  leaving  a horse  and  mule  for  you  at
Brundisium.  At  Rome  I fear  that  the  ist  of  January  will
be  the  beginning  of  serious  disturbances.  I shall  take  a
m.oderate  line  in  all  respects.  It  only  remains  to  beg  and
entreat  you  not  to  set  sail  rashly — seamen  are  wont  to  hurry
things  for  their  own  profit : be  cautious,  my  dear  Tiro  : you
have  a wide  and  difficult  sea  before  you.  If  you  can,  start
with  Mescinius ; he  is  usually  cautious  about  a sea  passage  ;
if  not,  travel  with  some  man  of  rank,  whose  position  may
give  him  influence  over  the  ship-owner.  If  you  take  every
precaution  in  this  matter  and  present  yourself  to  us  safe  and
sound,  I shall  want  nothing  more  of  you.  Good-bye,  again
and  again,  dear  Tiro ! I am  writing  with  the  greatest
earnestness  about  you  to  the  physician,  to  Curius,  and  to
Lyso.  Good-bye,  and  God  bless  you.

CCXCII  (A  VII,  2)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Brundisium,  25  November

I ARRIVED  at  Brundisium  on  the  24th  of  November,  after  a
sea  passage  of  your  fortunate  kind  : so  delightfully

“Blew  from  Epirus  the  softest  of  breezes — Onchesmites.”  ^

^ From  Onchesmus  in  Epirus,  and  south-east  as  regards  Brundisium.
It  is  therefore,  it  seems,  a local  name  used  by  sailors  between  the  two

214

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  so,  ^T.  $6

There ’s  a spondaic  hexameter  for  you  ! You  may  pass  it
off  as  your  own  before  any  of  our  young  poets  you  choose.
The  state  of  your  health  gives  me  much  uneasiness.  For
your  letter  indicates  that  you  are  really  suffering.  I,  how-
ever, knowing  your  courage,  strongly  suspect  that  there  is
something  which  absolutely  compels  you  to  give  in  and
almost  exhausts  your  strength,  although  your  Pamphilus
informed  me  that  one  fit  of  quartan  ague  had  departed,  and
that  another  less  serious  one  was  approaching.  Terentia,
indeed,  who  entered  the  gate  at  the  same  time  as  I entered
the  port  of  Brundisium,  told  me  that  L.  Pontius  had  in-
formed her  at  Trebulanum  ^ that  that  too  had  left  you.  If
this  is  the  case,  it  answers,  by  heaven,  to  my  highest  wishes,
and  I expect  that  you  have  obtained  it  by  your  prudence
and  temperate  habits.

1 now  come  to  your  letters,  great  budgets  of  which  have
reached  me  at  the  same  time,  one  more  delightful  than  the
other,  at  any  rate  those  that  were  in  your  own  handwriting.
For  while  I like  the  handwriting  of  Alexis,  for  its  excellent
imitation  of  your  own,  yet  I don’t  like  it  for  its  indication
that  you  are  not  well.  And  talking  of  him,^  I have  left
Tiro  ill  at  Patrae,  a young  man,  as  you  know,  and  add,  if

"'yCJtr  *pt{?ase7'*Sf  'excellent  character.  I have  never  seen  a
better.  Accordingly,  I miss  him  very  much.  Though  he
did  not  think  himself  seriously  ill,  I am  yet  anxious,  and
rest  my  greatest  hopes  in  the  assiduous  attention  of
Manius  Curius,  of  which  Tiro  has  spoken  in  his  letters  and
many  have  told  me  by  word  of  mouth.  Moreover,  Curius
himself  felt  how  much  you  wished  that  I should  like  him.
And,  in  fact,  I took  great  delight  in  his  society : there  is  a
natural  vein  of  humour  in  the  man  that  is  very  attractive.
I am  carrying  home  his  will  sealed  up  with  the  signets  of
two  Ciceros  ® and  of  the  praetorian  staff.  In  their  presence

coasts,  of  which  there  are  many  other  instances,  both  ancient  and
modern.

^ The  villa  near  Trebula  in  the  Sabine  district.  See  p.  5.

2 Letter  CCXXVII,  p.  89.

® Quintus  Cicero  and  his  son.  The  object  of  the  seals  afHxed  was  to
shew  that  the  document  was  the  one  which  the  testator  acknowledged
in  the  presence  of  witnesses  to  be  his  will.  The  execution  of  the  will
was  the  testator’s  acknowledgment,  not  the  sealing.

A VII,  2

TO  ATTICUS

215

he  declared  you  heir  to  one-tenth,  and  me  to  one-fortieth.
At  Actium  in  Corcyra  Alexis  made  me  a splendid  present.
Nothing  could  prevent  Quintus  Cicero  from  going  to  see
the  river  Thyamis.  I am  glad  you  find  such  delight  in  your
little  daughter,  and  are  convinced  of  the  doctrine  as  to  “ the
natural  instinct  for  procreation.”  For  in  the  absence  of  this
instinct  there  can  be  no  natural  tie  uniting  man  and  man,
and,  without  that,  social  life  is  impossible.  “Heaven
prosper  what  we  do,”  quoth  Carneades,  somewhat  inde-
cently,^ and  yet  with  more  modesty  than  our  countryman
Lucius  and  Patro — who  in  referring  everything  to  a selfish
motive,  and  denying  that  anything  is  ever  done  for  another’s
sake,  and  teaching  that  a man’s  only  motive  for  being  virtuous
is  to  avoid  evil  consequences  to  himself,  not  because  right
is  right,  do  not  perceive  that  they  are  describing  a crafty
man,  not  a good  one.  But  all  this,  I think,  is  discussed  in
those  books  which  you  encourage  me  by  praising.^

To  return  to  business.  How  anxious  I was  for  the  letter,
which  you  said  that  you  gave  to  Philoxenus  ! For  you  had
told  me  that  it  contained  an  account  of  Pompey’s  conversa-
tion at  Naples.  Patro  delivered  it  to  me  at  Brundisium,  hav-
ing received  it,  I presume,  at  Corcyra.  Nothing  could  have
been  more  delightful.  For  it  contained  information  about
politics,  about  the  great  man’s  opinion  as  to  my  uprightness,
about  the  kind  feeling  towards  me  which  he  manifested  in

^ TT^xy  ayaOy,  sc.  TraLdoTToiwfisv,  as  Casaubon  explains.  The  con-
nexion of  the  whole  of  this  passage  with  the  context  is  obscure.  It
seems  to  be  this.  Atticus,  who  married  late  in  life,  had  been  wont  to
argue  against  the  duty  or  pleasure  of  parentage.  Cicero  says,  “ Now
you  find  so  much  delight  in  your  little  daughter  you  will  recant  your
denial  of  the  doctrine  (of  the  Peripatetics  and  Academies),  which  makes
the  instinct  of  procreation  the  first  law  of  nature  and  the  origin  of  social
morality  ” (see  Polybius,  vi.  6,  who  there  points  out  that  society  begins
thus  : TrdvTwv  Trpbg  rag  ovvovaiag  opfxdjvrejv  Kurd.  <pv(nv,  sk  de  tovtojv
TraiSoTTouag  drroTEXov/jihijg,  fc.r.X.).  Cicero  then  goes  on  to  say  that
Carneades’s  remark  as  to  procreation  may  be  indecent,  but  is  not  so
bad  as  the  Epicurean  doctrine  which  would  attribute  this  act,  like  all
others,  to  mere  self-gratification,  not  to  the  natural  duty  of  producing
children.  With  <pv(nicr)v  in  the  text  understand  opfiyv.  Patro  is  an
Epicurean  philosopher,  of  whom  we  have  heard  before  (p.  32).  Lucius
is  L.  Manlius  Torquatus,  the  Epicurean  speaker  in  the  first  book  of
the  de  Finibus.

^ The  de  Republica.

2I6

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  JET,  56

what  he  said  about  the  triumph.  But  what  pleased  me
more  than  anything  else  was  to  learn  that  you  had  visited
him  to  ascertain  what  his  disposition  was  towards  me.
This,  I say,  gave  me  the  greatest  pleasure  of  all.  As  to  the
triumph,  I never  felt  any  great  desire  for  it  till  Bibulus’s
utterly  barefaced  despatch,  which  was  followed  by  a supplicatio
voted  in  the  most  complimentary  terms.  If  he  had  really
done  what  he  stated  in  his  despatch,  I should  have  rejoiced
and  been  in  favour  of  bestowing  honour  upon  him.  But
as  it  is — that  he,  who  never  set  foot  outside  the  city  gate
as  long  as  the  enemy  was  west  of  the  Euphrates,^  should  be
specially  honoured,  and  that  I,  on  whose  army  he  depended
entirely,  should  not  be  able  to  obtain  a similar  honour,  is
an  insult  to  us : I say  “ us,”  because  I include  you.  Ac-
cordingly, I will  leave  no  stone  unturned,  and,  as  I hope,
shall  succeed.  But  if  you  had  been  in  good  health,  I should
already  have  got  rid  of  certain  difficulties.  But,  I hope,  you
will  soon  recover.  About  the  debt  to  Numerius  I am  much
obliged  to  you.  I am  longing  to  know  what  Hortensius
has  done,  and  what  Cato  is  doing : the  latter,  it  is  true,  has
been  disgracefully  spiteful  to  me.  He  gave  his  testimony  to
my  integrity,  equity,  clemency,  good  faith,  which  I did  not  ask
for  : what  I did  ask  for  he  withheld.  Accordingly,  in  his  letter
of  congratulation,  containing  also  every  kind  of  promise,
how  Caesar  exults  over  the  slight  put  upon  me  by  Cato’s
signal  ingratitude ! Cato,  too,  who  votes  twenty  days’  sup-
plicatio to  Bibulus  ! Pardon  me,  I cannot  and  will  not  put
up  with  this.  I am  itching  to  answer  all  your  letters,  but
it  is  unnecessary : for  I shall  see  you  directly.  However,
I must  just  tell  you  about  Chrysippus — for  about  the  other
fellow  (a  mere  mechanic)  I am  less  surprised.  Yet  there
could  not  be  a more  rascally  trick  than  his  either.  But
Chrysippus — that  he,  whom  I liked  seeing  and  held  in
honour  for  his  tincture  of  letters,  should  abandon  my  boy
without  my  knowledge ! I say  nothing  about  many  other
things  of  which  I am  told ; I say  nothing  of  his  embezzle-
ments ; but  I cannot  put  up  with  his  absconding.  It  seemed
to  me  the  most  unprincipled  thing  in  the  world.  Accord-
ingly, I have  availed  myself  of  that  ancient  expedient  of

^ See  pp.  184-185.

A VII,  2,  3

TO  ATTICUS

217

Drusus  ^ when  praetor,  as  it  is  said,  in  the  case  of  a man
who  on  being  manumitted  declined  to  take  the  same  oaths.
I denied  having  manumitted  those  men,  especially  as  there
was  no  one  present  at  the  time  by  whom  their  manumission
could  legally  be  maintained.  Tell  me  what  you  think  of
that : I will  abide  by  your  opinion.^  The  most  eloquent
by  far  of  all  your  letters  I have  not  answered,  that  in  which
you  speak  of  the  dangers  of  the  Republic.  What  was  I to
write  back?  I was  much  upset,  but  the  Parthians  pre-
vent my  being  much  afraid,  who  suddenly  retreated,  leaving
Bibulus  half  dead  with  fright.

CCXCIII  (A  VII,  3)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Trebulanum  (Villa  of  Pontius),  9 December

On  the  6th  of  December  I reached  ^lEculanum,  and  there  read
the  letter  from  you  which  Philotimus  delivered  to  me.  The
first  glance  at  it  gave  me  pleasure  from  seeing  that  it  was  in
your  own  handwriting,  and  presently  I was  extraordinarily
delighted  at  its  extreme  minuteness  and  attention  to  detail.
To  begin  with,  you  say  you  disagree  with  Dicsearchus  but
although  I sought  with  the  greatest  eagerness,  and  with  your
approbation,  not  to  remain  more  than  a year  in  my  province,
this  was  not  brought  about  by  any  exertions  on  my  part.
For  let  me  tell  you  that  no  proposal  was  ever  made  in  the
senate  about  any  of  us  governors  of  provinces,  to  the  effect

^ M.  Livius  Drusus,  consul  B.c.  113=

^ It  was  customary  for  a slave  before  manumission,  in  some  cases,
to  promise  that  on  manumission  he  would  take  an  oath  to  perform
certain  duties  to  his  patronus.  It  was  at  present  an  unsettled  question
whether,  if  he  afterwards  declined  to  do  so,  he  could  be  brought  back
to  slavery.  In  any  case,  his  position,  if  manumitted  privately  {inter
amicos)y  was  less  secure  than  if  he  had  been  brought  before  the  praetor
and  touched  by  his  rod  {vindicta).  This  difference  was  later  on  recog-
nized by  law.  See  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  27.

® Who  recommended  a life  of  action,  and  therefore  would  have
approved  of  Cicero  remaining  at  his  post  in  Cilicia.

2I8

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  /ET.  56

that  we  should  remain  in  them  beyond  the  term  mentioned
in  the  decree : so  that  I cannot  now  be  blamed  even  for
having  been  a shorter  time  in  the  province  than  was  perhaps
for  the  good  of  the  public  service.  But  the  common  ex-
pression “Perhaps  it  was  all  for  the  best”  seems  to  come  in
patj  as  though  it  were  made  for  the  case.  For  whether  a
peace  can  possibly  be  patched  up,  or  the  victory  of  the
loyalists  secured,  I should  wish  in  either  case  to  lend  a help-
ing hand,  or  at  any  rate  not  to  be  wholly  out  of  it.  But  if,
on  the  contrary,  the  loyalists  are  beaten,  I should  have  been
beaten  with  them,  wherever  I was.  Wherefore  the  rapidity
of  my  return  should  be  no  cause  for  regret.  If,  again,
the  idea  of  a triumph  had  not  been  suggested  to  me — an
idea  which  you  also  approve — you  certainly  would  not  have
found  me  fall  much  short  of  the  ideal  statesman  sketched
in  the  sixth  book  of  my  Republic.  Well,  what  would  you
have  me  do,  you  who  have  devoured  those  books  ? Indeed,
even  now,  I shall  not  scruple  to  throw  this  hope  aside,  great
as  it  is,  if  it  turns  out  to  be  the  better  course.  The  two
things  indeed  cannot  be  done  at  the  same  time — to  canvass
for  a triumph,  and  to  speak  with  independence  on  politics.
But  do  not  doubt  for  a moment  that  the  more  righteous
course  will  have  the  preference  in  my  eyes.  For  as  to  your
opinion,  that  it  is  more  advantageous,  whether  for  my  per-
sonal safety,  or  as  enabling  me  to  serve  the  state,  to  retain
my  imperium — that  we  will  discuss  when  we  meet.  For  it
is  a matter  requiring  serious  consideration,  though  to  a great
extent  I agree  with  you.  About  my  loyalty  to  the  Republic
I thank  you  for  feeling  no  doubt : and  I also  quite  endorse
your  judgment  that,  considering  my  services  to  him,  and
considering  what  he  has  done  for  others,  Caesar  ^ has  been  by
no  means  over-liberal  in  his  conduct  to  me.  Your  explana-
tion of  that  fact  also  is  the  true  one,  and  agrees  strikingly

^ This  differs  in  tone  from  what  Cicero  has  been  saying  for  some
time  of  his  relations  with  Csesar,  to  whom  he  owed  money.  Can  it
be  a covert  allusion  to  his  treatment  of  Quintus  after  his  indiscretion
at  Aduatuca  (Cses.  B.  G.  vi.  36),  after  which  Quintus  seems  to  have
had  no  important  command?  There  is  a total  absence  of  allusion
in  the  letter  to  the  gallantry  of  Quintus  in  defending  the  camp  (near  mod.
Charleroi)  earlier  in  the  year,  or  to  his  faux  pas  later.  But  Caesar
wrote  severely  to  Cicero  about  this,  who  may  have  thought  that  Csesar
had  not  treated  Quintus  with  generosity.

A VII,  3

TO  ATTICUS

219

with  what  you  say  has  been  done  in  the  case  of  Fabius  and
Caninius.  Even  if  things  had  been  different,  and  he  had
been  profuse  in  his  liberality  to  me,  yet  that  “Guardian
goddess  of  the  city,”  whom  you  mention  in  your  letter,  would
have  compelled  me  to  remember  the  inscription  upon  her
statue,^  and  would  not  have  allowed  me  to  imitate  Volcatius
and  Servius,^  who  satisfy  you,  but  would  have  compelled  me
to  entertain  sentiments  and  maintain  some  course  worthy  of
myself : which,  indeed,  I would  have  done,  if  I could,  in  a
different  way  from  that  in  which  I must  now  act.  It  is  for
their  own  supremacy  that  these  men  are  now  contending,
but  it  is  at  the  risk  of  the  constitution.  For  if  it  is  the  con-
stitution that  is  being  now  defended  by  Caesar,  why  was  it
not  defended  in  his  own  consulship  ? Why  was  I,  in  whose
cause  the  safety  of  the  constitution  was  involved,  not  de-
fended in  the  next  year  ? Why  was  his  imperium  extended,
or  why  in  that  particular  way  ? Why  was  such  a fight  made
that  the  ten  tribunes  should  propose  a law  allowing  him  to
be  a candidate  in  his  absence  ? ^ Owing  to  these  measures
he  has  become  so  strong,  that  there  is  only  one  citizen  with
sufficient  force  to  resist  him ; and  I wish  that  he  had  refused
to  grant  him  all  this  power,  rather  than  resist  him  now  when
he  is  so  strong.

But  since  it  has  come  to  this  pass,  I will  not  ask,  as  you
say :

“Where  is  the  hull  that  once  the  Atreidse  owed ? ” ^

The  one  hull  for  me  will  be  that  which  has  Pompey  for
steersman.  Yes,  that  is  just  as  you  say.  “ What  is  to
happen  when  the  consul  says  : Your  vote,  Marcus  Tullius  ? ”
I shall  answer  in  a word  : “ I vote  with  Gn^us  Pompeius.”
Nevertheless,  in  private,  I shall  exhort  Pompey  to  keep  the

^ The  statuette  of  Minerva,  which  Cicero  dedicated  in  the  Capitol
before  his  exile.  C.  Fabius  Maximus  and  C.  Caninius  Rebilus  were
Caesar’s  legati.  If  he  treated  them  badly  in  any  way,  they  yet  do  not
seem  to  have  resented  it,  for  they  stuck  by  him  in  the  Civil  War,  unlike
others.

^ L.  Volcatius  Tullus  (consul  B.c.  66)  tried  to  steer  a middle  course,
and  refused  to  accompany  Pompey  to  Epirus.  Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus
(consul  B.  c.  51)  took  much  the  same  line  as  Volcatius.  They  both  had
sons  serving  with  Caesar  in  his  invasion  of  Italy  B.c.  49.

^ In  B.c.  52.  See  pp.  204,  228.

TTov  OKa^pog  to  t&v  ’ArpEidwv,  altered  from  Eurip.  Troad,  455.

220

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

peace.  For  my  opinion  is  that  there  is  the  most  imminent
danger.  Of  course  you  are  better  informed  as  being  in  the
city.  But  my  view  of  the  situation  is  this  : we  have  to  do  with
a man  of  the  most  consummate  boldness,  and  in  the  highest
state  of  preparation : all  who  have  been  condemned,  or
branded  with  infamy,  or  who  deserve  condemnation  and  in-
famy, are  on  his  side ; nearly  all  the  young  men ; all  the  lowest
city  rabble ; some  influential  tribunes,  including  Gains
Cassius  j all  who  are  overwhelmed  with  debt,  who  I find  are
more  numerous  than  I thought.  The  only  thing  this  cause
lacks  is  merit : it  has  everything  else  in  abundance.  On  our
side  everyone  is  doing  everything  he  can  to  avert  an  appeal
to  arms,  of  which  the  result  is  in  all  cases  uncertain,  while  on
this  particular  occasion  there  is  reason  to  fear  its  going  the
other  way.  Bibulus  has  quitted  his  province,  and  has  left
Veiento  in  charge  of  it.  I hear  he  will  be  somewhat  slow
on  his  return  journey.  In  complimenting  him  Cato  remarked
that  the  only  people  he  did  not  envy  were  those  whose
political  position  admitted  of  no  improvement,  or  at  any
rate  little.

Now  for  private  affairs : for  I have  pretty  well  answered
your  letters  on  politics,  both  the  one  you  wrote  in  your
suburban  villa,  and  that  which  you  wrote  subsequently.  So
now  I am  coming  to  private  affairs.  Still,  there  is  one  thing
more — about  Caelius.  So  far  from  his  affecting  my  opinion,
I am  strongly  of  opinion  that  he  must  himself  be  sorry  for
having  changed  his  views. ^ But  how  came  it  that  those
properties  of  Lucceius  were  conveyed  to  him  ? I wonder  you
passed  that  over.  As  to  Philotimus,  I will  do  as  you  advise.
But  I was  not  expecting  to  have  the  accounts  from  him,
which  he  submitted  to  you,  but  the  balance  which  he  him-
self, at  Tusculum,  wished  me  to  enter  in  my  day-book  with
my  own  hand,  and  for  which  he  also  gave  me  a bill  in  Asia
in  his  own  handwriting.  If  he  paid  the  sum  which  he  de-
clared to  you  to  be  the  amount  of  my  debt,  he  would
still  owe  me  as  much  again,  and  more.  But  in  business
of  this  kind,  if  only  the  state  of  public  affairs  permit,  I shall
not  henceforth  expose  myself  to  blame ; nor,  by  heaven,  was
I really  careless  about  it  in  former  times,  but  my  time  was

^ Cselius,  bribed  like  Curio,  had  become  Caesarian,

A VII,  3

TO  ATTICUS

221

swallowed  up  by  a crowd  of  friends.  Accordingly,  I shall
have  the  benefit,  as  you  promise,  of  your  assistance  and
advice,  and  yet  shall  not,  I hope,  be  troublesome  to  you.
You  need  not  alarm  yourself  about  the  splints  I made  my
staff  wear.  They  have  pulled  themselves  together  of  their  own
accord  from  admiration  of  my  upright  conduct.  But  no  one
had  given  me  a greater  surprise  than  the  man  of  whom  you
think  so  meanly.  He  had  been  at  the  beginning,  and  at  this
day  still  is,  excellent.  But  just  at  the  moment  of  leaving  the
province  he  indicated  to  me  that  he  had  hoped  for  something.
He  did  not,  however,  cling  to  the  idea,  upon  which  he  had
allowed  his  mind  to  dwell  for  a time,  but  quickly  returned
to  his  better  self,  and  being  much  affected  by  the  extremely
high  honours  bestowed  on  him  by  me,  he  looked  upon  them
as  more  valuable  than  any  money.  I have  received  his  will
from  Curius,  and  am  bringing  it  with  me.  I am  informed
of  the  legacies  Hortensius  has  to  pay.  I am  now  eager  to
know  the  man’s  position,  and  what  properties  he  is  putting
up  to  auction.  For  I don’t  know  why,  since  Caelius  has
monopolized  the  Porta  Flumentana,^  I should  not  make  my-
self owner  of  Puteoli.

Now  for  the  word  Pirmea : in  using  it  I exposed  my-
self to  severer  criticism  for  writing  Feirceea  instead  of
Pirasum — which  is  the  form  adopted  by  all  our  country-
men— than  for  adding  an  in.  For  I did  not  prefix  the
preposition  to  the  word  as  the  name  of  a town,  but  of  a
locality : and,  after  all,  our  friend  Dionysius,  and  Nicias  of
Cos,  who  is  with  me,  did  not  consider  the  Piraeus  to  be  a
town.  But  I will  see  to  it.  The  fact  is  that,  if  I have  made
a mistake,  it  is  in  not  speaking  of  it  as  a town,  but  as  a place ;
and  for  having  followed,  I don’t  say  Caecilius  {mane  ut  ex
portu  in  Pirceuni),,  for  he  is  a poor  authority  for  Latinity,  but
Terence,  whose  plays,  owing  to  the  elegance  of  their  language,
were  thought  to  be  written  by  Laelius.  He  says,  “ Heri
aliquot  adulescentuli  coimus  in  Piroeum  and  also,  “ Mer-
cator hoc  addebat . . . cap  tarn  e Sunio.”^  Now  if  we  choose  to
consider  demes  to  be  towns,  Sunium  is  as  much  a town  as
Piraeus.  But  since  you  are  by  way  of  being  a grammarian,

^ Near  which  Cselius  had  bought  the  property  of  Lucceius.

^ £un.  539,  1 1 5.

222

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

you  will  relieve  me  of  much  vexation  if  you  solve  me  this
knotty  point.  He  ^ sends  me  courteous  letters.  Balbus  does
the  same  for  him.  I am  resolved  not  to  swerve  a finger’s
breadth  from  the  most  absolute  loyalty  in  any  direction.  But
you  know  the  balance  he  has  against  me.  Do  you  think,
then,  that  some  one  will  twit  me  with  it,  if  I am  lukewarm  in
opposition,  or  that  he  will  demand  repayment  if  I am  over-
vigorous  ? What  solution  can  you  find  to  this  ? “ Pay  him,”
you  say.  Well,  then,  I will  borrow  from  Caelius.  How-
ever, pray  turn  this  matter  over  in  your  mind.  For  I
imagine,  if  I have  at  any  time  made  a fine  speech  in  defence
of  the  constitution,  that  your  Tartessian  ^ friend  will  say  to
me  as  I am  leaving  the  house,  “ Be  so  good  as  to  direct  the
money  to  be  paid.”  What  else  is  there  to  say  ? Why,  this.
My  son-in-law  makes  himself  very  agreeable  to  me,  to  Tullia,
and  to  Terentia.  He  has  any  amount  whether  of  ability  or  cul-
ture. We  must  be  content.  Other  points  in  his  character,  with
which  you  are  acquainted,  must  be  tolerated.  For  you  know
the  men  whom  we  have  [rejected  ^],  who  all,  except  the  one
about  whom  we  negotiated  through  you,"^  think  that  I am
making  money.  For  no  one  will  advance  them  any  on
their  own  credit.  But  of  this  when  we  meet;  for  it  is  a
subject  for  a long  talk.  My  hope  of  Tiro’s  recovery  is
centred  on  Manius  Curius,  to  whom  I said  in  a letter  that
you  will  be  very  grateful  to  him.

Pontius’s  Villa  at  Trebula,  9 December.

^ Csesar.

^ Balbus,  a native  of  Cades  (Tartessus).

® The  reading  is  very  doubtful.  There  is  no  authority  for  the  mean-
ing assigned  by  Tyrrell  for  aperiierimus.  Other  suggestions  are  avert'
erinius^  repudiarinius.

^ Perhaps  Ti.  Claudius  Nero,  whom  Cicero  preferred  as  a son-in-law.
See  pp.  97,  190.

A VII,  3,  4

TO  ATTICUS

223

CCXCIV  (A  VII,  4)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

(FoRMiiE,  II  December)

Dionysius  was  burning  with  desire  to  be  with  you,  and  I
have  accordingly  sent  him,  but,  by  Hercules,  with  great
reluctance.  However,  I was  obliged  to  give  way.  I have
found  him,  indeed,  both  a good  scholar  (which  I knew
before)  and  a man  of  high  character,  very  obliging,  careful
too  of  my  reputation,  honest,  and — not  to  give  him  only  the
praise  that  suits  a freedman — a thoroughly  good  man.

I saw  Pompey  on  the  loth  of  December:  we  were  together
perhaps  two  hours.  He  seemed  to  me  to  be  much  delighted
at  my  return  : urged  me  to  a claim  a triumph  : undertook
to  do  his  part : warned  me  not  to  enter  the  senate  until  I
had  gained  my  object,  for  fear  of  alienating  some  tribune  by
the  speeches  I delivered.  Need  I say  more?  In  cordiality
of  mere  language  nothing  could  have  been  more  explicit.
On  the  political  situation,  however,  the  tone  of  his  remarks
assumed  the  existence  of  downright  war.  He  held  out  no
hope  of  maintaining  peace  : “ he  had  felt  before  that  Caesar
was  alienated  from  him,  he  had  recently  become  quite  sure
of  it.  Hirtius,  Caesar’s  most  intimate  friend,  had  been  in
the  neighbourhood,  but  had  not  called  on  him.  Moreover,
Hirtius  having  arrived  in  the  evening  of  the  6th  of  December,
and  Balbus  having  arranged  to  visit  Scipio  ’ on  the  7th,
before  daybreak,  Hirtius  started  to  rejoin  Caesar  late  in  the
previous  night.”  This  seemed  to  him  to  be  a clear  “ symp-
tom ” ^ of  alienation.  In  short,  nothing  else  consoles  me  but
the  opinion  that  the  man,  to  whom  even  his  enemies  have
assigned  a second  consulship,  and  fortune  has  given  supreme
power,  will  not  be  so  mad  as  to  put  these  advantages  in
danger.  But  if  he  once  begins  to  run  amuck,  I verily  have
many  fears  which  I do  not  venture  to  put  into  writing.
However,  as  the  matter  stands  at  present,  I think  of  approach-
ing the  city  on  the  3rd  of  January.

^ Pompey’s  father-in-law.

^ TEKfxripioj^sq.

224

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  /ET.  56

CCXCV  (A  VII,  5)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

(Formic,  December)

I HAVE  received  several  letters  from  you  at  the  same  time,
and  though  I am  in  receipt  of  later  news  from  visitors,  they
yet  gave  me  much  pleasure.  For  they  shewed  your  zeal  and
kindness.  I am  disturbed  by  your  illness,  and  Pilia’s  having
fallen  ill  of  the  same  complaint  must,  I think,  cause  you  all
the  more  anxiety.  So  take  care,  both  of  you,  to  get  well.
I see  that  you  are  interested  about  Tiro.  Though  he  is
serviceable  to  me  in  a thousand  ways,  when  he  is  well,  in
every  department  of  my  business  and  my  studies,  yet  my
anxiety  for  his  recovery  is  founded  on  his  own  kindness  and
high  character,  rather  than  on  my  convenience.  Philo-
genes  never  said  a word  to  me  about  Luscenius.  As  to
other  matters,  you  have  Dionysius  with  you.  I wonder  that
your  sister  has  not  come  to  Arcanum.^  I am  glad  you
approve  my  decision  as  to  Chrysippus.^  I have  no  intention
of  going  to  Tusculum  at  such  a time  as  this.  It  is  out  of  the
way  for  people  coming  to  meet  me,  and  has  other  disadvant-
ages. But  from  Formiae  I mean  to  go  to  Tarracina  on  the
29th  of  December.  Thence  to  Pomptina  Summa,^  thence  to
Pompey’s  Alban  villa,  and  so  to  the  city  on  the  3rd,  my
birthday.  The  political  situation  gives  me  greater  terror
every  day.  For  the  loyalists  are  not,  as  people  think,
united.  How  many  Roman  knights,  how  many  senators,
have  I seen  prepared  to  inveigh  against  the  whole  policy,
and  especially  the  progress  through  Italy  now  being  made
by  Pompey.^  What  we  want  is  peace.  From  a victory,

' A villa  belonging  to  Quintus.  ^ See  p.  216.

^ Perhaps  the  head  of  the  canal  (Treponti)  which  ended  near  Tarra-
cina. In  Fam.  vii.  18,  Cicero  writes  from  “Pomptinum,”  a villa  of
M.  yEmilius  Philemo,  and  it  is  perhaps  here  that  he  means  to  stay.

* Pompey  was  already  commissioned  by  the  consul  Marcellus  to  visit
the  municipia  and  levy  troops.  Curio  had  in  vain  tried  to  induce  the
senate  to  send  an  order  round  that  he  was  not  to  be  obeyed  (Appian,
B,  C.  ii.  31).

A VII,  5,  6

TO  ATTICUS

225

among  many  evil  results,  one,  at  any  rate,  will  be  the
rise  of  a tyrant.  But  we  will  talk  of  this  together  before
long.  At  present  I have  absolutely  nothing  to  write  to  you
about — either  in  politics  (for  neither  of  us  knows  more  than
the  other)  or  in  domestic  affairs,  which  are  equally  known
to  us  both.  The  only  thing  left  is  to  jest,  if  this  personage
will  allow  us.  For  I am  one  who  thinks  it  more  expedient
to  yield  to  his  demands  than  to  fight.  For  it  is  too  late  in
the  day  to  be  resisting  a man,  whom  we  have  been  nursing  up
against  ourselves  these  ten  years  past.  “ What  will  be  your
view,  then.^”  say  you.  None,  of  course,  except  in  accord-
ance with  yours : nor  shall  I express  any  till  I have  accom-
plished or  laid  aside  my  own  affair  of  the  triumph.  So  take
care  of  your  health.  Do  at  length  shake  off  your  quartan
fever  by  exercising  the  prudence  in  which  no  one  surpasses
you.

CCXCVI  (A  VII,  6)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

(FoRMiiE,  December)

I HAVE  absolutely  nothing  to  say  to  you.  You  know  every-
thing, nor  can  I expect  any  fresh  news  from  you.  Let  me,
then,  merely  maintain  my  old  habit  of  never  letting  anyone
going  to  you  depart  without  a letter  At  the  political  situa-
tion I am  thoroughly  alarmed,  and  up  to  now  I have  found
hardly  anyone  not  convinced  that  it  would  be  better  to  yield
to  Caesar’s  demand  than  to  fight.  That  demand,  it  is  true,
shameless  as  it  is,  is  more  serious  than  we  thought.  But
why  begin  resisting  him  now  ?

“For  naught  more  dreadful  is  upon  us  now  ” ^
than  when  we  voted  his  additional  five  years,  or  when  we

^ Homer,  Od.  xii.  209  :

ov  fikv  rode  fiei^ov  ’ircL  kukop  i)  ore  KukXwt//
e’iXei  evi  aTrrj'i  y\a^vp(^  KpaTeprj(pi  j3'iy<pi.

Cicero  means  that  they  have  no  more  reason  to  resist  Caesar  than  before,
II.  Q

226

CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  50,  ^t.  56

allowed  his  being  a candidate  in  his  absence : for  we  did
not,  I presume,  give  him  arms  then,  that  we  might  have  a
well-furnished  enemy  to  fight  with  now  ! You  will  say,
“What,  then,  will  be  your  view?”  Not  the  one  I shall
express.  For  my  real  view  will  be  “anything  rather  than
fight  ” : I shall  sajy  exactly  what  Pompey  does.  And  that
I shall  do  from  no  abject  cowardice : but  once  more  it  is
a very  serious  evil  to  the  constitution,  and  less  allowable
perhaps  in  my  case  than  in  that  of  others,  that  in  matters
of  such  importance  I should  differ  from  Pompey.

CCXCVII  (A  VII,  7)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)
(FoRMiiE,  December)

“ Dionysius,  a most  excellent  fellow  — as  I,  too,  have
reason  to  know — and  also  a very  good  scholar  and  warmly  <
devoted  to  you,  arrived  in  Rome  on  the  i6th  of 'January  '
and  delivered  me  a letter  from  you.”  Those  are  your  exact
words  about  Dionysius  in  your  letter.  You  dori’t  add,  “ and
he  expressed  his  gratitude  to  yofi.”  And  yet  he  certainly
ought  to  have  done  so,  and,  if  he  had,  you  are  always  so
good-natured  that  you  would  have  added  it  to  your- sentence.
However,  any  palinode  in  regard  to  him'  is  made  impos-
sible for  me,  owing  to  the  character  I gave  him  in  my  last
letter.  Let  him,  then,  pass  for  an  excellent  man.  I am
obliged  to  him  for  one  thing  at  least — he  has  given  me  this
opportunity  also  of  knowing  him  thoroughly.  Philogenes
was  quite  correct  in  what  he  wrote  to  you : for  he  has  paid
the  money  due.  I wished  him  to  have  the  use  of  the  money
as  long  as  he  legally  could  ; accordingly,  he  has  kept  it  four-

for  his  claim  to  keep  his  province  is  not  more  unconstitutional  than  his
former  claims.  “ We  can’t  suppose  that  our  object  in  yielding  the  old
demands  was  to  arm  him  against  ourselves  ! ” JWsi  forte  is  here  practic-
ally a negative  ; it  introduces  an  impossible  supposition.

A VII,  7

TO  ATTICUS

227

teen  months.  I hope  Pomptinus  is  recovering,  and  as  to
having  entered  the  city,  as  you  say  in  your  letter,  I feel
somewhat  anxious  as  to  what  he  means  by  it.  For  he  would
not  have  done  so  except  for  some  weighty  reason.  As  the
2nd  of  January  is  the  Compitalia,^  I don’t  want  to  arrive  at
Pompey’s  Alban  villa  on  that  day,  for  fear  of  inconveniencing
his  servants.  I shall  do  so,  therefore,  on  the  3rd,  and  go
thence  to  the  city  on  the  4th.  I don’t  know  on  what  day
your  quartan  fit  is  due ; but  I am  very  unwilling  that  you
should  be  disturbed  to  the  detriment  of  your  health.  As  to
my  triumph,  unless  Caesar  has  been  secretly  intriguing  by
means  of  the  tribunes  who  are  in  his  interest,  everything  else
appears  to  be  going  smoothly.  My  mind,  however,  is
supremely  calm,  and  regards  the  whole  thing  with  utter  in-
diference  : the  more  so  that  I am  told  by  many  that  Pompey
and  his  council  have  determined  to  send  me  to  Sicily  on  the
ground  of  my  having  imperium.  That  is  worthy  of  Abdera  ! ^
For  neither  has  the  senate  decreed  nor  the  people  ordered
me  to  have  imperium  in  Sicily.  But  if  the  state  delegates
this  to  Pompey,  why  should  he  send  me  rather  than  some
unofficial  person?  So,  if  the  possession  of  this  imperium' \?,
going  to  be  a nuisance  to  me,  I shall  avail  myself  of  the  first
city  gate  I come  to./  For  as  to  what  you  say,  that  my  coming
is  awaited  with  astonishing  interest,  and  that  none  of  the
loyalists,  or  even  the  semi-loyalists,  have  any  doubt  about
what  I am  likely  to  do — I don’t  understand  whom  you  mean
by  the  “ loyalists  ” — I know  of  none — that  is  to  say,  no
class  of  such  men  : for,  of  course,  there  are  individuals  who
are  loyalists;  but  when  it  is  a case  of  political  divisions,
what  we  have  to  look  for  is  classes  and  sets  of  loyalists.  Do
you  regard  the  senate  as  loyalist,  when  it  is  owing  to  it  that
the  provinces  have  no  governors  with  imperium  I For  Curio
would  never  have  held  out  if  negotiations  with  him  had  been
set  on  foot — a measure  which  the  senate  refused  to  adopt,
with  the  result  that  no  successor  was  named  to  Caesar.  Or
the  publicani^  who,  having  never  been  staunch,  are  now

' The  Compitalia  were  always  about  this  time,  though  the  exact  day
varied.  At  them  slaves  took  part  in  the  family  festival.  It  was  there-
fore like  arriving  on  Christmas  Day  to  come  to  a house  then.

^ Renowned  for  the  stupidity  of  its  inhabitants.

® /.(?.,  get  rid  of  my  imperium  by  entering  the  city.

228

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

warmly  in  favour  of  Caesar?  Or  the  financiers  or  the
farmers,  whose  chief  interest  is  peace?  Unless  you  can
suppose  such  men  to  dread  being  under  royal  rule,  who
have  never  declined  it,  so  long  only  as  they  were  left  in  peace
and  quiet.  Well  then  ! Do  I approve  of  votes  being  taken
for  a man  who  is  retaining  an  army  beyond  the  legal
day?  For  my  part,  I say  710 ; nor  in  his  absence  either.
But  when  the  former  was  granted  him,  so  was  the  latter.^
“ Why,  do  you  approve  of  the  ten  years’  grant,  and  of  the
way  in  which  the  law  was  carried  ? ” If  I do,  then  I ap-
prove of  my  own  banishment,  and  the  loss  of  the  Campanian
land,  and  of  the  adoption  of  a patrician  by  a plebeian,  of  a
Gaditanian  by  a Mytilenean;^  I approve  of  the  wealth  of
Labienus  and  Mamurra,  of  the  pleasure-grounds  and  Tusculan
villa  of  Balbus.  But  the  fountain-head  of  all  these  things  is  the
same.  We  should  have  resisted  him  when  he  was  weak,  and
that  would  have  been  easy.  Now  we  are  confronted  by
eleven  legions,  cavalry  at  his  desire,  the  Transpadani,^  the  city
rabble,  all  these  tribunes,  a rising  generation^  corrupted  as
we  see,  a leader  of  such  influence  and  audacity.  With  such
a man  we  must  either  fight  a pitched  battle,  or  admit  his
candidature  in  virtue  of  the  law.  “ Fight,”  say  you,  “ rather
than  be  a slave.”  To  what  end  ? To  be  proscribed,  if
beaten : to  be  a slave  after  all,  if  victorious  ? “ What  do  you
mean  to  do,  then?”  say  you.  Just  what  animals  do,  who
when  scattered  follow  the  flocks  of  tbeir  own  kind.  As  an
ox  follows  a herd,  so  shall  I follow  the  loyalists  or  whoever
are  said  to  be  loyalists,  even  if  they  take  a disastrous  course.
What  the  best  course  is  in  this  unfortunate  dilemma  I see
clearly.  For  no  one  can  be  certain  of  the  result  when  once
we  come  to  fighting : but  everyone  is  certain  that,  if  the
loyalists  are  beaten,  this  man  will  not  be  more  merciful  than
Cinna  in  the  massacre  of  the  nobility,  nor  less  rapacious
than  Sulla  in  confiscating  the  property  of  the  rich.  I have

^ When  he  was  given  his  five  extra  years,  i.e.^  up  to  March,  B.c.  48,
the  right  of  standing  for  the  consulship  was  practically  given  him  also.

^ Of  Balbus  by  Theophanes  of  Mitylene.  The  latter  was  a friend  of
Pompey,  who  had  given  him  civitas.  He  adopted  Balbus  (Caesar’s
friend)  when  Pompey  and  Caesar  were  on  good  terms.

^ Because  Caesar  promised  them  full  citizenship  instead  of  their
existing  Latinitas,  a promise  which  he  promptly  fulfilled  in  B.c.  48.

A VII,  7,  8

TO  ATTICUS

229

been  talking  politics  with  you  all  this  time,  and  I would
have  gone  on  doing  so,  had  not  my  lamp  failed  me.  The
upshot  is  this : “ Your  vote^  M.  Tullius  / ” “I  vote  with
Gnaeus  Pompeius : that  is,  with  Titus  Pomponius.”  Pray
give  my  regards  to  Alexis,  that  very  accomplished  boy,
unless  perchance  he  has  become  a man  during  my  absence^
for  he  seemed  on  the  point  of  doing  so.

CCXCVIII  (A  VII,  8)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

(FoRMiiE,  26  December)

What  need  was  there  to  speak  so  strongly  about  Dionysius  ?
Wouldn’t  the  slightest  hint  from  you  have  been  enough  for
me  ? The  fact  is,  your  silence  had  roused  all  the  more  sus-
picion in  me,  first  because  your  usual  custom  is  to  cement
friendship  by  testifying  to  mutual  goodwill,  and  secondly
because  I was  told  that  he  had  spoken  to  others  in  a dif-
ferent tone.^  However,  I am  quite  convinced  that  the  truth
is  as  you  say.  Accordingly,  my  feelings  towards  him  are
what  you  wish  them  to  be.  The  day  on  which  your  fit  was
due  I had  noted  for  myself,  from  a letter  which  you  wrote  in
the  early  stages  of  your  feverish  attack,  and  I had  calculated
that,  as  things  are,  you  could  come  to  the  Alban  villa  to
meet  me  on  the  3rd  of  January  without  inconvenience.  But
pray  do  nothing  to  injure  your  health.  For  what  does  one
day  or  another  matter  ? I see  that  by  Livia’s  will  Dolabella,
takes  a third  between  himself  and  two  others,^  but  is  ordered
to  change  his  name.  Here ’s  a problem  in  politics  for  you  ^
— can  a young  man  of  rank  properly  change  his  name  in
accordance  with  a woman’s  will  ? We  shall  be  able  to  solve

^ See  p.  226.

^ That  is,  he  took  a third  of  a third,  i.e.,  one-ninth  of  the  whole
estate.  We  don’t  know  who  Livia  was,  and  there  is  no  evidence  of
Dolabella  having  changed  his  name.  He  therefore  probably  renounced
the  legacy.

^ TToXlTlKOV  (TKfiHfia.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

230

B.C.  50,  ^T.  56

that  question  in  a more  scientific  spirit/  when  we  know  to
about  how  much  a third  of  a third  amounts.

What  you  thought  would  be  the  case — that  I should  see
Pompey  before  arriving  at  Rome — has  happened.  For  he
caught  me  up  near  the  Lavernium  on  the  25th.  We  came
together  to  Formise,  and  from  two  o’clock  till  evening  had  a
private  conversation.  As  to  your  question  whether  there  is
any  hope  of  making  peace,  as  far  as  I could  gather  from  a
long  and  exhaustive  discourse  of  Pompey’s,  he  hasn’t  even  the
wish  for  it.  His  view  is  this : if  he  becomes  consul,  even
after  dismissing  his  army,  there  will  be  a bouleversement  of  the
constitution.^  Besides,  he  thinks  that  when  Caesar  is  told
that  preparations  against  him  are  being  pushed  on  ener-
getically, he  will  throw  aside  the  consulship  for  this  year,
and  prefer  retaining  his  army  and  province.  But  if  Caesar
were  to  act  such  a mad  part,  he  entertained  a low  opinion
of  his  power,  and  felt  confident  in  his  own  and  the  state’s
resources.  The  long  and  the  short  of  it  was  that,  although
“ intestine  war  ” ^ was  often  in  my  thoughts,  yet  I felt  my
anxiety  removed  while  I listened  to  a man  of  courage,
military  skill,  and  supreme  influence,  discoursing  like  a
statesman  on  the  dangers  of  a mock  peace.  Moreover,  we
had  in  our  hands  the  speech  of  Antony,  delivered  on  the  21st
of  December,  which  contained  an  invective  against  Pompey,
beginning  from  his  boyhood,  a complaint  as  to  those  who
had  been  condemned,  and  a threat  of  armed  intervention.
On  reading  this  Pompey  remarked,  “What  do  you  think
Caesar  himself  will  do,  if  he  obtains  supreme  power  in  the
state,  when  his  quaestor — a man  of  no  influence  or  wealth —
dares  to  talk  like  that  ? ” ^ In  short,  he  appeared  to  me  not

^ (l)i\o(TO(f)OJT£pov  SievKpivrjaofXEv.

^ avyxvf^t-v  Trig  TroXirsiag,  perhaps  coup  (Tetat  might  represent  it,  but
it  does  not  really  represent  Pompey’s  view.

^ ^vvdg  ’F^vvdXiog  (Horn.  //.  xviii.  309).

^ M.  Antonius  had  just  become  tribune  (loth  December,  B.c.  50),  but
he  had  been  quaestor  in  Gaul  in  B.c.  52,  and  seems  to  have  been  in
high  favour  with  Caesar,  who  had  been  exerting  himself  to  get  him
elected  augur.  The  “ condemned  ” are  the  victims  of  Pompey’s  law
on  bribery  of  B.c.  52  (see  vol.  i.,  p.  366).  The  Caesarians  always
maintained  that  these  men  had  been  in  many  cases  unfairly  con-
demned, and  one  of  the  first  measures  after  Caesar’s  success  was  their
recall.

A VII,  8,  9

TO  ATTICUS

231

merely  not  to  desire  the  peace  you  talk  of,  but  even  to  fear  it.
However,  he  is,  I think,  somewhat  shaken  in  his  idea  of
abandoning  the  city  by  the  scandal  it  would  cause.  ^ My  chief
vexation  is  that  I must  pay  the  money  to  Caesar,  and  devote
what  I had  provided  for  the  expenses  of  my  triumph  to  that.
For  it  is  “an  ugly  business  to  owe  money  to  a political
opponent.”  But  this  and  much  besides  when  we  meet.

CCXCIX  (A  VII,  9)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

(Formia:,  27  December)

“ Am  I to  receive,”  quoth  you,  “ a letter  from  you  every
single  day  ? ” Yes  ! if  I find  anyone  to  give  it  to,  every  day.
“ But  you  are  all  but  here  in  person.”  Well,  when  I have
arrived,  I will  stop  writing.  I see  that  one  of  your  letters
has  not  reached  me.  While  my  friend  L.  Quintius  was  con-
veying it,  he  was  wounded  and  robbed  near  the  tomb  of
Basilus.^  Please  consider,  therefore,  whether  there  was  any-
thing in  it  which  I ought  to  know,  and  at  the  same  time
“solve  this  strictly  political  problem.”  Seeing  that  it  is
necessary,  either  that  Caesar  should  be  allowed  to  stand
for  the  consulship  while  he  still  holds  his  army  (whether  by
the  favour  of  senate  or  tribunes) ; or  that  Caesar  should  be
persuaded  to  hand  over  his  province  and  army,  and  so
become  consul;  or,  if  he  cannot  be  persuaded  to  do  so,
that  the  election  should  be  held  without  admitting  his  name
as  candidate ; or,  if  he  employs  tribunes  to  prevent  that,
and  yet  makes  no  warlike  move,  that  there  must  be  an  inter-
regnum ; OR,  if  on  the  ground  of  his  legal  candidateship
having  been  ignored  he  moves  up  his  army,  that  we  must
fight  him  with  arms,  while  he  must  begin  hostilities  either  at

^ The  text  is  very  uncertain  here.  I read  invidia  (MS.  t)  relinquendce
urbis.

* On  the  via  Appia,  Though  close  to  the  city,  it  was  a place
notorious  for  highway  robberies,  according  to  Asconius,  § 50.

232

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  50,  MT.  56

once  before  we  are  prepared,  or  as  soon  as  his  friends  have
their  demand  for  having  him  recognized  as  a candidate  at  the
election  refused : but  that  he  will  either  have  the  one  excuse
for  an  appeal  to  arms  j(that  his  candidature  is  ignored),  or
will  have  an  additional  one,  if  it  chances  that  some  tribune,
when  vetoing  the  senate -or  stirring  up  the  people,  is  censured,
or  hampered  by  a senatorial  decree,  or  forcibly  removed,  or
driven  out  of  the  city,  or  flies  to  him,  alleging  that  he  has
been  so  driveli  out : seeing  finally,  that,  if  war  is  once  begun,
we  must  either  defend  the  city,  or  abandon  it  and  try  to  cut
him  off  from  supplies  and  other  resources  : consider,  I say,
which  of  these  evils,  some  one  of  which  we  must  confront,
you  think  the  least.

You  will  no  doubt  say  “to  persiiade  him  to  hand  over
his  army,  and  so  become  consul.”  WelTT^effaihlY' against
this  proposal,  supposing  him  to  submit  so  far,  nothing  can
be  said  : and,  since  he  doesn’t  succeed  in  getting  his  candida-
ture acknowledged  while  he  still  retains  his  army,  I wonder
he  does  not  do  so.  For  us,  however,  as  certain  persons
think,  nothing  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  his  becoming
consul.  “But  I would  prefer  his  being  consul  on  these
terms  to  his  being  so  with  an  army,”  you  will  say.  Certainly.
But  even  on  “these  terms,”  I tell  you,  there  is  one  who
thinks  it  a grave  evil.  Ndr  is  there  any  remedy  against  it :
we  must  submit  if  he  insists  upon  it.  Imagine  him  consul
a second  time  after  our  experience  of  his  former  consulship  !
“Why,  comparatively ^eak  as  he  was  then,’” you  say,  “he
was  more  powerful  than  the  whole  state.”  What,  then,  do
you  think  will  be  the  case  now<?  Moreover,  if  he  is  consul,
Pompey  is  resolved  to  be  in  Spain.  WhaLa  sad  state  of
things,  when  the  very  worst  alternative  is  just  the  one  which
cannot  be  rejected,  and  the  one  which,  if  he  adopts  it,  would
at  once  secure  him  the  highest  favour  with  all  the  loyalists  !

Let  us,  then,  put  this  out  Of  the  question.  They  say
that  he  cannot  be  induced  to  accept  it.  Which  is  the  worst
of  the  other  alternati^  ? Why,  to  concede  to  him  what,
according  to  the  same  authority,  is  his  most  impudent  de-
mand. For  could  anything  be  more  impudent?  “You  have
held  a province  for  ten  years,  a time  not  granted  you  by
the  senate,  but  assumed  by  yourself  with  the  help  of  violence
and  sedition  : this  period — not  assigned  by  the  law,  but  by

A VII,  9;  F XVI,  I

TO  ATTICUS

233

your  own  caprice — has  passed.  Let  us,  however,  grant  that
it  was  by  the  law : a decree  is  made  for  naming  your  successor  :
you  cry  halt  and  say,  “ Take  my  candidature  into  considera-
tion.” Rather,  do  you  take  us  into  consideration.^  Are  you
to  have  an  army  longer  than  the  vote  of  the  people  gave  it
you  ? “You  must  %ht  unless  you  grant  it.”  Certainly —
to  quote  Pompey  again — and  with  a fair  prospect  either
of  conquering  or  of  dying  free  men.  Moreover,  , if  fight
we  must,  the  time  depends  on  chance,  the  plan  on  cir-
cumstances. Therefore  I do  not  worry  you  on  that  point.
In  regard  to  what  I have  said,  pray  make -any  suggestion
that  occurs  to  you  : for  my  part,  I am  on  the  rack  day  and
night.

CCC  (f  XVI,  II)

In  this  year  the  Civil  War  began  in  earnest  as  soon  as  Caesar  crossed
the  Rubicon.  Directly  the  news  arrived  Pompey  left  Rome  to  gather
soldiers  stationed  in  winter  quarters  and  on  garrison  duty

B. c.  49.  Coss.,  in  various  parts  of  Italy,  and  Italy  itself  was  portioned

C.  Claudius  out  into  districts  for  defence  under  various  magistrates

L^Coraelius  senators.  But  by  the  i8th  of  March  Pompey  had

Lentulus  Crus,  quitted  Italy,  never  to  return,  with  the  two  consuls  and

other  magistrates ; and  before  the  end  of  the  month  Caesar
had  arrived  at  Rome,  left  it  in  charge  of  the  praetor  Lepidus,  and  Italy
in  charge  of  the  tribune  Antony,  specially  invested  with  praetorian
powers,  and  had  gone  to  besiege  Marseilles  and  to  fight  Pompey’s
legates  in  Spain.  Cicero,  who  had  had  the  district  of  Capua  assigned
to  him,  had  nothing  left  but  to  keep  as  quiet  as  he  could  in  his
country  houses.  But  his  conscience  left  him  no  peace  until  he  had
joined  Pompey  in  Greece,  though  he  was  fully  aware  of  the  unsatis-
factory nature  of  the  party  which  had  accompanied  him  there.  After
long  hesitation,  he  at  last  made  up  his  mind,  early  in  June,  to  join  Pom-
pey’s camp.  After  his  arrival  there  we  have  no  more  letters  this  year.

^ Habere  rationem  is  here  used  in  a double  sense  : ( i ) to  allow  votes
bdn&  tak^  for  (technical) ; (2)  to  have  consideration  for,  “to  take
into  account  ” (common).

234

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^)

Outside  Rome,  12  January

Cicero  and  his  son,  Terentia,  Tullia,  Quintus  and  his  son,
send  warm  greetings  to  Tiro.  Though  I miss  your  ever-
ready  help  at  every  turn,  yet  it  is  not  for  my  sake  so  much
as  for  yours  that  I grieve  at  your  illness.  But  now
that  the  violence  of  your  disease  has  abated  so  far  as  to
become  a quartan  fever — for  so  Curius  writes  me  word — I
hope  that  with  care  you  will  soon  become  stronger.  Only
be  sure — as  becomes  a man  of  your  good  sense — to  think
of  nothing  for  the  present  except  how  to  get  well  in  the
best  possible  way.  I know  how  your  regret  at  being  absent
worries  you,  but  all  difficulties  will  disappear,  if  you  get  well.
I would  not  have  you  hurry,  for  fear  of  your  suffering  from
sea-sickness  in  your  weak  state,  and  finding  a winter  voyage
dangerous.  I arrived  at  the  city  walls  on  the  4th  of  January.
Nothing  could  be  more  complimentary  than  the  procession
that  came  out  to  meet  me ; but  I found  things  in  a blaze  of
civil  discord,  or  rather  civil  war.  I desired  to  find  a cure
for  this,  and,  as  I think,  could  have  done  so ; but  I was
hindered  by  the  passions  of  particular  persons,  for  on
both  sides  there  are  those  who  desire  to  fight.  The
long  and  short  of  it  is  that  Caesar  himself — once  our
friend — has  sent  the  senate  a menacing  and  offensive
despatch,^  and  is  so  insolent  as  to  retain  his  army  and
province  in  spite  of  the  senate,  and  my  old  friend  Curio
is  backing  him  up.  Farthermore,  our  friend  Antonius
and  Q.  Cassius,  having  been  expelled  from  the  house,
though  without  any  violence,  left  town  with  Curio  to  join
Caesar,  directly  the  senate  had  passed  the  decree  ordering
“consuls,  praetors,  tribunes,  and  us  proconsuls  to  see  that
the  Republic  received  no  damage.”  Never  has  the  state
been  in  greater  danger : never  have  disloyal  citizens  had  a

^ Caesar  (B.  C.  i.  5)  describes  it  as  containing  demands  of  “the  mildest
possible  kind” — lenissima  postulata.  It  was  brought  by  Curio,  who,
going  out  of  office  on  the  loth  December,  had  joined  Caesar  at
Ravenna.

* This  senatus  consuUitm  iiltunwn  was  passed  on  the  7th  of  January,

F XVI,  II ; V,  20  TO  MESCINIUS  RUFUS

235

better  prepared  leader.  On  the  whole,  however,  preparations
are  being  pushed  on  with  very  great  activity  on  our  side  also.
This  is  being  done  by  the  influence  and  energy  of  our  friend
Pompey,  who  now,  when  it  is  too  late,  begins  to  fear  Caesar.
In  spite  of  these  exciting  incidents,  a full  meeting  of  the
senate  clamoured  for  a triumph  being  granted  me : but  the
consul  Lentulus,  in  order  to  enhance  his  service  to  me,  said
that  as  soon  as  he  had  taken  the  measures  necessary  for  the
public  safety,  he  would  bring  forward  a motion  on  the  sub-
ject. J do  nothing  in  a spirit  of  selfish  ambition,  and  con-
sequently my  influence  is  all  the  greater.  Italy  has  been
marked  out  into  districts,  shewing  for  what  part  each  of  us
is  to  be  responsible.  I have  taken  Capua.  That  is  all  I
wanted  to  tell  you.  Again  and  again  I urge  you  to  take
care  of  your  health,  and  to  write  to  me  as  often  as  you  have
anyone  to  whom  to  give  a letter.  Good-bye,  good-bye
12  January.

CCCI  (f  V,  20)

TO  MESCINIUS  RUFUS'

Outside  Rome  (January)

I WOULD  have  done  my  very  best  to  meet  you,  if  you  had
chosen  to  come  to  the  place  arranged.  Wherefore,  although
from  regard  to  my  convenience  you  were  unwilling  to  dis-
turb me,  I should  wish  you  to  believe  that,  if  you  had  sent
m.e  word,  I should  have  preferred  your  wish  to  my  own  con-

the fifth  meeting  of  the  senate — two  comitial  days,  3rd  and  4th,  pre-
venting a meeting  being  held  (Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  5).  Cicero’s  assertion
that  no  violence  was  done  to  Cassius  and  Antony  seems  to  be  con-
firmed by  Caesar’s  account,  who  only  says  that  after  this  decree  profu-
giuni  statim  ex  urbe  tr.  pi.  If  any  violence  had  been  used,  he  would
certainly  have  mentioned  it  as  strengthening  his  case.  In  the  decree
the  (unusual)  mention  of  proconsuls  was  in  order  to  include  Pompey
and  Cicero.

^ Mescinius  Rufus  had  been  quaestor  in  Cilicia  during  Cicero’s
government  (see  p.  167),  and  was  responsible,  in  part  at  least,  for
the  accounts.  /

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

236

venience.  In  reply  to  your  letter,  I should  have  been  able  to
write  to  you  on  the  details  more  conveniently,  if  my  secretary,
M.  Tullius,  had  been  with  me.  He,  I feel  certain,  at  any
rate  in  making  up  the  accounts — I cannot  speak  of  other
things — did  not  knowingly  do  anything  adverse  to  your
interest  or  your  reputation.  And  in  the  next  place  I can
assure  you  that,  if  the  old  rule  and  ancient  custom  as  to  giving
in  accounts  had  been  in  force,  I should  never  have  given
them  in  until  I had  first  checked  and  made  them  up  with
you,  as  our  close  official  connexion  demanded./^ What  I
should  have  done  outside  Rome,  had  the  old  custom  re-
mained in  force,  that  I did  in  the  province,  because,  by  the
Julian  law,  it  was  necessary  to  leave  accounts  in  the  province
and  to  give  in  a verbatim  copy  of  them  at  the  treasury.  I
did  not  do  this  with  a view  of  forcing  you  to  adopt  my
calculation  ; but  I put  a great  confidence  in  you,  and  shall
never  be  sorry  that  I did  so.  For  I handed  over  my
secretary  to  your  entire  control — of  whom  I now  see  that
you  entertain  suspicions — and  you  joined  your  brother
M.  Mindius  with  him  in  the  business.  The  accounts  were
made  up,  in  my  absence,  under  your  eye,  to  which  I did
nothing  whatever  beyond  reading  them.  When  I received  a
copy  from  my  secretary,  I regarded  it  as  received  from  your
brother.  If  that  was  a compliment,  I could  not  pay  you  a
greater  one : if  it  was  an  instance  of  confidence,  I have
shewn  you  almost  more  than  I shewed  myself : if  my  duty
had  been  to  see  that  nothing  was  entered  in  them  that  was
not  for  your  honour  and  advantage,  there  was  no  one  to
whom  I could  have  intrusted  them  in  preference  to  the
man  to  whom  I did  do  so.  At  any  rate,  I merely  obeyed
the  law  by  depositing  copies  of  the  accounts  made  up  and
audited  in  two  cities,  Laodicea  and  Apamea,  which  I re-
garded as  the  two  chief  cities  (for  it  had  to  be  the  chief
cities).  So  then  to  this  point  my  first  reply  is  that,  though
for  good  and  sufficient  reasons  I have  made  haste  to  give
in  the  accounts  at  the  treasury,  yet  I should  have  waited
for  you,  had  I not  considered  that  depositing  the  accounts
in  the  province  was  tantamount  to  giving  them  in  at  the
treasury.^

^ Because  the  two  copies,  having  been  deposited  in.  the  provincial

F V,  20

TO  MESCINIUS  RUFUS

237

As  to  what  you  say  of  Volusius,  that  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  accounts.  I have  been  advised  by  experts —
among  them  by  C.  Camillus,  the  best  lawyer  of  the  day  and
a very  kind  friend  of  mine — that  the  debt  (the  amount  was
not  3,000  sestertia,  as  you  say,  but  1,900)  could  not  be
transferred  from  Valerius  to  Volusius,  and  that  the  sureties
of  Valerius  were  liable.  For  a sum  of  money  had  been  paid
us  in  the  name  of  Valerius  as  purchaser:  the  balance  I
entered  in  the  accounts^  But  your  proposal  robs  me  of  the
fruit  of  my  liberality,  of  my  activity,  and  even  (what,  after  all,
I do  not  much  care  about)  of  a moderate  amount  of  good
§ense : of  my  liberality,  because  you  prefer  to  suppose  my
legate  and  my  prefect,  Q.  Lepta,  to  have  been  relieved  from
a most  serious  calamity  by  the  good  offices  of  my  secretary
rather  than  of  myself,  and  that  though  they  ought  never  to
have  been  made  liable  : of  my  activity,  because  you  suppose
that  in  regard  to  so  important  a duty,  I may  say  so  grave  a
danger,  I neither  knew  anything  nor  took  any  thought — that
my  secretary  made  any  entry  he  chose  without  even  going
through  the  form  of  reading  it  over  to  me : of  my  good
sense,  because  you  think  that  an  arrangement,  which  had
been  thought  out  by  me  with  no  little  acuteness,  had  been
practically  not  thought  of  at  all.  The  fact  of  the  matter  is
that  the  release  of  Volusius  was  my  own  design,  and  I also
formed  the  plan  for  relieving  the  securities  of  Valerius  and
Tit.  Marius  himself  from  so  heavy  a loss.  And  this  scheme
has  not  only  the  approval  of  everybody,  but  their  warm  com-
mendation, and,  if  you  wish  to  know  the  real  truth,  I perceived
that  my  secretary  was  the  one  person  who  did  not  like  it.  But
it  was  my  view  that,  so  long  as  the  People  got  its  own,  a good
man  should  consult  for  the  interests  of  so  large  a number —
whether  of  friends  or  fellow  citizens.  As  regards  Lucceius,  the

towns,  could  not  be  altered,  and  the  copy  in  the  treasury  was  bound  to
be  a verbatim  copy  of  them.

^ Apparently  Cicero,  having  satisfied  himself  that  the  proportion  of
the  1,900  sestertia  paid  by  Valerius  was  sufficient  to  save  the  treasury
from  loss,  entered  the  balance  on  the  debit  side  as  “remitted”  or  “ re-
turned ” on  his  authority  as  proconsul.  We  cannot  tell  what  the  debt
was,  perhaps  for  some  contract,  for  which  Volusius  had  bid  too  high,
and  for  which  Valerius  (a  banker)  gave  securities,  and  because  he  be-
came thereby  the  purchaser  or  contractor  [mancep)  was  liable  to  the
state  for  the  whole.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  MT.  57

238

arrangement  come  to,  at  the  suggestion  of  Pompey,  was  that
the  money  should  be  deposited  in  a temple.  I acknowledged
that  as  having  been  done  on  my  order.  This  money  Pom-
pey has  employed,  as  Sestius  did  that  deposited  by  you.  But
this,  I am  aware,  does  not  affect  you.  I should  have  been
sorry  to  have  omitted  to  record  your  having  deposited  the
money  in  the  temple  on  my  order,  had  not  that  sum  been
attested  by  records  of  the  most  solemn  and  precise  nature —
stating  to  whom  it  was  paid,  by  what  decree  of  the  senate,
and  in  virtue  of  what  written  order  from  you  and  from  my-
self it  had  been  handed  over  to  P.  Sestius.^  Seeing  that
these  facts  had  been  put  on  record  in  so  many  ways,  that  a
mistake  in  regard  to  them  was  impossible,  I did  not  make
an  entry,  which  after  all  had  no  reference  to  you.  How-
ever, I wish  now  I had  made  the  entry,  since  I see  that  you
regret  its  not  having  been  done.

I quite  agree  as  to  your  being  obliged,  as  you  say,  to
enter  this  transaction,  and  your  balance  will  not  differ  at  all
from  mine  by  your  doing  so.  You  may  add  also,  “on  my
authority,”  which,  though  I did  not  add  it,  I have  no  reason
for  denying,  nor  should  deny,  had  there  been  any  such
reason,  and  had  you  declined  to  add  it.  Again,  as  to  the
sum  of  900,000  sesterces ; that,  at  any  rate,  was  entered  in
accordance  with  your  own  or  your  brother’s  wishes.  How-
ever, if  there  is  any  entry  (for  the  posting  of  the  public

* The  two  points  Cicero  answers  are:  (i)  Rufus  complained  of  an
item  in  the  accounts,  in  which  Valerius  had  been  entered  as  a debtor  to
the  state,  and  also  as  having  discharged  the  debt,  though  he  had  not
paid  the  full  sum.  This  Cicero  explains  that  he  did  on  professional
advice,  as  Valerius,  not  Volusius,  was  liable  : he  had  remitted  this
balance,  because  the  state  did  not  lose  anything.  (2)  Rufus  complains
that  Cicero  made  no  entry  of  a certain  sum,  as  to  which  there  was  a
dispute,  having  been  deposited  by  him  in  a temple.  Cicero  says  he
might  have  done  so,  but  that,  after  all,  Rufus  was  protected  by  a number
of  formal  receipts  and  other  documents.  We  have  heard  of  disputed
money  being  put  in  a temple  before  (p.  131).  Pompey  and  Sestius
(Cicero’s  successor  in  Cilicia)  took  this  money  in  virtue  of  a senatorial
decree  passed  on  the  7th  of  January,  giving  Pompey  a large  number
of  men  and  complete  command  of  all  public  money  (App.  B.  C.  ii.
34;  Dio,  41,  3).  It  was  thus  that  Ccesar  was  justified  in  regarding  what
he  found  in  the  hands  of  Pompeian  officers  as  public  money  (see  Cses.
B.  C.  i.  23).  The  senate  having  passed  this  vote,  Rufus  and  Cicero
gave  their  orders  or  cheque  upon  the  temple  to  pay  the  money  to  Pompey.

F V,  20

TO  MESCINIUS  RUFUS

239

ledger  is  not  completed)  which  I can  correct  even  now
in  my  accounts,  I must  consider — since  I have  not  taken
advantage  of  the  decree  of  the  senate — what  grace  the
laws  allow  me.^  Anyhow,  you  were  not  bound  to  make  the
entry  you  have  made  in  regard  to  the  amount  collected
tally  with  my  accounts,^  unless  I am  mistaken — for  there
are  others  with  more  technical  knowledge  than  myself.  But
pray  do  not  doubt  my  doing  everything  that  I think  to  be
for  your  interests  or  in  accordance  with  your  wish,  if  I
possibly  can.

As  to  what  you  say  about  the  list  for  good-service  re-
wards, you  must  know  that  I have  returned  the  names  of
my  military  tribunes  and  prefects,  and  the  members  of  the
staff — at  least  of  my  own  staff.®  In  this  matter,  indeed,  I
made  a mistake.  I thought  that  the  time  allowed  me  for
giving  in  their  names  was  unlimited : I was  afterwards  in-
formed that  it  had  to  be  done  within  thirty  days  of  handing
in  my  accounts.  I am  very  sorry  that  this  list  for  good-
service  rewards  was  not  reserved  to  enhance  your  credit
rather  than  mine,  since  I have  no  promotion  to  work  for.
However,  in  regard  to  the  centurions  and  the  subalterns  of
the  military  tribunes,  nothing  has  yet  been  done,  for  good-
service  rewards  of  that  class  have  no  time  limit  by  law.

The  last  item  is  the  100,000  sesterces,  in  regard  to  which
I remember  receiving  a letter  from  you  from  Myrina  ac-
knowledging the  mistake  to  be  not  mine,  but  yours.  The
mistake — if  mistake  it  was — appeared  to  have  originated
with  your  brother  and  Tullius.  But  since  it  could  not  be
corrected — for  I had  already  deposited  my  accounts  and
quitted  my  province — I believe  I answered  you  as  politely

^ It  appears  that  the  senate  had  granted  him  an  extension  of  time  as
to  giving  in  his  accounts,  but  that,  having  not  taken  advantage  of  that
decree,  he  can  only  do  what  the  law  dictates  as  to  sending  in  correc-
tions. But  the  reading  and  meaning  of  de  logczo  is  very  uncertain.

2 The  reading  and  meaning  are  alike  uncertain.  I suppose  it  to  refer
to  the  sum  of  money  just  mentioned,  as  to  the  entry  of  which  in
Cicero’s  accounts  Rufus  found  some  technical  objection.  Cicero  says,
“Well,  you  and  your  brother  agreed  as  to  the  item  : and  in  your  office
as  qusestor  you  were  responsible  for  the  account  of  the  amount  actually
got  in,  and  were  not  bound  to  copy  my  entry  in  your  own  accounts.”

® Not  yours  also.  The  coniubernales  were  young  men  serving  with  a
magistrate  as  volunteers,  for  the  sake  of  experience.

240

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

as  the  warmth  of  my  feelings  dictated  and  my  financial
outlook  at  the  time  allowed.^  But  I did  not  either  then
consider  that  I was  bound  by  the  polite  tone  of  my
letter,  nor  do  I now  think  that  I was  bound  to  have
regarded  your  letter  about  the  loo  sestertia  in  the  light
in  which  men  regard  dunning  letters  received  in  times  like
these.  At  the  same  time  you  ought  to  take  this  into  con-
sideration. The  whole  sum  of  money  legally  coming  to  me
I deposited  with  the  publicani  at  Ephesus.  It  amounted  to
2,200,000  sesterces  (about  ;^i  7,600).  The  whole  of  it
has  been  appropriated  by  Pompey.  Whether  I submit  to
that  with  patience  or  the  reverse,  you  at  least  ought  to
take  the  loss  of  100  sestertia  (about  ;£^8oo)  with  equanimity,
and  to  reckon  that  just  so  much  the  less  has  come  into  your
pocket  from  your  own  allowances  or  my  liberality.  But
even  if  you  had  debited  me  with  this  100  sestertia,  yet
your  kindness  and  affection  for  me  is  such  that  you  would
not  wish  to  distrain  ^ on  me  at  such  a time  as  this : for,
however  much  I wished  the  money  paid  in  cash,  I have  not
the  wherewithal.  But  regard  this  as  a joke,  just  as  I do
what  you  said.  However,  as  soon  as  Tullius  comes  back
from  the  country,  I will  send  him  to  you,  if  you  think  that  will
be  any  good.  I have  no  reason  for  wishing  this  letter  not  to
be  torn  up.^

CCCII  (a  VII,  10)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Outside  the  Walls  of  Rome,  17  January

I HAVE  suddenly  resolved  to  leave  town  before  daybreak,
to  avoid  all  gazing  and  gossip,  especially  with  my  bay-decked

^ /.d.,  considering  that  I was  saving  all  I could  for  my  triumph,  and
that  I could  ill  afford  to  lose  so  much  (about  £^^00).

^ JEstimationem  accipere^  i.e.^  to  take  property  in  satisfaction  of  a
debt,  on  a fixed  valuation.

^ Cicero  seems  to  mean  that  if  Rufus  thinks  the  letter  against  his  in-
terest, he  is  at  liberty  to  destroy  it,  and  so  have  a freer  hand  in  dealing
with  his  secretary  Tullius.

A VII,  lO,  II

TO  ATTICUS

241

lictors.^  For  the  rest,  I don’t  know,  by  heaven,  what  to  do
now  or  in  the  future : such  is  the  agitation  into  which  I am
thrown  by  the  infatuation  of  our  party’s  most  insane  de-
cision. But  what  counsel  should  I ofer  you,  you  whose
advice  I am  myself  anxious  to  receive?  What  plan  our
Gnasus  has  adopted,  or  is  adopting,  I don’t  know : as  yet
he  is  cooped  up  in  the  towns  and  in  a state  of  lethargy.  If
he  makes  a stand  in  Italy,  we  shall  all  be  together:  if  he
abandons  it,  I shall  have  to  reconsider  the  matter.  Up  to
now,  unless  I am  out  of  my  senses,  his  proceedings  are  all
fatuous  and  rash.  Yes,  pray  write  to  me  frequently  just
anything  that  comes  into  your  head.

CCCIII  (A  VII,  ii)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

(In  Campania)  19  January

What  in  the  world  does  it  mean?  What  is  going  on  ? I
am  quite  in  the  dark.  “We  are  in  occupation  of  Cingulum,”
says  some  one;  “we  have  lost  Ancona.”  “Labienushas
abandoned  Caesar.”  Are  we  talking  of  an  imperator  of  the
Roman  people,  or  of  a Hannibal  ? Madman ! Miserable
wretch,  that  has  never  seen  even  a shadow  of  virtue ! And
he  says  that  he  is  doing  all  this  “ to  support  his  honour  ” !
How  can  there  be  any  “ honour  ” where  there  is  no  moral
right?  Can  it  be  morally  right  to  have  an  army  without
commission  from  the  state  ? To  seize  cities  inhabited  by
one’s  fellow  citizens,  as  a means  of  attacking  one’s  own
country?  To  be  contriving  abolition  of  debts,  restoration
of  exiles,  hundreds  of  other  crimes

^ Pompey  left  Rome,  it  appears,  on  the  7th  or  8th.  The  consuls  and
other  magistrates  of  his  party  remained  in  town,  but  on  hearing  of
Caesar’s  advance  (about  the  17th)  they  hurriedly  quitted  Rome  (Caes.
B.  C.  i.  14).  Caesar  says  that  this  took  place  on  a false  alarm  on  the
day  after  Pompey’s  leaving  Rome : but  it  is  apparent  from  this  letter
that  Pompey  had  started  some  time  before.

II.  R

242

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

“For  royalty,  the  first  of  things  divine”?^

Let  him  keep  his  fortune,  and  welcome ! By  heaven,  I
would  rather  have  one  hour  of  basking  in  your  free^  sun
than  all  the  royalties  of  that  kind  in  the  world,  or  rather  I
would  die  a thousand  times  sooner  than  once  take  an  idea
of  that  sort  into  my  mind : “ What  if  you  should  take  the
fancy?”  say  you.  Well,  everyone’s  wishes  are  free:  but  I
regard  the  mere  wish  as  a greater  misfortune  than  the  cross.
There  is  one  greater  misfortune  still — to  attain  such  a wish.
But  enough  of  this.  It  is  a kind  of  relief  to  philosophize
thus  much  in  the  midst  of  such  troubles.  To  return  to  our
friend.  In  the  name  of  fortune,  what  do  you  think  of
Pompey’s  plan  ? I mean  in  abandoning  the  city  ? For  /
am  at  a loss  to  explain  it.  Nothing,  again,  could  be  more
irrational.  Do  you  mean  to  abandon  the  city?  Then  you
would  have  done  the  same  if  the  Gauls  were  upon  us.
“ The  Republic,”  says  he,  “ does  not  depend  on  brick  and
mortar.”  No,  but  it  does  depend  on  altars  and  hearths.
“ Themistocles  did  the  same.”  Yes,  for  one  city  was  in-
capable of  resisting  the  flood  of  the  whole  East.  But
Pericles  did  not  so  act,  about  fifty  years  afterwards,  for  he
abandoned  everything  except  the  walls.  Our  own  country-
men in  the  old  times  held  the  citadel,  though  the  rest  of
the  city  was  taken  :

“ Such  deeds  of  fame — so  poets  told —

Our  fathers  wrought  in  days  of  old.”®

On  the  other  hand,  I gather  from  the  indignation  aroused
in  the  municipia.,  and  the  conversation  of  those  whom  I meet,
that  this  plan  is  likely  to  prove  successful  in  a way.  There
is  an  extraordinary  outcry — I don’t  know  what  people  are
saying  with  you,  but  pray  let  me  know — at  the  city  being
without  magistrates  or  senate.  In  fact,  there  is  a wonder-
fully strong  feeling  at  Pompey’s  being  in  flight.  Indeed,
the  point  of  view  is  quite  changed : people  are  now  for

^ rrjv  9su)v  fieyiffTTjv  wtrr’  Tvpavv'ida  (Eurip.  Phocn.  509).

® Lucrativo^  a very  doubtful  word  here ; it  has  been  emended  in
various  ways,  Lucretino  (“near  Lucretilis”),  Lucretiano,  etc.

® ovTit)  TTOv  Tuiv  TTpoffOev  eTTivOofieOa  kXsu  avSpwv  (Horn.  II.  ix.

524)-

A VII,  II,  12

TO  ATTICUS

243

making  no  concessions  to  Caesar.  Expound  to  me  what
all  this  means.  My  department  is  a very  quiet  one.  For
Pompey  wishes  me  to  be  a kind  of  “ president  ” of  the
whole  of  this  Campanian  sea-coast,  to  superintend  the  levy,
and  hold  the  chief  command.  Accordingly,  I meditate
being  continually  on  the  move.  I think  you  must  see  by
this  time  what  Caesar’s  aim,  what  the  disposition  of  the  people,
and  the  general  position  of  affairs  are.  Pray  write  and  tell
me  about  them,  and  that,  too,  as  often  as  possible,  since
they  are  continually  shifting.  For  I find  relief  both  in
writing  to  you  and  in  reading  your  letters.

CCCIV  (A  VII,  12)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  22  January

As  yet  I have  received  only  one  letter  from  you  dated  the
19th,  and  in  it  you  indicated  that  you  had  written  another,
which  I have  not  received.  But  I beg  you  to  write  as
often  as  possible,  not  only  whatever  you  know  or  have  been
told,  but  also  what  you  suspect,  and  above  all  what  you
think  I ought  to  do  or  not  to  do.  You  ask  me  to  be  sure
to  let  you  know  what  Pompey  is  doing : I don’t  think  he
knows  himself,  certainly  none  of  us  do.  I saw  the  consul
Lentulus  at  Formiae  on  the  21st;  I have  seen  Libo.  No-
thing but  terror  and  uncertainty  everywhere ! Pompey  is
on  the  road  to  Larinum ; for  there  are  some  cohorts  there,
as  also  at  Luceria  and  Teanum,  and  in  the  rest  of  Apulia.
After  that  nobody  knows  whether  he  means  to  make  a stand
anywhere,  or  to  cross  the  sea.  If  he  stays  in  Italy,  I am
afraid  he  cannot  have  a dependable  army : but  if  he  goes
away,  where  I am  to  go  or  stay,  or  what  I am  to  do,  I don’t
know.  For  the  man,  whose  “ Phalarism  ” ^ you  dread,  will,
I think,  spare  no  form  of  brutality : nor  will  the  suspension

^ Cruelty  like  that  of  the  tyrant  Phalaris.

244

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

of  business,  nor  the  departure  of  senate  and  magistrates,
nor  the  closing  of  the  treasury  cause  him  to  pause.  But
all  this,  as  you  say,  we  shall  know  before  long.  Meanwhile,
forgive  my  writing  to  you  at  such  length  and  so  often.  For
I find  some  relief  in  it,  and  at  the  same  time  want  to  draw
a letter  from  you,  and  above  all  some  advice  as  to  what  I
am  to  do  and  how  to  conduct  myself.  Shall  I commit  my-
self wholly  to  this  side  ? I am  not  deterred  by  the  danger,
but  I am  bursting  with  vexation.  Such  a want  of  all  plan  ! so
utterly  opposed  in  every  respect  to  my  advice ! Am  I to
procrastinate  and  trim,  and  then  join  the  winning  side,  the
party  in  power?  “ I dread  to  face  the  Trojans,”  ^ and  I am
held  back  from  that  course  by  the  duty  not  only  of  a citizen,
but  also  of  a friend,  though  my  resolution  is  often  weakened
by  pity  for  my  children.  Do,  therefore,  though  equally
anxious  yourself,  write  something  to  a man  in  this  state  of
utter  uncertainty,  and  especially  what  you  think  I ought  to
do  in  case  of  Pompey’s  quitting  Italy.  Manius  Lepidus,
for  his  part — for  we  have  been  together — draws  the  line  at
that,  and  so  does  L.  Torquatus.  I am  hampered,  among
many  other  things,  by  my  lictors : I have  never  seen  such  a
hopeless  entanglement.  Accordingly,  I don’t  expect  any-
thing positive  from  you,  but  merely  your  present  impression.
In  fact,  I want  to  know  what  the  precise  difficulty  in  your
mind  is.  It  is  all  but  certain  that  Labienus " has  abandoned
him.  If  it  could  only  have  been  possible  that  on  coming
to  Rome  Labienus  had  found  magistrates  and  a senate
there,  he  would  have  been  of  eminent  service  to  our  cause.
For  it  would  have  been  clear  that  loyalty  to  the  Republic
had  caused  him  to  hold  one  who  was  his  friend  guilty  of
treason.  This  is  clear  even  now,  but  of  less  practical
advantage : for  there  is  no  one  to  be  of  advantage  to,  and
I expect  him  to  feel  some  dissatisfaction — unless  perchance

^ For  this  quotation — Cicero’s  constant  way  of  indicating  public
opinion— see  vol.  i. , p.  90.

^ T.  Atius  Labienus  had  been  Caesar’s  legafus  in  Gaul,  and  was  so
trusted  by  him  as  to  be  left  in  charge  of  Gallia  Togata  in  Caesar’s
absence  (b.c.  50).  Caesar  was  warned  that  he  was  being  tampered
with,  but  refused  to  believe  it  {B.  G.  viii.  52).  It  was,  however,  true,
and  he  became  one  of  the  most  violent  of  the  Pompeians.  He  eventu-
ally fell  at  Munda.

A VI,  12  ; F XIV,  i8  TO  TERENTIA,  ETC.

245

it  is  not  true,  after  all,  that  he  has  abandoned  Caesar.  For
myself,  I am  convinced  that  it  is  true.  Pray,  though  you
say  you  confine  yourself  to  the  limits  of  your  own  house,  do
give  me  a sketch  of  the  city.  Is  Pompey  missed  ? Is  there
any  appearance  of  a feeling  against  Caesar  ? What,  too,  is
your  opinion  as  to  Terentia  and  Tullia?  Should  they  stay
at  Rome,  or  join  me,  or  seek  some  place  of  safety  ? On
this,  and  indeed  on  any  other  point,  pray  write  to  me,  or
rather  keep  on  writing.

CCCV  (f  XIV,  18)

TO  TERENTIA  AND  TULLIA  (AT  ROME)
F0RM1.E,  22  January

Tullius  to  his  wife,  and  her  father  to  his  dearest  daughter,
and  Cicero  to  his  mother  and  sister,  send  warm  greetings.
I think,  my  darlings,  you  should  carefully  consider  and  re-
consider what  to  do,  whether  to  stay  at  Rome,  or  to  join  me,
or  seek  some  place  of  safety.  This  is  not  a point  for  my  con-
sideration alone,  but  for  yours  also.  What  occurs  to  me  is
this : you  may  be  safe  at  Rome  under  Dolabella’s  protec-
tion, and  that  circumstance  may  prove  serviceable  to  us  in
case  of  any  violence  or  plunder  commencing.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  I am  shaken  in  this  idea  by  seeing  that  all  the
loyalists  have  left  Rome  and  have  the  ladies  of  their  families
with  them.  Again,  the  district  in  which  I now  am  consists
of  towns  and  estates  also  which  are  in  my  power,  so  you
could  be  a good  deal  with  me,  and,  if  you  quitted  me,  could
very  conveniently  stay  in  domains  belonging  to  us.  I can-
not as  yet  quite  make  up  my  mind  which  of  the  two  is  the
better  course  for  you  to  take.  Please  observe  for  your-
selves what  other  ladies  of  your  rank  are  doing,  and  be
careful  not  to  be  cut  off  from  the  power  of  leaving  town
when  you  do  wish  to  do  so.  I would  have  you  carefully
consider  it  again  and  again  with  each  other  and  with  your

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

246

friends.  Tell  Philotimus  to  secure  the  house  with  barricades
and  a watch.  Also  please  organize  a regular  service  of
letter-carriers,  so  that  I may  hear  something  from  you  every
day.  Above  all  attend  to  your  health,  if  you  wish  me  to
maintain  mine.

Formise,  22  January.

CCCVI  (a  VII,  13  a)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

MiNTURNiE,  23  January

As  to  the  business  of  Vennonius,  I agree  with  you.  Labienus
I regard  as  a “demigod.”  There  has  been  no  political
stroke  this  long  time  past  more  brilliant.  If  he  has  done  no
other  good,  he  has  at  least  given  Atm  pain.  But  as  a matter
of  fact,  I do  think  that  some  good  has  been  done  to  the
cause.  I am  charmed  also  with  Piso,  whose  judgment  on
his  son-in-law  I think  will  have  weight.  But  you  perceive
the  nature  of  the  war.  It  is  only  a civil  war  in  the  sense
that  it  has  originated  from  the  unscrupulous  boldness  of  one
unprincipled  citizen,  not  as  arising  from  a division  of  senti-
ment between  the  citizens  generally.  But  that  man  is  strong
in  the  possession  of  an  army,  he  commands  the  allegiance
of  many  by  the  prospects  he  holds  out  and  the  promises  he
makes  : nothing  that  anyone  possesses  is  beyond  the  scope
of  his  desires.  To  such  a man  as  this  the  city  has  been
abandoned,  without  any  garrison  to  protect  it,  crammed
with  every  kind  of  wealth.  What  would  you  not  have  to
fear  from  the  man  who  regards  those  temples  and  roofs,  not
as  constituting  his  fatherland,  but  as  objects  for  plunder  ? ^
What  his  proceedings  are  going  to  be,  and  how  they  are  to
be  put  into  any  shape,  without  senate  and  without  magistrates,
I cannot  tell.  He  will  not  be  able  to  keep  up  even  a pre-

^ Cp.  Bliicher’s  reported  remark  on  seeing  London — was  fiir
plunder  !

A VII,  13  a

TO  ATTICUS

247

tenceof  constitutional  action.  For  us,  however — where  shall
we  be  able  to  raise  our  heads  or  when  ? How  utterly  in-
capable our  general  is  you  yourself  observe,  in  having  had
no  intelligence  of  the  state  of  affairs  even  in  Picenum  : and
how  devoid  of  any  plan  of  campaign,  the  facts  are  witness.
For,  to  say  nothing  of  other  mistakes  committed  during
the  last  ten  years,  could  any  terms  be  worse  than  such  a
flight  ? Nor,  indeed,  have  I any  idea  what  he  is  contemplat-
ing at  this  moment,  though  I never  cease  asking  again  and
again  by  letter.  Everyone  agrees  that  he  is  in  a state  of
abject  alarm  and  agitation.  Accordingly,  as  far  as  I can  see,
there  is  no  garrison — to  organize  which  he  was  kept  at  the  city
walls — nor  any  place  where  a garrison  could  be  posted.  His
whole  hope  rests  on  the  two  legions  somewhat  treacherously
retained,  and  almost  to  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  another.^
For  as  yet,  indeed,  those  whom  he  is  enlisting  are  men  re-
luctant to  serve  and  averse  from  fighting.  While  the  time
for  making  terms  has  been  let  slip.  I do  not  see  what  is
going  to  happen.  At  any  rate  we,  or  our  leader,  have
allowed  things  to  come  to  this  pass,  that,  having  left  harbour
without  a rudder,  we  must  let  ourselves  drift  before  the
storm.  So  I hesitate  as  to  what  to  do  with  my  son  and
nephew : sometimes  I think  I had  better  despatch  them  to
Greece.  For  Tullia  and  Terentia,  again — when  I see  a
vision  of  barbarians  arriving  in  the  city — I am  filled  with  all
kinds  of  alarm  ; but  when  I think  of  Dolabella,  I breathe
again  somewhat.  But  pray  consider  what  you  think  ought
to  be  done  : in  the  first  place,  with  an  eye  to  their  safety —
for  I must  regard  their  security  as  requiring  to  be  considered
in  a different  light  from  my  own — secondly,  with  a view  to
popular  opinion,  that  I may  not  be  blamed  for  deciding  that
they  should  remain  at  Rome,  when  the  loyalists  generally
are  flying  from  it.  Nay,  even  you  and  Peducseus — for  he
has  written  to  me — must  take  care  what  you  do.  You  are
men  of  such  shining  characters,  that  the  same  line  of  con-
duct is  expected  from  you  as  from  the  noblest  citizens.  But
I can  safely  leave  this  to  you,  since  it  is  to  you  that  I look
for  advice  for  myself  and  my  family.  All  I have  to  add  is
to  ask  you  to  find  out,  as  far  as  you  can,  what  is  going  on,

^ See  p.  253,  note.

2^8

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

and  to  write  me  word  of  it,  and — what  I expect  from  you
even  more — tell  me  what  you  are  yourself  able  to  conjecture.
“ The  best  prophet,”  ^ you  know.  Pardon  my  running  on
like  this  : it  is  a relief  to  me  when  writing  to  you,  and  draws
a letter  from  you.

CCCVII  (F  XIV,  14)

TO  TERENTIA  AND  TULLIA  (AT  ROME)
Minturn^,  23  January

Tullius  to  Terentia,  her  father  to  Tullia,  his  two  sweet-
hearts, and  Cicero  to  his  excellent  mother  and  darling  sister,
send  warm  greetings.  If  you  are  well,  we  are  so  too.  It  is
now  for  you  to  consider,  and  not  for  me  only,  what  you  must
do.  If  Caesar  means  to  come  to  Rome  in  a peaceable
manner,  you  can  stay  at  home  with  safety  for  the  present :
but  if  in  his  madness  he  is  going  to  give  up  the  city  to
plunder,  I fear  Dolabella  himself  may  not  be  able  to  protect
us  sufficiently.  Besides,  I am  alarmed  lest  we  should  be
cut  off  from  you,  so  that  when  you  do  wish  to  leave  town
you  may  be  prevented.  There  is  one  other  thing,  which  you
are  in  the  best  position  to  observe  yourselves — are  other
ladies  of  your  rank  remaining  in  Rome  ? If  not,  it  deserves
consideration  whether  you  can  do  so  with  propriety.  As
things  stand  at  present  indeed,  always  provided  that  I am
allowed  to  hold  this  district,  you  will  be  able  to  stay  with
me  or  on  one  of  our  estates  with  the  greatest  comfort.
There  is  another  thing  I am  afraid  of — a want  of  provisions
in  the  city  before  long.  On  these  points  pray  consult  with
Pomponius,  with  Camillus,  with  anybody  you  think  right :
above  all  don’t  be  frightened.  Labienus  has  made  things
better  for  us.  Piso,  too,  is  helpful  in  quitting  the  city  and
declaring  his  own  son-in-law  guilty  of  treason.  Do  you,  dear

^ fiavTiQ  S'  dpioTOQ,  which,  as  usual,  he  leave  Atticus  to  fill  up.  It
is  a line  from  a lost  tragedy  of  Euripides  : fidvrig  S apiaroQ  offrig
iiKd^ei  KoXwc,  “the  best  prophet  is  the  good  guesser.”

F XIV,  14  ; A VII,  13  b TO  ATTICUS

249

hearts,  write  to  me  as  often  as  possible,  and  tell  me  how  you
are  and  what  is  going  on  around  you.  Quintus  and  his  son
and  Rufus  send  their  love.  Gooibye  !

23  January,  Minturnae.

CCCVIII  (A  VII,  13  b)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Minturn^,  24  January

I didn’t  guess  your  riddle  : it  is  more  obscure  than  Plato’s
number.^  However,  I have  made  it  out  now : you  meant
the  Oppii  of  Velia  by  your  succories  (blood-suckers).^  I
wavered  about  it  a long  time ; but  when  I hit  on  the  solu-
tion, the  rest  became  clear  and  quite  agreed  with  Terentia’s
total.

I saw  L.  Caesar^  at  Minturnae  early  on  the  23rd  of
January  with  his  utterly  absurd  message — he  is  not  a human
being,  but  a broom  with  the  binding  off.  I think  Caesar
himself  must  have  acted  with  the  purpose  of  throwing
ridicule  on  the  affair,  in  trusting  a message  on  matters  so
important  to  such  a man  as  this— unless,  perchance,  he

’ The  “ nuptial  number  ” in  the  Republic,  545c — 547 A.  On  its  in-
terpretation much  learned  ink  has  been  spent,  mostly  in  vain.  See
Nuptial  Number  of  Plato ^ its  Solution  and  Significance^  by  James
Adam,  1891.

^ The  Oppii  were  money-lenders  who  had  a house  in  Rome  close  to
that  of  Atticus  (see  Letter  CCCXXXIII).  What  Atticus  had  said
about  them  we  cannot  tell,  or  whether  there  was  an  obscure  pun  in  the
name  thus  given  them  by  Atticus  (from  oTrof,  “fig  juice,”  sucus)^  we
cannot  be  sure.  If  there  was  it  is  no  wonder  that  Cicero  found  the
riddle  a dark  one.  Tyrrell  and  Purser,  who  read  saccones,  “bagmen,”
object  to  the  pun  on  sucus  as  too  bad  even  for  Cicero;  it  is  not  Cicero’s,
however,  but  Atticus’s,  and  Cicero  evidently  thought  it  pretty  bad.

^ A distant  connexion  of  lulius  Caesar.  His  father  was  Caesar’s
legatusy  and  he  visited  Caesar  at  Ariminum  with  a message  from
Pompey  (with  one  of  the  praetors),  and  brought  back  a proposal  that
Pompey  should  go  to  his  province  of  Spain,  and  that  all  troops  in  Italy
should  be  disbanded,  the  comitia  left  free,  and  an  interview  immediately
arranged  between  them  (Caes.  B.  C.  i.  8-9).

250

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  /ET.  57

never  did  intrust  it,  and  the  fellow  has,  without  warrant,  made
use  of  some  conversation  which  he  picked  up  as  a message.
Labienus,  a man  of  noble  character  in  my  opinion,  arrived
at  Teanum  on  the  22nd.  There  he  met  Pompey  and  the
consuls.  What  their  conversation  was,  and  what  arrange-
ment was  come  to,  I will  write  and  tell  you  when  I know  for
certain.  Pompey  set  off  from  Teanum  in  the  direction  of
Larinum  on  the  23rd.  He  stopped  that  day  at  Venafrum.
Labienus  seems  to  have  brought  no  little  courage  to  our  side.
But  I haven’t  yet  anything  to  tell  you  from  these  parts : I
expect  rather  to  hear  news  from  you — what  intelligence  from
Caesar  reaches  Rome,  how  he  takes  Labienus’s  desertion,
what  Domitius  is  doing  among  the  Marsi,  Thermus  at
Iguvium,  P.  Attius  at  Cingulum  what  the  feeling  of  the
city  folk  is,  what  your  own  conjecture  as  to  the  future  : on
all  these  points  pray  write  frequently,  and  tell  me  what  your
opinion  is  about  my  ladies,  and  what  you  intend  doing
yourself.  If  I had  been  writing  with  my  own  hand,  this
letter  would  have  been  longer,  but  I dictated  it  owing  to  my
eyes  being  inflamed.

CCCIX  (A  VII,  14)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Cales,  25  January

I WRITE  this  letter,  though  suffering  from  slight  inflammation
of  the  eyes,  when  on  the  point  of  quitting  Cales  for  Capua.
L.  Caesar  brought  Caesar’s  message  to  Pompey  on  the  23rd,
while  the  latter  was  at  Teanum  with  the  consuls.  His  pro-
posal was  accepted,  but  on  condition  of  his  withdrawing  his
garrisons  from  the  towns  which  he  had  occupied  outside  his
province.  If  he  did  this,  they  said  in  their  answer  that  we
would  return  to  Rome  and  conclude  the  negotiation  in  the

^ L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus  occupied  Corfinium,  but  presently  had
to  surrender  it  to  Csesar.  The  same  had  happened  to  P.  Attius  Varus
at  Auximum  (not  Cingulum),  and  Q.  Minucius  Thermus  had  to  sur-
render Iguvium  to  Curio  (Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  12-17).

A VII,  14

TO  ATTICUS

251

senate/  I hope  for  the  present  we  have  peace : for  he  is
not  quite  easy  about  his  mad  enterprise,  nor  our  general  as
to  the  amount  of  his  forces.  Pompey  has  directed  me  to
come  to  Capua  and  assist  the  levy,  to  which  the  Campanian
settlers  ^ do  not  make  a very  eager  response.  Caesar’s  •
gladiators  at  Capua,  about  whom  I gave  you  some  incorrect
information  on  the  authority  of  a letter  from  A.  Torquatus,
Pompey  has  very  adroitly  distributed  among  the  heads  of
families,  two  to  each.®  There  were  5,000  shields  in  the
school : they  were  said  to  be  contemplating  breaking  out.
Pompey’s  measure  was  a very  wise  precaution  for  the  safety
of  the  state.  As  to  our  ladies,  in  whom  I include  your  sister,
pray  consider  whether  they  can  stay  at  Rome  with  propriety,
when  other  ladies  of  the  same  rank  have  left  town.  I have
said  this  to  them  and  to  yourself  in  a previous  letter.  I
would  like  you  to  urge  upon  them  to  leave  the  city,  especially
as  I have  properties  on  the  sea-coast — now  under  my  pre-
sidency— on  which  they  might  reside  in  tolerable  comfort,
considering  all  things.  For  if  I get  into  any  difficulty  ^ about
my  son-in-law,  though  I am  not  bound  to  be  responsible  for
him,  yet  it  is  made  worse  by  my  women  folk  having  re-
mained in  Rome  longer  than  others.  Please  let  me  know
what  you  and  Sextus  are  thinking  of  doing  as  to  leaving
town,  and  what  your  opinion  is  on  the  whole  situation.  For
my  part,  I never  cease  urging  peace,  which,  however  unfair,
is  better  than  the  justest  war  in  the  world.  But  this  is  in
the  hands  of  fortune.

^ Caesar  [B.  C.  i.  14)  calls  this  proposal  unfair,  for  Pompey,  who  con-
sented to  promise  to  go  to  his  province,  mentioned  no  time  at  which  he
would  go  to  Spain,  and  proposed  to  retain  his  province  and  legions,
while  Caesar’s  army  was  to  be  disbanded.

^ Many  of  Pompey’s  own  veterans  had  been  settled  with  grants  of
land  in  the  ager  Campanus^  the  old  territory  of  Capua,  by  Caesar’s
agrarian  law  of  b.c.  59.

® Caesar  gives  an  account  of  this  {B.  C.  i.  14).  He  says  that  Lentulus,
the  consul,  at  first  called  these  men  out  with  a promise  of  freedom.
But  this  seemed  shocking  to  Roman  ideas,  and,  being  remonstrated  with,
he  billeted  them  out  as  described.  Cicero  would  seem  to  put  the
matter,  as  though  this  billeting  them  out  in  pairs  was,  from  the  first,
a precautionary  measure.  It  may  be  that  Cicero  is  right,  and  that
Caesar  got  a false  idea  of  the  transaction  from  some  hostile  source.

^ /.<?.,  with  Pompey  and  his  party,  because  Dolabella  was  with
Caesar.

252

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

CCCX  (A  VII,  15)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Capua,  26  January

Ever  since  I left  Rome  I have  not  let  a single  day  pass
without  sending  you  something  by  way  of  letter ; not  because
I had  anything  particularly  to  write  about,  but  in  order  that
I might  chat  with  you  in  my  absence,  than  which — since  I
cannot  do  so  face  to  face — nothing  gives  me  greater  pleasure.
On  arriving  at  Capua  on  the  25th — the  day  before  I write
this — I met  the  consuls  and  many  members  of  the  senate.
All  were  anxious  that  Caesar  should  stand  by  his  offer,  with
the  addition  of  withdrawing  his  garrisons.  Favonius  alone  dis-
approved of  any  conditions  being  imposed  on  us  by  him;  but
he  was  not  listened  to  in  the  discussion.  For  even  Cato  him-
self now  prefers  slavery  to  fighting.  However,  he  says  that
he  wishes  to  be  in  the  senate  when  the  terms  are  debated,
if  Caesar  can  be  induced  to  withdraw  his  garrisons.  So  he
is  not  eager  about  going  to  Sicily — the  very  thing  most
wanted  : but  he  does  wish  to  be  in  the  senate,  where  I fear  he
will  only  do  mischief.  Postumius,  moreover,  who  was  definitely
named  in  the  senatorial  decree  to  go  to  Sicily  at  once  and
succeed  Furfanius,  says  that  he  will  not  go  without  Cato,  and
thinks  very  highly  of  his  own  personal  service  and  influence
in  the  senate.  Accordingly,  this  duty  has  fallen  to  Fannius.
He  is  being  sent  in  advance  to  Sicily  with  imperium.  In  our
discussions  a great  variety  of  opinion  is  expressed.  Most
declare  that  Caesar  will  not  abide  by  his  offer,  and  say  that
these  demands  were  only  thrown  in  by  him  to  prevent  our
making  the  necessary  preparations  for  war.  I,  however,  am
of  opinion  that  he  will  carry  out  the  withdrawal  of  the
garrisons.  For  he  will  have  gained  his  point  if  he  is  elected
consul,  and  gained  it  with  less  crime  than  that  of  his  first
step.  But  we  must  put  up  with  the  blow : for  we  are
scandalously  unprepared  both  in  regard  to  soldiers  and
money.  All  the  latter,  indeed — not  only  private  money  in

A VII,  15;  F XVI,  12

TO  TIRO

253

the  city,  but  the  public  money  in  the  treasury  also — we  have
left  for  him.  Pompey  has  started  to  join  the  Appian  legions.^
He  has  Labienus  with  him.  I am  anxious  to  hear  what  you
think  of  these  events.  I am  thinking  of  returning  to  Formise
at  once.

CCCXI  (F  XVI,  12)

TO  TIRO  (AT  PATR^)

Capua,  27  January

How  seriously  my  personal  safety  and  that  of  all  loyalists  is
imperilled,  as  well  as  that  of  the  whole  senate  and  Republic,
you  may  judge  from  the  fact  that  we  have  abandoned  our  town
houses,  and  the  very  city  itself,  to  plunder  and  conflagration.
Matters  have  come  to  such  a pitch  that,  unless  some  god  or
some  accident  intervenes,  we  cannot  possibly  be  saved.  For
my  part,  ever  since  I arrived  at  the  city,  I have  never  ceased
promoting  in  thought,  word,  and  deed  everything  that  made
for  peace : but  a strange  mad  passion  for  fighting  has  in-
flamed not  only  the  disloyal,  but  even  those  who  are  reckoned
loyalists,  though  I loudly  proclaim  that  nothing  can  be  more
lamentable  than  a civil  war.  Accordingly,  when  Caesar
yielded  to  the  promptings  of  what  may  be  called  downright
insanity,  and — forgetting  his  name  and  his  honours — had
successively  occupied  Ariminum,  Pisaurum,  Ancona,  and
Arretium,  I left  the  city.  On  the  wisdom  or  courage
of  such  a step  it  is  useless  to  argue.  You  see  how  we
stand  now.  The  upshot  is,  proposals  are  received  from
Caesar  that  Pompey  should  go  to  Spain  : that  the  levies
already  completed  and  our  garrisons  should  be  disbanded  :
that  he  will  hand  over  farther  Gaul  to  Domitius,  hither  Gaul
to  Considius  Nonianus  (these  are  the  men  to  whom  these

’ Apparently  the  two  legions  sent  from  Gaul  a year  before  by  Caesar
for  the  Parthian  war,  which,  according  to  Plutarch  {Po?np.  57),  were
led  into  Italy  by  one  Appius.  There  is,  however,  a doubt  as  to  the
reading  between  Appianas  and  Attianas.  The  legions  were  in  winter
quarters  in  various  towns  in  Apulia.  See  pp.  243,  247.

254

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  .ET.  57

provinces  have  been  allotted) : that  he  will  come  to  canvass
for  the  consulship,  and  no  longer  demand  that  his  can-
didature be  admitted  in  his  absence : that  he  will  be  in
town  as  candidate  for  the  legal  three  nundince}  We  accept
the  proposals,  but  on  the  condition  that  he  withdraws  his
garrisons  from  the  places  he  has  occupied,  so  that  a meeting
of  the  senate  may  be  held  at  Rome  to  discuss  these  same  pro-
posals in  security.  If  he  does  this,  there  is  hope  of  a peace
— not  a creditable  one,  for  we  accept  terms  from  him,  but
anything  is  better  than  to  be  as  we  are.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  he  declines  to  abide  by  his  terms,  everything  is  ready
for  war,  but  of  a kind  that  he  cannot  possibly  maintain —
especially  as  he  will  have  shirked  terms  proposed  by  himself
— provided  only  that  we  cut  him  off  from  all  power  of
approaching  the  city.  This  we  hope  can  be  done  : for  we
are  holding  levies  on  a large  scale,  and  we  think  that  he  is
afraid,  if  he  once  begins  a march  upon  the  city,  that  he  may
lose  the  Gauls,  both  of  which,  with  the  exception  of  the
Transpadani,  are  bitterly  hostile  to  him : and  on  the  side  of
Spain  he  has  six  legions  and  a large  force  of  auxiliaries  under
Afranius  and  Petreius^  on  his  rear.  If  he  persists  in  his
madness  it  seems  possible  that  he  may  be  crushed — if  it  can
only  be  done  without  losing  Rome  ! He  has,  again,  received
a very  severe  blow  in  the  fact  that  Titus  Labienus,  who
occupied  the  most  influential  position  in  his  army,  has
declined  to  be  a partner  in  his  crime.  He  has  abandoned
him  and  is  with  us,  and  many  are  said  to  intend  doing  the
same.  I as  yet  am  president  of  fhe  sea-coast  from  Formiae.
I refused  any  more  important  function,  that  my  letters  and
exhortations  to  peace  might  have  greater  influence  with  Caesar.
If,  however,  war  does  break  out,  I see  that  I shall  have  to  take
command  of  a camp  and  a definite  number  of  legions.  I
have  another  trouble  in  the  fact  that  my  son-in-law  Dola-
bella  is  with  Caesar.

I wished  you  to  know  these  facts,  but  don’t  let  them
agitate  you  and  retard  your  recovery.  I have  recom-
mended you  with  great  earnestness  to  Aulus  Varro,  whom
I know  to  be  warmly  attached  to  me  and  very  fond  of  you,

• ^ That  is,  seventeen  clear  days.

^ Two  of  the  three  legates  of  Pompey  in  Spain.

F XVI,  12  ; A VII,  l6

TO  ATTICUS

255

asking  him  to  interest  himself  in  your  health  and  your
voyage,  and  generally  to  take  you  under  his  charge  and  look
after  you.  I feel  certain  he  will  do  all  this,  for  he  promised
to  do  so,  and  spoke  to  me  in  the  kindest  manner.  Pray,
since  you  were  unable  to  be  with  me  at  the  time  I
most  wanted  your  help  and  fidelity,  do  not  hurry  or  allow
yourself  to  embark  upon  a voyage  while  ill,  or  in  bad  weather.
I shall  never  think  you  come  late  if  you  come  well  and
strong.  As  yet  I have  seen  no  one  who  had  seen  you  since
M.  Volusius,  who  handed  me  your  letter.  I don’t  wonder
at  this,  for  I don’t  think  my  letters  either  can  reach  you  in
such  stormy  weather.  But  do  your  best  to  recover,  and,
when  you  do  recover,  only  sail  when  you  can  do  so  with
safety.  My  son  is  at  Formiae,  Terentia  and  Tullia  at  Rome.
Take  care  of  yourself.

Capua,  27  January*-

CCCXIl  (A  VII,  16)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Cales,  28  January

I THINK  all  your  letters  have  reached  me,  but  the  first  batch
was  out  of  their  proper  order,  the  rest  in  the  order  in  which
they  were  sent  by  Terentia.  About  Caesar’s  message  and
the  arrival  of  Labienus,  and  about  the  consuls’  and  Pompey’s
answer,  I told  you  in  the  letter  of  the  26th  of  January  from
Capua,  and  I put  a good  deal  more  information  into  the
same  packet.  At  present  we  are  in  suspense  on  two  points  :
first,  what  Caesar  will  do  when  he  has  received  the  answer
intrusted  to  L.  Caesar  to  take  to  him ; and,  secondly,  what
Pompey  is  doing  now.  The  latter,  indeed,  writes  me  word
that  in  a few  days  he  will  have  a strong  army,  and  leads  me
to  hope  that,  if  he  makes  his  way  into  Picenum,  we  shall
return  to  Rome.  He  has  got  Labienus  with  him,  who  has
no  doubt  about  the  weakness  of  Caesar’s  forces  ; and  Pompey
is  in  much  better  spirits  since  his  arrival.  I have  been

2S6  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  49,  jet.  57

ordered  to  Capua  by  the  consuls  on  the  5th  of  February.  I
left  Capua  for  Formise  on  the  28th  of  January.  On  that
day  having  received  your  letter  at  Cales  about  three  o’clock
in  the  afternoon,  I am  writing  this  on  the  spot.  About
Terentia  and  Tullia  I agree  with  you,  and  I have  written  to
tell  them  to  apply  to  you.  If  they  have  not  yet  started,  there
is  no  occasion  for  their  disturbing  themselves  until  we  see
how  affairs  stand.

CCCXIII  (F  XVI,  8)

Q.  CICERO  TO  TIRO  (AT  PATRAE)
(Campania,  January)

I AM  very  anxious  about  your  health,  for  though  those  w’ho
come  from  you  announce  that  your  complaint  is  not  danger-
ous though  lingering,  yet,  consoling  as  that  is,  it  involves  the
great  anxiety  of  a prolonged  absence  from  us  of  one  whose
usefulness  and  charm  I appreciate  by  their  loss.  Yet  though
I long  with  my  whole  heart  to  see  you,  I still  earnestly  beg
you  not  to  trust  yourself  to  so  long  a voyage  and  a winter
journey,  unless  you  are  quite  strong,  and  not  to  set  sail  at  all
without  careful  consideration.  Even  in  houses  and  towns  it
is  difficult  to  avoid  cold  when  one  is  unwell,  to  say  nothing
of  escaping  the  inclemency  of  the  weather  at  sea  and  on  the
road.

“ Cold  to  the  tender  skin  is  deadliest  foe,”^

says  Euripides.  I don’t  know  what  you  think  of  him  as  an  *
authority.  I look  upon  his  verses  as  so  many  solemn  affida-
vits. If  you  love  me,  make  sure  of  your  recovery,  and  come
to  us  well  and  strong  as  soon  as  possible.  Love  us  all,
and  good-bye.  The  son  of  Quintus  sends  his  regards.

^ xj/vxoG  XeTTTip  TToXtumTarov.  A fragment  of  Euripides,

from  what  play  is  unknown.

F XVI,  8 ; A VII,  17

TO  ATTICUS

257

CCCXIV  (A  VII,  17)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

F0RMI.E,  2 February

Your  letter  is  both  welcome  and  delightful.  I thought  of
sending  the  boys  to  Greece  when  there  seemed  an  idea  of
Pompey’s  flying  from  Italy  : for  I should  have  made  for  Spain,
which  would  not  have  been  equally  suitable  for  them.  For
yourself  and  Sextus,^  it  seems  to  me  that  even  now  you  may
remain  with  propriety  at  Rome.  For  you  are  not  at  all
bound  to  be  my  Pompey’s  friends.  For  no  one  ever  did
more  to  detract  from  the  value  of  city  property  ! ^ Do  you
see  that  I am  absolutely  joking?  You  ought  now  to  know
what  answer  L.  Caesar  is  taking  back  from  Pompey,  and
what  sort  of  a letter  he  is  conveying  from  him  to  Caesar :
for  they  were  drawn  up  and  despatched  with  the  express
purpose  of  being  exposed  for  public  perusal.  On  this  point
I blamed  Pompey  in  my  own  heart  for  having  trusted  our
friend  Sestius  with  the  writing  of  a despatch  so  important
and  certain  to  come  into  everybody’s  hands,  though  he  has
a very  good  style  of  his  own.  Accordingly,  I never  read
anything  more  “Sestian.”^  Nevertheless,  it  is  made  quite
clear  from  Pompey’s  despatch  that  nothing  is  denied  to
Caesar,  and  that  all  his  demands  are  conceded  to  the  full :
he  will  be  a sheer  madman  if  he  declines  the  very  proposals
which  it  required  the  most  consummate  impudence  ever  to
have  made  ! Pray,  who  are  you  to  say,  “ If  he  goes  to  Spain,”
“if  he  dismisses  the  garrisons”?  Nevertheless,  the  con-

^ Sext.  Peducaeus.

^ Atticus  invested  much  money  in  city  property  (Nepos,  AU.  14).
Cicero  means  that  Pompey’s  abandonment  of  Rome  has  depreciated  the
value  of  such  properties.

^ 'SrjaTLojdifTTEpov.  In  the  many  allusions  to  P.  Sestius  (whom  he  de-
fended) Cicero  does  not  seem  ever  to  have  depreciated  him,  except  that
once  (vol.  i.,  p.  219)  he  calls  him  morosus,  “ whimsical,”  “ difficile,”  and
talks  of  his  “wrong-headedness  in  certain  particulars”  ^perversitatem
quibtisdam  in  rebns).

II.

S

258

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

cession  is  being  made : with  less  dignity,  indeed,  at  this  time
of  day — for  it  is  after  the  Republic  has  actually  been  violated
by  him  and  its  territory  invaded — than  if  he  had  some  time
back  obtained  his  demand  to  be  reckoned  a candidate  ; and
yet  I doubt  his  being  content  even  with  these  concessions.
For,  after  giving  that  message  to  L.  Caesar,  he  ought,  until
he  received  the  answer,  to  have  somewhat  relaxed  his  war-
like movements,  whereas  he  is  said  to  be  at  this  moment
more  active  than  ever.  Trebatius,  indeed,  writes  to  say
that  on  the  22nd  of  January  he  was  asked  by  him  to  write
to  me,  urging  me  to  remain  at  the  city  walls : that  I could
not  oblige  him  more.  This  was  put  at  great  length.  I
calculated  by  reckoning  the  days  that,  as  soon  as  Caesar
heard  of  my  departure,  he  began  to  be  anxious  lest  we
should  all  leave  town.  Therefore  I have  no  doubt  he  has
written  to  Piso,  and  also  to  Servius.  One  thing  I am  sur-
prised at,  that  he  has  not  written  to  me  himself,  nor  opened
his  communication  with  me  through  Dolabella  or  Caelius :
not  that  I disdain  a letter  from  Trebatius,  whom  I know  to
be  singularly  attached  to  me.  I wrote  back  to  Trebatius —
for  I wouldn’t  write  to  Caesar  himself,  as  he  had  not  written
to  me — pointing  out  how  difficult  that  course  was  for  me  at
such  a time  as  this  ; that  I was,  however,  at  my  own  country
seat  and  had  not  undertaken  any  levy  or  any  active  part  in
the  affair.^  By  this  I shall  abide,  as  long  as  there  is  any
hope  of  peace.  But  if  war  really  begins,  I shall  not  be
wanting  to  my  duty  or  position,  after  despatching  my  boys
to  Greece.  For  I perceive  that  all  Italy  will  be  blazing
with  war.  Such  the  mischief  that  is  caused  partly  by  dis-
loyal, partly  by  jealous  citizens  ! But  how  far  this  will  go  I
shall  learn  within  the  next  few  days  by  his  answer  to  mine.
Then  I will  write  to  you  at  greater  length,  if  there  is  going
to  be  war : but  if  there  is  to  be  peace,  or  even  a truce,  I
shall,  I hope,  see  you  in  person.  On  the  2nd  of  February,
on  which  I write  this,  I am  expecting  the  ladies  at  my
Formian  house,  whither  I have  returned  from  Capua.  I

^ Cicero  had  been  urged  to  come  to  Capua  to  assist  in  the  levy.
Those  who  wish  to  maintain  his  veracity  assert  that  he  had  done
nothing  in  the  matter.  But  at  any  rate  he  had  accepted  the  command
of  the  sea-coast  of  Campania,  though  he  afterwards  resigned  even  that.
It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  he  is  sailing  near  the  wind.

A VII,  17,  18

TO  ATTICUS

259

had  written  to  them  on  your  advice  to  remain  at  Rome;
but  I hear  that  there  is  some  increase  of  panic  in  the  city.
I mean  to  be  at  Capua  on  the  5th  of  February,  in  accord-
ance with  orders  from  the  consuls.  Whatever  news  reaches
me  here  from  Pompey  I will  let  you  know  at  once,  and
shall  expect  a letter  from  you  as  to  what  is  going  on  at
Rome.

CCCXV  (A  VII,  18)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  3 February

On  the  2nd  of  February  our  ladies  came  to  Formias  and
reported  to  me  your  services  to  them  replete  with  the  most
affectionate  kindness.  I wished  them,  till  we  knew  whether
we  were  to  have  a dishonourable  peace  or  an  unhappy  war,
to  remain  in  my  Formian  villa,  and  our  two  boys  with

them.  I myself,  with  my  brother,  am  starting  for  Capua
on  the  3rd  of  February,  on  which  I despatch  this  letter,  to
join  the  consuls,  having  been  ordered  to  be  there  on  the
5th.  Pompey’s  answer  is  said  to  be  popular  and  to  have
received  the  approbation  of  a public  meeting.  I thought
that  would  be  the  case.  If  Caesar  refuses  to  accept  that^  he
will  be  entirely  discredited  : if  he  accepts  it — — ! “ Which,

then,  do  you  prefer  ? ” you  will  say.  I would  have  answered
the  question  if  I knew  what  our  state  of  preparation  was.
It  is  reported  here  that  Cassius^  has  been  driven  from
Ancona,  and  that  city  occupied  by  our  men.  If  there  is
to  be  war,  that  will  be  an  advantage.  As  for  Caesar  himself,
they  say  that,  though  he  sent  L.  Caesar  with  a message  as
to  making  peace,  he  continues  holding  levies  with  the
greatest  activity,  occupying  posts,  securing  them  with  garri-
sons. What  an  unprincipled  bandit ! What  a disgrace  to

^ Q.  Cassius  Longinus,  the  tribune  who,  with  Antony,  had  vetoed
the  decree  about  Caesar  in  January,  and  had  fled  to  Ariminum.  The
rumour  referred  to  had  no  foundation.

26o

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  /ET.  57

the  Republic,  hardly  to  be  outweighed  by  any  relief  from
war ! But  let  us  cease  anger,  bow  to  circumstances,  and
accompany  Pompey  to  Spain.  It  is  the  best  of  a bad  job,
since  we  failed  to  avert  that  man’s  second  consulship  from
the  state,  even  when  we  had  the  opportunity.^  But  enough
of  this.

I forgot  to  write  to  you  about  Dionysius  before ; but  I
have  come  to  the  conclusion  to  wait  till  Caesar’s  answer  is
known,  so  that,  if  I return  to  the  city,  he  should  await  me
there,  but,  if  there  is  any  delay,  I should  summon  him  to
join  me.  Of  course  I know  what  his  duty  will  be  in  case  I
have  to  fly,  and  what  will  be  the  conduct  becoming  a man
of  learning  and  a friend : but  I don’t  expect  too  much  in
this  way  from  Greeks.  However,  if,  as  I hope  will  not  be
the  case,  I have  to  send  for  him,  pray  see  that  I am  not
troubling  an  unwilling  man.  Quintus  is  anxious  to  pay  you
his  debt  by  drawing  on  Egnatius,  and  Egnatius  is  neither
unwilling  nor  short  of  cash ; but  when  the  state  of  things  is
such  that  Quintus  Titinius^ — of  whom  we  are  seeing  a
good  deal — declares  that  he  has  no  money  for  personal
expenses,  and  has  yet  announced  to  his  debtors  that  they
may  go  on  with  the  same  interest,  and  when  L.  Ligur  is
said  to  have  done  the  same,  and  when  Quintus  at  this  crisis
has  no  cash  in  hand,  and  is  neither  able  to  get  any  from
Egnatius  nor  to  raise  a new  loan,^  he  is  surprised  that  you
do  not  take  into  consideration  this  general  tightness  of  the
money  market.  For  my  part,  though  I obey  the  pseudo-

^ When  we  might  have  prevented  the  law  being  passed  allowing  Caesar
to  be  a candidate  in  his  absence.  Others  take  it,  “though  we  refused
him  his  second  consulship  even  when  it  was  not  an  opportune  moment
for  doing  it  ” (because  he  had  a strong  army).  I do  not  think  the  Latin
will  bear  this.  In  support  of  the  translation  in  the  text  we  may
remember  that  Cicero  often  traces  the  whole  difficulty  to  the  initial
mistake  of  the  law  allowing  Caesar  to  be  a candidate  without  coming  to
Rome.

“ Q.  Titinius,  a Roman  eques,  who  lent  money.  He  was  the  father
of  the  Titinius  on  Caesar’s  staff,  immortalized  by  Shakespeare  (“Give
me  some  drink,  Titinius  ”).  L.  Octavius  Ligur  was  also  a lender
of  money.  L.  Egnatius  is  mentioned  several  times  as  owing  Q.  Cicero
money.

^ Versuram  facere^  lit.  “to  effect  a transfer,”  was  the  technical
term  for  raising  a new  loan  in  order  to  pay  off  the  principal  and  interest
of  an  old  one.

A VII,  i8,  19

TO  ATTICUS

261

Hesiodic  maxim,  “ Judge  not,”  etc.,^  especially  in  the  case  of
yourself,  whom  I have  never  seen  to  act  unreasonably,  yet
I am  affected  by  his  tale  of  woe.  Whatever  this  amounts  to,
I thought  you  ought  to  know  it.

CCCXVI  (A  VII,  19)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formi/e,  3 February

I HAVE  nothing  to  tell  you.  Why,  I didn’t  even  send  you
a letter  which  I composed  last  night.  For  it  was  full  of
hopeful  expressions,  because  I had  just  been  told  of  the
spirit  shewn  at  the  public  meeting,  and  was  still  in  the
belief  that  he  would  abide  by  the  terms,  especially  as  they
were  of  his  own  proposing.  But  here,  this  3rd  of  February,
I have  received  in  the  morning  a letter  from  you,  one  from
Philotimus,  another  from  Furnius,  with  one  from  Curio  to
Furnius,  in  which  Curio  ridicules  the  mission  of  L.  Caesar.
I think  we  are  completely  trapped,  nor  do  I know  what
plan  to  adopt.  But  it  isn’t  about  myself  that  I am  anxious :
what  to  do  about  the  boys  is  what  puzzles  me.  However,
as  I write  this  I am  on  the  point  of  starting  for  Capua,  that
I may  have  a better  opportunity  of  ascertaining  Pompey’s
position.

^ diKijv  {diKacryg  rrplv  av  afi^cTtv  fivOov  ctKovayg),  “don’t  judge

till  you  have  heard  both  sides.”  Cicero,  as  usual,  indicates  the  proverb
by  a word  or  two,  knowing  that  Atticus  can  fill  it  up,  just  as  we  do
with  well-known  proverbs.  The  line  does  not  occur  in  the  extant
Hesiodic  poems,  and  was  attributed  to  Phocyllides.

262

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  JET.  57

CCCXVII  (A  VII,  20)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Capua,  5 February

I HAVE  no  choice  but  to  be  brief.  I have  given  up  all  hope
of  peace,  and  as  to  war,  our  men'  are  not  stirring  a finger.
Don’t,  pray,  suppose  that  our  consuls  care  for  anything  less
than  that : though  it  was  in  hopes  of  hearing  something  and
learning  what  preparations  we  were  making  that  I came  to
meet  them  in  a pelting  rain  on  the  4th,  according  to  orders.
They,  however,  had  not  arrived,  and  were  expected  on  the
5th — empty-handed  and  unprepared.  Pompey,  again,  is
said  to  be  at  Luceria,  and  on  his  way  to  join  some  cohorts
of  the  Appian  legions, which  are  far  from  being  in  a very
satisfactory  state.  But  /le,  they  say,  is  hurrying  along  and
is  expected  at  Rome  every  hour,  not  to  fight  a battle — for
who  is  there  to  fight  with  ? — but  to  prevent  the  flight  from
town.  For  myself,  if  it  is  to  be  in  Italy — “ if  die  I must,”
etc.  ! ^ I don’t  ask  your  advice  about  that : but  if  it  is  to
be  outside  Italy — what  can  I do  ? On  the  side  of  remaining
there  are  the  winter-season,  my  lictors,  the  improvidence
and  carelessness  of  our  leaders : on  the  side  of  flight,  my
friendship  for  Pompey,  the  claims  of  the  loyalist  cause,  the
disgrace  of  having  anything  to  do  with  a tyrant ; as  to  whom
it  is  uncertain  whether  he  will  copy  Phalaris  or  Pisistratus.
Pray  unravel  these  perplexities  for  me,  and  help  me  with
your  advice,  though  I expect  by  this  time  you  are  in  a warm
corner  yourself  at  Rome.  However,  do  the  best  you  can.
If  I learn  anything  fresh  to-day,  I will  let  you  know.  For
the  consuls  will  be  here  directly  on  the  5th,  the  date  they

^ The  two  legions  which  had  been  withdrawn  from  Gaul  in  B.c.  51.
See  p.  274.

^ Kup  cLTrodavtiv  {Sfy  jue,  Bavotix  tKoucr/wg),  “ if  die  I must,  right
willingly  I’ll  die.”  A verse  of  Diphilus,  indicated,  as  usual,  by  one  ortwo
words.

A VII,  20,  21

TO  ATTICUS

263

tixed  themselves.  I shall  look  for  a letter  from  you  every
day.  But  do  answer  this  as  soon  as  you  can.  I left  the
ladies  and  the  two  boys  at  Formiae.

CCCXVIII  (A  VII,  21)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Gales,  8 February

About  our  misfortunes  you  hear  sooner  than  I : for  they
flow  from  Rome.  As  for  anything  good,  there  is  none
to  be  expected  from  this  quarter.  I arrived  at  Capua
for  the  5th  of  February,  in  accordance  with  the  order  of
the  consuls.  Late  on  that  day  Lentulus  arrived ; the  other
consul  had  absolutely  not  come  on  the  7th.  For  I left
Capua  on  that  day  and  stayed  at  Cales.  From  that  town  I
am  sending  this  letter,  before  daybreak,  on  the  8th.  What
I ascertained  while  at  Capua  was  that  the  consuls  are  no
good : that  no  levy  is  being  held  anywhere.  For  the
recruiting  officers  do  not  venture  to  shew  their  faces,  with
Caesar  close  at  hand,  and  our  leader,  on  the  contrary,
nowhere  and  doing  nothing;  nor  do  recruits  give  in  their
names.  It  is  not  goodwill  to  the  cause,  but  hope  that  is
wanting.  As  to  our  leader  Gnseus — what  an  inconceivably
miserable  spectacle ! What  a complete  breakdown ! No
courage,  no  plan,  no  forces,  no  energy ! I will  pass  over  his
most  discreditable  flight  from  the  city,  his  abject  speeches
in  the  towns,  his  ignorance  not  only  of  his  opponent’s,  but
even  of  his  own  resources — but  what  do  you  think  of  this  ?
On  the  7th  of  February  the  tribune  C.  Cassius  came  with
an  order  from  him  to  the  consuls  that  they  should  go  to
Rome,  remove  the  money  from  the  reserve  treasury,^  and

'■  Sanctius  cerariiim.  A reserve  fund,  said  originally  to  have  been
made  in  case  of  a Gallic  invasion,  was  replenished  by  the  tax  of  five
per  cent,  on  the  selling  value  of  manumitted  slaves.  This  was  first
levied  in  B.c.  357  (Livy,  vii.  16),  and  remained  in  force  till  a late  period
of  the  empire.  The  reserve  fund  was  drawn  upon  in  B.c.  212,  during

264

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

immediately  quit  the  town.  After  leaving  the  city  they
are  to  return ! Under  what  guard  ? They  are  to  come
out  of  the  city!  Who  is  to  give  them  leave  to  do  so?
The  consul  (Lentulus)  wrote  back  to  say  that  Pompey  must
himself  first  make  his  way  into  Picenum.  But  the  fact  is,
that  district  has  already  been  entirely  lost.  No  one  knows
that  except  myself,  who  have  learnt  it  from  a letter  of  Dola-
bella’s.  I have  no  manner  of  doubt  but  that  Caesar  is  all
but  actually  in  Apulia,  and  our  friend  Gnaeus  already  on
board  ship.  What  I am  to  do  is  a great  “problem,”  though
it  would  have  been  no  problem  to  me,  had  not  everything
been  most  disgracefully  mismanaged,  and  without  consult-
ing me  in  any  way ; problem,  however,  it  is,  as  to  what  it  is
my  duty  to  do.  Caesar  himself  urges  me  to  promote  peace.
But  his  letter  is  dated  before  he  began  his  violent  proceed-
ings. Dolabella  and  Caelius  both  say  that  he  is  well
satisfied  with  my  conduct.  I am  on  the  rack  of  perplexity.
Assist  me  by  your  advice  if  you  can,  but  all  the  same  look
after  your  own  interests  to  the  utmost  of  your  power.  In
such  a total  upset  I have  nothing  to  say  to  you.  I am
looking  for  a letter  from  you.

CCCXIX  (A  VII,  22)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  9 February

I CAN  see  that  there  is  not  a foot  of  ground  in  Italy  which
is  not  in  his  power.  About  Pompey  I know  nothing,  and  I
think  he  will  be  caught,  unless  he  has  already  embarked.
What  incredible  rapidity ! Whereas  our  general’s — but  I
cannot  find  fault  with  him  without  sorrow,  for  whom  I am

the  second  Punic  war  (Livy, xxvii.  ii).  According  to  Coesar  {B.C.  14),
the  consuls  were  just  about  to  open  it  before  they  left  Rome,  but,
terrified  by  a false  report  of  Caesar’s  immediate  approach,  fled  without
doing  so.  Pompey  now  wishes  them  to  go  back  for  it.

A VII,  22,  23

TO  ATTICUS

265

in  an  agony  of  anxiety.  You  have  good  reason  for  fearing  a
massacre  : not  that  anything  could  be  less  in  Caesar’s  interest,
with  a view  to  the  permanency  of  his  victory  and  supremacy,
but  I can  see  at  whose  bidding  he  is  likely  to  act.  To  be
safe,  my  opinion  is  that  we  must  go.  As  to  those  Oppii  ^
of  yours,  I don’t  know  what  to  advise.  Do  what  seems
to  you  to  be  best.  You  should  speak  to  Philotimus,  and
besides,  you  will  have  Terentia  on  the  13th.  But  what  am
I to  do  ? On  what  land  or  sea  am  I to  follow  a man,  when
I don’t  even  know  where  he  is  ? After  ail,  how  can  I do  so
by  land  ? And  by  sea — whither  ? Shall  I surrender  myself
to  Caesar  then  ? Suppose  I could  do  so  with  safety — and
many  advise  it — could  I with  honour  also  ? Assuredly  not.
Am  I,  again,  to  ask  advice  of  you,  as  my  custom  is  ? There
is  no  way  out  of  the  tangle.  Still,  if  anything  occurs  to
your  mind,  please  write,  and  tell  me  also  what  you  mean
to  do  yourself.

CCCXX  (A  VII,  23)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  10  February

On  the  9th  of  February,  in  the  evening,  I received  a letter
from  Philotimus  saying  that  “ Domitius  has  a strong  force ;
cohorts  from  Picenum,  under  Lentulus  and  Thermus,  have
effected  a junction  with  Domitius’s  army ; Csesar’s  advance
can  be  stopped  : he  is  himself  afraid  of  that ; the  courage  of
the  loyalists  at  Rome  is  raised;  the  disloyal  are  in  dismay.”
For  my  part,  I fear  that  these  are  dreams.  However,
Manius  Lepidus,  L.  Torquatus,  Gains  Cassius,  who  are
staying  with  me  at  Formise,  are  quite  restored  to  life  by
Philotimus’s  letter.  I,  however,  am  afraid  that  the  truer
account  is  this : that  we  are  all  now  practically  captives ;
that  Pompey  is  on  the  point  of  abandoning  Italy,  of  whom,
indeed  (what  a bitter  pill  to  swallow !),  Caesar  is  said  to  be
actually  in  pursuit.  Caesar  pursue  Pompey  ? What,  to  kill

^ See  Letter  CCCVII.

266

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

him  ? Merciful  heavens  ! and  don’t  we  rush  as  one  man  to
throw  our  bodies  in  the  way?  You,  too,  must  sigh  at  that !
But  what  are  we  to  do  ? We  are  utterly  beaten,  trapped,
and  taken.

However,  after  reading  Philotimus’s  letter,  I changed  my
plan  as  to  the  ladies,  whom,  as  I wrote  you  word,  I intended
sending  back  to  Rome.  It  has  occurred  to  my  mind  that  it
would  give  rise  to  much  talk  to  the  effect  that  I already
shewed  my  opinion  about  the  fortunes  of  the  party,  and
that,  regarding  it  as  desperate,  I had  in  this  return  of  my
ladies  made  a kind  of  first  step  towards  my  own  return.  As
for  myself,  however,  I agree  with  you  that  I should  not
commit  myself  to  an  indefinite  and  dangerous  flight,  by
which  I should  do  no  good  to  the  Republic  or  to  Pompey,
for  whom  I can  die  with  as  much  cheerfulness  as  loyalfy.  I
will  remain,  therefore.  But  to  go  on  living !

You  ask  what  is  going  on  here.  The  whole  business  of
Capua,  and  the  levy  in  this  neighbourhood,  are  at  a standstill.
There  is  complete  despair.  Everybody  is  preparing  to  fly,
unless  some  such  incident  occurs  as  Pompey  effecting  a junc-
tion of  his  forces  with  those  of  Domitius.  But  I think  we
shall  know  all  about  it  in  two  or  three  days.  I send  you
a copy  of  Caesar’s  letter  to  me ; for  you  asked  for  it.  Many
have  written  to  tell  me  that  he  is  much  pleased  with  me.  I
don’t  mind  that,  so  long  as  I abstain — as  I have  as  yet —
from  doing  anything  discreditable.

CCCXXI  (A  VIII,  II  a)

POMPEY  TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMIC)
Luceria,  io  February

Quintus  Fabius  came  to  me  on  the  loth  of  February.  He
brings  me  word  that  L.  Domitius,  with  twelve  cohorts  of  his
own  and  with  fourteen  brought  to  him  by  Vibullius,^  were

’ L.  Vibullius  Rufus,  Pompey’s  prccfecHis  fahnini.

A VIII,  II  a;  VII,  24,  25  TO  ATTICUS

267

on  the  march  to  join  me : that  his  intention  was  to  quit
Corfinium  on  the  9th  of  February,  that  Gaius  Hirrus  with
five  cohorts  was  coming  up  behind  himd  My  opinion  is
that  you  should  join  me  at  Luceria.  For  here  I think  you
will  be  safest.

CCCXXII  (A  VII,  24)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  ii  February

Philotimus’s  letter  did  not  give  me  over  much  pleasure,
but  it  did  very  much  so  to  the  people  about  here.  Behold,
the  next  day  a letter  to  Cassius  from  Capua,  sent  by  his
friend  Lucretius,  announcing  that  Nigidius  had  arrived  at
Capua  from  Domitius,  bringing  the  intelligence  that  Vibullius,
with  a small  body  of  soldiers,  was  hastening  from  Picenum
to  join  Pompey,  that  Caesar  was  marching  rapidly  at  his
heels,  that  Domitius  had  not  three  thousand  men.  I feel
no  doubt  of  Pompey  being  in  full  retreat — I only  hope  he
may  escape.  I have  given  up  the  idea  of  flying,  in  accord-
ance with  your  opinion.

CCCXXIII  (A  VII,  25)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  II  February

After  I had  sent  you  a gloomy  and,  I fear,  true  letter
about  Lucretius’s  letter  to  Cassius,  forwarded  here  from

’ Caesar  {B.  C.  i.  17)  makes  Domitius,  writing  to  Pompey,  mention
“more  than  thirty  cohorts,”  which  agrees  with  these  numbers  (thirty-
one).  L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus  had  been  nominated  by  the  senate  to  the
province  of  Transalpine  Gaul.

268

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  MT.  SI

Capua,  Cephalio  arrived  from  you  with  one  more  cheerful
in  tone,  but  yet  not  very  confident,  as  is  usual  with  you.  I
can  believe  anything  more  easily  than  that  Pompey — as  you
assert — has  an  army.^  Nobody  brings  such  a report  here,
but  rather  everything  opposite  to  my  wishes.  What  a
wretched  anomaly  ! When  he  was  in  the  wrong,  he  always
got  his  way ; now  that  he  is  eminently  in  the  right,  he  fails
entirely.  How  can  I explain  it,  except  by  saying  that  he
knew  how  to  do  the  former — for  it  was  not  difficult — but
not  the  latter.  For  to  rule  a free  state  in  the  right  way  was
a difficult  art ! But  I hourly  expect  full  information,  and
then  I will  at  once  write  you  word.

CCCXXIV  (A  VIII,  12  b)

POMPEY  TO  L.  DOMITIUS  AHENOBARBUS  (IN
CORFINIUM)

Luceria  (between  io  and  1 6 February)

I AM  much  surprised  at  not  hearing  from  you,  and  that  I am
informed  of  public  affairs  by  others  rather  than  yourself.
We  cannot  be  on  equal  terms  with  our  opponent  if  our
army  is  scattered : with  forces  concentrated  I hope  we  may
be  of  service  to  the  Republic  and  the  common  safety.
Wherefore,  as  you  had  arranged — according  to  Vibullius’s
letter  to  me  of  the  9th  of  February — to  start  from  Corfinium
with  your  army  and  join  me,  I am  at  a loss  to  understand
why  you  have  changed  your  design.  For  the  reason
mentioned  to  me  in  Vibullius’s  despatch  is  quite  inadequate
— that  you  have  delayed  because  you  had  received  in-
telligence of  Caesar  having  left  Firmum  and  arrived  at

^ Cicero  seems  throughout  to  exaggerate  Pompey’s  failure  to  obtain
troops.  When  Caesar  arrived  at  Brundisium  he  found  Pompey  there
with  two  legions,  although  the  consuls  had  already  crossed  with  the
main  army  {cum  magna  parte  exercitus^  Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  25).  Aheno-
barbus’s  obstinacy  in  staying  at  Corfinium,  however,  had  deprived
Pompey  of  considerable  reinforcements.

A VIII,  12  b ; VII,  26

TO  ATTICUS

269

Castrum  Truentinum.  For  the  nearer  the  opponent  begins
to  approach,  the  prompter  ought  you  to  have  been  in  effect-
ing a junction  with  me,  before  Caesar  had  the  opportunity
of  preventing  your  march  or  throwing  himself  between  us.
Wherefore  I once  more  earnestly  entreat  and  exhort  you,  as
I have  not  ceased  in  my  former  despatches  to  demand,  that
you  should  come  to  Luceria  on  the  first  day  possible,  before
the  forces,  which  Caesar  has  begun  collecting,  become  con-
centrated in  one  spot,  and  so  separate  you  from  us.  But  if
certain  individuals  are  preventing  your  march,  in  order  to
preserve  their  own  country  seats,  it  is  only  fair  that  you
should  concede  my  request  and  be  careful  to  send  me  the
cohorts,  which  have  arrived  from  Picenum  and  Camerinum,
leaving  all  their  property  behind  them.

CCCXXV  (A  VII,  26)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  13  February

No,  my  experience  does  not  tally  with  yours,  as  you  express
it  in  the  sentence  beginning  “ As  often  as  I begin  to  feel
elated.”  The  fact  is  that  I am  at  this  moment  somewhat
elated,  and  especially  by  letters  from  Rome  respecting
Domitius  and  the  Picentine  cohorts.  Everything  has  be-
come more  cheerful  in  the  course  of  the  last  two  days.
Accordingly,  the  flight  for  which  I was  preparing  has  been
stopped.  Caesar’s  threats,

“If  with  to-morrow’s  light  I find  you  here,”  ^

are  flouted.  The  report  about  Domitius  is  good,  about
Afranius  splendid.  Thank  you  for  your  most  friendly  advice
to  keep  myself  uncommitted  as  long  as  possible.  You  add
that  I should  not  give  the  impression  of  being  too  much  in-
clined to  the  evil  side : certainly  I may  possibly  seem  to  be

^ A line  from  a Latin  translation  of  Euripides’  Medea,  352.

270

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

doing  so.  I refused  to  take  a leading  part  in  a civil  war,  as  long
as  negotiations  for  peace  were  going  on,  not  because  it  was  not
a just  one,  but  because  former  conduct  of  mine,  which  was
much  more  fully  justified,  had  done  me  harm.  I was,  of
course,  quite  unwilling  to  have  as  my  enemy  a man  to  whom
our  own  leader  had  offered  a second  consulship  and  a triumph
— and  in  what  high-flown  terms  ! “ In  consideration  of  the
extraordinary  brilliancy  of  your  achievements.”  I am  well
aware  both  of  whom  to  be  afraid  and  on  what  grounds.
But  if  there  is  to  be  war,  as  I see  there  will  be,  I shall  not
fail  to  play  my  part.

As  to  the  twenty  sestertia,  Terentia  has  answered  you.  I
did  not  wish  to  trouble  Dionysius  as  long  as  I thought  that  I
should  be  on  the  move.  However,  I made  no  answer  to  your
frequent  remarks  about  his  duty  to  me,  because  I expected
day  after  day  to  be  able  to  settle  what  was  to  be  done.  At
present,  as  far  as  I can  see,  the  boys  are  certain  to  pass  the
winter  in  my  Formian  villa.  And  I ? I can’t  tell.  For  if
there  is  war,  I am  resolved  to  be  with  Pompey.  Whatever
I learn  for  certain  I will  take  care  you  know.  I think  there
will  be  a most  horrible  war,  unless,  as  you  suggest,  some
Parthian  incident  ^ comes  to  the  front.

CCCXXVI  (A  VIII,  II  b)

TO  POMPEY  (AT  LUCERIA)

Formic,  15  February

M.  Cicero,  imperator,  greets  Gnaeus  Magnus,  proconsul.
On  the  15th  of  February  I received  your  letter  at  Formiae,  in-
forming me  that  what  had  happened  in  Picenum  was  much
more  satisfactory  than  had  been  before  reported  to  us ; and
I was  glad  to  hear  of  the  courage  and  activity  of  Vibullius.
Up  to  this  time,  though  I have  continued  living  on  this

^ A sudden  withdrawal  of  Caesar,  like  that  of  the  Parthians  from
Syria.  See  p.  203.

A VIII,  II  b

TO  POMPEY

271

coast,  of  which  I was  put  in  command,  yet  I have  kept  a
vessel  in  readiness.  For  the  news  that  kept  reaching  me,
and  the  anxious  fears  that  I was  entertaining,  were  of  such  a
kind  that  I thought  myself  bound  to  follow  any  counsel  you
might  give  me.  At  present  our  hopes  are  stronger,  thanks
to  your  influence  and  policy.  If  you  think  that  Tarracina  and
the  sea-coast  can  be  held,  I am  ready  to  remain  in  it,  though
there  are  no  garrisons  in  the  towns.  There  is,  in  fact,  no  one  of
senatorial  rank  in  this  part  of  the  country  except  M.  Eppius,
whom  I directed  to  remain  at  Minturnae,  a man  of  vigilant
and  painstaking  character.  For  that  gallant  and  influential
man,  L.  Torquatus,  is  not  with  me  at  Formiae : I think  he
has  started  to  join  you.  Anyhow,  according  to  your  most
recent  directions,  I went  to  Capua  on  the  same  day  as  you
left  Teanum  Sidicinum  : for  you  had  expressed  the  wish  that
I should  superintend  operations  there  in  conjunction  with
the  praetor  M.  Considius.  On  my  arrival  in  that  town,  I
saw  that  Titus  Ampius  was  holding  a levy  with  the  greatest
energy,  that  Libo  was  taking  over  the  men  from  him,  who  is
also  a man  of  very  great  energy  and  influence  in  that  colony.
I remained  at  Capua  as  long  as  the  consuls  did.  I visited
Capua  a second  time,  in  accordance  with  an  order  of  the
consuls,  on  the  5th  of  February.  After  staying  there  three
days  I returned  to  Formiae.  At  present  I am  ignorant  of
your  designs  and  plan  of  campaign.  If  you  think  that  this
coast  is  to  be  held,  which  offers  many  advantages  and  is  an
important  district,  with  illustrious  citizens  residing  in  it,
and  is  capable,  I think,  of  being  held,  there  must  be  some
one  to  command  in  it.  But  if  everything  is  to  be  con-
centrated in  one  spot,  I feel  no  hesitation  about  joining
you  at  once.  I wish  for  nothing  more  earnestly  than  that,
and  so  I told  you  the  day  we  quitted  the  city.  For  my
part,  I do  not  trouble  myself  about  anyone’s  thinking
that  I have  as  yet  been  less  active  than  I ought,  so  long  as
you  do  not  think  so : nevertheless,  if,  as  I am  convinced  is
the  case,  we  have  to  fight,  I feel  confident  of  being  able  to
justify  myself  to  all  the  world.  I have  sent  my  connexion
M.  Tullius  to  you,  to  receive  a letter,  if  you  think  it  well  to
write  to  me.

2/2

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  .^;t.  57

CCCXXVII  (A  VIII,  I)  i

i

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)  i

Formic,  i6  February

After  I had  despatched  a letter  to  you,  I received  one
from  Pompey.  I would  have  sent  you  the  letter  itself,  had
not  my  brother’s  servant  been  in  such  a hurry  to  start.  I
will  send  it,  therefore,  to-morrow.  The  rest  of  it  contained
the  operations  in  Picenum ; about  what  Vibullius  had  written
to  him  j about  the  levy  held  by  Domitius — all  of  which  are
known  to  you,  but  yet  were  not  so  flourishing  as  Philotimus’s
letter  had  represented.  But  at  the  end  of  Pompey’s  letter
there  was  a sentence  in  his  own  handwriting  : “I  am  of
opinion  that  you  should  come  to  Luceria ; you  will  not  be
safer  anywhere  else.”  The  interpretation  I put  on  this  is
that  he  considers  the  towns  in  this  district  and  the  sea-coast
as  abandoned,  nor  am  I surprised  at  a man,  who  has  given
up  the  head,  having  no  regard  for  the  other  limbs.  I wrote
back  at  once  and  sent  the  letter  by  one  of  my  establishment
upon  whom  I could  rely,  saying  that  I did  not  want  to  '
know  where  I should  be  safest : if  he  wished  me  to  come  to
Luceria  for  his  own  sake  or  for  that  of  the  Republic,  I would
come  at  once ; and  I urged  him  to  keep  a hold  upon  the  sea-
coast,  if  he  wished  to  be  supplied  with  corn  from  the  pro-
vinces. I see  that  it  is  no  use  my  writing  this.  But  as
before  in  regard  to  keeping  the  city,  so  in  regard  to  not
abandoning  Italy,  I put  my  opinion  on  record.  I per-
ceive, indeed,  that  the  plan  is  to  concentrate  all  forces  at
Luceria,  and  even  that  not  as  a permanent  centre,  but  that,
if  hard  pressed,  we  are  to  abandon  that  also.  You  need
not,  therefore,  be  much  surprised  at  my  not  being  very
enthusiastic  about  engaging  in  a cause,  in  which  no  pro-
vision has  ever  been  sought  for  making  peace  or  securing
victory,  but  from  the  first  for  a discreditable  and  calamitous
flight.  I must  go,  to  encounter  any  danger  that  chance

273

A VIII  I,  12  c POMPEY  TO  L.  DOMITIUS

may  bring  with  those  who  are  reputed  to  be  loyalists,
rather  than  be  thought  to  disagree  with  loyalists.  Yet  I
foresee  that  before  long  the  city  will  be  crammed  with  the
“loyalists,”  that  is,  the  fine  gentlemen  and  men  of  pro-
perty— crammed  chock  full,  indeed,  when  these  municipal
towns  have  been  abandoned.  And  I would  be  in  their
number  if  I had  not  these  confounded  lictors.  Nor  should
I be  dissatisfied  to  have  as  my  companions  Manius  Lepidus,
L.  Volcauus,  and  Servius  Sulpicius  : not  one  of  them  is  a
greater  fool  than  L.  Domitius,  nor  more  of  a weathercock
than  Appius  Claudius.  The  one  person  who  makes  me  hesi-
tate is  Pompey,  not  from  his  personal  importance,  but  for  old
sake’s  sake.  For  what  weight  can  he  have  in  this  contro-
versy ? When  we  were  all  alarmed  at  Caesar,  he,  for  his  part,
was  devoted  to  him  : now  that  he  has  begun  to  be  alarmed
at  him,  he  thinks  that  everybody  ought  to  be  his  enemy.
However,  I shall  go  to  Luceria,  and  yet  perhaps  my  arrival
will  not  give  him  any  satisfaction.  For  I shall  not  be  able
to  conceal  my  disapproval  of  what  has  been  done  up  to  this
time.  If  I could  sleep  I wouldn’t  have  pestered  you  with
such  long  letters.  If  you  are  similarly  affected,  pray  pay  me
back  in  &nd.

CCCXXVIII  (A  VIII,  12  c)

POMPEY  TO  L.  DOMITIUS  AHENOBARBUS  (IN
CORFINIUM)

Luceria,  i6  February

Gn^us  Pompeius,  proconsul,  salutes  Lucius  Domitius,  pro-
consul.  M.  Calenius  has  brought  me  a despatch  from  you
dated  the  i6th  of  February,  in  which  you  say  that  your  in-
tention is  to  watch  Caesar,  and,  if  he  commences  his  march
upon  me  by  the  coast  road,  to  come  to  me  with  speed  into
Samnium ; but  that,  if  he  spends  time  about  the  towns  in
your  district,  you  wish  to  resist  him  in  case  of  his  approach-
II.  T

2/4  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  49,  ^t.  5^

ing  you.  I think  your  plan  is  spirited  and  gallant ; but
am  compelled  to  be  more  solicitous  as  to  whether  we  ma;
not,  if  divided,  be  unequal  to  our  opponent ; since  he  ha
large  forces  and  is  likely  soon  to  have  larger.  For  a mai
of  your  foresight  ought  not  to  reckon  how  many  cohort
Caesar  has  at  this  moment  against  you,  but  what  amount
of  infantry  and  cavalry  he  is  likely  to  collect  before  long
This  is  proved  in  my  eyes  by  a letter  from  Bussenius  to  me
in  which  he  says — as  I learn  from  other  letters  also — tha
Curio  is  drawing  the  garrisons  in  Umbria  and  Etruri;
together,  and  marching  to  join  Caesar.  Now  if  all  thesi
forces  are  combined,  even  suppose  a detachment  is  sen
to  Alba,  and  another  threatens  you,  and  though  Caesa
should  not  offer  battle,  but  should  remain  on  the  defensive
in  his  own  strongholds,  you  will  still  be  at  a stand,  an(
will  not  be  able,  isolated  with  a force  the  size  of  yours
to  offer  a resistance  to  such  vast  numbers  sufficient  even  t(
allow  of  your  foraging  for  corn.  Wherefore  I strongly  urg<
you  to  come  here  as  soon  as  possible  with  your  entire  force
The  consuls  have  decided  to  do  so.  I sent  a message  t(
you  by  M.  Tuscilius  to  say  that  we  must  take  care  that  th(
two  legions  should  not,  without  the  cohorts  from  Picenum
be  allowed  to  come  within  sight  of  Caesar.^  Wherefore  d(
not  disturb  yourself  if  you  hear  that  I am  making  a back
ward  movement,^  should  Caesar  chance  to  advance  toward
me : for  I think  I must  by  all  means  avoid  being  caught  ir
the  toils  and  prevented  from  stirring.  For  I cannot  con
struct  a camp  owing  to  the  season  and  the  disposition  o
my  soldiers,  nor  is  it  proper  to  call  in  the  garrisons  from  al
the  towns,  lest  I should  be  left  without  a place  of  retreat
Accordingly,  I have  not  mustered  more  than  fourteen  co
horts  at  Luceria.  The  consuls  are  about  to  bring  in  al
garrisons  to  me,  or  are  going  to  Sicily.  For  I must  eithe:
have  an  army  sufficiently  strong  to  make  me  feel  sure  o
being  able  to  break  out,  or  hold  districts  of  such  a kind  a.‘

^ The  two  legions,  of  whose  withdrawal  from  Csesar  on  the  plea  o
a Parthian  war  we  have  heard  so  much.  Pompey  fears  that  if  they  set
their  old  imperator  they  will  desert — a significant  commentary  on  whal
he  had  been  told  and  believed  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  as  to  the  dis'
affection  of  Caesar’s  army.

^ /,e.,  in  the  direction  of  Brundisium.

A VIII,  12  c,  12  d POMPEY  TO  L.  DOMITIUS  275

to  enable  us  to  act  on  the  defensive.  At  the  present  time
we  have  neither,  for  Caesar  has  occupied  a large  part  of
Italy^  and  we  have  an  army  neither  as  well-appointed  nor  as
large  as  he  has.  We  must  therefore  be  careful  and  look  to
the  main  interests  of  the  Republic.  I urge  on  you  again
and  again  to  come  to  me  at  the  earliest  opportunity  with
your  whole  force.  We  may  even  now  restore  the  fortunes
of  the  state,  if  we  conduct  our  operations  in  common : if
we  are  divided  we  shall  be  weak.  I am  quite  satisfied  of
this.

After  I had  written  the  above.  Sicca  brought  me  a
despatch  and  message  from  you.  You  urge  me  to  come
to  you  : I do  not  think  that  I can  do  so,  because  I don’t  feel
great  confidence  in  these  legions.^

CCCXXIX  (A  VIII,  12  d)

POMPEY  TO  L.  DOMITIUS  AHENOBARBUS  (IN
CORFINIUM)

Luceria,  17  February

I RECEIVED  a despatch  from  you  on  the  1 7th  of  February,
in  which  you  say  that  Caesar  has  pitched  his  camp  near
Corfinium.  What  I thought  and  warned  you  of  is  now
taking  place,  namely,  that  at  present  he  would  not  give  you
battle,  and  yet  would  hem  you  in  by  concentrating  all  his
forces,  to  prevent  the  road  to  me  being  open  to  you,  and
your  being  able  to  unite  your  troops,  formed  of  the  strongest
loyalists,  with  the  legions  of  whose  fidelity  we  are  doubtful.
I am  therefore  all  the  more  disturbed  by  your  letter.  For
I am  not  sufficiently  confident  in  the  good  disposition  of
the  soldiers,  whom  I now  have  with  me,  to  risk  a battle
involving  the  safety  of  the  state,  nor  have  the  levies  made
by  the  consuls  as  yet  come  in.  Wherefore  do  your  best,  if
it  is  still  by  any  means  possible,  to  extricate  yourself,  and

^ The  two  Caesarian  legions,  as  above.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

276

come  here  as  soon  as  you  can,  before  our  opponent  is
joined  by  all  his  forces.  For  it  is  neither  possible  for  the
new  levies  to  arrive  here  quickly,  nor,  if  they  had  ai^ved,
can  it  escape  your  observation  how  impossible  it  is  to  trust
men,  who  are  not  even  acquainted  with  each  other,  against
veteran  legions.^

CCCXXX  (A  VIII,  12  a)

POMPEY  TO  THE  CONSULS
Luceria,  17  February

GNiEUS  Magnus,  proconsul,  greets  the  consuls,  C.  Marcellus
and  L.  Lentulus.  Being  of  opinion  that  if  we  were  scattered
we  could  neither  be  of  service  to  the  state,  nor  protect  our-
selves, I sent  a despatch  to  L.  Domitius  that,  if  possible,  he
should  join  me  with  all  his  men,  and  that,  if  he  felt  doubt-
ful about  himself,  he  should  send  me  the  nineteen  cohorts
which  were  on  the  march  to  join  me  from  Picenum.^  What
I feared  has  taken  place : Domitius  is  surrounded,  and  is
not  in  sufficient  force  to  form  a camp,  because  he  has  my
nineteen  and  his  own  twelve  cohorts  distributed  among  three
towns — for  he  has  stationed  some  at  Alba  and  some  at
Sulmo — and  he  cannot  now  extricate  himself  even  if  he
wished.  In  these  circumstances  I am,  I can  assure  you,  in
extreme  anxiety.  I am  eager  to  relieve  men  who  are  so
numerous  and  of  such  high  position^  from  the  danger  of
a siege,  and  yet  I cannot  go  to  their  assistance,  because  I
do  not  think  that  we  can  trust  these  two  legions  to  go  there

^ This  seems  to  be  the  letter,  the  contents  of  which  Domitius  tried
to  conceal  from  his  council  and  the  army  at  Corfinium,  pretending  that
Pompey  had  promised  to  come  speedily  to  his  relief.  The  soldiers  and
centurions  detected  the  truth,  and  hastened  to  make  terms  with  CiEsar.
See  Caesar,  B.  C.  i.  19-20.

^ They  had  halted  on  the  way  at  Corfinium.

^ Domitius  had  with  him  his  son,  five  senators,  with  many  young
men  of  senatorial  families,  a large  number  of  equites,  and  magistrates
from  neighbouring  municipia  (Caes.  B.  C.  i.  23).

A VIII,  12  a,  2

TO  ATTICUS

277

— of  whom,  after  all,  I have  not  been  able  to  keep  together
more  than  fourteen  cohorts ; for  I have  sent  two  to  Brun-
disiiftn,  and  I did  not  think  that  Canusium  ought  to  be  left
in  my  absence  without  a garrison.  I had  told  Decimus
Laelius  to  suggest  to  you,  as  I hope  for  an  increase  to  my
numbers,  that  one  of  you  should  join  me,  the  other  go  to
Sicily  with  the  force  you  have  collected  at  Capua  and  the
neighbourhood  of  Capua,  and  the  soldiers  whom  Faustus
has  recruited : that  Domitius  with  his  own  twelve  cohorts
should  form  a junction  with  the  same,  and  that  all  other
forces  of  every  description  should  muster  at  Brundisium,
and  be  shipped  thence  to  Dyrrachium.  But  as  it  is,  since
at  this  juncture  I cannot  go,  any  more  than  you,  to  the
relief  of  Domitius,  he  must  extricate  himself  by  crossing  the
mountains,  and  I must  be  careful  not  to  allow  the  enemy  to
get  near  these  fourteen  cohorts,  whose  loyalty  is  doubtful,  or
to  catch  me  up  on  the  march.  Wherefore  I have  determined
— and  I find  that  Marcellus  and  other  senators  who  are
here  agree  with  me — to  march  the  force  I have  with  me  to
Brundisium.  I urge  you  to  collect  all  the  troops  that  you
can  collect,  and  come  to  me  at  Brundisium  also  as  promptly
as  possible.  I think  you  should  use  the  arms,  which  you
were  intending  to  send  to  me,  to  arm  the  soldiers  whom  you
have  with  you  : if  you  will  have  all  arms  that  may  be  to  spare
carted  to  Brundisium,  you  will  have  done  the  state  excellent
service.  Please  let  my  men  know  about  this.  I have  sent
word  to  the  praetors  P.  Lupus  and  C.  Coponius,  to  join  you
and  take  whatever  men  they  have  to  you.

CCCXXXI  (A  VIII,  2)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formi/e,  17  February

Thank  you  all  round — both  for  writing  to  tell  me  the
remarks  you  had  heard,  and  for  not  believing  what  reflected
^nergy,  and,  lastly,  for  letting  me  know  your

2/8  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  49,  ^T.  57

opinion.  I wrote  only  one  letter  to  Caesar  from  Capua  in
answer  to  the  remonstrance  he  addressed  to  me  on  the
subject  of  his  gladiators.’^  My  letter  was  short  but  expreissed
in  friendly  terms.  So  far  from  containing  any  attack  upon
Pompey,  it  mentioned  him  in  the  most  complimentary
terms.  This  exactly  corresponded  with  my  sentiment  in
favour  of  his  making  terms  with  Pompey.  If  he  has  sent
that  letter  anywhere,  let  him  placard  it  for  everyone  to  read
with  all  my  heart.  I am  writing  a second  letter  to  him  on
the  same  day  as  I write  this  to  you.  I cannot  do  otherwise
than  write,  since  he  has  written  to  me  both  by  his  own
hand  and  by  that  of  Balbus.  I am  sending  you  a copy  of
it.  I don’t  think  there  is  anything  for  you  to  find  fault
with.  If  there  is,  suggest  how  I am  to  escape  criticism.
“ Don’t  write  at  all,”  you  will  say  ; “ how  better  elude  those
who  want  to  make  up  a story?”  Well,  I will  follow  your
advice  as  long  as  it  is  possible.  You  exhort  me  to  remember
my  deeds,  words,  and  even  my  writings  : it  is  truly  friendly
on  your  part,  and  I thank  you  warmly  for  it ; but  you
appear  to  me  to  take  a different  view  from  mine  as  to  what  is
right  and  suitable  to  my  character  in  this  controversy.  For
in  my  opinion  nothing  more  discreditable  was  ever  done  in
any  nation  by  anyone  professing  to  be  a statesman  and
leader,  than  the  course  taken  by  our  friend.  I am  sorry  for
him.  He  abandoned  the  city,  that  is,  his  country,  for  which,
and  in  which,  it  would  have  been  a glorious  thing  to  die.
You  don’t  seem  to  me  to  appreciate  the  magnitude  of  this
disaster : for  you  are  at  this  moment  in  your  own  town
house.  Yes,  but  you  cannot  remain  there  any  longer  except
by  the  consent  of  the  vilest  of  men.  Can  anything  be  more
humiliating,  more  shameful  than  that  ? We  are  wandering
about  in  distress  with  wives  and  children.  All  our  hopes
are  dependent  on  the  life  of  one  man,  who  has  a dangerous
illness  every  year.  We  are  not  expelled,  but  summoned
from  our  country,  which  we  have  left  not  to  be  safe-guarded
till  our  return,  but  to  be  plundered  and  firedy'  There  are
not  so  very  many  with  me,^  nor  in  suburban  houses,  nor  sub-

^ See  p.  251.

2 I have  ventured  to  emend  this  difficult  passage  by  writing  non  ita
fmdti  for  ita  multi.  Cicero  says  the  leading  Pompeians,  who  ought  to
have  defended  the  city,  are  all  gone  far  away  ; there  are  not  many  left

A VIII,  2

TO  ATTICUS

279

urban  parks,  nor  in  the  city  itself — and  if  they  are  there  now,
they  soon  will  not  be.  I meanwhile  shall  not  stay  even  at
Capua,  but  at  Luceria,  and  shall,  of  course,  abandon  the  care
of  the  sea-coast  at  once.  I shall  wait  to  see  what  Afranius
and  Petreius  do  : ^ for  Labienus  lacks  distinction.  Here  you
will  hint  that  that  is  just  what  you  find  lacking  in  me.  I say
nothing  about  myself.  I will  leave  that  to  others.  In  these
circumstances,  indeed,  where  is  it  to  be  found  ? All  you
loyalists  are  sticking  to  your  houses,  and  will  do  so.  In  the
old  times  didn’t  every  loyalist  come  forward  to  support
me  ? Who  does  so  now  in  this  war,  for  so  it  must  now  be
called?  As  yet  Vibullius  has  covered  himself  with  glory.
You  will  learn  all  about  that  from  Pompey’s  letter : in  which
please  notice  the  passage  at  which  you  will  find  a mark  of
attention  ( <I).  You  will  see  what  Vibullius  himself  thinks
about  our  friend  Gnaeus.  What,  then,  is  the  point  of  all  this
talk  ? Why,  I am  capable  of  dying  cheerfully  for  Pompey  :
I value  him  more  than  anyone  in  the  world.  But,  for  all  that,
I do  not  think  that  all  hope  for  the  Republic  is  centred  in  him.
You  express  an  opinion  also  considerably  different  from  your
usual  one,  that  I must  even  quit  Italy  if  he  does  so  : a step
which,  in  my  judgment,  is  of  advantage  neither  to  the
Republic  nor  to  my  children,  and,  what  is  more,  neither
right  nor  morally  justifiable.  But  why  do  you  say,  “ Will
you  be  able  to  endure  the  sight  of  a tyrant  ? ” As  though
it  mattered  whether  I heard  of  him  or  saw  him ; or  as  though
I needed  to  look  for  any  better  precedent  than  that  of
Socrates,  who  at  the  time  of  the  Thirty  never  set  foot  out  of
the  city  gate.  I have  personally  also  a special  motive  for
remaining,  concerning  which  I wish  to  heaven  I might

even  near  him  at  Formise,  or  in  suburban  residences,  much  less  in  the  city.
I do  not  feel  the  difficulty  as  to  the  contradiction  to  Letter  CCCXXVII,
p.  273,  where  he  says  the  honi  will  soon  crowd  into  Rome.  He  is  think-
ing of  different  things.  In  the  other  letter  he  was  imagining  the  action
of  the  lukewarm  boni,  who  would  soon  be  making  submission  to  Csesar  :
here  he  is  thinking  of  the  leading  and  sincere  boni^  who  have  yet  shewn
(as  he  thinks)  the  white  feather  by  seeking  distant  places  of  retirement.
Non  ita  multi  makes  the  sentence  much  easier,  and  is  a favourite
phrase  of  Cicero’s.

^ Two  of  Pompey’s  legates  in  Spain,  whose  resistance  and  submission
to  Caesar  this  summer  are  described  in  the  first  book  of  Caesar’s  ‘ ‘ Civil
War.”

28o

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  JET.  57

some  time  have  a talk  with  you.  After  writing  this  on  the
1 7th,  by  the  same  lamp  as  that  in  which  I burnt  your  letter,
I am  leaving  Formiae  to  join  Pompey,  with  some  prospect
of  being  of  use  if  there  is  any  question  of  peace,  but  if  it  is
to  be  war — what  good  shall  I be  ?

CCCXXXII  (A  VIII,  3)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Gales,  18-19  February

A PREY  to  the  gravest  and  most  depressing  anxieties,  though
I am  precluded  from  discussing  the  question  with  you
personally,  I have,  nevertheless,  resolved  ig.  seek  your  advice.
The  whole  question  in  debate  is  this  : if  Pompey  quits  Italy,
which  I suspect  that  he  is  about  to  do,  what  do  you  think  I
ought  to  do  ? To  assist  you  in  giving  me  advice,  I will  state
briefly  what  occurs  to  my  mind  on  either  side.  FPompey’s
very  great  services  in  securing  my  restoration  and  the  in-
timacy existing  between  us,  as  well  as  the  interests  of  the
Republic  themselves,  lead  me  to  the  conclusion  that  my
policy  or,  if  you  choose,  my  fortune  must  be  united  with  his.
Then  there  is  this  : if  I stay  here  and  desert  that  company
of  most  loyal  and  illustrious  citizens,  I must  come  under  the
power  of  one  man : and  although  he  shews  by  many  in-
stances that  he  is  well  disposed  to  me — and  you  yourself
know  what  precautions  I took  in  that  direction,  because  I
suspected  the  storm  that  was  hanging  over  our  heads — yet
I must  look  at  the  matter  in  two  lights  : first,  how  far  I can
trust  him  ; and,  secondly,  however  certain  I may  be  that  he
will  be  my  friend,  whether  it  is  the  action  of  a brave  man
and  a good  citizen  to  remain  in  a city,  in  which,  after  having
enjoyed  the  highest  offices  and  commands,  after  having  per-
formed the  most  important  services,  and  been  invested  with
the  most  august  priesthood,  he  is  to  become  a mere  name,^

^ Nomen  futuruSy  for  non  ftdurus.  The  abbreviation  of  non  and
nomen  would  be  very  nearly  the  same.  Still,  the  emendation  is  far

A VIII,  3

TO  ATTICUS

281

and  to  incur  danger,  not  perchance  unaccompanied  by  some
disgrace,  if  Pompey  ever  restores  the  constitution.  So  much
for  that  side.  Now  for  the  other.  Our  friend  Pompey
has  shewn  neither  wisdom  nor  courage  in  anything  that  he
has  done  : I may  add  that  he  has  acted  in  every  case  against
my  counsel  and  advice.  I put  out  of  the  question  the  old
scores : how  he  fostered  Caesar  against  the  Republic,  pro-
moted, armed  him;  assisted  him  in  the  passing  of  laws  by
violence  and  against  the  auspices ; supported  the  addition
of  farther  Gaul  to  his  provinces;  married  his  daughter;
acted  as  augur  at  the  adoption  of  Publius  Clodius  ; shewed
greater  zeal  in  effecting  my  recall  than  in  preventing  my
exile ; supported  the  extension  of  Caesar’s  provincial  govern-
ment ; championed  his  cause  at  every  point  in  his  absence ;
actually  in  his'  third  consulship,  when  he  started  being  a
defender  of  the 'constitution,  yet  urged  the  ten  tribunes  to
propose  the  bill  allowing  Caesar’s  caiiaidature  in  his  absence ;
confirmed  the  same  privilege  in  "a  certain  law  of  his  own,
and  resisted  the  consul  Marcus  Marcellus  when  he  pro-
posed to  fix  the  end  of  Caesar’s  government  on  the  ist  of
March.  ^ Well,  to  pass  over  all  this,  what  could  be  more
discreditable,  more  ill-considered,  than  this  departure  from
the  ci^i  or  I should  rather  call  it  this  most  shameful,  most
unprincipled  flight  What  terms  could  there  be  that  were
not  prefer^le  to  the  abandonment  of  one’s  country  ? The
terms  offered  were  bad.  I confess  it : but  could  anything  be
worse  thSn  this  ? But  (you  say)  he  will  recover  the  Republic.

. When  ? What  preparation  has  been  made  for  realizing  that
hope  ? Is  not  Picenum  lost  ? Is  not  the  road  to  the  city
laid  open  Is  not  all  money,  public  and  private,  handed
over  to  his  opponent  ? In  fact,  there  is  no  cause  to  support,
no  forces  to  support  it,  no  rallying  point  for  those  who  wish
the  constitution  maintained.  Apulia  has  been  selected,  the
most  sparsely  peopled  district  of  Italy,  and  the  most  widely
removed  from  the  point  of  attack  in  this  war : it  is  evident
that,  from  sheer  desperation,  the  object  in  view  is  flight
and  the  facilities  of  a sea-coast.  I undertook  Capua  with

from  certain.  Another  is  non  futurus  sit  sui  iurisy  “ not  even  his  own
master,”  “a  slave.”

^ M.  Marcellus,  consul  B.c.  51.

282

CICERO’S  LETTERS  |.c.  49,  ^

reluctance,  not  because  I desired  to  shirk  that  duty,  but
because  it  was  in  a cause  in  which  there  was  no  openly
expressed  grievance  on  the  part  of  the  orders  in  the  state  or
of  private  individuals,  though  there  was  some — far  from
keen,  as  usual — on  the  part  of  the  Optimates ; and  because,
as  I saw  for  myself,  the  multitude  and  the  lowest  of  the
people  were  inclined  to  the  other  side,  while  many  were
eager  simply  for  change.  1 told  Pompey  himself  that  I
would  undertake  no  duty  without  a guard  and  money.
Accordingly,  I had  practically  nothing  to  do  at  all,  because,
from  the  first,  I saw  that  his  sole  object  was  flight.  If  I am
to  follow  that  flight  now,  whither  am  I to  go?  Not  with
him ; for  when  I started  to  join  him,  I learnt  that  Caesar  was
in  such  a position  that  I could  not  reach  Luceria  safely.^  I
should  have  to  sail  by  the  Mare  Inferum,  without  definite
direction  and  in  the  worst  possible  weather.  Again,  am  I
to  take  my  brother,  or  only  my  son  without  him,  or  how  ?
Either  alternative  involves  very  great  difficulty,  and  the
keenest  distress  of  mind.  Again,  what  kind  of  attack  will
he  employ  against  us  and  our  property  in  our  absence?
.x'^mething  more  violent  than  in  the  case  of  others,  for  he
will  perhaps  think  that  he  has  a chance  of  winning  popularity
by  damaging  us.  Consider,  again,  these  fetters — I mean  my
laurelled  fasces — what  a nuisance  to  carry  them  out  of  Italy  !
Moreover,  what  place,  even  suppose  I enjoy  a calm  passage,
will  be  safe  for  me  till  I reach  Pompey  ? By  what  route,
again,  or  whither  to  go,  I have  no  idea.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  I keep  my  ground  and  find  some
footing  on  this  side,  I shall  have  done  what  L.  Philippus  did
during  the  tyranny  of  Cinna,  as  well  as  L.  Flaccus  and
Q.  Mucius.  Though  it  turned  out  unhappily  in  the  case  of
the  latter,^  he  used,  nevertheless,  to  say  that  he  foresaw  the
result  (a  result  which  did  actually  happen),  but  preferred  it
to  approaching  the  walls  of  his  native  city  in  arms.  Thrasy-
bulus  ® acted  differently  and  perhaps  better.  But  yet  there

^ Though  Cicero  had  told  Pompey  that  his  personal  safety  did  not
affect  the  question  ! (Letter  CCCXXVII,  p.  272.)

^ Q.  Mucius  Scsevola  (the  younger)  was  put  to  death  by  the  younger
C.  Marius  B.c.  82.  See  p.  349.

^ Who  retired  from  Athens  during  the  time  of  the  Thirty,  and  re-
turned with  a force  collected  at  Pylm  to  free  his  country,  B.c.  404-3.

A VIII,  3

TO  ATTICUS

283

are  good  grounds  for  Mucius's  line  of  policy  and  opinion,  as
well  as  for  that  of  the  other,  namely,  to  temporize,  when
necessary,  and  not  to  let  slip  an  opportunity  when  it  is  given.
But  even  it  I adopt  this  course,  those  same  fasces  involve  a
difficulty.  \Jor  suppose  he  is  my  friend,  which  is  uncertain,
but  suppose^e  is,  he  will  offer  me  the  triumph.  Not  to
accept  I fear  will  get  me  into  trouble  with  him,  to  accept  I
fear  will  appear  scandalous  to  the  loyalists.  “ What  a
difficult  and  insoluble  problem  ! ” you  say.  And  yet  I must
solve  it.  For  what  can  possibly  be  done  else?  Don’t  think
me  more  inclined  to  remain,  because  I have  used  more
words  bh  that  side?  T?*1may  very  well  be,  as  happens  in
many  investigations,  that  one  side  has  the  superiority  in
words,  the  other  in  truth.  Wherefore  please  give  me  your
advice,  on  the  understanding  tjiat  I am  considering  a most
important  matter  with  impartiality  There  is  a vessel  at
Caieta  ready  for  me,  and  another  at  Brundisium.  But
here  come  couriers,  as  I am  in  the  act  of  writing  these
words  at  Gales  before  daybreak  : here  comes  a letter  stating
that  Caesar  has  reached  Corfinium,  that  Domitius  is  inside
Corfinium  with  a strong  force  eager  to  fight.  I c«in’t
believe  that  our  friend  Gnaeus  will  go  so  far  as  to
don  Domifms,  though  he  has  sent  Scipio  in  advaijR^to
Brundisium  with  two  cohorts,  and  has  written  to  the  (jpfisuls
saying  that  he  wishes  the  legion  enroITed  by  Faustu^  to  be
taken  to  Sicily  by  a consul.  But  it  will  be  shameful  if
Domitius  is  abandoned  when  imploring  to  bfeiHfeHeved.
There  is  a certain  hope,  no  great  one  in  my' mind,  but
warmly  entertameHnin  these  parts,  that  Afranius  has  fought
a battle  with  Trebonius  in  the  Pyrenees ; that  Trebonius
has  been  repulsed ; that  your  friend  Fadius  ^ also  has  come
over  with  his  cohorts.  The  chief  hope,  however,  is  that
Afranius  is  on  his  way  hither  with  large  forces.  If  that  is
the  case,  we  shall  perhaps  stay  in  Italy.  However,  since
Cposar’s  line  of  march  was  uncertain,  as  he  was  thought  to
be  intending  to  go  either  in  the  direction  of  Capua  or
Luceria,  I am  sending  Lepta  with  a letter  to  Pompey,  and
am  returning  myself  to  Formiae,  to  avoid  falling  in  with  any-
one. I wished  you  to  know  this,  and  I am  writing  in  a

^ M.  Fadius  Gallus,  one  of  Caesar’s  legates.

284

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

somewhat  quieter  frame  of  mind  than  I mentioned  just  now :
my  object  being  not  to  put  forward  a judgment  of  my  own,
but  to  ask  yours.

CCCXXXIII  (A  VIII,  lie)

POMPEY  TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMI^E)
Canusium,  20  February

If  you  are  well,  I am  glad.  I was  pleased  to  read  your
letter ; for  I recognized  your  old  gallantry  still  in  defending
the  public  safety.  The  consuls  have  joined  my  army  in
Apulia.  I strongly  urge  you,  in  the  name  of  your  unique
and  unbroken  zeal  for  the  service  of  the  state,  to  join  us
also,  that  by  our  united  counsels  we  may  support  and  aid
the  violated  Republic.  My  opinion  is  that  you  should
travel  by  the  Appian  road,  and  come  with  all  speed  to
Brundisium.

CCCXXXIV  (A  VIII,  4)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  2 2 February  (morning)

Dionysius,^  whom  I look  upon  as  your  man  rather  than
mine — for  though  I knew  very  well  what  his  character  was,
I yet  stood  by  your  judgment  rather  than  my  own — without
any  respect  even  for  your  recommendation  several  times
repeated  in  my  hearing,  has  given  himself  airs  in  view  of

^ Cicero’s  freedman  Dionysius  (of  whom  we  often  hear)  had  apparently
declined  to  come  to  Formise  to  continue  his  duties  as  tutor  to  the  young
Ciceros,  and  Cicero  thinks  he  has  done  so  rudely,  and  from  a dislike  to
serve  a ruined  man.

I

A VIII,  II  c,  4

TO  ATTICUS

285

what  he  thinks  will  be  the  state  of  my  fortune.  The  course
of  that  fortune,  however,  as  far  as  it  can  be  affected  by
human  wisdom,  I shall  pilot  with  a certain  amount  of  skill.
What  honour,  what  consideration,  what  recommendation
even  to  others  (the  contemptible  fellow ! ) has  he  not  had
at  my  hands?  Why,  I even  preferred  to  have  my  judg-
ment attacked  by  my  brother  Quintus,  and  by  the  world
in  general,  rather  than  not  praise  him  to  the  skies : and
that  my  young  Ciceros  should  have  some  supplementary
lessons  from  myself,  rather  than  look  out  for  another  master
for  them.  Good  heavens ! what  a letter  I wrote  to  him  !
what  respect,  what  affection  did  it  express ! You  would
have  said  that  it  was  an  invitation  addressed  to  a Dicsearchus
or  an  Aristoxenus,  not  to  the  greatest  windbag  and  the  worst
teacher  in  the  world.  “ But  he  has  a good  memory.”  He
shall  find  I have  a better  ! He  answered  my  letter  in  a tone
which  I never  used  to  anyone  whose  case  I declined.  Why,
I always  used  to  say,  “ If  I can,”  “ If  I am  not  prevented  by
a previous  engagement  ” : I never  had  a defendant  so  low,
so  mean,  so  clearly  guilty,  so  utterly  a stranger  to  myself,
that  I refused  him  with  the  abruptness  which  he  has  used  with-
out disguise  or  reserve  to  me.  I never  saw  such  gross  ingrati-
tude, a vice  which  embraces  every  other.  But  enough  and  to
spare  about  him.  I have  a vessel  ready : yet  I wait  for  a
letter  from  you,  to  know  what  answer  it  will  contain  to  the
case  I put  to  you  for  advice.  You  are  aware  that  at  Sulmo
Gaius  Attius,  the  Paelignian,  has  opened  the  gates  to  Antony,
though  there  were  five  cohorts  there,  and  that  Q.  Lucretius
has  escaped  from  the  town ; ^ that  Gnaeus  is  on  his  way
to  Brundisium  ; that  Domitius  ^ has  been  abandoned.  It  is
all  over.

Caesar  {B.  C.  i.  18)  says  that  the  Sulmonians  insisted  on  joining
him,  but  were  for  a time  prevented  by  Q.  Lucretius  and  Attius  Paelignus.
Lucretius  escaped,  but  Attius  was  captured.

2 The  name  is  not  in  the  text  of  the  MSS.,  but  I think  the  sentence
in  Letter  CCCXXXIII  {Att.  viii.  3,  § 7),  sed  turpe  Domitium  deseri
implorantem  eius  auxilium^  makes  the  emendation  almost  certain.
When  Cicero  writes  letters  one  after  the  other  so  quickly  the  same  words
and  expressions  continually  recur.

286

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

CCCXXXV  (A  VIII,  5)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  22  February  (evening)

Having  written  you  a letter  before  daybreak  of  the  22nd
about  Dionysius,  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day  Dionysius
himself  arrived,  induced  by  your  influence,  I suspect.  For
what  else  am  I to  think  ? However,  it  is  his  way  to  repent
when  he  has  done  anything  intemperate : and  he  never  was
more  insane  than  in  this  business.  For — a circumstance  I
did  not  mention  to  you  before — I heard  afterwards  that  at
the  third  milestone  from  the  city  he  took  fright,  after

“Venting  his  horns’  vain  fury  on  the  air,”  ^

I mean,  after  uttering  a number  of  curses,  which,  as  the  say-
ing is,  I hope  m.ay  come  home  to  roost ! But  see  what  ^
good-natured  man  I am  ! I put  into  the  packet  along  with
the  letter  to  you  one  addressed  to  him,  written  with  great
warmth  : this  I should  like  returned  to  me,  and  for  that
sole  reason  I have  sent  my  body-servant  Pollix  to  Rome.
I am  therefore  writing  to  you  that,  if  it  has  by  any  chance
been  delivered  to  you,  you  would  take  care  to  have  it  sent
back  to  me,  lest  it  should  come  into  his  hands.  If  there
had  been  any  news  I would  have  written  it.  I am  in
anxious  suspense  as  to  the  affair  at  Corfinium,  which  will
decide  the  fate  of  the  Republic.  Pray  see  that  the  packet
addressed  to  Manius  Curius  is  conveyed  to  him,  and  re-
commend Tiro  to  Curius,  and  ask  him  to  supply  him  with
any  money  he  requires.

^ TToXXd  ficLT^v  Kepaeacii/  tg  i}kpd_QvfxpvavTa,  The  author  is  unknown.

A VIII,  5,  6

TO  ATTICUS

287

CCCXXXVI  (A  VIII,  6)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  23  February

When  I had  already  sealed  the  letter  to  you  which  I in-
tended to  despatch  over  night,  as  I did — for  it  was  written
in  the  evening — C.  Sosius,  the  praetor,  came  to  Formise
on  a visit  to  my  neighbour  Manius  Lepidus,  whose  quaestor
he  once  was.  He  brought  me  a copy  of  Pompey’s  letter
to  the  consuls.

I have  received  a despatch  from  L.  Domitius  on  the  I'^th  of
February.  I append  a copy.  Now.,  without  my  saying  a
word.,  I know  you  understand  of  your  own  accord  how  im-
portant it  is  to  the  Republic  that  all  troops  should  be  concen-
trated in  one  place  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  Pray,  if  you
think  it  right,  make  an  effort  to  join  me  as  early  as  possible,
and  leave  a garrison  for  Capua  of  such  strength  as  you  may
determine  to  be  sufficient.

Then  he  added  a copy  of  Domitius’s  letter,  which  I sent
yesterday.  Good  heavens  ! how  I trembled  with  excitement !
How  anxious  I am  as  to  what  is  going  to  happen.  do

hope  that  Magnus  will  justify  his  name  in  the  terror  he  in-
spires when  he  arrives.  I have  even  some  hope  that,  as
carelessness  and  negligence  have  been  our  only  stumbling-
block  at  present,  operations  will  now  be  conducted  with
courage  and  due  attention.^

One  thing,  by  Hercules,  has  given  me  pleasure.  I have
recently  heard  that  the  quartan  fever  has  left  you.  Upon
my  life,  I could  not  have  been  more  glad  if  it  had  happened
to  me.  Tell  Pilia  that  it  is  not  fair  for  her  to  have  her  fever
any  longer ; it  is  a reflexion  on  your  perfect  sympathy  ! I
hear  that  Tiro  has  got  rid  of  his  second  attack.  But  I see
that  he  has  raised  money  for  his  expenses  from  others;

^ The  words  of  the  text  are  quite  corrupt.  This  sentence  only
attempts  to  conjecture  the  general  sense.

288

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

whereas  I had  asked  Curius  to  supply  him  with  what  was
necessary.  I prefer  to  think  Tiro’s  modesty  in  fault  rather
than  the  illiberality  of  Curius.

CCCXXXVII  (A  VIII,  7)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  23  February

There  is  only  one  thing  left  to  complete  our  friend’s  dis-
grace— failure  to  relieve  Domitius.  “ But  nobody  doubts
that  he  intends  going  to  his  relief.”  I don’t  think  he  will.
“ Will  he,  then,  abandon  such  an  illustrious  citizen,  and  those
whom  you  know  to  be  with  him,  and  that  when  he  himself
has  thirty  cohorts?”  Yes,  he  will,  unless  I am  entirely  mis-
taken. He  has  become  alarmed  beyond  belief.  He  looks
to  nothing  except  flight ; in  which  you  think — for  I see  what
your  opinion  is — that  I ought  to  be  his  companion.  I,
however,  know  from  whom  to  fly,  but  not  whom  to  follow.
As  to  my  remark,  which  you  praise  and  declare  to  be
memorable,  that  I preferred  defeat  with  Pompey  to  victory
with  those  others,  it  is  quite  true  : I do  prefer  it — but  it  is
with  the  Pompey  as  he  was  then,  or  as  I thought  him.  But
with  a Pompey  who  flies  before  he  knows  from  whom  he  is
flying,  or  whither,  who  has  betrayed  our  party,  who  has
abandoned  his  country,  and  is  about  to  abandon  Italy — if  I
did  prefer  it,  I have  got  my  wish  : I am  defeated.  For  the
rQSt,  I cannot  stand  the  sight  of  what  I never  had  any  fear
of  seeing,  nor  of  the  man  on  whose  account  I have  to  give
up  not  only  my  friends,  but  my  own  past.  I have  written
to  Philotimus  about  furnishing  me  with  money  for  the
journey,  either  from  the  Mint^ — for  no  one  pays  ready
money  now — or  from  your  comrades  the  Oppii.^

^ Moneta,  the  temple  of  luno  Moneta,  in  which  was  the  Mint,  where
coined  money  could  be  purchased  for  bullion.

2 See  p.  249.

A VIII,  7,  8

TO  ATTICUS

289

CCCXXXVIII  (A  VIII,  8)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  24  February

What  a disgraceful  and,  for  that  reason,  what  a miserable
thing ! For,  in  my  opinion,  that  which  is  disgraceful  is
ultimately,  or  rather  is  alone,  miserable.  He  had  fostered
Caesar,  and  then,  all  on  a sudden,  had  begun  to  be  afraid
of  him  : he  had  declined  any  terms  of  peace  : he  had  made
no  preparation  for  war  : he  had  abandoned  the  city  : he  had
lost  Picenum  by  his  own  fault : he  had  blocked  himself  up
in  Apulia  : he  was  preparing  to  go  to  Greece : he  was  going
to  leave  us  without  a word,  entirely  uninformed  of  a move
on  his  part  so  important  and  so  unprecedented.  Lo  and
behold,  there  is  suddenly  sprung  on  us  a letter  from  Domitius
to  him,  and  one  from  him  to  the  consuls.  I thought  honour
had  flashed  before  his  eyes,  and  that  he — the  real  man  he
ought  to  be — had  exclaimed  :

“So  let  them  try  each  sleight  they  may  against  me,

And  every  craft  their  cunning  can  devise  :

The  right  is  on  my  side.”  ‘

But  our  hero,  bidding  a long  good-bye  to  honour,  takes
himself  to  Brundisium,  while  Domitius,  they  say,  and  those
with  him,  on  hearing  of  this,  surrendered.  What  a lament-
able thing ! Distress  prevents  my  writing  any  more  to  you.
I wait  for  a letter  from  you.

^ A fragment  of  Euripides,  parodied  by  Aristophanes,  Ackarn.  659.

II.

U

290

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

CCCXXXIX  (A  VIII,  9)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  25  February

You  say  my  letter  has  been  widely  published  : well,  I don’t
care.  Nay,  I myself  allowed  several  people  to  take  a copy  of
it.  For  such  is  the  nature  of  events  that  have  already  happened
and  are  about  to  happen,  that  I wished  my  sentiments  as  to
keeping  the  peace  to  be  put  on  record.  Now,  while  exhort-
ing Caesar  of  all  people  to  keep  it,  I could  see  no  better  way
of  influencing  him  than  by  saying  that  it  was  suitable  to  his
wisdom.  If  I called  that  wisdom  “ admirable,”  seeing  that
I was  urging  him  to  the  preservation  of  our  country,  I am
not  afraid  of  being  thought  guilty  of  flattery,  when  for  such
an  object  I would  gladly  have  thrown  myself  at  his  feet.
Where,  again,  my  expression  is  “ bestow  some  of  your  time  ”
— that  does  not  refer  to  peace,  but  it  is  a request  to  him  to
reflect  in  some  degree  on  my  own  case  and  on  my  obliga-
tions. As  to  my  protesting  that  I have  taken  no  part  in  the
war,  though  that  has  been  proved  by  facts,  yet  I mentioned  it
that  my  persuasions  might  have  the  greater  weight,  and  my
expressing  approval  of  his  claim  has  the  same  object.  But
what  is  the  use  of  discussing  this  now  ? I only  wish  it  had
done  any  good  ! Nay,  I should  not  object  to  have  the  letter
read  in  public  meeting,  since  Pompey  himself,  when  also
writing  to  Caesar,  put  up  for  public  perusal  the  despatch  in
which  are  the  words  “Considering  the  extraordinary  brilliancy
of  your  achievements.”  What ! more  brilliant  than  his  own,
or  those  of  Africanus  ? “ Circumstances  made  it  necessary  to
say  so.”  Well,  since  two  men  of  your  character  are  going  to
meet  him  at  the  fifth  milestone,’  pray,  to  what  does  he  pledge
himself,  what  is  he  doing  or  going  to  do?  With  what

^ That  is,  in  the  complimentary  procession  to  meet  Caesar  on  his
coming  to  Rome — the  usual  custom  in  respect  to  returning  governors.
See  p.  234.

A VIII,  9

TO  ATTICUS

291

greater  confidence  will  he  rely  upon  the  merits  of  his  case,
when  he  sees  you,  and  men  like  you,  not  only  in  crowds,
but  with  smiles  on  your  faces,  and  congratulations  on  your
lips?  “Are  we,  then,  doing  wrong?”  Not  at  all,  as  far  as
you  are  concerned.  Yet,  nevertheless,  there  is  an  end  of  all
distinguishing  between  the  signs  of  genuine  and  pretended
feeling.  What  decrees  of  the  senate  do  I foresee ! — But  I
have  spoken  more  openly  than  I intended.

I mean  to  be  at  Arpinum  on  the  28th,  then  to  go  the
round  of  my  country  houses,  which  I have  no  hope  of  ever
seeing  again.  Your  “frank ” policy — which  is  yet  not  with-
out a spice  of  caution  to  suit  the  times — has  my  warm
approbation.  Lepidus,  for  his  part — for  we  spend  almost
every  day  together,  much  to  his  gratification — never  liked
the  idea  of  leaving  Italy,  Tullus  much  less.  For  letters
from  him  frequently  pass  from  others  to  me.  But  it  is  not
so  much  their  opinions  that  move  me : for  they  have  given
much  fewer  pledges  to  the  Republic  than  I have  : it  is  your
influence,  by  Hercules,  that  has  the  greatest  weight  with  me  ;
for  it  suggests  a means  of  retrieving  the  past  and  of  securing
the  present.  But  I appeal  to  you : what  could  be  more
wretched  than  that  the  one  gains  applause  in  the  worst
possible  cause,  the  other  nothing  but  anger  in  the  best?
That  the  one  is  esteemed  the  preserver  of  his  enemies,  the
other  the  betrayer  of  his  friends?  And,  by  heaven,  how-
ever much  I love  our  Gnaeus,  as  I do  and  am  bound  to  do,
yet  I cannot  commend  him  for  failing  to  relieve  such  men.
For  if  it  was  fear,  what  could  be  more  cowardly?  If,  as
some  think,  it  was  because  he  thought  that  his  own  position
would  be  improved  by  their  massacre,  what  could  be  more
unfair  ? But  a truce  to  these  reflexions : I only  increase
my  grief  by  recalling  them.

On  the  evening  of  the  24th  Balbus  the  younger  called  on
me,  hastening  on  a secret  mission  to  the  consul  Lentulus
from  Caesar,  with  a letter,  a message,  and  a promise  of  a pro-
vince, to  induce  him  to  return  to  Rome.  I don’t  think  he  will
be  persuaded  except  by  a personal  interview.  Balbus  also
told  me  that  Caesar  wished,  above  all  things,  to  catch  up
Pompey  (I  believe  that  much),  and  to  be  reconciled  to  him.
This  latter  I do  not  believe,  and  I much  fear  that  all  this
clemency  is  only  an  elaborate  preparation  for  a Cinna-

292

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  57

like  massacre.  The  elder  Balbus,  indeed,  writes  me  word
that  Caesar  would  wish  nothing  better  than  to  live  in  safety,
with  Pompey  as  chief  citizen.  You  believe  that,  I suppose  !

But  while  I am  writing  these  words  (25th  February),
Pompey  may  have  reached  Brundisium ; for  he  started  in
light  marching  order  in  advance  of  his  legions  on  the  19th,
from  Luceria.  But  this  portent  is  a man  of  frightful
vigilance,  rapidity,  and  energy.  I haven’t  an  idea  what  will
happen.

CCCXL  (a  VIII,  10)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  26  February

When  Dionysius,  much  to  my  surprise,  arrived  at  my  house,
I spoke  to  him  with  the  utmost  candour.  I put  before  him
my  circumstances ; asked  him  what  he  had  in  his  mind  to
do ; said  that  I would  not  press  him  for  anything  against
his  will.  answ)^red  that  he  did  not  know  where  such
money  as  he  posse’ssed  was  to  be  found.  Some  could  not
pay,  from  others  Tt  was  not  yet  due.  He  gave  me  certain
other  reasons,  connected  with  his  poor  slaves,  for  his  being
unable  to  stay  with  me.  I gave  in  to  him.  I discharged
him  from  farther  attendance,  with  regret  as  a master  for  the
boys,  but  with  satisfaction  as  an  ungrateful  fellow.  I wished
you  to  know  the  facts,  and  what  my  opinion  of  his  conduct
was.

CCCXLI  (A  VIII,  II)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  27  February

You  think  me  thoroughly  upset  by  a violent  mental  struggle.
I am  so,  indeed,  but  not  by  one  so  violent  as  you  perhaps
imagine.  For  all  my  anxiety  is  lightened  as  soon  as  I have

A VIII,  lO,  II

TO  ATTICUS

293

either  made  up  my  mind,  or  found  on  reflexion  that  a solu-
tion is  impossible.  However,  one  may  express  regret.  Well,
I do  so,  after  all,  from  one  day’s  end  to  another.  But  con-
sidering the  uselessness  of  this,  I dread  being  an  absolute
discredit  to  my  philosophy  and  my  writings : I therefore
spend  all  my  time  in  considering  what  the  virtue  of  that
ideal  character  is,  which,  according  to  you,  I have  delineated
in  my  books  ^ with  considerable  care.  Do  you  remember,
then,  that  ideal  “director  of  the  commonwealth”  to  whom
we  would  refer  all  questions  ? In  the  fifth  book,  I think  it
is,  Scipio  thus  speaks  : For  as  the  object  of  a pilot  is  a suc-
cessful voyage^  of  a physician  bodily  healthy  of  a commander
victory^  so  the  object  of  such  a director  of  the  commonwealth
is  the  happiness  of  the  citizens^  that  it  should  be  secure  in
means  of  defence^  qpudent  in  material  resources^  splendid  in
reputation^  untarriisTieS  in  its  virtue.  For  my  idea  of  him  is
that  he  should  carry  to  perfection  the  work  which  is  the
greatest  and  best  among  menl^

Such  a conception  never  occurred  to  our  friend  Gnseus  in
former  times,  and  least  of  all  in  this  controversy.  Supremacy
has  been  the  object  of  both ; there  has  been  no  idea  of
securing  the  happiness  and  virtue  of  the  citizens.  Nor,
indeed,  did  he  abandon,  the  city  because  he  was  unable  to
protect  it,  nor  Italy  because  he  was  driven  from  it;  but
his  idea  from  the  first  was  to  stir  up  every  land  and  sea,  to
rouse  foreign  princes,  to  bring  barbarous  tribes  in  arms  into
Italy,  to  collect  the  most  formidable  armies  possible.  For
some  time  past  a kind  of  royalty  like  Sulla’s  has  been
the  object  in  view,  and  this  is  the  eager  desire  of  many  who
are  with  him.  Do  you  suppose  that  some  understanding
between  the  two,  some  bargain  has  been  impossible?  To-
day it  is  still  possible.  But  the  object  of  neither  is  our
happiness : both  want  to  be  kings.  This  brief  exposition
of  the  situation  I have  made  in  response  to  your  invita-
tion : for  you  wished  me  to  explain  to  you  my  sentiments
as  to  these  unhappy  circumstances.  I speak  “prophetic-
ally,” then,  my  dear  Atticus,  not  in  vague  denunciation  like
hers,  whom  no  one  believed,  but  foreseeing  in  imagination  :

^ The  de  Republica.  He  proceeds  to  quote  his  description  of  the
ideal  statesman.

294  CICERO’S  LETTERS  b.c.  49,  /et.  57

“ E’en  now  upon  the  mighty  deep,  etc.”  ^

What  I can  prophesy,  I repeat,  is  much  the  same : such  an
Iliad  of  miseries  is  there  hanging  over  our  heads.  Besides,
my  position  is  worse  than  that  of  those  who  have  crossed  the
sea  with  Pompey  in  this,  that  they  fear  one  or  the  other ; I
fear  both.  “ Why  have  I stayed,  then  ? ” you  will  say.  From
obedience  to  you,  if  you  like,  or  from  failing  to  meet  him  in
person,  or  because  it  was  a juster  course.  You  will  see,  I
tell  you,  our  poor  Italy  trodden  under  foot  next  summer,  or
in  the  hands  of  the  slaves  ^ of  both  leaders  gathered  from
the  four  corners  of  the  earth.  It  is  not  a proscription
(which  is  said  to  have  been  frequently  threatened  in  the
talk  at  Luceria)  that  is  so  much  to  be  feared,  as  a general
destruction : so  vast  are  the  forces  which  I see  will  take
part  in  the  conflict  on  both  sides.  That’s  my  conjecture  of
what  is  to  happen.  But  you  perhaps  looked  for  something
consoling  from  me.  I can  find  nothing  of  the  sort.  Nothing
can  exceed  the  misery,  ruin,  and  disgrace.  You  ask  me
what  Caesar  said  in  his  letter  to  me.  The  usual  thing : he
was  much  obliged  by  my  having  remained  neutral,  and
begged  me  to  continue  to  do  so.  The  younger  Balbus
brought  me  a message  to  the  same  effect.  The  latter  was

^ From  the  Alexander  of  Ennius — Cassandra’s  prophecy  (Vahlen,  Fr.

87):

lamque  man  magno  classis  cita
texitur,  exilium  examen  rapit:
adveniet : fera  velivolantihus
navibus  complebit  manus  litora.

“ E’en  now  upon  the  mighty  deep
Swift  ships  are  building,  soon  to  sweep —

Laden  with  death  and  swarming  hordes
Of  foemen — on  the  doomed  sea-boards.

A cruel  host  shall  fill  the  shore
With  ships  that  fly  by  sail  and  oar.”

In  mancipiis.  I don’t  think  there  is  need  to  object  to  this,  as
Tyrrell  and  Purser  do.  Of  course,  Cicero  would  not  seriously  call  the
chief  followers  of  Pompey  and  Caesar  “ slaves,”  but  he  is  thinking  of
the  foreign  auxiliaries,  Pompey’s  from  the  East,  Caesar’s  from  Gaul.
There  is  some  petulant  exaggeration  in  the  word,  though  not  more  than
is  natural  in  Cicero’s  frame  of  mind.  Compare  his  description  of
Antony’s  proceedings  in  Italy  in  B.c.  49-48,  2 Phil.  §57,  and  his  em-
ployment of  a guard  of  Ityreans,  ib.  § 19.

A VIII,  II,  II  d

TO  POMPEY

295

on  his  way  to  visit  the  consul  Lentulus  with  a letter  from
Caesar,  and  promises  of  rewards  if  he  would  return  to
Rome.  But,  when  I calculate  the  days,  I think  he  will
have  crossed  over  before  he  could  be  met  by  Balbus.  I
wished  you  to  appreciate  the  slovenly  style  of  Pompey’s  1
two  letters  sent  to  me,  and  my  great  care  in  writing  my
answer.  I am  sending  you  copies  of  them.  I am  anxious
to  see  what  this  dash  of  Caesar’s  upon  Brundisium  through
Apulia  accomplishes.  Oh  that  it  might  turn  out  something
like  the  Parthian  affair  ! ^ As  soon  as  I hear  anything  I will
let  you  know ; on  your  part,  pray  let  me  know  what  the
loyalists  are  saying;  I hear  there  are  crowds  of  them  at
Rome.  I know,  of  course,  that  you  don’t  go  abroad ; ^ still
you  must  hear  a great  deal.  I remember  a book  being
brought  you  by  Demetrius  of  Magnesia,  dedicated  to  you,
“On  Concord.”^  Please  send  it  to  me.  You  see  in  what
direction  my  thoughts  are  turning.

/

CCCXLII  (A  VIII,  II  d)

TO  POMPEY  (AT  BRUNDISIUM)

Formi/E,  27  February

When  I sent  you  the  letter  which  was  delivered  to  you  at
Canusium,  I had  no  idea  that  you  were  about  to  cross  the
sea  in  the  service  of  the  Republic,  and  I was  in  great  hopes
that  we  might  eventually  be  able,  while  in  Italy,  to  effect  an
arrangement — the  most  advantageous  thing  of  all  in  my
opinion — or  to  defend  the  Republic  without  the  least  loss
of  dignity.  Meanwhile,  before  my  letter  could  have  reached
you,  being  informed  of  your  design  from  your  message  sent
through  Decimus  Laelius  to  the  consuls,  I did  not  wait  for  a
letter  from  you  to  reach  me,  but  with  all  promptitude  began
my  journey  to  join  you  in  Apulia  with  my  brother  Quintus
and  our  sons.  When  I had  reached  Teanum  Sidicinum

^ I.e.f  as  abortive  as  that  movement.  See  p.  270.

^ See  p.  279.  ^ Letter  CXXIII,  vol.  i.,  p.  254.

296

CICERO'S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  JET.  57

your  intimate  friend  Gaius  Messius,  and  several  others
besides,  told  me  that  Caesar  was  on  his  march  to  Capua,
and  was  going  to  halt  that  very  day  at  ^sernia.  I was
much  disturbed,  because,  if  that  were  so,  I thought  not  only
that  my  journey  was  barred,  but  that  I myself  was  fairly
caught.  So  I went  no  farther  than  Cales  at  that  time,  in-
tending to  wait  there,  rather  than  elsewhere,  till  something
certain  was  reported  to  me  from  ^sernia  in  regard  to  this
information.  But  at  Cales  a copy  of  your  letter  to  Lentulus,
the  consul,  was  brought  to  me.  The  substance  of  this  was
that  you  had  received  a despatch  from  L.  Domitius  on  the
17th  of  February,  a copy  of  which  you  appended,  and  added
that  it  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  state,  that  all
forces  should  concentrate  in  one  place  as  early  as  possible,
and  that  he  should  leave  a sufficient  garrison  at  Capua.
When  I read  this  letter  I thought,  and  everybody  else
agreed  with  me,  that  you  were  about  to  proceed  in  full
force  to  Corfinium,  to  which  place,  since  Caesar  was  en-
camped against  it,  I did  not  think  that  there  was  a safe
road  for  me.  Whilst  waiting  in  the  greatest  suspense  for
farther  news,  I heard  two  items  of  intelligence  at  the  same
time — what  had  happened  at  Corfinium,  and  that  you  had
commenced  your  march  to  Brundisium  : and  though  neither
I nor  my  brother  had  any  hesitation  as  to  hurrying  on  to
Brundisium,  we  were  warned  by  many  coming  from  Sam-
nium  and  Apulia  to  be  on  our  guard  against  being  inter-
cepted by  Caesar,  since,  having  started  for  the  same  district
as  that  to  which  we  were  going,  he  was  likely  to  arrive  at  his
destination  even  quicker^than  we  could.  That  being  the  case,
neither  I nor  my  brother,  nor  any  of  our  friends,  thought  it
right  by  rashness  on  our  part  to  run  the  risk  of  injuring  not
only  ourselves,  but  the  state  also ; especially  as  we  felt  sure
that,  even  if  the  road  proved  safe  to  ourselves,  we  could  not,
after  all,  possibly  catch  you  up  so  late  as  this.  Meanwhile
I received  a letter  from  you  dated  Canusium,  20th  of  Feb-
ruary, in  which  you  urged  me  to  make  still  more  haste  to
Brundisium.  As  I received  this  on  the  27th,  I felt  sure
that  you  had  already  arrived  at  Brundisium,  and  I saw  that
the  road  there  was  entirely  closed  to  us,  and  that  we  were  as
completely  prisoners  as  those  at  Corfinium.  For  I do  not
count  as  prisoners  those  only  who  have  fallen  into  the  hands

A VIII,  II  d

TO  POMPEY

297

of  armed  men,  but  those  also  quite  as  much  who,  being
barred  from  certain  districts,  find  themselves  between  garri-
sons and  within  the  lines  of  another.

That  being  so,  my  first  and  greatest  desire  would  have
been  never  to  have  been  separated  from  you,  and,  indeed,  I
shewed  you  my  wish  when  I resigned  the  charge  of  Capua  :
which  I did  not  do  to  escape  a burden,  but  because  I saw
that  that  city  could  not  be  held  without  troops,  and  I did
not  wish  to  meet  with  the  mischance  which  I grieve  to  see
has  befallen  some  very  gallant  gentlemen.  Since,  however,
I had  not  the  good  fortune  to  be  with  you,  would  that  I had
been  kept  informed  of  your  design ! For  I could  not
possibly  guess  it,  being  always  accustomed  to  think  that  the
last  thing  in  the  world  to  happen  would  be  that  this  cause
of  the  Republic  should  fail  in  Italy,  while  we  had  you  as
our  leader.  Not,  however,  that  I am  now  finding  any  fault
with  your  policy,  but  I lament  the  fortune  of  the  Republic ;
and  yet,  if  I fail  to  see  your  object,  I do  not  on  that  account
feel  less  certain  that  you  have  done  nothing  without  the
most  careful  calculation.  I think  you  remember  what  my
opinion  has  ever  been,  in  the  first  place,  as  to  maintaining
peace  at  any  price,  however  unfair ; in  the  second,  as  to  the
city — for  as  to  Italy ^ you  had  never  given  me  any  indication
of  your  purpose.

But  I do  not  claim  for  myself  that  my  policy  ought  to
have  prevailed : I followed  yours,  and  that  not  only  for  the
sake  of  the  Republic — of  which  I despaired,  and  which  has
already  been  overthrown,  and  cannot  be  restored  without
a most  mischievous  civil  war — but  I wanted  you  : it  was  with
you  that  I wished  to  be ; nor  will  I omit  any  opportunity  of
securing  that,  if  any  such  occurs.  I was  quite  aware  that
in  the  whole  controversy  I was  failing  to  satisfy  men  who
had  set  their  hearts  on  war.  For,  in  the  first  place,  I openly
avowed  that  I preferred  peace  to  everything,  not  because  I
was  not  afraid  of  the  same  things  as  they  were,  but  because
I regarded  them  as  less  formidable  than  civil  war.  In  the
second  place,  after  the  war  had  begun,  when  I saw  that
conditions  of  peace  were  being  offered  you,  and  a concilia-
tory and  liberal  answer  was  being  returned  by  you  to  those
proposals,  I took  my  special  case  into  consideration,  a con-
sideration which  I thought  in  view  of  your  kindness  to  me

298

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  JET.  57

I should  have  no  difficulty  in  justifying  in  your  eyes.  For
I remembered  that  I was  the  one  man  who,  in  return  for
the  most  eminent  services  to  the  state,  had  suffered  the
most  afflicting  and  cruel  punishment ; the  one  man  who,  if
I offended  Mm — to  whom,  in  spite  of  our  being  actually  in
arms,  a second  consulship  and  a most  splendid  triumph  was
being  offered — would  be  exposed  to  the  same  contests  as
before  : for  my  person  seems  ever  to  present  a favourite  mark
for  the  attacks  of  disloyal  citizens.  Nor  were  my  suspicions
premature : threats  of  this  sort  have  been  openly  made  to
me  : and  I was  not  so  much  afraid  of  them,  if  I had  to  face
them,  as  convinced  that  I ought  to  avoid  them,  if  that  could
be  done  with  honour.

You  have  now  a resume.,  as  brief  as  possible,  of  my  policy
during  the  time  that  there  was  any  hope  of  peace : for  the
time  following  events  made  me  powerless.  But  I have  an
easy  answer  to  those  who  find  fault  with  me.  I have  never
been  more  devoted  to  Caesar  than  they,  nor  they  more  de-
voted to  the  Republic  than  I.  The  difference  between
them  and  me  is  this : while  they  are  loyal  citizens,  and  I
deserve  the  same  honourable  title,  I wished  the  controversy
settled  by  diplomacy  (as  I know  you  did  too),  they  wished
it  settled  by  arms.  But  since  the  latter  method  has  won
the  day,  I will  take  care  that  the  Republic  shall  not  miss  in
me  the  spirit  of  a citizen,  nor  you  that  of  a friend.

CCCXLIII  (F  VIII,  IS)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMI.^)

North  Italy,  February  (late)

Did  you  ever  see  a more  futile  person  than  your  friend
Pompey,  for  having  stirred  up  all  this  dust,  without  any  stuff
in  him,  after  all  ? And,  on  the  other  hand,  did  you  ever  read
or  hear  of  anyone  prompter  in  action  than  our  Caesar,  and
more  moderate  in  victory  ? Why ! Do  you  think  that
our  soldiers,  who  in  the  most  inclement  and  frozen  dis-

F VIII,  15  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  299

tricts,  in  the  severest  winter  weather,  have  successfully
finished  a war  at  a walk,  have  been  fed  on  the  pick  of  the
orchard?^  “What,  then,”  say  you,  “is  it  all  glory  with
you?”  Nay,  if  you  only  knew  how  anxious  I am,  you
would  laugh  at  this  glory  of  mine,  which,  after  all,  has
nothing  to  do  with  me.  I can’t  explain  matters  to  you  un-
less we  meet,  and  I hope  that  will  soon  take  place.  For  as
soon  as  he  has  driven  Pompey  out  of  Italy,  Csesar  has  re-
solved to  summon  me  to  Rome : and  I look  upon  that  as
good  as  done,  unless  Pompey  has  preferred  being  besieged
in  Brundisium.  Upon  my  life,  the  chief  motive  I have  for
hurrying  there  is  my  ardent  desire  to  see  you  and  impart
all  my  thoughts.  And  what  a lot  I have  ! Goodness  ! I am
afraid  that,  as  usual,  I shall  forget  them  all  when  I do  see
you.  But  what  have  I done  to  be  obliged  to  retrace  my
steps  to  the  Alps  ? It  is  all  because  the  Intemelii  ^ are  in
arms,  and  that  on  some  trumpery  excuse.  Bellienus,  a
slave  of  Demetrius,  who  was  commanding  a garrison  there,
seized  one  Domitius — a man  of  rank  and  a friend  of  Caesar’s
— for  a bribe,  and  strangled  him.  The  tribe  rushed  to  arms  :
and  I have  got  to  go  there  with  my  cohorts  over  the  snow.
All  over  the  world,  say  you,  the  Domitii  are  coming  to  grief.
I could  have  wished  that  our  descendant  of  Venus  had
shewn  as  much  resolution  in  the  case  of  your  Domitius,^  as
the  son  of  Psecas  ^ did  in  this  one.  Give  my  love  to  your
son.

^ /.e.f  on  dainties,  lit.  “round  apples.”

^ The  people  who  have  left  their  name  in  Ventimiglia.

^ L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  who  surrendered  to  Csesar  at  Corfinium,
but  was  allowed  to  depart  unharmed.

* Apparently  a slave,  mother  of  Bellienus.

300

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

CCCXLIV  (A  VIII,  12)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  28  February

The  inflammation  in  my  eyes  is  somewhat  more  trouble-
some even  than  before.  However,  I preferred  dictating
this  letter  to  letting  Fadius  Callus,  who  is  a very  affectionate
friend  of  us  both,  have  no  line  to  deliver  to  you.  Yesterday,
indeed,  I wrote  with  my  own  hand,  as  best  I could,  the
letter  whose  prophecy  I hope  may  be  falsified.  The  motive,
however,  of  the  present  letter  is  not  only  to  prevent  any  day
passing  without  writing  to  you,  but  the  more  reasonable  one
of  inducing  you  to  devote  a little  time  to  me.  It  won’t
take  you  long,  and  so  I do  much  wish  to  have  your  view
explained  to  me  in  such  a way,  that  I may  thoroughly
understand  it.  I have  not  yet  committed  myself  in  any
respect.  I have  been  guilty  of  no  omission  which  does  not
admit  of  a sound,  not  merely  a plausible,  excuse.  For  cer-
tainly I did  not  make  a mistake  when  I refused  to  accept
the  charge  of  Capua  without  a garrison,  in  my  wish  to
escape  not  only  the  crime  of  failure,  but  the  suspicion  of
treachery  as  well ; nor  when,  after  the  terms  had  been  brought
by  L.  Caesar  and  Fabatus,^  I was  careful  not  to  offend  a
man  to  whom  Pompey  was  offering  a consulship  and
triumph,  though  both  were  in  arms.  Nor,  indeed,  can  any-
one fairly  find  fault  with  my  last  step  in  not  crossing  the
sea.  For  on  this  measure,  though  it  was  a thing  to  be  con-
sidered, I have  not  had  the  opportunity  of  embarking.  For
I had  no  right  to  suspect  what  he  was  going  to  do,  especi-
ally as  from  Pompey’s  own  letter — as  I see  was  your  own
opinion  also — I felt  no  doubt  of  his  intention  to  go  to  the
relief  of  Domitius.  In  point  of  fact,  I preferred  to  have  a
longer  time  to  consider  what  was  the  right  course  and  what
I ought  to  do.  First  of  all,  then,  I wish  you  would  write

‘ The  praetor  L.  Roscius  Fabatus  (Cses.  C.  i.  3).

A VIII,  12,  15  a L.  CORNELIUS  BALBUS  TO  CICERO  3OI

and  tell  me  more  distinctly — though  you  have  already  made
it  pretty  clear — what  you  think  of  all  this ; and,  secondly,
that  you  would  look  into  the  future  and  give  me  a sketch  of
what  you  think  ought  to  be  my  rdle^  and  where  you  think  I
could  be  of  most  service  to  the  Republic  ; whether  a pacific
part  is  required,  or  whether  everything  depends  on  a man  of
war.  And,  indeed,  though  my  standard  is  always  duty,  I
yet  remember  the  advice  you  once  gave  me,  which,  if  I had
followed,  I should  not  have  endured  the  sad  disaster  of
that  crisis  in  my  life.  I remember  what  you  urged  me  to
do  on  that  occasion  through  Theophanes,  through  Culleo,
and  I have  often  recalled  it  with  a sigh.  Therefore  let  me
at  last  revert  to  the  calculation,  which  I then  rejected,  and
see  how  I may  follow  a course  which  will  not  simply  aim  at
glory,  but  will  conduce  somewhat  more  to  my  safety  also.
But  I make  no  stipulation  with  you.  I want  you  to  write  me
your  opinion  in  plain  terms.  I want  you  also  to  investigate
with  all  the  diligence  you  can — and  you  will  have  men
through  whom  you  can  do  so — what  our  friend  Lentulus  and
Domitius  are  doing  or  intending  to  do,  what  their  present
bearing  is,  whether  they  find  fault  with  anyone,  or  are  angry
with  anyone.  Why  do  I say  “ anyone  ” ? I mean,  of  course,
Pompey.  Certainly  Pompey  lays  all  the  blame  on  Domi-
tius, as  may  be  seen  in  his  letter,  of  which  I send  you  a
copy.  These  things,  then,  be  so  good  as  to  look  into,  and,
as  I asked  you  in  a previous  letter,  send  me  the  book  “ On
Concord,”  by  Demetrius  of  Magnesia,  which  he  sent  you.

CCCXLV  (A  VIII,  15  a)

L.  CORNELIUS  BALBUS  TO  CICERO  (AT
FORMI.^)

Rome,  February

I ENTREAT  you,  my  dear  Cicero,  to  undertake  a task  and  a
project  in  the  highest  degree  worthy  of  your  high  character
— to  recall  Caesar  and  Pompey  to  their  former  cordiality.

302

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

who  have  been  alienated  by  the  treachery  of  others.  Believe
me,  Caesar  will  not  only  put  himself  in  your  hands,  but  will
also  consider  himself  under  the  deepest  obligation  to  you,
if  you  throw  yourself  into  this  task.  I wish  Pompey  would
do  the  same,  but  that  he  can  at  this  time  of  day  be  induced
to  accept  any  terms  is  rather  a matter  for  wishes  than  hopes.
But  when  he  has  recovered  from  his  agitation  and  alarm,  I
shall  begin  to  have  some  hope  that  your  influence  with  him
may  prove  to  be  of  the  greatest  avail.  In  having  expressed
a wish  that  my  friend  the  consul  Lentulus  should  remain  at
Rome  you  have  obliged  Caesar,  and,  believe  me,  myself  also
in  the  highest  degree.  For  I value  him  so  greatly,  that  he
holds  as  high  a place  in  my  regard  as  Caesar  himself : and  if
he  had  only  allowed  me  to  talk  with  him  as  usual,  and  had  not
again  and  again  shewed  himself  wholly  averse  from  conversa-
tion with  me,  I should  have  been  less  unhappy  than  I am.
For  you  must  not  suppose  that  anyone  at  this  crisis  is  more
painfully  affected  than  I am  by  seeing  a man,  whom  I love
more  than  myself,  resolved  in  his  consulship  to  be  anything
in  the  world  rather  than  a consul.  If  he  will  only  deign  to
take  your  advice  and  to  believe  us  in  regard  to  Caesar,  and
to  serve  the  rest  of  his  consulship  at  Rome,  I shall  even
begin  to  hope  that  by  the  advice  of  the  senate — acting  at
your  suggestion,  and  with  him  to  bring  the  matter  formally
before  it — Pompey  and  Caesar  may  be  reconciled.  If  that
is  done,  I shall  think  that  I have  not  lived  in  vain.  I feel
sure  that  you  will  entirely  approve  of  what  Caesar  did  about
Corfinium.  Considering  the  circumstances,  nothing  better
could  have  occurred  than  a settlement  being  made  without  a
drop  of  blood.  I am  much  gratified  by  the  pleasure  you
express  at  the  visit  of  my  dear  (and  your  dear)  Balbus.
Whatever  Balbus  has  told  you  about  Caesar,  and  whatever
Caesar  has  written,  I am  sure  the  latter  will  convince  you  by
his  acts — whatever  measure  of  success  he  may  have — that
he  has  written  with  the  most  absolute  sincerity.

A VIII,  15  a;  IX,  7 c C^SAR  TO  C.  ORPIUS,  ETC.

303

CCCXLVI  (A  IX,  7 c)

C^SAR  TO  C.  OPPIUS  AND  CORNELIUS
BALBUS  (AT  ROME)

Arpi,  I March

I AM  very  glad  that  your  letter  expresses  such  strong  ap-
proval of  what  happened  at  Corfinium.  I shall  be  glad  to
follow  your  advice,  and  all  the  more  so,  that  I had  spontane-
ously resolved  to  display  the  greatest  clemency  and  to  do
my  best  to  reconcile  Pompey.  Let  us  try  in  this  way  if  we
can  recover  the  affections  of  all  parties,  and  enjoy  a lasting
victory ; for  others,  owing  to  their  cruelty,  have  been  unable
to  avoid  rousing  hatred,  or  to  maintain  their  victory  for  any
length  of  time,  with  the  one  exception  of  Lucius  Sulla,  whom
I have  no  intention  of  imitating.  Let  this  be  our  new  method
of  conquering — to  fortify  ourselves  by  mercy  and  generosity.
As  to  how  that  may  be  secured,  certain  ideas  suggest  them-
selves to  my  mind,  and  many  more  may  be  hit  upon.  I
beg  you  to  take  these  matters  into  consideration.  I have
taken  Pompey’s  prefect  Numerius  Magius.  Of  course  I kept
to  my  policy,  and  caused  him  at  once  to  be  set  at  liberty.
I have  now  had  two  of  Pompey’s  prefects  of  engineers  in
my  hands,  and  have  set  them  both  at  liberty.^  If  they  wish
to  be  grateful,  they  will  be  bound  to  advise  Pompey  to
prefer  my  friendship  to  that  of  the  men  who  have  ever  been
most  bitterly  hostile  both  to  him  and  myself,  by  whose
intrigues  the  Republic  has  been  reduced  to  its  present  posi-
tion.^

^ L.  Vibullius  Rufus  and  Numerius  Magius.  The  latter  Caesar  employed
to  negotiate  with  Pompey  at  Brundisium  (Cses.  B.  C.  i.  15,  24,  26).

^ Caesar  dwells  on  this  point,  that  Pompey  was  now  joined  with
those  who  had  been  enemies  to  them  both,  in  the  B.  C.  i.  4,  declaring  that
much  of  their  enmity,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned,  had  been  actually  in-
curred by  his  union  with  Pompey.

304

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

CCCXLVII  (A  VIII,  13)

r TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  I March

Take  the  handwriting  of  my  secretary  as  a sign  of  my  eyes
being  inflamed,  and  let  the  same  fact  excuse  my  brevity,
though  at  this  particular  time  I have  nothing  to  write.  We
are  hanging  entirely  on  news  from  Brundisium.  If  Caesar
has  caught  our  friend  Gnaeus,  there  is  a dubious  hope  of
peace ; but  if  the  latter  has  got  across  beforehand,  there  is  a
fear  of  a fatal  war.  But  do  you  see  upon  what  sort  of  man
the  Republic  has  fallen  ? How  clear-sighted,  how  alert,  how
well  prepared  ! By  heaven,  if  he  puts  no  one  to  death,  nor
despoils  anyone  of  anything,  he  will  be  most  adored  by  those
who  had  feared  him  most.  The  burgesses  of  the  country
towns,  and  the  country  people  also,  talk  a great  deal  to  me.
They  don’t  care  a farthing  for  anything  but  their  lands,
their  poor  villas,  their  paltry  pence.  And  now  observe  the
reaction : the  man  in  whom  they  once  trusted  they  pow
dread  : the  man  they  dreaded  they  worship.  -What  grave
mistakes  and  vices  on  our  side  are  accountable  for  this  I
cannot  think  of  without  sorrow.  However,  I have  already
written  to  tell  you  what  I thought  was  threatening ; and  I
am  now  waiting  for  a letter  from  you.

CCCXLVIII  (A  VIII,  14)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  2 March

I FEEL  sure  that  my  daily  packets  must  bore  you,  especially
as  I don’t  inform  you  of  anything  new,  nor,  in  fact,  am  able
to  hit  upon  any  novel  sentiment  to  express.  But  if  I went

A VIII,  13,  14

TO  ATTICUS

305

out  of  my  way  needlessly  to  send  letter-carriers  to  you  with
these  empty  epistles,  I should  indeed  be  foolish : as  it  is,
when  people  are  going  to  Rome,  especially  people  about  the
house,  I cannot  reconcile  myself  to  sending  nothing  by  way
of  a letter  to  you ; and  besides,  believe  me,  I find  a relief
in  a time  of  such  unhappiness  in,  as  it  were,  talking  to  you ;
and  much  more  so  when  I read  letters  from  you.  I certainly
feel  it  to  be  true  that  there  has  been  no  period  since  our
panic  flight  that  less  demanded  a continuance  of  our  corre-
spondence, because  no  news  reaches  either  Rome  or  this
place,  which  is  only  two  or  three  days  journey  from  Brun-
disium  : whereas  Brundisium  is  the  cardinal  point  of  the
whole  struggle  in  this  first  campaign.  I am  therefore
racked  with  suspense  about  it.  But  we  shall  know  all  before
the  15th.  For  I observe  that  Caesar  started  from  Corfinium
on  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day — that  is,  the  21st  of
February — as  that  on  the  morning  of  which  Pompey  left
Canusium.  But  Caesar  moves  so  rapidly,  and  encourages
the  speed  of  his  men  with  such  bounties,  that  I fear  he  may
have  approached  Brundisium  quicker  than  may  be  con-
venient. You  will  say,  “What  good,  then,  do  you  do  by
anticipating  an  annoyance,  which  you  are  to  ascertain  three
days  hence?”  None  indeed.  But,  as  I said  before,  I like
above  all  things  talking  to  you,  and  at  the  same  time  I want
to  tell  you  that  my  plan  of  procedure,  which  I thought  quite
fixed,  is  somewhat  shaken.  The  precedents,^  of  which  you
approve,  don’t  altogether  satisfy  me.  For  what  gallant
action  on  their  part  in  the  service  of  the  state  has  there  ever
been  ? Or  who  expects  anything  praiseworthy  from  them  ?
Nor,  by  heaven,  do  I see  anything  commendable  in  those
who  have  crossed  the  sea  to  prepare  a war,  intolerable  as
things  were  here — for  I foresee  the  extent  and  destructive
nature  of  that  war.  But  there  is  one  man  who  shakes  my  re-
solution, whose  companion  in  flight,  whose  partner  in  the  re-
covery of  the  constitution,  I think  myself  bound  to  be.  “ Do
you  change  your  opinion  as  often  as  that,  then  ? ” I speak
to  you  as  to  myself : and  who  is  there  that  in  a matter  of
such  importance  does  not?  argue  with  himself  in  a variety  of
ways  ? At  the  same  time  I also  desire  to  elicit  your  opinion  ;

^ M.  Lepidus  and  L.  Volcatius.  See  p.  336.

3o6

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  .OT.  57

if  it  is  the  same,  that  I may  be  strengthened  in  my  resolu-
tion ; if  it  has  changed,  that  I may  conform  mine  to  yours.
Certainly,  in  regard  to  my  present  doubt,  it  concerns  me  to
know  what  Domitius  and  our  friend  Lentulus  intend  doing.
As  to  Domitius,  we  hear  contradictory  rumours  : at  one
time  that  he  is  at  Tibur  not  by  any  means  leaping  for  joy,
at  another  that  he,  with  the  Lepidi^  has  come  to  the  walls  of
the  city,  which  also  I find  not  to  be  true.  For  Lepidus  says
that  he  has  made  his  way  somewhere  by  secret  roads — is  it
to  hide  himself  or  to  reach  the  sea  ? ^ Lepidus  himself  does
not  know.  He  knows  nothing  either  about  the  younger
Domitius.  He  adds  a very  annoying  particular ; that  a
considerable  sum  of  money  which  Domitius  had  at  Cor-
finium  had  not  been  restored  to  him.^  Of  Lentulus  I hear
nothing.  Please  inquire  into  these  matters,  and  report  to
me.

CCCXLIX  (A  VIII,  15)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  3 March

On  the  3rd  of  March  ^gypta  ® delivered  me  your  letters,
one,  an  old  one,  dated  26th  of  February,  which  you  say  that
you  intrusted  to  Pinarius,  whom  I have  not  seen.  In  this
you  say  that  you  are  waiting  to  learn  how  Vibullius,  who

^ L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  after  having  been  let  go  by  Caesar  from
Corfinium,  seems  to  have  set  about  preparations  for  taking  possession
of  the  province  of  farther  Gaul,  to  which  he  had  been  nominated  by  the
senate.  He  went  first  to  his  estates  in  Etruria  and  raised  his  servants  and
dependents  to  man  a fleet  collected  at  Cosa  ; from  that  place  he  went  to
Marseilles — a free  city,  yet  closely  connected  with  the  province — where
his  legal  position  was  at  once  acknowledged,  for  the  people  of  Marseilles
had  received  additions  of  territory  by  Pompey’s  means  and  were  deter-
mined to  stand  by  him  (Cses.  B.  C.  i.  34-36).  For  the  younger  Domi-
tius, see  p.  317.

^ This  turned  out  to  be  false.  Caesar  says  that,  although  he  knew
it  was  public  money,  he  yet  allowed  Domitius  to  keep  it  {B.  C.  i.  23).
It  was  6,000  sestertia,  or  about  ;^48,ooo.

^ A slave,  afterwards  a freedman,  of  Cicero’s.

A VIII,  1,5

TO  ATTICUS

307

had  been  sent  in  advance,  is  getting  on,  who  did  not  obtain
an  interview  with  Caesar  at  all  (I  observe  in  your  second
letter  that  you  are  aware  of  this),  and  how  I mean  to  receive
Caesar  when  he  returns.  I design  to  avoid  meeting  him  at
all.  Y ou  mention  also  your  intended  retreat  from  Rome  ^ and
the  change  in  your  way  of  life,  in  the  necessity  of  which  I
agree,  and  you  say  that  you  don’t  know  whether  Domitius
retains  his  fasces.  When  you  know,  please  inform  me.

So  much  for  your  first  letter.  There  followed  two,  both
dated  the  28th  of  February,  which  completely  dislodged  me
from  my  old  resolve,^  which,  however,  I told  you  was  be-
ginning to  totter.  I am  not  shaken  by  your  expression,
“incensed  with  Jove  himself,”^  for  there  is  danger  in  the
angry  passions  of  both ; and  though  victory,  of  course,  is  un-
certain, yet  now  the  worse  side  seems  to  me  to  be  the  better
prepared.  Nor  am  I influenced  by  the  consuls,  who  are
themselves  more  easily  moved  than  feather  or  leaf.  Con-
sideration of  duty  tortures  me,  and  has  all  this  while  been
torturing  me,  with  indecision.  To  remain  is  certainly  the
more  cautious  policy,  to  cross  the  sea  is  considered  the  more
honourable.  Sometimes  I prefer  that  many  should  think
that  I have  acted  incautiously,  rather  than  a few  think  that
I had  acted  dishonourably.  You  ask  me  about  Lepidus  and
Tullus;  they,  indeed,  have  made  up  their  minds  to  meet
Caesar  at  Rome,  and  to  come  into  the  senate.

Your  most  recent  letter  is  dated  on  the  ist  of  March,  in
which  you  express  a wish  that  there  might  be  a meeting
between  them,  and  say  that  you  do  not  despair  of  peace.
But  at  the  moment  of  writing  I am  of  opinion  that  they  will
not  meet,  and  that,  if  they  do,  Pompey  will  not  yield  to
any  offer  of  terms.  You  appear  to  have  no  doubt,  if  the
consuls  cross,  what  I ought  to  do.  They  are  certainly
going  to  cross,  or  rather,  as  a matter  of  fact,  have  already
crossed.  But  remember  that,  with  the  exception  of  Appius,

^ The  text  here  is  quite  corrupt.  The  English  is  only  a guess.

2 To  stay  quietly  in  Italy.  See  last  letter,  p.  305.

^ Atticus  seems  to  have  said  in  his  letter  that  Pompey  would  be  angry
with  anyone  who  stayed  in  Rome  when  Caesar  came,  “ even  with  lupiter
Capitolinus  himself  ” for  not  leaving  his  temple.  Such  an  exaggerated
way  of  expressing  a strong  feeling  needs,  perhaps,  no  explanation.  But
we  may  remember  that  the  gods  were  supposed  to  quit  a captured  city.

3o8

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  .CT.  57

there  is  hardly  one  who  has  not  a legal  right  to  cross.  For
they  either  have  imperium^  as  Pompey,  Scipio,  Sufenas,
Fannins,  Voconius,  Sestius,  the  consuls  themselves — who
have  by  immemorial  custom  the  right  to  visit  all  provinces —
or  they  are  their  legates.  But  I decide  on  nothing.  As  to
what  your  opinion  is,  and  pretty  well  what  is  the  right  course,
I am  clear.  I would  have  written  at  greater  length,  if  I had
been  able  to  do  so  with  my  own  hand.  But  I think  I shall
be  able  to  do  so  in  a couple  of  days.  I am  sending  you  a
copy  of  Cornelius  Balbus’s  letter  received  on  the  same  day
as  yours,  that  you  may  sympathize  with  me,  when  you  see
me  treated  with  such  mockery.

CCCL  (A  IX,  7 a)

L.  CORNELIUS  BALBUS  AND  GAIUS  OPPIUS
TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMIC)

Rome,  3 March

To  say  nothing  of  humble  people  like  ourselves,  even  in  the
case  of  the  most  important  persons  designs  are  generally
judged  by  the  majority  of  mankind  by  their  result,  and  not
their  intention : yet,  relying  on  your  goodness  of  heart,  we
will  offer  you,  on  the  point  as  to  which  you  have  written  to  us,
the  advice  which  seems  to  us  to  be  the  soundest ; and  if  it
is  not  sensible  advice,  yet  it  will  at  least  proceed  from  abso-
lute good  faith  and  good  feeling.  If  we  knew  from  his
own  lips  that  Caesar — as  in  our  judgment  we  think  he
should  do — would  try  directly  he  arrived  in  Rome  to  effect
a reconciliation  between  himself  and  Pompey,  we  should
urge  you  to  resolve  upon  taking  part  in  the  negotiation,  in
order  to  facilitate  and  add  an  air  of  dignity  to  the  business
through  the  ties  which  bind  you  to  both  parties.  Or
if,  on  the  contrary,  we  thought  that  Caesar  would  not  do  so,
and  if  we  knew  that  he  wished  to  go  to  war  with  Pompey,
we  would  never  persuade  you  to  bear  arms  against  a man
who  had  done  you  very  great  services,  just  as  we  have  ever
begged  you  not  to  engage  in  a war  against  Caesar.  But  since.

A IX,  7 a ; VIII,  i6

TO  ATTICUS

309

even  now,  what  Caesar  intends  doing  is  for  us  a matter  of
opinion  rather  than  of  knowledge,  all  we  can  say  is  this  : we
do  not  think  it  consistent  with  your  position  or  your  uni-
versally acknowledged  good  faith  to  bear  arms  against  either
one  or  the  other,  considering  your  intimate  connexions  with
both;  and  we  have  no  doubt  that  Caesar,  with  his  usual
kindness,  will  very  warmly  approve  this  course.  However,
if  you  wish  it,  we  will  write  to  Caesar,  and  ask  to  be  informed
what  he  means  to  do  in  the  circumstances.  On  receiving
an  answer  from  him,  we  will  at  once  write  and  tell  you  what
our  sentiments  are,  and  will  convince  you  that  we  give  you
the  advice  which  seems  to  us  to  conduce  most  to  your  own
position,  not  to  Caesar’s  policy.  And  this  we  feel  certain
that  Caesar,  with  his  usual  liberality  in  making  allowance  for
his  friends,  will  approve.

" \

CCCLI  (A  VIII,  16)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formia:,  4 March

I HAVE  provided  for  everything  except  a secret  and  safe
journey  to  the  Upper  Sea.  For  I cannot  venture  upon  this
(Lower)  Sea  at  this  season  of  the  year.  But  by  what  route
am  I to  get  to  the  place,  on  which  my  thoughts  are  set,  and
to  which  the  circumstances  of  the  case  call  me  ? I must  not
delay  my  departure,  lest  anything  should  hinder  it  and  tie
me  here.  It  is  not,  in  truth,  that  man  who  attracts  me,  as
is  thought  to  be  the  case : I long  ago  knew  him  to  be  the
most  incapable  of  politicians,  I now  know  him  also  to  be  the
least  capable  of  generals.^  It  is  not  he,  therefore,  that
attracts  me,  but  it  is  the  common  talk  reported  to  me  by
Philotimus.  He  says  I am  being  torn  to  pieces  by  the
Optimates.  Ye  Gods  ! Optimates  indeed  ! See  how  they  are
rushing  to  meet  Caesar,  and  parading  their  loyalty  to
him ! Why,  the  country  towns  are  offering  him  prayers

^ a7ro\iTLK(ljTarov,  aarpaTrjyiKtjJTaTov.

310

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

as  though  he  were  a god,  and  not  sham  ones,  as  those  offered
on  behalf  of  the  other  when  he  was  ill.^  But  the  simple  fact
is  that  whatever  mischief  this  Pisistratus  abstains  from  doing
is  as  much  a subject  for  gratitude,  as  if  he  had  prevented
some  one  else  from  doing  it.  They  hope  the  one  will  be
lenient,  they  believe  the  other  to  be  enraged.  What  com-
plimentary processions  from  the  towns ! What  honours
voted  ! Pure  fright,  you  will  say.  Yes,  I daresay ; but  they
I are  still  more  afraid  of  the  other.  The  artful  clemency  of
the  one  delights,  the  angry  temper  of  the  other  alarms,  them.
Those  on  the  roll  of  the  360  jurors,'  who  used  to  be  par-
ticularly fond  of  our  friend  Gnaeus,  and  one  or  other  of  whom
I see  every  day,  are  horrified  at  some  of  his  Lucerian  doings.®
So  I want  to  know  what  sort  of  Optimates  these  are  to
force  me  abroad,  while  they  remain  at  home  themselves.
However,  be  they  who  they  may,  “I  fear  the  Trojans.”^
Yet  I see  clearly  with  what  a prospect  I am  starting ; and
I am  joining  myself  with  a man  better  prepared  to  de-
vastate Italy  than  to  win  a victory,  and  have  only  a master
to  expect.  And,  indeed,  at  the  moment  of  writing  this
(4th  March)  I am  in  momentary  expectation  of  some  news
from  Brundisium.  But  why  do  I say  some  news  ? It  is  news
of  his  shameful  flight  thence  that  I expect,  and  of  the  route
which  the  victor  is  taking  on  his  return  and  of  his  destina-
tion. When  I have  got  that  news,  if  Caesar  comeSby  the
Appia,  I think  of  retiring  to  Arpinum.

^ For  Pompey’s  illness  see  p.  168.

^ This  is  the  number  mentioned  in  Plutarch  55)  on  the  special

roll  of  indices  drawn  up  by  Pompey  for  the  trial  of  Milo  in  B.c.  52,  the
album  iudicum  which  Asconius,  § 39,  says  consisted  of  men  of  the
highest  rank  and  character.

This  is  explained  by  Letter  CCCXLI,  p.  294,  where  Cicero  says
that  Pompey’s  followers  were  some  of  them  openly  threatening  a pro-
scription.

public  opinion,  his  favourite  quotation  from  11.  vi.  442  ; see
vol.  i.,  p.  90,  etc.

A VIII,  i6  ; IX,  I

TO  ATTICUS

31I

CCCLII  (A  IX,  I)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME
Formic,  6 March

Although  by  the  time  you  read  this  I think  I shall  know
what  has  happened  at  Brundisium — for  Gnaeus  left  Canusium
on  the  2 1 St  of  February,  and  I write  on  the  6th  of  March,
the  fourteenth  day  after  his  removing  from  Canusium — yet
I am  kept  in  painful  suspense  as  to  what  each  hour  may
bring,  and  am  wondering  that  nothing  even  by  way  of  rumour
has  reached  me.  There  is  a surprising  silence.  But  perhaps
all  this  is  mere  idle  curiosity  ^ about  what,  after  all,  must  soon
be  known.  One  thing  worries  me,  that  I cannot  at  present
make  out  where  our  friend  P.  Lentulus  and  Domitius  are.
Now  I want  to  know,  in  order  the  easier  to  find  out  their
intentions,  whether  they  are  going  to  Pompey,  and  if  so,  by
what  route  and  when.  The  city,  indeed,  I am  told,  is  now
crammed  full  of  Optimates.  I hear  that  Sosius  and  Lupus  are
sitting  in  court,^  whom  our  friend  Gnseus  thought  would
arrive  at  Brundisium  before  himself.  From  these  parts  there
is  a general  exodus.  Even  Manius  Lepidus,  with  whom  I am^
used  to  spend  the  day,  is  thinking  of  starting  to-morrow.
For  myself,  I am  stopping  on  at  Formiae  in  order  to  get
quicker  intelligence.  Then  I am  for  Arpinum.  Thence,
by  whatever  road  there  is  least  chance  of  meetings,  to  the
Upper  Sea,  leaving  behind  or  altogether  giving  up  my  lictors.
For  I am  told  that  by  some  loyalists,  who  are  now  and
have  often  been  before  a protection  to  the  commonwealth,
my  staying  in  Italy  is  disapproved,  and  that  at  their  enter-
tainments (beginning  pretty  early  in  the  day  too)  many  severe
reflexions  are  being  made  upon  me ! Evidently,  then,  the
thing  to  do  is  to  leave  the  country,  to  wage  war  on  Italy  by
land  and  sea,  to  rouse  the  hatred  of  the  disloyal  against  us
once  more,  which  had  become  extinct,  and  to  follow  the

^ KEVOtTTTOvSa.

- C.  Sosius  and  P.  Rubilius  Rufus,  prsetors.

312

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

advice  of  a Lucceius  and  Theophanes  ! For  others  have
some  reason  for  going : Scipio,  for  instance,  starts  for  Syria,
the  province  allotted  to  him,  or  is  accompanying  his  son-in-
law,  in  either  case  with  an  honourable  pretext,  or,  if  you  like,
is  avoiding  the  wrath  of  Caesar.  The  Marcelli,  for  their  part,
had  they  not  feared  the  sword  of  Caesar,  would  have  re-
mained : Appius  has  the  same  reason  for  fear,  and  that,  too,
in  connexion  with  a recent  quarrel.  Except  him  and  Q.
Cassius,  the  rest  are  legates,  Faustus  is  a proquaestor : I am
the  only  one  who  might  take  either  one  course  or  the  other.
Added  to  this,  there  is  my  brother,  whom  it  is  not  fair  to
involve  in  this  adventure,  considering  that  Caesar  would  be
still  more  angry  with  him.  But  I cannot  induce  him  to
stay  behind.  This  concession  I shall  make  to  Pompey,  as
in  duty  bound : for  as  far  as  I am  concerned  no  one  else
influences  me — nor  the  talk  of  the  loyalists,  who  do  not
really  exist,  nor  the  cause  which  has  been  conducted  with
timidity  and  will  be  conducted  with  crime.  To  one  man,
one  alone,  I make  this  concession,  and  that,  too,  without  any
request  from  him,  and  though — as  he  says — he  is  not  defend-
ing his  own  cause,  but  that  of  the  state.  I should  like
much  to  know  what  you  are  thinking  of  doing  as  to  crossing
into  Epirus.

CCCLIII  (A  IX,  7 b)

C.  CORNELIUS  BALBUS  TO  CICERO  (AT
FORMIvE)

Rome,  6 March

If  you  are  well,  I am  glad.  After  sending  you  the  letter
written  in  conjunction  with  Oppius,  I have  received  one
from  Caesar,  of  which  I am  sending  you  a copy.  From  this
you  will  be  able  to  see  how  desirous  he  is  for  a reconcilia-
tion between  himself  and  Pompey,  and  how  averse  from
every  thought  of  cruelty.  That  such  are  his  sentiments  I

A IX,  7 b C.  CORNELIUS  BALBUS  TO  CICERO  313

am,  as  in  duty  bound,  greatly  rejoiced.  As  to  yourself,  your
good  faith,  and  your  piety,  I entertain  the  same  opinion  as
you  do  yourself,  my  dear  Cicero — that  your  reputation  and
duty  cannot  admit  of  your  bearing  arms  against  a man  from
whom  you  avow  having  received  so  much  kindness.  I have
full  assurance  that  Caesar,  as  might  be  expected  from  his
extraordinary  kindness,  will  approve  of  this  course,  and  I
know  for  certain  that  you  will  satisfy  him  to  the  full  by
undertaking  no  command  in  the  war  against  him,  and  by
not  associating  yourself  with  his  adversaries.  And  it  is  not
only  in  the  case  of  a man  of  such  a high  position  and
character  as  yourself  that  he  will  accept  this  as  sufficient,
but  even  in  my  own  case  he  has  volunteered  the  concession,
that  I should  not  serve  in  any  camp  that  shall,  in  the  future,
be  opposed  to  either  Lentulus  or  Pompey,  to  whom  I am
under  very  great  obligations  ; and  he  has  told  me  that  he
will  be  satisfied  with  my  performing  civil  functions  for  him,
which  I am  at  liberty  to  perform  for  them  also  if  I choose.
Accordingly,  I am  now  at  Rome  acting  for  Lentulus  gener-
ally, taking  his  business  upon  me,  and  doing  for  them  all  that
duty,  honour,  and  piety  demand.  But,  by  heaven,  the  hope
of  their  coming  to  terms,  which  I had  given  up,  I now  think
not  entirely  desperate,  since  Caesar  is  minded  as  we  are
bound  to  wish  him  to  be.  In  the  circumstances  my  opinion
is,  if  you  think  well,  that  you  should  write  to  him  and  ask
him  for  protection,  as,  with  my  full  approbation,  you  asked
it  from  Pompey  at  the  Milonian  crisis.^  I will  engage,  if  I
am  right  in  my  judgment  of  Caesar,  that  he  will  take  more
thought  for  your  dignity  than  for  his  own  advantage.  I am
no  certain  judge  of  the  wisdom  of  the  advice  I am  now  giving
you,  but  at  least  I am  sure  that  whatever  I write  to  you  I
write  from  an  uncommon  affection  and  friendly  disposition ;
because  upon  my  life — which  I would  forfeit  to  save  Caesar —
I value  you  so  highly,  that  I regard  few  as  equally  dear  as
yourself.  When  you  have  come  to  some  conclusion  on  this

^ The  admirers  of  Clodius  raised  such  a tumult  on  the  first  day  of  the
trial  of  Milo,  that  Pompey,  being  appealed  to,  promised  to  be  present
the  next  day  with  an  armed  guard.  According  to  Asconius,  it  was  M.
Marcellus,  one  of  Milo’s  advocates,  and  L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  who
as  praetor  was  presiding  at  the  trial,  that  asked  for  the  guard,  not  Cicero
(Ascon.  41).  But  Cicero  may  very  well  have  joined  in  the  request.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  MT.  57

314

matter,  let  me  hear  from  you.  For  I am  uncommonly
anxious  that  you  may  find  it  possible  to  make  good  your
kindly  intentions  to  both  sides ; which,  by  heaven,  I feel
sure  you  will  do.  Take  care  of  your  health.

CCCLIV  (A  IX,  2)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  7 March

Though  on  the  7th  of  March  (the  day,  I think,  for  your  fever
fit)  I am  expecting  a longer  letter  from  you,  yet  I think  I
ought  to  answer  even  the  short  one  which  you  wrote  on  the
4th,  just  before  your  attack.  You  say  that  you  are  glad  that
I have  stayed  in  Italy,  and  that  you  are  of  the  same  opinion
as  before.  But  in  a former  letter  you  seemed  to  me  to  have
no  doubt  about  my  going,  always  provided  that  Gnaeus  em-
barked with  an  adequate  following,  and  that  the  consuls
crossed  also.  Have  you  forgotten  this,  or  did  I misunder-
stand you,  or  have  you  changed  your  opinion  ? But  I shall
either  ascertain  your  opinion  from  the  letter  I am  now
expecting,  or  I shall  draw  another  letter  from  you.  No  news
as  yet  from  Brundisium.

CCCLV  (a  IX,  2 a)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formia:,  8 March

What  a difficult,  what  a hopeless  thing ! You  pass  over
no  point  in  giving  your  advice,  and  yet  how  completely
you  fail  to  reveal  what  your  real  opinion  is  ! You  are
glad  that  I am  not  with  Pompey,  and  yet  you  suggest  how
discreditable  it  would  be  for  me  to  be  in  the  House  when

A IX,  2,  2 a

TO  ATTICUS

315

any  attack  is  made  on  him ; yet  shocking  to  approve  his
conduct.  Certainly.  To  speak  against  him,  then ? “God
forbid  ! ” say  you.  What,  then,  is  to  be  done,  if  the  one  course
is  criminal,  the  other  exposed  to  punishment?  “ You  will
obtain  permission,”  say  you,  “ from  Caesar  to  absent  yourself
and  live  in  retirement.”  Am  I to  implore  this  permission,
then  ? How  humiliating  ! What  if  I fail  to  get  it  ? Again,
you  say,  “The  question  of  your  triumph  will  be  unpre-
judiced.” What  if  this  very  thing  is  used  to  put  pressure
upon  me  ? Should  I accept  it  ? What  a disgrace  ! Should
I decline  it  ? Caesar  will  think  that  I am  repudiating  his
whole  policy,  as  formerly  in  the  case  of  the  land  commission.^
Why,  in  excusing  himself,  he  always  throws  the  whole  blame
for  what  then  happened  on  me,  saying  that  I was  so  bitterly
opposed  to  him,  that  I would  not  accept  even  an  honour  at
his  hands.  With  how  much  greater  irritation  will  he  take  a
similar  proceeding  from  me  now?  It  will,  of  course,  be
greater  in  proportion  as  this  honour  is  greater  than  the
former,  and  he  is  himself  in  a stronger  position.

But  you  say  that  you  have  no  doubt  I am  in  very  bad
odour  with  Pompey  by  this  time : I don’t  see  why  that
should  be  the  case,  particularly  at  this  time.  Shall  a man
who  never  told  me  anything  about  his  plan,  till  after  he  had
lost  Corfinium,  complain  of  my  not  having  come  to  Brun-
disium,  when  Caesar  lay  between  me  and  Brundisium  ? In
the  next  place,  complaint  on  his  side  he  must  know  to  be
barred.  He  considers  that  I was  clearer  sighted  than  he
about  the  weakness  of  the  municipal  towns,  the  levies,  the
maintenance  of  peace,  the  city,  money,  and  the  need  of
occupying  Picenum.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  I don’t  go  when
it  is  in  my  power,  he  will  have  some  right  to  be  angry  with
me  : and  I shrink  from  that,  not  for  fear  of  his  hurting  me—
for  what  could  he  do  ? And

“ Who  is  a slave  who  does  not  fear  to  die  ? ” ^

But  because  I have  a horror  of  ingratitude.  I feel  confident,

'■  The  commission  of  twenty  {vigintiviri)  for  the  distribution  of  the
Campanian  land  under  Caesar’s  law  of  B.c.  59,  on  which  Cicero  had
declined  to  serve.  See  vol.  i.,  p.  113,

rig  S’  tort  SovXog  tov  Oavelv  d(ppovTig  mv  ; a.  line  of  Euripides,  but
from  what  play  is  unknown.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

316

therefore,  that  my  arrival  in  his  camp,  whenever  it  takes
place,  will,  as  you  say,  be  welcome  enough.^  For  as  to  what
you  say,  “ If  Caesar  acts  with  more  moderation  you  will  re-
consider your  advice  to  me  ” — how  can  he  help  behaving
ruthlessly?  Character,  previous  career,  the  very  nature  of
his  present  undertaking,  his  associates,  the  strength  of  the
loyalists,  or  even  their  firmness,  all  forbid  it.

I had  scarcely  read  your  letter,  when  Curtius  Postumus
called  on  me  as  he  was  hurrying  to  join  Caesar,  talking  of
nothing  but  fleets  and  armies — “ Caesar  was  going  to  seize
the  Spains,^  occupy  Asia,  Sicily,  Africa,  Sardinia,  and  was
promptly  pursuing  Pompey  into  Greece.”  I must  start,
therefore,  with  the  view  of  sharing  not  so  much  in  a war
as  in  a stampede.  For  I shall  never  be  able  to  stand
the  gossip  of  your  folk  at  Rome,  w'hatever  they  are,  for
loyalists  they  are  not,  in  spite  of  their  name.  Neverthe-
less, it  is  precisely  that  which  I want  to  know — what  they
say ; and  I earnestly  entreat  you  to  make  inquiries  and
inform  me.  As  yet  I am  entirely  ignorant  of  what  has
happened  at  Brundisium : when  I know,  I shall  shape  my
plans  in  the  light  of  facts  and  circumstances,  but  I shall
consult  you.

CCCLVI  (A  IX,  6 a)

lULIUS  C^SAR  TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMIC)

Near  Brundisium,  7 March

Having  merely  seen  our  friend  Furnius,  and  not  having  been
able  conveniently  either  to  speak  or  to  listen  to  him,  as  I
was  in  haste  and  on  the  march,  after  sending  my  legions  in
advance,  I yet  could  not  omit  writing  to  you,  and  sending
him  to  thank  you : though  this  last  I have  often  done,  and

^ dapLsvKTTov,  quoted  apparently  from  the  letter  of  Atticus.  It  is  a
word  of  late  Greek.

2 Spain  was  now  held  by  Pompey’s  ^kree  legates,  L.  Afranius,
M.  Petreius,  and  M.  Terentius  Varro.

A IX,  6 a,  3

TO  ATTICUS

317

think  I shall  have  occasion  to  do  so  still  oftener — so  great  are
your  services  to  me.  Above  all,  I beg  of  you,  as  I feel  sure
that  I shall  be  coming  to  the  city  walls  ^ before  long,  that  I
may  see  you  there  to  enable  me  to  avail  myself  of  your
advice,  influence,  position,  and  support  of  every  kind.  I
will  return  to  what  I said  at  first : be  kind  enough  to  pardon
my  haste  and  the  brevity  of  my  letter.  You  will  learn  every-
thing else  from  Furnius.

CCCLVII  (A  IX,  3)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  9 March

The  son  of  Domitius  passed  through  Formiae  on  the  8th  of
March,  hurrying  to  his  mother  at  Naples,^  and  on  my  slave
Dionysius  putting  some  earnest  questions  to  him  about  his
"father,  he  bade  him  tell  me  that  he  was  outside  the  city.  I,
however,  had  been  told  that  he  had  gone  either  to  join
Pompey  or  into  Spain.  What  the  truth  of  the  matter  is  I
should  like  very  much  to  know : for  it  affects  the  question
on  which  I am  now  deliberating,  that,  if  Domitius,  at  any
rate,  has  failed  to  find  an  exit  from  Italy,  Gnaeus  should
understand  that  my  own  departure  from  Italy  is  not  easy,
occupied  as  it  now  is  throughout  with  arms  and  garrisons,
especially  in  the  winter  season.  For  if  it  had  been  a more
convenient  season  of  the  year,  I might  have  sailed  even  on
the  Lower  Sea.  As  it  is,  a passage  is  impossible  except  by
the  Upper  Sea,  to  which  my  road  is  closed.  Be  good
enough  to  inquire,  therefore,  about  both  Domitius  and
Lentulus.  No  rumour  has  come  as  yet  from  Brundisium,
and  to-day  is  the  9th,  on  which  (or  on  the  day  before)  I

^ Caesar  is  careful  to  use  the  phrase  ad  urbem  (not  /«),  for,  as  having
impe'>ium^  he  could  not  constitutionally  pass  the  pomxrium.

^ Cn.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  who  afterwards  was  counted  by  some
among  the  assassins  of  lulius,  and  played  a considerable  part  in  events
that  followed  it.  His  mother  was  Porcia,  sister  of  Cato  Uticensis.

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  57

318

imagine  that  Caesar  has  reached  Brundisium.  For  he  halted
at  Arpi  on  the  ist.  But  if  you  choose  to  believe  Postumus,
he  was  intending  to  pursue  Gnaeus.  For  by  a calculation  of
the  state  of  the  weather  and  days  he  concluded  that  the
latter  had  already  crossed.  I said  I didn’t  think  Caesar
would  have  crews : Postumus  felt  confident  on  that  point,
and  all  the  more,  because  Caesar’s  liberality  had  been  heard
of  by  shipowners.  But  it  cannot  now  be  long  before  I learn
the  entire  state  of  affairs  at  Brundisium.

CCCLVIII  (A  IX,  5)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  10  March

On  your  birthday  ^ you  wrote  me  a letter  full  of  advice,  and
not  only  shewing  the  greatest  kindness  to  me,  but  also  the
most  admirable  wisdom.  Philotimus  delivered  it  to  me  the
day  after  receiving  it  from  you.  The  points  you  put  are
indeed  of  extreme  difficulty — the  journey  to  the  Upper  Sea,
a voyage  by  the  Lower,  a departure  to  Arpinum,  lest  I
should  seem  to  have  avoided  Caesar,  a continuance  at
Formiae,  lest  I should  seem  to  have  put  myself  forward  to
congratulate  him — but  nothing  is  more  distressing  than  the
sight  of  those  things,  which,  I tell  you,  must  before  long  be
seen.  Curtius  Postumus  has  been  with  me : I told  you  how
oppressive  he  was.  Q.  Fufius  also  has  been  to  see  me.
What  a triumphant  look  ! What  assurance  ! Post  haste  for
Brundisium : denouncing  the  crime  of  Pompey,  the  reck-
lessness and  folly  of  the  senate.  If  I can’t  stand  such
things  in  my  own  villa,  shall  I be  able  to  put  up  with
Curtius  in  the  senate-house?  But  suppose  me  to  endure
this  with  good  temper,  what  will  be  the  sequel  of  the  usual

^ Natali  die  tuo.  Several  editors  wish  to  omit  natali,  in  which  case
the  words  will  mean  “ on  the  day  of  your  ague  fit,”  as  in  previous
letters.

A IX,  5

TO  ATTICUS

319

“Speak,  Marcus  Tullius”?^  To  say  nothing  of  the  Re-
publican cause,  which  I look  upon  as  lost,  both  from  the
wounds  inflicted  on  it  and  the  cures  prepared  for  them,
what  am  I to  do  about  Pompey?  With  whom — for  why
should  I deny  it  ? — I am  downright  angry.  For  I am  always
more  affected  by  the  causes  of  events  than  by  the  events
themselves.  Therefore,  turning  over  these  disastrous  events
in  my  mind — and  what  could  be  more  disastrous  ! — or
rather,  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  his  doing
and  his  fault,  I feel  more  hostile  to  him  than  to  Caesar
himself : just  as  our  ancestors  decided  that  the  day  of  the
battle  of  the  Allia  was  more  fatal  than  that  of  the  capture
of  the  city,  because  the  latter  evil  was  the  result  of  the
former ; and  accordingly  the  one  day  is  even  now  regarded
as  accursed,  while  the  other  is  generally  unknown — so  I,
remembering  the  errors  of  ten  years,  among  which  was
also  that  year  which  ruined  me,  without  his  defending  me
(not  to  put  it  more  strongly),  and  being  fully  aware  of  the
rashness,  incompetence,  and  carelessness  of  the  present
management,  felt  my  anger  growing.  But  that  is  all  for-
gotten now.  It  is  of  his  kindness  that  I think,  and  also
of  my  own  position.  I understand — later,  indeed,  than
I could  have  wished,  thanks  to  the  letters  and  conversations
of  Balbus — I see  plainly,  I repeat,  that  the  one  object  now,
nay,  the  one  object  from  the  beginning,  was  the  death  of
Pompey.  As  for  me^.  therefore,  since  Homer’s  hero,  when
his  goddess  mother  said  to  him,  “For  next  to  Hector’s
death  thy  doom  is  fixed,”  answered  his  mother :

“ Death,  then  ! since  fate  allowed  me  not  to  save

The  friend  I loved.”  ^

What  should  I do  for  one  who  was  not  merely  a “ friend,”  but
a “ benefactor  ” also  ? One,  too,  of  such  a great  character,
and  engaged  in  such  a great  cause  ? Why,  in  truth,  I regard
such  duties  as  worth  the  loss  of  life.  In  your  Optimates,
however,  I have  no  sort  of  confidence,  and  henceforth  do
not  devote  myself  either  to  their  service.  I see  how  they
are  surrendering  themselves  to  Caesar,  and  will  continue  to
do  so  in  the  future.  Do  you  suppose  that  those  decrees  of

^ See  p.  204.  2 Homer,  11.  xviii.  96.

320

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

the  municipalities  as  to  Pompey’s  illness  ^ are  to  be  com-
pared with  these  congratulations  now  offered  to  Caesar  on  his
victory?  “All  terror,”  you  will  say.  Yes,  but  they  them-
selves assert  that  they  were  alarmed  on  the  former  occasion.
However,  let  us  wait  to  see  what  has  happened  at  Brundisium.
Perhaps  from  that  may  come  a change  of  plan  and  in  the
tone  of  my  letters.

CCCLIX  (A  IX,  6)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  ii  March

Nothing  as  yet  from  Brundisium.  Balbus  has  written
from  Rome  that  he  thinks  that  the  consul  Lentulus  has  by
this  time  crossed,  and  that  the  younger  Balbus  did  not  suc-
ceed in  getting  an  interview  with  him ; because  the  young
man  heard  this  news  at  Canusium,  and  had  written  to
him  from  that  town.  He  says,  too,  that  the  six  cohorts
which  were  at  Alba  had  joined  Curius  by  the  Minucian
road  that  Caesar  had  written  to  tell  him  that,  and  he  would
himself  be  shortly  at  the  city.  Therefore  I shall  follow  your
advice,  and  shall  not  go  into  hiding  at  Arpinum  at  the  present
time,  although,  as  I wished  to  give  my  son  his  toga  virilis
at  Arpinum,  I contemplated  leaving  this  excuse  for  Caesar.
But  perhaps  that  very  thing  would  offend  him — “ Why  not  at
Rome  rather  ? ” And  after  all,  if  meet  him  I must,  I would
rather  it  were  here  than  anywhere.  Then  I shall  consider
the  rest,  that  is,  whither  and  by  what  road  and  when  I am

^ See  ante,  pp.  i68,  310.

^ The  via  Minucia  is  spoken  of  by  Horace  {Ep.  i.  1 8,  20)  as  an
alternative  route  to  the  Appia  leading  to  Brundisium.  It  seems  to  have
been  by  this  road  that  the  Martia  and  fourth  legion  came  to  Alba
Fucentia  in  44  B.c.,  instead  of  proceeding  up  the  coast  road  from  Brun-
disium to  Gaul,  as  Antony  had  directed  them.  According  to  Csesar,
B.  C.  i.  24,  the  six  cohorts  from  Alba  Fucentia  joined  Vibius  Curius  on
the  march  to  Brundisium.

® Usually  given  at  the  Liberalia  (17th  March).

A IX,  6

TO  ATTICUS

321

to  go.  Domitius,  I hear,  is  at  Cosa,  ready,  too,  I am  told,
to  set  sail : if  to  Spain  I don’t  approve,  if  to  join  Gnaeus  I
commend  him  : he  had  better  go  anywhere  than  have  to  see
Curtins,^  of  whom,  though  his  patron,  I cannot  stand  the
sight.  What,  then,  am  I to  say  of  the  rest  ? But,  I suppose,
we  had  better  keep  quiet,  lest  we  prove  our  own  error,  who,
while  loving  the  city,  that  is,  our  country,  and  while  thinking
that  the  matter  would  be  patched  up,  have  so  managed
matters  as  to  be  completely  intercepted  and  made  prisoners.

I had  written  thus  far  when  a letter  arrived  from  Capua,
as  follows :

“Pompey  has  crossed  the  sea  with  all  the  men  he  had
with  him.  The  total  is  30,000;  besides  the  consuls,  two
tribunes  of  the  plebs,  and  the  senators  who  were  with  him,
all  with  wives  and  children.  He  is  said  to  have  embarked
on  the  4th  of  March.  Since  that  day  the  north  wind  has
prevailed.  They  say  that  he  disabled  or  burnt  all  such
ships  as  he  did  not  use.”

On  this  subject  a letter  has  been  received  at  Capua
by  L.  Metellus,  the  tribune,  from  his  mother-in-law  Clodia,
who  has  herself  crossed.  I was  anxious  and  full  of  pain
before,  as,  of  course,  the  bare  facts  of  the  case  compelled,
when  I found  myself  unable  to  unravel  the  mystery  by  any
consideration;  but  now,  when  Pompey  and  the  consuls
have  left  Italy,  I am  not  merely  pained,  I am  burning  with
indignation :

“ Reason  deserts  her  throne.

And  I am  torn  with  grief.”  ^ ^

Believe  me,  I really  am  beside  myself  to  think  of  the  dis-
honour I have  brought  upon  myself.  That  I,  in  the  first
place,  should  not  be  with  Pompey,  whatever  plan  he  has
followed,  nor,  in  the  second  place,  with  the  loyalists,  how-
ever imprudently  managed  their  cause ! Especially,  too,
when  those  very  persons,  for  whose  sake  I was  somewhat
timid  in  trusting  myself  to  fortune — wife,  daughter,  son,  and

^ M.  Curtius  Postumus  (see  p.  316).  Cicero  had  formerly  promoted
his  interests  with  Caesar  (voL  i. , p.  277).  He  may  refer  to  that  in  calling
himself  his  pa^ronus,  or  he  may  have  defended  him  in  some  lawsuit.

~ ovdk  fiOl  ^TOp

'ipTrecov,  d\\’  aXaXvKrrjfiai.  — Horn.  //.  x.  91.

Y

II.

322

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

nephew — preferred  that  I should  follow  that  design,  and
thought  that  my  present  plan  was  discreditable  and  un-
worthy of  me.  For,  as  to  my  brother  Quintus,  whatever  I
determined  upon  he  said  that  he  considered  right,  and  he
accepted  it  with  the  most  absolute  acquiescence.

I am  reading  over  your  letters  from  the  beginning  of  the
business.  They  somewhat  relieve  me.  The  earliest  ones
warn  and  entreat  me  not  to  be  precipitate.  The  next  in-
dicate that  you  are  glad  that  I stayed.  Whilst  reading
them  I feel  less  base,  but  only  while  I read  them.  Presently
grief  and  the  “ vision  of  shame  ” rises  again.  Wherefore,  my
dear  Titus,  pray  pluck  out  this  sorrow  from  my  mind,  or  at
least  mitigate  it  by  consoling  words  or  advice,  or  by  any-
thing you  can.  But  what  could  you  or  any  human  being
do  ? It  is  now  almost  beyond  the  power  of  God.

For  my  part,  my  object  now,  as  you  advise  and  think
possible,  is  to  obtain  leave  from  Caesar  to  absent  myself
when  any  motion  is  being  made  against  Pompey  in  the
senate.  But  I fear  I may  not  obtain  the  concession.  Fur-
nius  has  arrived  from  Caesar.  To  shew  you  the  sort  of  men
we  are  following,  he  tells  me  that  the  son  of  Q.  Titinius  is
with  Caesar,  but  that  the  latter  thanks  me  even  more  than
I could  wish.  What,  however,  it  is  that  he  asks  of  me,
expressed  indeed,  for  his  part,  in  few  words,  but  still  en  grand
seigneur.,  you  may  learn  from  his  own  letter.  How  distressed
I am  at  your  ill-health : if  we  had  only  been  together,  you
would  at  least  not  have  wanted  advice.  For  “ two  heads,”
you  know.^  But  don’t  let  us  cry  over  spilt  milk  : ^ let  us  do
better  for  the  future.  Up  to  this  time  I have  been  mis-
taken in  two  particulars : at  the  beginning  I hoped  for

^ <Tyv  rf  kfjxofi^vu)  Kai  rt  Trpo  o tov  evorfaev

oTnroig  Kspdog  ty.  fiovvog  d’  siTrsp  re  voyay,
aXKa  re  oi  f^pdcraiov  re  voog,  Xenry  Ss  re  (iririg.

“Two  comrades  on  the  road  : two  heads  in  council ;

Each  sees  for  each  and  finds  the  better  way.

But  he  whose  council  is  his  single  breast

Is  scant  of  skill  and  slower  to  divine.” — II.  x.  224.

Acta  ne  agamus,  “let  us  not  do  what  has  been  done,”  a proverb
answering  to  “shutting  the  stable  door  when  the  horse  is  stolen,”  or
“ whipping  a dead  horse,”  or  as  in  the  text.  See  de  Am.  § 85,  where
Cicero  calls  it  an  ancient  proverb.

A IX,  6,  4

TO  ATTICUS

323

peace,  and,  if  that  were  once  gained,  was  prepared  to  be
content  with  the  life  of  a private  citizen,  and  an  old  age
freed  from  anxiety : and  later,  I found  that  a bloody  and
destructive  war  was  being  undertaken  by  Pompey.  Upon
my  honour,  I thought  it  shewed  a better  man  and  a better
citizen  to  suffer  any  punishment  whatever  rather  than,  I
don’t  say  to  lead,  but  even  to  take  part  in  such  bloody
work.  I think  it  would  have  been  better  even  to  die  than
to  be  with  such  men.  I shall  bear  any  result  with  greater
courage  than  such  a pain.

CCCLX  (A  IX,  4)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  12  March

Although  any  feeling  of  repose  is  for  me  confined  to  the
time  I spend  in  writing  to  you  or  reading  a letter  from  you,
yet  I am  myself  at  a loss  for  a subject  for  my  letters,  and  I
feel  certain  that  the  same  is  the  case  with  you.  For  the
topics  usually  filling  familiar  letters,  written  with  an  easy
mind,  are  excluded  by  the  critical  nature  of  these  times;
while  those  connected  with  the  crisis  we  have  already  worn
threadbare.  Nevertheless,  not  to  surrender  myself  wholly
to  sorrowful  reflexions,  I have  selected  certain  theses,  so  to
speak,  which  have  at  once  a general  bearing  on  a citizen’s
duty,  and  a particular  relation  to  the  present  crisis  :

Ought  one  to  remain  in  one's  country  when  under  a tyrant  t
If  onds  country  is  u?ider  a tyrant^  ought  one  to  labour  at  all
hazards  for  the  abolition  of  the  tyranny^  even  at  the  risk  of
the  total  destruction  of  the  city  ? Or  ought  we  to  be  on  our
guard  against  the  man  attempting  the  abolition^  lest  he  should
rise  too  high  himself  I

Ought  one  to  assist  one's  country  when  under  a tyrant  by
seizing  opportunities  and  by  argument^  rather  than  by  war  ?

Is  it  acting  like  a good  citizen  to  quit  one's  country  when
under  a tyrant  for  any  other  land^  and  there  to  remain  quiet^

324

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  /ET.  57

or  ought  one  to  face  any  and  every  danger  for  liberty's
sake  ?

Ought  one  to  wage  war  upon  and  besiege  one's  7iative  town,
if  it  is  under  a tyrant  ?

Even  if  one  does  not  approve  afi  abolitio7i  of  a tyranny  by
war,  ought  one  still  to  enroll  oneself  in  the  ranks  of  the
loyalists  ?

Ought  one  in  politics  to  share  the  dangers  of  one's  benefactors
and  friends,  even  though  one  does  not  think  their  general  policy
to  be  wise  ?

Should  a man  who  has  done  cotispicuous  services  to  his
coimtry,  and  on  that  very  account  has  been  shamefully  treated
a7id  exposed  to  envy,  voluntarily  place  himself  in  danger  for
his  coimtry,  or  may  he  be  permitted  at  length  to  take  thought
for  hhnself  a7id  those  nearest  and  dearest  to  him,  giving  up  all
political  struggles  against  the  stronger  party

By  keeping  myself  at  work  on  questions  such  as  these,
and  discussing  both  sides  both  in  Greek  and  Latin,  I at
once  distract  my  mind  for  a time  from  its  anxieties,  and
at  the  same  time  attempt  the  solution  of  a problem  now
very  much  to  the  point.  But  I fear  you  may  find  me  un-
seasonable ; for  if  the  bearer  of  this  keeps  up  the  proper
pace,  it  will  reach  you  exactly  on  your  ague  day.

CCCLXI  (A  IX,  7)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  13  March

I WROTE  you  a letter  on  the  12  th  of  March,  but  the
messenger  to  whom  I intended  to  give  it  did  not  start  on
that  day.  But  there  did  arrive  that  very  day  that  “ swift-
foot  ” mentioned  by  Salvius.  He  brought  me  your  full  and
very  interesting  letter,  which  did,  so  to  speak,  put  just  a

^ These  Greek  theses  are  merely  the  doubts  entertained  by  Cicero  as
to  his  own  particular  position,  and  have  been  already  expressed  again
and  again  in  every  variety  of  language.  Like  most  people,  he  imagines
that  what  affects  himself  has  a general  application.

A IX,  7

TO  ATTICUS

325

drop  of  life  into  me  : for  wholly  restored  I can’t  say  that  I
am.  But  you  have  clearly  done  the  main  thing.  Yes,  believe
me,  a prosperous  issue  for  me  is  not  now  my  aim  at  all : for
I see  plainly  that  we  can  never  have  our  constitution,  either
while  these  two  men  are  both  alive,  or  with  this  one  remain-
ing. Accordingly,  I no  longer  entertain  any  hope  of  repose
for  myself,  nor  refuse  to  contemplate  any  amount  of  sorrow.
The  one  thing  I do  positively  dread  is  doing,  or,  I should
say,  having  done  anything  dishonourable.  So  be  assured
that  your  letter  was  wholesome  for  me,  and  I don’t  only
mean  this  longer  one — the  most  explicit  and  complete
possible — but  also  the  shorter  one,  in  which  what  gave  me
the  most  intense  pleasure  was  the  statement  that  my  policy
and  action  had  the  approval  of  Sextus.  I am  exceedingly
obliged  to  you,  of  whose  affection  to  myself  and  keen  sense
of  what  is  right  I am  well  aware.  ^

Your  longer  letter,  indeed,  relieved  not  only  myself,  but
all  my  party  from  painful  feelings.  So  I will  follow  your
advice  and  remain  at  Formiae  : I shall  thus  avoid  the  scandal
of  a meeting  with  him  outside  the  city,  or,  if  I see  him
neither  here  nor  there,  giving  him  the  impression  of  his  having
been  intentionally  avoided  by  me.  As  to  your  advice  to
ask  him  to  allow  me  to  shew  the  same  consideration  for
Pompey,  as  I have  shewn  to  himself — ^that  you  will  see
from  the  letters  of  Balbus  and  Oppius,  of  which  I sent  you
copies,  I have  been  doing  all  the  time.  I send  you  also
Caesar’s  letter  to  them,  written  in  quite  a sane  frame  of
mind,  considering  the  insanity  of  the  whole  business.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  Caesar  will  not  make  this  concession  to
me,  I see  your  opinion  is  that  my  role  should  be  that  of  the
peacemaker.  In  this  it  is  not  the  danger  that  I fear — for  with
so  many  hanging  over  my  head,  why  not  settle  the  matter  by
choosing  the  most  honourable  ? — but  what  I do  fear  is  em-
barrassing Pompey ; and  that  he  should  turn  upon  me

“The  monster  Gorgon’s  petrifying  glare.”  ^

For  our  friend  Pompey  has  set  his  heart  to  a surprising

^ These  words,  as  the  text  stands,  must  apply  to  Atticus.  It  seems,
however,  much  more  natural  that  they  should  refer  to  Sext.  Peduc?eus.
Accordingly,  editorshave  endeavoured  to  fill  up  the  Az^?<«ain  variousways.

^ Odyss.  xi.  633.  fir]  fioi  yopysirjv  KtfaXi^v  Seivolo  TreXwpov.

326

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

degree  on  imitating  Sulla’s  reign.  I am  not  speaking  with-
out book,  I assure  you.  He  never  made  less  of  a secret  of
anything.  “With  such  a man,”  you  will  say,  “do  you  wish
to  be  associated?”  I follow  personal  obligation,  not  the
cause ; as  I did  in  the  case  of  Milo,  and  in — but  there  is
no  need  to  go  into  that.  “ Is  not  the  cause,  then,  a good
one  ? ” Nay,  the  best : but  it  will  be  conducted,  remember,
in  the  most  criminal  way.  The  first  plan  is  to  choke  off
the  city  and  Italy  by  starving  them ; the  next,  to  devastate
the  country  with  sword  and  fire,  and  not  to  keep  their
hands  off  the  money  of  the  wealthy.  But  seeing  that  I fear
the  same  from  Caesar’s  side,  without  any  good  to  be  got
on  Pompey’s,  I think  my  better  course  is  to  stay  at  home,
and  there  await  whatever  comes.  Yet  I hold  myself  to  be
under  so  great  an  obligation  to  him,  that  I do  not  venture
to  incur  the  charge  of  ingratitude.  However,  you  have
yourself  fully  stated  what  is  to  be  said  in  defence  of  that
course.

As  to  the  triumph,  I quite  agree  with  you  : it  will  not  cost
me  a moment’s  hesitation  or  a pang  to  throw  it  utterly
aside.  I much  like  your  idea  that,  while  I am  moving
about  the  country,  “ the  moment  for  sailing  ” ^ may  suddenly
present  itself.  “ If  only,”  say  you,  “ Pompey  shews  a resolute
front  enough.”  He  is  even  more  resolute  than  I thought.
You  may  pin  your  faith  on  him.  I promise  you  that,  if  he
wins,  he  will  not  leave  a tile  on  any  roof  in  Italy ! “You
his  ally,  then?”  Yes,  by  Hercules,  against  my  own  judg-
ment, and  against  the  warnings  of  all  history ; and — not  so
much  to  help  his  side,  as  to  avoid  seeing  what  is  going  on
here — I am  anxious  to  quit  the  country.  For  pray  don’t
imagine  that  the  mad  proceedings  of  the  party  in  Italy  will
be  endurable  or  all  of  one  kind.  I need  hardly,  however,
point  out  to  you,  that  when  laws,  jurors,  law  courts,  and
senate  are  abolished,  neither  the  fortunes  of  individuals  nor
the  revenues  of  the  state  will  suffice  for  the  licentious  de-
sires, the  shameless  demands,  the  extravagances,  and  the
necessities  of  so  many  men  in  the  lowest  depths  of  poverty.
Let  me  depart,  therefore,  never  mind  by  what  kind  of
voyage — that,  indeed,  shall  be  as  you  please — but  anyhow

* 6 ttXooc  wjoaTor.  See  Letter  CCCLXXV,  p.  354.

A IX,  7,  8

TO  ATTICUS

327

let  me  depart.  For  I,  at  least,  shall  be  able  to  satisfy  your
curiosity  on  one  point,  as  to  what  has  been  done  at  Brun-
disium.  I am  very  glad — if  one  can  be  glad  of  anything
now — to  hear  that  my  conduct  up  to  this  has  the  approval
of  the  loyalists,  and  that  they  are  aware  of  my  not  having
started.  As  to  Lentulus,  I will  make  more  careful  inquiry  :
I have  given  orders  about  it  to  Philotimus,  a man  of  courage
and  even  too  strong  an  Optimate.  The  last  thing  I have
to  say  is  this : supposing  you  are  now  at  a loss  for  some-
thing to  write  about — for  any  other  subject  is  out  of  the
question,  and  what  more  can  be  found  to  say  on  this? —
yet,  as  there  is  no  lack  of  ability  (I  mean  it,  by  Heaven  !)
or  affection  on  your  part,  which  latter  also  adds  a spur  to
my  own  intellect,  pray  maintain  your  practice  of  writing  all
you  possibly  can.  I am  a little  vexed  at  your  not  inviting
me  to  Epirus ; I shouldn’t  give  much  trouble  as  a guest !
But  gooibye ; for  as  you  must  have  your  walk  and  anoint-
ing, so  I must  have  some  sleep.  In  fact,  your  letter  has
made  sleep  possible  for  me.

CCCLXII  (A  IX,  8)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  14  March

As  we  were  at  dinner  on  the  14th,  and  after  nightfall
indeed,  Statius  arrived  with  a short  letter  from  you.  You
ask  about  L.  Torquatus  : not  only  Lucius,  but  Aulus  also,
has  left  the  country,  the  latter  a good  many  days  ago.  You
mention  the  sale  of  prisoners  at  Reate  : I am  sorry  that  the
seeds  of  a proscription  should  be  sown  in  the  Sabine  dis-
trict. I too  had  been  informed  that  there  were  numerous
senators  at  Rome.  Can  you  give  any  reason  why  they  ever
left  town  ? In  these  parts  there  is  a notion— founded  on
conjecture  rather  than  on  message  or  despatch — that  Caesar
will  be  at  Formiae  on  the  22nd  of  March.  I could  wish  I

B.c.  49,  MT.  57

328  CICERO’S  LETTERS

had  Homer’s  Minerva  here  disguised  as  Mentor,  to  say  to
her :

“ How  shall  I go  then,  O Mentor,  and  how  shall  I bear  me  before
him  ? ” ‘

I never  had  a harder  problem  to  solve.  Still  I am  trying  to
solve  it,  and  I shall  not  be  unprepared  as  far  as  is  possible
in  a bad  business.  But  look  after  your  health,  for  I reckon
that  yesterday  was  your  ague  day.

CCCLXIII  (A  IX,  9)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  17  March

I RECEIVED  three  letters  from  you  on  the  i6th  of  March.
They  were  dated  on  the  12th,  13th,  and  14th.  So  I will
answer  each  in  its  order  of  time.  I quite  agree  with  you
in  thinking  Formiae  the  best  of  all  places  for  me  to  stay.  I
also  agree  with  you  about  the  Upper  Sea,  and  I am  very
desirous,  as  I told  you  in  a previous  letter,  to  discover  how
I may  without  annoying  Caesar  avoid  taking  any  part  what-
ever in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs.  You  praise  me  for
saying  that  I put  away  the  memory  of  my  friend’s  past  and
his  shortcomings.  I really  do  so  : nay,  I even  forget  those
very  injuries  inflicted  by  him  upon  myself  which  you
mention.  So  much  more  influence  do  I choose  gratitude
for  kindness  to  have  with  me,  than  resentment  for  injury.
Let  me  act,  then,  according  to  your  opinion,  and  summon
up  all  my  energies.  The  fact  is,  I am  philosophizing  all  the
time  I am  riding  about  the  country,  and  in  the  course  of
^ my  expeditions  I never  cease  meditating  on  my  theses.  But
some  of  them  are  very  difficult  of  solution.  As  to  the
Optimates,  be  it  as  you  will : but  you  know  the  proverb,

^ Horn.  Odyss.  iii.  22.  Mkvrop,  Triog  t dp^  iw,  Trdg  t*  dp  TrpoaTrTv^ofiai
avrbr.  Athene  has  taken  the  shape  of  Mentor.

A IX,  9

TO  ATTICUS

329

“Dionysius  at  Corinth.”^  The  son  of  Titinius  is  with
Caesar.^  You  seem  to  have  a kind  of  fear  that  I do  not  like
your  counsels : the  fact,  however,  is  that  nothing  else  gives
me  any  pleasure  except  your  advice  and  your  letters.  Pray,
therefore,  keep  to  your  word : do  not  cease  writing  to  me
whatever  occurs  to  you  : you  can  do  me  no  greater  favour.

I now  come  to  your  second.  You  are  quite  right  to  be
incredulous  about  the  number  of  Pompey’s  men.  Clodia
just  doubled  them  in  her  letter.^  It  was  all  a lie  also  about
disabling  the  ships.  You  praise  the  consuls  : so  do  I as  far
as  their  spirit  is  concerned,  but  I blame  their  policy.  For  by
their  departure  the  negotiation  for  peace  was  rendered  im-
possible, which  I for  one  was  meditating.  Accordingly,  after
this  I sent  you  back  Demetrius’s  book  “ On  Concord,”  and
gave  it  to  Philotimus.  Nor  have  I any  doubt  left  of  a
murderous  war  impending,  which  will  begin  with  a famine.
And  yet  I am  vexed  that  I am  not  taking  part  in  such  a
war ! A war  in  which  wickedness  is  certain  to  attain  such
dimensions,  that,  whereas  it  is  a crime  not  to  support  one’s
parents,  our  leaders  will  think  themselves  entitled  to  starve
to  death  the  supreme  and  holiest  of  parents — their  country  !
And  this  fear  is  not  with  me  a matter  of  conjecture  : I have
heard  their  actual  words.  The  whole  object  of  collecting
this  fleet  from  Alexandria,  Colchis,  Tyre,  Sidon,  Aradus,
Cyprus,  Pamphylia,  Lycia,  Rhodes,  Chios,  Byzantium,

^ This  is  generally  interpreted  by  a reference  to  the  story  told  in
Tusc.  iii.  § 2rj^  of  Dionysius  the  younger,  after  being  expelled  from
Syracuse,  keeping  a school  at  Corinth  because  he  could  not  live  without
some  absolute  power  ; so  the  Optimates  will  not  rest,  Cicero  is  supposed
to  argue,  till  they  get  power,  and  then  they  will  persecute  me.  Tyrrell
and  Purser  think  it  sufficient  to  explain  it  as  an  example  of  the  ups  and
downs  of  life.  This  hardly  seems  sufficiently  in  point  here.  I am  in-
clined to  dismiss  the  school-keeping  altogether.  Plutarch  (in  his  life  of
Timoleon),  giving  a pretty  full  account  of  Dionysius’s  exile,  says  nothing
about  it  ; but  does  say  that  he  adopted  a life  of  dissipation  and  frivolity
in  Corinth  to  avert  suspicion  of  intending  to  recover  his  power.  Cicero
may  mean,  “ The  Optimates  may  be  moderate  enough  men  now,  as  you
say ; but  wait  and  see  what  they  will  do  if  they  gain  power,  either  by
Pompey’s  success,  or  by  joining  Caesar.”

^ Cicero  seems  to  think  that  the  presence  of  the  younger  Titinius  in
Caesar’s  company  especially  disgraceful  or  dangerous  to  himself  (see
pp.  260,  322).  His  father  was  on  the  other  side.

3 .See  Letter  CCCLIX,  p.  321.

330

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  JET.  57

Lesbos,  Zmyrna,  Miletus,  Cos,’  is  to  intercept  the  supplies
of  Italy  and  blockade  the  corn-growing  provinces.  Then,
again,  in  what  a state  of  anger  will  Pompey  come  ! and
especially  with  the  very  men  most  anxious  for  his  safety,  as
though  he  had  been  abandoned  by  those  whom  he,  in  fact,
abandoned  himself.  Accordingly,  in  my  state  of  doubt  as
^ to  what  it  is  right  for  me  to  do,  my  feeling  of  obligation  to
Pompey  becomes  a very  weighty  motive  : if  that  feeling  were
away,  it  were  better  in  my  eyes  to  perish  in  my  country,  than
to  ruin  it  in  the  attempt  to  save  it.  About  the  north  wind  it
u'  is  clearly  as  you  say : I am  afraid  Epirus  may  be  harassed.
But  what  part  of  Greece  do  you  suppose  will  not  be
plundered?  For  Pompey  gives  out  openly,  and  demon-
strates to  his  soldiers,  that  he  will  outdo  Caesar  even  in  his
liberality.  It  is  an  excellent  suggestion  of  yours  that,  when
do  see  Caesar,  I should  not  speak  with  too  much  tolerance,
but  rather  with  a grave  severity.  I clearly  ought  to  do  so.
I am  thinking  of  Arpinum,  but  not  till  I have  had  my  meet-
ing with  him ; thus  avoiding  being  absent  when  he  arrives,
, ^ or  having  to  hurry  backwards  and  forwards  along  a detest-

ably bad  road.  I am  told,  as  you  say  in  your  letter,  that
Bibulus  has  arrived  and  started  back  again  on  the  14th."
You  were  expecting  Philotimus,  you  say  in  your  third  letter.
But  he  only  left  me  on  the  15th.  That  was  why  you  got  my
letter  in  reply  to  yours  rather  late,  though  I wrote  the
answer  at  once.  I agree  with  what  you  say  about  Domitius
— he  is  at  Cosa,  and  no  one  knows  what  his  design  is.  Yes,
that  basest,  meanest  fellow  in  the  world,  who  says  that  a
consular  election  can  be  held  by  a praetor,  is  the  same  as  he
always  was  in  constitutional  matters.^  So  of  course  that  was

^ The  fleet  which  Pompey  was  collecting  from  the  East,  where  his
name  was  still  of  the  greatest  weight.

^ /.(?.,  has  come  home  from  Syria,  and  gone  back  to  join  Pompey.
Bibulus  had  the  command  of  Pompey’s  fleet.

^ M.  .^milius  Lepidus,  praetor  this  year,  consul  B.c.  45,  master  of  the
horse  to  Caesar  as  dictator,  Pontifex  Maximus  B.c.  44,  triumvir  B.c.
43-36.  Cicero  elsewhere  describes  him  as  the  “greatest  weather-cock
in  the  world  ” {homo  ventosissimus) : and  his  feebleness  was  afterwards
only  too  clearly  manifested.  He  was  expelled  from  the  triumvirate  by
Augustus  in  B.c.  36,  and  lived  on  in  obscurity  (though  still  nominally
Pontifex  Maximus)  till  B.c.  14.  The  constitutional  point  Cicero  now
attacks  him  on  was  the  doctrine  that  a praetor  could  “ create  a consul

A IX,  9

TO  ATTICUS

331

what  Caesar  meant  by  saying  in  the  letter,  of  which  I sent
you  a copy,^  “ that  he  wished  to  avail  himself  of  my  advice  ”
(well,  well ! that  is  a mere  generality),  “ of  my  popularity  ”
(that’s  empty  flattery — but  I suppose  he  adopts  that  tone-^
with  a view  to  my  influencing  certain  senatorial  votes),  “ of
my  position  ” (perhaps  he  means  my  vote  as  a consular).
He  finishes  up  by  saying  “ of  my  help  in  every  particular.”

I had  already  begun  to  suspect  from  your  letter  that  this  was
the  real  meaning  of  it,  or  something  very  like  it.  For  it  is
of  great  importance  to  him  that  there  should  not  be  an
interregnum  : and  that  he  secures,  if  the  consuls  are
“ created  ” by  the  praetor.  However,  it  is  on  record  in  our
augural  books  that,  so  far  from  consuls  being  legally  capable
of  being  created  by  a praetor,  the  praetors  themselves  cannot
be  so  created,  and  that  there  is  no  precedent  for  it : that  it
is  illegal  in  case  of  the  consuls,  because  it  is  not  legal  for
the  greater  imperium  to  be  proposed  to  the  people  by  the
less ; in  case  of  the  praetors,  because  their  names  are  sub-
mitted to  the  people  as  colleagues  of  the  consuls,  to  whom
belongs  the  greater  imperium.  Before  long  he  will  be
demanding  that  my  vote  in  the  college  should  be  given,  and
he  won’t  be  content  with  Galba,  Scaevola,  Cassius,  and
Antonius :

‘ ‘ Then  let  the  wide  earth  gape  and  swallow  me  ! ” ^ ^

But  you  see  what  a storm  is  impending.  Which  of  the
senators  have  crossed  the  sea  I will  tell  you  when  I know
for  certain.  About  the  corn-supply  you  are  quite  right,  it
cannot  possibly  be  managed  without  a revenue  : and  you
have  good  reason  for  fearing  the  clamorous  demands  of
Pompey’s  entourage.,  and  an  unnatural  war.  I should  much
like  to  see  my  friend  Trebatius,  though,  as  you  say,  he  is  in
despair  about  everything.  Pray  urge  him  to  make  haste  and
come : for  it  will  be  a great  convenience  to  see  him  before

— both  consuls  being  away,  Caesar  would  otherwise  be  unable  to  be
elected — whereas,  the  true  doctrine  Cicero  holds  to  be  that  the  less
magistrate  cannot  “create”  the  greater.  See  Letter  CCCLXXII,
P-  349-

^ Letter  CCCLVI.

® rore  fxot  xdvoi  evpeXa  (Horn.  It.  iv,  182).

332

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

Cesar’s  arrival/  As  to  the  property  at  Lanuvium,  as  soon
as  I heard  of  Phamea’s  death,  I conceived  the  wish — pro-
vided the  constitution  was  to  survive — that  some  one  of  my
friends  should  buy  it,  yet  I never  thought  of  you,  the
greatest  of  my  friends.  For  I knew  that  you  usually  wanted
to  know  how  many  years’  purchase  it  was  worth,  and  what
was  the  value  of  the  fixtures,  and  I had  seen  your  digammd^
not  only  at  Rome,  but  also  at  Delos.  After  all,  however,  I
value  it,  pretty  as  it  is,  at  less  price  than  it  was  valued  in
the  consulship  of  Marcellinus,^  when  I thought — owing  to
the  house  I possessed  at  that  time  at  Antium — that  those
little  pleasure-grounds  would  suit  me  better,  and  be  less
expensive,  than  repairing  my  Tusculan  house.  I was  then
willing  to  give  500  sestertia  (about  ;^4,ooo)  for  them.  I
made  an  offer  through  a third  person,  which  he  refused,
when  he  was  putting  it  up  for  sale  at  Antium.  But  in
these  days  I presume  all  such  properties  are  gone  down
in  value,  owing  to  the  dearness  of  money.  It  will  suit  me
exactly,  or  rather  us^  if  you  buy  it.  But  don’t  be  put  off
by  the  late  owner’s  follies  : it  is  really  a lovely  place.  How-
ever, all  such  properties  appear  to  me  to  be  now  doomed
to  desolation.  I have  answered  your  three  letters,  but  am
expecting  others.  For  up  to  this  time  it  is  letters  from  you
that  have  kept  me  going.

The  Liberalia  (17th  March).

1 to  consult  him  on  the  legal  question,  and  so  strengthen  his
hands  in  answering  Caesar.

^ No  one  knows  what  this  digamma  means.  It  may  be  some  mark
used  by  Atticus  in  the  ledgers  containing  an  account  of  properties  on
which  he  had  lent  money ; or  it  may  be  that  the  word  is  a mistake  for
didypanfia,  “ a schedule,”  as  was  long  ago  conjectured.

B.c.  56.

A IX,  9,  lO

TO  ATTICUS

333

CCCLXIV  (A  IX,  lo)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  1 8 March

I HAVE  nothing  to  write  about : for  I have  heard  no  news  -
and  I answered  all  your  letters  yesterday.  But  as  uneasiness
of  mind  not  only  deprives  me  of  sleep,  but  prevents  my
even  keeping  awake  without  extreme  pain,  I have  begun  this
letter  to  you — I can’t  tell  what  about,  and  I have  no  subject
to  hand — that  I may  in  a manner  have  a talk  with  you,  the
one  thing  which  gives  me  any  repose.  I think  I have  been
a fool  from  the  beginning,  and  the  one  thing  that  torments
me  is  that  I did  not  follow  Pompey,  like  any  private  in  the
ranks,  when,  in  every  part  of  his  policy,  he  was  losing  his
footing,  or  rather  rushing  headlong  to  ruin.  On  the  17th  of
January  I could  see  that  he  was  thoroughly  frightened.  On
that  very  day  I detected  his  design.  From  that  moment  he
forfeited  my  confidence,  and  never  ceased  committing  one
blunder  after  another.  Meanwhile,  never  a line  to  me ; no
thought  of  anything  but  flight.  Need  I say  more?  As  in
love  affairs  men  lose  all  fancy  for  women  who  are  dirty,
stupid,  and  indelicate,  even  so,  the  indecency  of  his  flight  *-
and  mismanagement  put  me  off  from  my  love  for  him.  For
in  no  respect  was  he  acting  in  a way  to  make  it  proper  for
me  to  join  his  flight.  Now  love  again  rises  : now  my  regret
for  him  is  more  than  I can  bear  : now  I can  get  no  good  out
of  books,  literature,  or  philosophy.  So  earnestly  as  I gaze
across  the  sea,  do  I long,  like  Plato’s  bird,  to  fly  away.^  I
am  being  punished,  indeed  I am,  for  my  rashness.  Yet
what  did  that  rashness  amount  to  ? What  have  I done  with-
out the  most  anxious  consideration  ? If  his  only  object  had
been  flight,  I could  have  fled  with  the  utmost  pleasure,  but

^ Plato,  vii.  348A  : KaBarrep  opviQ  t:oQG)v  Tro^'fv  draTCTaaQai.  It
is  natural  to  think  of  the  Psalmist’s  “ O that  I had  the  wings  of  a dove,”
etc.

334

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  .^T.  57

y it  was  the  nature  of  the  war,  beyond  measure  sanguinary  and
widespread,  the  future  of  which  men  do  not  yet  realize,
that  I shrank  from  with  horror.  What  threats  to  the  towns,  to
individual  loyalists  personally,  to  everybody,  in  fact,  who  stayed
in  Rome  ! How  often  did  I hear  “ Sulla  could  do  it,  why  not
» ^ I ?”  For  myself  I was  haunted  with  the  reflexions  : it  was  un-
righteous of  Tarquinius  to  stir  upPorsena  and  Octavius  Mami-
lius  against  his  country ; impious  in  Coriolanus  to  seek  aid
from  the  Volsci;  righteous  in  Themistocles  to  prefer  death  ;
Hippias,  son  of  Pisistratus,  who  fell  in  the  battle  of  Marathon
bearing  arms  against  his  country,  was  criminal.  But  it  may
be  said  that  Sulla,  Marius,  and  Cinna  had  right  on  their
side  : rather  I should  perhaps  admit  that  they  had  a technical
justification  ; yet  what  could  be  more  cruel  and  bloody  than
their  use  of  victory?  It  was  the  nature  of  the  war  that  I
shrank  from,  and  the  more  so  because  I saw  that  even
bloodier  work  was  being  imagined  and  prepared.  I — whom
some  called  the  preserver  of  this  city,  some  its  parent — I to
bring  against  it  armies  of  the  Getae,  Armenians,  and  Colchians  !
I to  inflict  famine  on  my  fellow  citizens,  devastation  upon
Italy ! Caesar,  to  begin  with,  I reflected  was  mortal,  and  in
the  next  place  might  also  come  to  an  end  in  many  ways  : but
t the  city  and  our  people  I thought  ought  to  be  preserved,  as
far  as  in  us  lay,  for  ever : and,  after  all,  I pleased  myself  by
hoping  that  some  accommodation  would  be  reached  rather
than  the  one  of  these  men  commit  such  a crime,  or  the
other  such  an  abomination.  The  matter  is  now  wholly
changed,  and  so  are  my  feelings.  The  sun,  as  you  said  in
one  of  your  letters,  seems  to  me  to  have  disappeared  from
the  universe.  As  in  the  case  of  a sick  man  one  says,  “ While
there  is  life  there  is  hope,”  so,  as  long  as  Pompey  was  in
Italy,  I did  not  cease  to  hope.  It  is  the  present  situation,
the  present,  I say,  that  has  baffled  my  calculations.  And  to
confess  the  truth,  my  age,  now  after  my  long  day’s  labour
sloping  towards  an  evening  of  repose,  has  relaxed  my
energies  by  suggesting  the  charms  of  family  life.  But  now,
however  dangerous  the  experiment  of  attempting  to  fly
hence,  that  experiment  shall  at  least  be  made.  I ought,
perhaps,  to  have  done  so  before.  But  the  considerations  I
have  mentioned  held  me  back,  and  above  all  things  your
influence.  For  when  I got  to  this  point  in  my  letter,  I un-

A IX,  lO

TO  ATTICUS

335

rolled  the  volume  of  your  letters,  which  I keep  under  seal
and  preserve  with  the  greatest  care.  Now  there  were  in  the
letter  dated  by  you  the  21st  of  January  the  following  ex-
pression : “ But  let  us  first  see  what  Gnaeus  is  about,  and  in
what  direction  his  plans  are  drifting.  Now,  if  he  does
abandon  Italy,  he  will  be  acting  certainly  improperly,  and,
in  my  opinion,  unwisely  too.  But  it  will  be  time  enough,  when
he  does  that,  to  make  a change  in  our  policy.”  This  you
write  on  the  fourth  day  after  our  quitting  the  city.  Next  on
the  23rd  of  January  : “ May  our  friend  Gnaeus  only  not
abandon  Italy,  as  he  has  unwisely  done  Rome  ! ” On  the
same  day  you  write  a second  letter,  in  which  you  answer  my
application  for  advice  in  the  plainest  terms.  This  is  what
you  say  : “ To  come  to  the  point  on  which  you  ask  my^-
opinion.  If  Gnaeus  quits  Italy,  I think  you  should  return  to
the  city : for  what  limit  can  there  be  to  such  a trip  abroad  ■’
as  that  ? ” This  is  what  I could  not  get  over : and  I now
see  that  attached  to  a most  humiliating  flight,  which  you
euphemistically  call  a “ trip  abroad,”  is  an  unlimited  war.
Then  follows  your  prophecy  of  the  25th  of  January : “ If^
Pompey  remains  in  Italy,  and  no  terms  are  come  to,  I
think  there  will  be  an  unusually  long  war  : but  if  he  abandons
Italy,  I think  that  there  awaits  us  in  the  future  a really ' ■
‘ truceless  ’ war.”  It  is  in  such  a war,  then,  that  I am  forced
to  be  an  abettor — one  that  is  both  truceless  and  with  fellow
citizens.  Again,  on  the  7th  of  February,  when  you  had  heard
more  particulars  of  Pompey’s  designs,  you  end  a certain
letter  thus  : “ For  my  part,  if  Pompey  quits  Italy,  I should
not  advise  your  doing  the  same.  For  you  will  be  running
a very  great  risk  and  be  doing  no  good  to  the  Republic,  to
which  you  may  be  of  some  service  hereafter  if  you  remain.”
What  patriot  or  statesman  would  not  such  advice,  backed  by
the  weight  of  wisdom  and  friendship,  have  moved  ? Next,
on  the  nth  of  February,  you  again  answer  my  request  for
advice  thus  : “You  ask  me  whether  I advise  flight,  or  defend
delay,  and  consider  it  the  better  course : for  the  present,
indeed,  my  opinion  is  that  a sudden  departure  and  hurried
start  would  be,  both  for  yourself  and  Gnaeus,  useless  and
dangerous,  and  I think  it  better  that  you  should  be  separate,^
and  each  on  his  own  watch-tower.  But,  on  my  honour,  I
think  it  disgraceful  for  us  to  be  thinking  of  flight ! ” This

336  CICERO’S  LETTERS  ^ <7

“ disgraceful  ” measure  our  friend  Gnaeus
two  years  ago  : for  so  long  a time  past  has  his  mind  been  set
on  playing  the  Sulla  and  indulging  in  proscriptions.  Then,
as  I think,  after  you  had  written  to  me  again  in  somewhat
more  general  terms,  and  I had  taken  certain  expressions  of
yours  as  advising  me  to  leave  Italy,  you  warmly  disavow  any
such  meaning  on  the  19th  of  February.  “I  certainly  have
not  indicated  in  any  letter  of  mine  that,  if  Gnaeus  quits  Italy,
you  should  do  so  with  him  : or,  if  I did  so  express  myself,  I
was,  I don’t  say  inconsistent,  but  mad.”  In  another  passage
of  the  same  letter  you  say : “ Nothing  is  left  for  him  but
flight,  in  which  I do  not  think,  and  never  have  thought,  that
you  should  share.”  This  whole  question  again  you  discuss
in  greater  detail  in  a letter  of  the  22nd  of  February:  “If
M.  Lepidus  and  L.  Volcatius  stay,  I think  you  should  stay
also ; with  the  understanding,  however,  that,  if  Pompey
survives  and  makes  a stand  anywhere,  you  should  leave  this
inferno^  and  be  more  content  to  be  beaten  in  the  contest
along  with  him,  than  reign  with  Caesar  in  the  sink  of  in-
iquity which  will  evidently  prevail  here.”  You  adduce  many
arguments  to  support  this  opinion.  Then  at  the  end  you
say  : “ What  if  Lepidus  and  Volcatius  depart  ? In  that  case
I doubt.  So  I think  you  must  acquiesce  in  whatever
happens  and  whatever  you  have  done.”  If  you  had  felt
doubt  before,  you  have  now,  at  any  rate,  no  hesitation,  since
those  two  are  still  in  Italy.  Again,  when  the  flight  had
become  an  accomplished  fact,  on  the  25th  of  February  :
“ Meanwhile,  I feel  no  doubt  you  had  better  remain  at
Formiae.  That  will  be  the  most  suitable  place  for  waiting
to  see  what  turns  up.”  On  the  ist  of  March,  when  Pompey
had  been  four  days  at  Brundisium : “We  shall  be  able  to
deliberate  then  no  longer,  it  is  true,  with  quite  free  hands,
but  certainly  less  fatally  committed  than  if  you  had  taken
the  great  plunge  in  his  company.”  Then  on  the  4th  of
March,  though  writing  briefly,  because  it  was  the  eve  of  your
attack  of  ague,  you  yet  use  this  expression  : “ I will  write  at
greater  length  to-morrow;  however,  speaking  generally,  I
will  say  this — that  I do  not  repent  my  advice  as  to  your
staying,  and  though  with  great  anxiety,  yet,  because  I think
it  involves  less  evil  than  your  starting  would  do,  I abide  by
my  opinion  and  rejoice  that  you  have  stayed.”  Moreover,

TO  C^SAR

337

V,  * ow  in  great  pain,  and  was  fearing  that  I had  been

guilty  of  a base  act,  on  the  5th  of  March  you  say : “ After
all,  I am  not  sorry  that  you  are  not  with  Pompey.  Here-
after, if  it  turns  out  to  be  necessary,  there  will  be  no  difficulty  :
and  at  whatever  time  it  takes  place,  it  will  be  welcome  to  ^ t
him.  But  I speak  on  the  understanding  that,  if  Csesar  goes
on  as  he  has  begun,  and  acts  with  sincerity,  moderation,  and
wisdom,  I shall  have  thoroughly  to  reconsider  the  position,
and  to  look  with  greater  care  into  what  is  for  our  advantage  to
do.”  On  the  9th  of  March  you  say  that  our  friend  Peducaeus
also  approves  of  my  having  kept  quiet ; and  his  opinion  has
great  weight  with  me.  From  these  expressions  in  your
letters  I console,  myself  with  the  belief  that  as  yet  I have
done  no  wrong.  Only  pray  justify  your  advice.  There  is
no  need  to  do  so  as  far  as  I am  concerned,  but  I want;,*-
others  to  be  in  the  same  boat  as  myself.  If  I have  done
nothing  wrong  in  the  past,  I will  maintain  the  same  blame-
lessness in  the  future.  Only  pray  continue  your  exhorta-
tions in  that  direction,  and  assist  me  by  communicating  your
thoughts.  Nothing  has  as  yet  been  heard  here  about  Caesar’s
return.  For  myself,  I have  got  thus  much  good  by  writing
this  letter : I have  read  through  all  yours,  and  have  found
repose  in  that.  ,

CCCLXV  (A  IX,  II  a)

TO  C^.SAR  (IN  APULIA)

F0RM1.E,  19-20  March

On  reading  your  letter,  handed  to  me  by  our  friend  Furnius,
in  which  you  ask  me  to  come  to  the  city  walls,  I was  not
so  much  surprised  at  your  wishing  “to  avail  yourself  of  my
advice  and  position,”  but  what  you  meant  by  speaking  of
my  “influence  and  assistance”  I did  ask  myself.  My
thoughts,  however,  were  so  far  dominated  by  my  hope,  that
Ij  was  induced  to  think  that  you  wished  to  consult  for  the
tiranquillity,  peace,  and  harmony  of  our  fellow  citizens  : and
n.  z

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  57

338

for  a policy  of  that  kind  I regarded  both  my  natural  dis-
position and  my  public  character  as  sufficiently  well  adapted.
If  this  is  the  case,  and  if  you  are  at  all  anxious  to  preserve
our  common  friend  Pompey,  and  to  reconcile  him  to  your-
self and  the  Republic,  you  will  assuredly  find  no  one  better
calculated  than  myself  for  supporting  such  measures.  For,
as  soon  as  opportunity  offered,  I pleaded  for  peace  both  to
him  and  the  senat^^nor  since  the  commencement  of
^hostilities  have  I taken  any  part  whatever  in  the  war ; and  I
have  held  the  opinion  that  by  that  war  you  are  being  wronged,
in  that  men  who  were  hostile  to  and  jealous  of  you  were
striving  to  prevent  your  enjoying  an  office  granted  you  by
the  favour  of  the  Roman  people.^ ) But  as  at  that  period  I
was  not  only  personally  a supporter  of  your  rights,  but  also
advised  everybody  else  to  assist  you,  so  at  the  present
moment  I am  strongly  moved  by  consideration  for  the
position  of  Pompey.  It  is  now  a good  number  of  years
ago  since  I picked  out  you  two  as  the  special  objects  of
my  political  devotion,  and — as  you  still  are — of  my  warm
personal  affection.  Wherefore  I ask  you,  or  rather  entreat
^u,  and  appeal  to  you  with  every  form  of  prayer,  that  in  the
midst  of  your  very  great  preoccupations  you  would  yet  spare
^-pome  part  of  your  time  to  reflect  how  by  your  kindness  I may
be  enabled  to  do  what  goodness  and  gratitude,  and,  in  point
of  fact,  natural  affection  demand,  by  remembering  the  ex-
1 4xem£-JDbligatien--«nder  which  I stand.  If  these  considera-
tions only  affected  myself,  I should  yet  have  hoped  to  secure
your  assent ; but,  in  my  opinion,  it  concerns  both  your  own
honour  and  the  public  interest  that  I — a friend  to  peace  and
to  you  both — should,  as  far  as  you  are  concerned,  be  main-
tained in  a position  best  calculated  to  promote  harmony
between  you  and  among  our  fellow  citizens.

Though  I have  thanked  you  before  in  regard  to  Lentulus,“

^ Cicero  is  using  language  which  he  had  reason  to  know  was  such  as
Caesar  had  himself  used  to  L.  Caesar  at  Ariminum — doluisse  se,  quod  P.
P.  beneficimn  per  contiwieliam  ab  inimicis  extorqueretur  (Caes.  B.  C.
i.  9).  It  is  rather  a pitiful  attempt  to  “ sit  on  the  hedge,”  considering
what  his  real  sentiments  were.

^ P.  Cornelius  Lentulus  Spinther,  consul  B.C.  57,  to  whom  we  have
had  many  letters  addressed  while  he  was  in  Cilicia.  He  had  fallen  into
the  hands  of  Caesar  at  Corfinium,  and  had  been  dismissed  unharmed.

A IX,  II  a,  II

TO  ATTICUS

339

for  saving  the  man  who  saved  me,  yet  after  reading  a letter
from  him,  in  which  he  speaks  with  the  utmost  gratitude  of
your  generous  treatment  and  kindness  to  him,  I felt  that
the  safety  you  gave  him  was  given  to  me  also : and  if  you
perceive  my  gratitude  in  his  case,  pray  take  means  to  allow
me  to  shew  the  same  in  the  case  of  Pompey.

CCCLXVI  (A  IX,  II)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  20  March

Do  you  know  that  our  friend  Lentulus  is  at  Puteoli  ? Hav-
ing been  told  this  by  a passer-by,  who  said  that  he  had
recognized  him  on  the  Appia  upon  his  partly  drawing  the
curtain  of  his  sedan,  though  it  was  in  itself  probable,  I yet
sent  some  servants  to  Puteoli  to  inquire  and  take  him  a
letter.  He  was  discovered  with  some  difficulty,  as  he  was
keeping  himself  concealed  in  his  villa,  and  he  sent  me  back
an  answer  containing  wonderful  expressions  of  gratitude  to
Caesar ; but  as  to  his  own  plans  he  said  that  he  had  given
C.  Caecius  a message  for  me.  I am  expecting  him  to-day,
that  is,  the  20th  of  March.  Matius^  also  came  to  see  me
on  the  Quinquatrus  (19th  of  March),  a man,  by  Hercules,
as  he  seemed  to  me,  of  moderate  and  sensible  views.  Cer-
tainly he  has  always  been  regarded  as  a promoter  of  peace.
How  strongly  he  appeared  to  me  to  disapprove  what  is
going  on  in  Italy  ! How  fearful  of  that  inferno^  as  you  call  it !
In  the  course  of  a long  conversation  I shewed  him  Caesar’s
letter  to  me,  the  one  of  which  I have  sent  you  a copy  before,
and  asked  him  to  explain  the  sentence  in  it — “ he  wished  to
avail  himself  of  my  advice,  influence,  position,  and  help  in
all  ways.”  He  replied  that  he  had  no  doubt  that  he  wanted

^ C.  Matius,  of  whom  we  shall  hear  much  more,  was  a friend  of
Trebatius,  and  a strong  Caesarian.  He  survived  the  Civil  War  and
became  a friend  of  Octavian.

340

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  MT.  57

my  help  and  my  influence  for  eflecting  a pacification.  I
only  wish  I could  effect  and  carry  through  some  politic
move  in  the  present  distressing  circumstances  of  the  state  !
For  his  part,  Matius  felt  confident  that  that  was  Caesar’s
feeling,  and  promised  that  he  would  promote  it.  However,
on  the  day  previous  Crassipes  had  been  with  me,  who  said
that  he  had  quitted  Brundisium  on  the  6th  of  March  and  had
left  Pompey  there  : and  the  same  news  was  brought  also  by
those  who  quitted  that  place  on  the  8th.  They  one  and  all,
even  Crassipes — who  is  a sensible  enough  man  to  take  note
of  what  was  going  on — tell  the  same  story  of  threatening
speeches,  alienation  from  the  Optimates,  hostility  to  the
municipal  towns,  undisguised  proscriptions — Sullas  pure  and
simple.  What  things  Lucceius  says,  and  the  whole  posse  of
Greeks,  and  Theophanes  at  their  head ! And  yet  there  is
no  hope  of  safety  except  in  them : and  I am  keeping  my
mind  on  the  watch,  and  passing  sleepless  nights,  and  yearn-
ing to  be  with  men  exactly  the  opposite  of  myself,  in  order
to  escape  the  abominations  going  on  here  ! For  there —
what  crime  do  you  suppose  Scipio,  Faustus,  Libo  will  stick
at,  whose  creditors  are  said  to  be  actually  arranging  to  sell
them  up  ? What  do  you  suppose  they  are  likely  to  do  to
the  citizens,  if  they  turn  out  the  winning  side  ? ^ Moreover,
what  a poltroon  our  Gnaeus  is  ! They  tell  me  he  is  thinking
of  Egypt,  Arabia  Felix,  and  Mesopotamia,  and  has  now  quite
abandoned  Spain.  The  reports  are  outrageous,  but  they
may  possibly  be  untrue : yet  at  best  all  is  lost  here,  and  far
from  safe  there.  I am  beginning  to  pine  for  a letter  from
you.  Since  our  flight  there  has  never  been  so  long  a break
in  them.  I send  you  a copy  of  my  letter  to  Caesar,^  by  which
I think  I shall  do  some  good.

* Q.  Csecilius  Scipio,  Pompey’s  father-in-law,  was  deeply  in  debt,  and
Csesar  declares  that  to  have  been  his  motive  for  wishing  for  a civil  war
(Cres.  B.  C.  i.  4) ; L.  Cornelius  Sulla  Faustus  was  the  son  of  the  dictator
Sulla ; and  L.  Scribonius  Libo’s  daughter  was  married  to  Sext.  Pompeius.
Faustus  had  been  a rich  man,  but  had  probably  squandered  his  wealth.
We  hear  of  Libo  afterwards  as  owing  Cicero  money,  but  as  likely  to
j^ay.

The  previous  letter,  p.  337.

A IXj  II,  12

TO  ATTICUS

341

CCCLXVII  (A  IX,  12)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

F0RMI.E,  20  March

I HAD  just  read  your  letter  on  the  20th,  when  a packet  was
brought  me  from  Lepta  saying  that  Pompey  had  been  com-
pletely invested,  that  even  the  channels  of  the  harbour  were
blocked  up  with  vessels.  Upon  my  honour,  tears  prevent  my
thinking  of  or  writing  the  rest.  I send  you  a copy.  What
wretches  we  have  been  ! Why  did  we  not  follow  his  fortunes
to  the  end  ? Oh,  here ’s  the  same  news  from  Matius  and  Tre-
batius,who  have  been  met  by  Caesar’s  letter-bearers  at  Min-
turnae.  I feel  so  wracked  with  misery  that  I long  for  an  end
like  that  of  Mucius.^  Yet  how  honourable,  how  clear  is  your
advice,  how  thoroughly  thought  out,  in  regard  to  my  journey
by  land  as  well  as  by  sea,  and  my  meeting  and  conversation
with  Caesar ! There  is  honour  and  caution  alike  in  every
word.  Your  invitation  to  Epirus,  too,  how  kindly,  how
courteous,  how  brotherly  it  is  ! I am  surprised  at  Dionysius,
who  has  been  treated  with  greater  honour  in  my  family  than
Panaetius  was  in  Scipio’s : yet  my  unfortunate  position  has
been  regarded  by  him  with  the  foulest  contempt.  I detest
the  fellow,  and  always  shall.  I only  wish  I could  be  even
with  him  ! But  his  own  character  will  be  his  punishment.
Yes,  pray,  now  of  all  times  turn  over  in  your  mind  what  I
ought  to  do.  An  army  of  the  Roman  people  is  actually
surrounding  Gnaeus  Pompeius : it  has  inclosed  him  with
foss  and  palisade;  it  is  preventing  his  escape.  Are  we
alive  ? Is  our  city  still  intact  ? Are  the  praetors  presiding
in  the  courts,  the  aediles  making  preparations  for  their  games,
the  Optimates  entering  their  investments,  I myself  sitting
quietly  looking  on  ? Am  I to  make  an  effort  to  reach  Pompey
like  a madman  ? Am  I to  appeal  to  the  loyalty  of  the  muni-

^ Q.  Mucius  Scsevola,  murdered  in  B.c.  82  by  the  order  of  the  younger
Marius.  See  p.  282.

342

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

cipal  towns?  The  loyalists  won’t  follow  me,  the  careless
will  laugh  me  to  scorn,  the  revolutionists — especially  now
that  they  are  successful  and  fully  armed — will  use  main  force
to  me.  What  is  your  opinion,  then  ? Have  you  any  advice
to  give  as  to  how  to  put  an  end  to  this  most  wretched  state
of  existence  ? It  is  now  that  I feel  the  pang,  the  torture —
now  that  some  one  is  found  to  think  me  either  wise  or  lucky
for  not  having  gone.  My  feeling  is  the  reverse.  For  while
I was  never  willing  to  be  the  partner  of  his  victory,  I should
have  preferred  having  been  associated  with  his  disaster.
Why,  then,  should  I now  appeal  to  your  letter,  to  your  wis-
dom, or  your  kindness?  It  is  all  over.  Nothing  can  help
me  now : for  I have  now  nothing  even  to  wish  for,  except  to
be  set  free  by  some  merciful  stroke  of  the  enemy.

CCCLXVIII  (A  IX,  13)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  23  March

“’Tis  no  true  tale”^ — as  I think — that  about  the  ships.’^
For  in  that  case  what,  would  have  been  the  meaning  of
Dolabella’s  words  in  his  letter,  dated  from  Brundisium  on
the  13th  of  March,  when  he  mentioned  it  as  a success  on
the  part  of  Caesar  that  Pompey  was  in  full  retreat,  and  was
going  to  sail  with  the  first  favourable  wind  ? This  is  quite
inconsistent  with  those  letters,  of  which  I have  already  sent
you  copies.  Here,  indeed,  they  talk  of  nothing  but  disaster.
But  we  have  no  more  recent  authority,  and  of  this  particular
fact  no  better  one,  than  Dolabella.

I have  received  your  letter  of  the  22nd  of  March,  in  which
you  propose  to  postpone  all  plans  till  we  know  what  has
happened.  Of  course  that  is  quite  right : and  meanwhile  it

^ ovK  €(tt’  ervfiog  \6yog,  the  first  words  of  the  palinode  of  Stesichorus
on  Helen.

Perhaps  the  blocking  up  of  the  harbour  of  Brundisium,  which  we
know  from  Csesar  {B.  C.  i.  26,  27)  was  not  completed  ; or  the  news  on
p.  32[.

A IX,  13

TO  ATTICUS

343

is  impossible  not  merely  to  settle,  but  even  to  consider  any
plan.  However,  this  letter  of  Dolabella’s  inclines  me  to
recur  to  my  original  ideas.  For  on  the  day  before  the
Quinquatrus  ( 1 8th  of  March)  the  weather  was  splendid,  and
I suppose  he  has  taken  advantage  of  it.  That  precis  of  your
advice  was  not  made  by  me  by  way  of  reproach  to  you,  but
rather  to  console  myself.  For  the  evils  of  the  time  were
not  causing  me  so  much  vexation,  as  the  idea  of  my  having
done  wrong  and  acted  rashly.  I have  now  got  rid  of  that
idea,  since  my  actions  and  plans  coincide  with  your  sugges-
tions. You  remark  in  your  letter  that  it  is  rather  my  avowal
of  Pompey’s  services,  than  the  actual  amount  of  them,  that
makes  me  seem  to  be  under  an  obligation  to  him.  That  is
true  : I have  always  magnified  them,  and  the  more  so  that
I might  prevent  his  thinking  that  I remembered  his  earlier
conduct.  However  much  I might  remember  this,  I should
yet  be  bound  to  follow  the  example  he  set  at  that  time.^
He  gave  me  no  aid  when  he  might  have  done  so.  True  :
but  afterwards  he  was  my  friend,  and  a very  warm  one,  I
don’t  at  all  know  why.  Therefore  I too  will  be  his  friend.
Nay,  more,  there  is  this  analogy  in  our  two  cases,  that  we
have  been  betrayed  by  the  same  people.  But  oh,  that  it
had  been  in  my  power  to  render  him  as  important  a ser-
vice, as  he  was  able  to  render  me  ! After  all,  I am  exceed-
ingly grateful  for  what  he  did  ; yet,  at  the  present  moment,
I neither  know  how  to  help  him,  nor,  if  I could,  should  I
think  I ought  to  assist  him  while  preparing  to  engage  on
such  an  execrable  war.  Only  I don’t  wish  to  hurt  his  feelings
by  remaining  here.  I should  neither  have  the  resolution,
by  Hercules  ! to  watch  the  events,  which  you  can  even  now
foresee  in  imagination,  nor  to  take  part  in  those  unhappy
measures.  But  I was  all  the  slower  to  depart,  from  the
difficulty  of  imagining  a voluntary  departure  when  there
is  no  hope  of  a return.  For  I see  that  Caesar  is  so  well
equipped  with  infantry,  cavalry,  fleets,  and  Gallic  auxiliaries.
About  these  last  I suppose  Matius  was  talking  big,  but  he
certainly  said  that  10,000  infantry  and  6,000  cavalry  pro-
mised their  services  at  their  own  expense  for  ten  years.  But

' In  supporting  Cicero’s  recall,  though  he  had  failed  to  prevent  his
exile.

344

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

grant  this  to  be  gasconnade.  He  certainly  has  great  forces,
and  he  will  not  merely  have  the  revenue  of  Italy,  but  the
property  of  the  citizens.  Add  to  this  the  man’s  own  self-
confidence  and  the  weakness  of  the  loyalists,  who,  in  fact,
because  they  think  Pompey  deservedly  enraged  with  them,
have,  as  you  expressed  it,  become  disgusted  with  the  game.
Yes,  but  I could  have  wished  that  you  had  indicated  who
these  men  were.  The  fact  is  that  Caesar,  because  he  has
done  much  less  than  he  threatened,  is  regarded  with  affec-
tion;^ while  in  every  direction  those  who  loved  Pompey
now  cease  to  do  so.  The  municipal  towns,  in  fact,  and
the  Romans  living  in  the  country  fear  Pompey,  and  are
still  attached  to  Caesar.  Accordingly,  the  latter  is  so  well
prepared  that,  even  if  he  proves  unable  to  win  a victory,  I
yet  cannot  see  how  he  can  be  beaten  himself.  For  myself,
I am  not  so  much  afraid  of  Caesar’s  sorcery,  as  of  his  power
of  compulsion.  “ For  the  requests  of  tyrants,”  as  Plato  says,
“you  know,  partake  of  the  nature  of  commands.”^

I see  you  don’t  like  a place  of  residence  for  me  without
a port.  Neither  do  I : but  the  fact  is  I have  there  both  a
means  of  concealment  and  a trusty  band  of  followers.  If  I
could  have  had  the  same  at  Brundisium,  I should  have  pre-
ferred it.  But  concealment  is  impossible  there.  However,  as
you  say,  when  we  know  ! I am  not  very  careful  to  excuse  my-
self to  the  loyalists.  For  what  dinners  they  are  giving  and
attending,  according  to  Sextus’s  letter  to  me  ! How  splendid,
how  early  ! ^ But  let  them  be  as  loyalist  as  they  please,  they
are  not  more  so  than  we  are.  I should  have  cared  more  for
their  opinion,  if  they  had  shewn  more  courage.

I was  wrong  about  Phamea’s  estate  at  Lanuvium.  I was
dreaming  of  one  near  Troja.^  I wanted  it  for  Quintus  ;
but  it  is  too  dear.  I should,  however,  have  liked  t7  buy

^ Reading  sed  et  iste — amatur.  The  alteration  to  sedet  istJ  and  its
explanation  by  Boot  as  referring  to  D.omitius  appear  to  me  p be  very
harsh.  Domitius  was  not  being  by  any  means  inactive  at  th&  time,  and
there  is  no  special  reason  for  referring  to  him  here.  It  p,  true  that
amatur  is  not  in  the  MSS.,  but  its  introduction  (by  Graevps)  seems  to
me  a simpler  and  better  way  of  emending  the  text.  f

^ Plato,  Ep,  vii.  J

^ That  is,  beginning  early  in  the  afternoon,  a sign  pi  idleness  and
luxury  {pro  Mur.  § 13).  See  p.  31 1.  /

^ Apparently  the  name  of  some  property  near  Antiym.

A IX,  13,  13  a

BALBUS  TO  CICERO

345

that  one,  if  I had  seen  any  prospect  of  enjoying  it.  What
frightful  news  we  are  reading  every  day  you  will  under-
stand from  the  small  roll  inclosed  in  this  packet.  Our
friend  Lentulus  is  at  Puteoli,  distracted  with  doubt,  he  too,
as  Caecius  tells  me,  as  to  what  to  do.  He  is  in  terror  of  a
contretemps  like  that  at  Corfinium.^  He  thinks  that  he  had
done  his  duty  to  Pompey,  and  is  affected  by  Caesar’s  mag-
nanimous treatment,  but  still  more,  after  all,  by  the  outlook
in  the  future.

CCCLXIX  (A  IX,  13  a)

BALBUS  TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMIC)

Rome,  20  March

C^SAR  has  sent  me  a very  short  note,  of  which  I append  a
copy.  From  the  shortness  of  the  letter  you  will  be  able  to
gather  that  he  is  much  occupied,  or  he  would  not  have
written  so  briefly  on  so  important  a subject.  If  I get  any
farther  intelligence  I will  at  once  write  you  word.

“C^SAR  TO  OpPIUS  and  CORNELIUS.

“On  the  9th  of  March  I reached  Brundisium.  I have
pitched  my  camp  under  the  walls.  Pompey  is  at  Brun-
disium. He  sent  Numerius  Magius  to  me  to  negotiate  for
peace.*  I answered  as  I thought  right.  I wished  you  to

^ When  Domitius  and  his  army  had  had  to  surrender  to  Caesar ; P.
Lentulus  Spinther  was  among  the  senators  who  were  included  in  the
surrender  and  were  dismissed  unharmed  by  Caesar  (Caes.  B.  C.  i.  23).

^ Numerius  Magius  was  Pompey’s  prcefectus  fabrum.  According  to
Caesar  C.  i.  24-26,  see  p.  303),  he  fell  into  Caesar’s  hands  during  his
march  on  Brundisium,  and  was  sent  by  him  with  a message  to  Pompey,
but  did  not  return  with  any  answer.  Caesar  then  sent  Caninius  Rutilius
to  endeavour  to  induce  Pompey  to  have  a personal  conference.  In  the
Commentaries  Caesar  may,  from  a lapse  of  memory,  have  confused
matters.  Still,  it  looks  as  though  in  the  commentary  he  meant  to
justify  himself.  He  has  represented  the  proposals  for  peace  as  emanat-

346

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

know  this  at  once.  As  soon  as  I see  any  prospect  of  success
in  coming  to  terms,  I will  at  once  inform  you  of  it.”

You  can  imagine,  my  dear  Cicero,  my  state  of  torturing
anxiety,  after  having  again  conceived  some  hope  of  peace,
lest  any  circumstance  should  prevent  their  coming  to  terms.
For  I earnestly  wish  it,  which  is  all  I can  do  at  this  distance.
If  I were  only  there,  I might  perhaps  possibly  seem  of  some
use  in  the  matter;  as  it  is,  I am  wracked  with  anxious
suspense.

CCCLXX  (A  XI,  13,  § 8)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiB,  24  March

Can  you  endure  this  ? It  is  a lamentable  business  altogether,
but  nothing  can  be  more  lamentable  than  this  : Pompey  has
sent  N.  Magius  to  negotiate  a peace,  and  yet  is  being
besieged.  I could  not  have  believed  it,  but  I have  a letter
from  Balbus,  of  which  I inclose  a copy.  Read  it,  I beg  of
you,  and  especially  the  last  clause  of  the  excellent  Balbus
himself,  to  whom  our  Gnseus  presented  a site  for  a suburban
villa,  and  whom  he  often  preferred,  did  he  not  ? to  everyone
of  us  ! Accordingly,  the  poor  man  is  in  a state  of  painful
anxiety.  But  to  save  you  the  trouble  of  reading  the  saihe
thing  twice,  I refer  you  to  the  letter  itself.  Hope  of  peace,
however,  I have  none.  Dolabella  in  his  letter  dated  the
15  th  of  March  breathes  nothing  but  war.  Let  us  stick,  then,
to  the  same  resolution,  formed  in  sorrow  and  despair,  since
nothing  can  be  more  lamentable  than  this.

ing  from  himself,  whereas  the  letter  shews  that  they  came  from  Pompey.
It  may,  however,  be  that  when  Magius  is  said  to  have  been  deprensus
ex  itinere  he  was  really  on  his  way  with  a message  from  Pompey.

A XI,  13,  § 8 ; IX,  14

TO  ATTICUS

347

CCCLXXI  (A  IX,  14)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Formic,  25  March

I HAD  sent  you,  on  the  24th  of  March,  a copy  of  a letter
from  Balbus  to  me  and  of  Caesar’s  to  him.  Lo  and  behold,
on  the  same  day  I receive  a letter  from  Q.  Pedius,  from
Capua,  telling  me  that  Caesar  had  written  to  him  on  the
14th  of  March  in  the  following  words:  “Pompey  keeps
himself  in  the  town.  Our  camp  is  at  the  gates.  We  are
attempting  a difficult  operation,  and  one  which  will  occupy
many  days,  owing  to  the  depth  of  the  sea ; but  nevertheless
it  is  the  best  thing  for  us  to  do.  We  are  throwing  out  moles
from  both  headlands  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  in  order
to  compel  Pompey  to  take  the  forces  he  has  at  Brundisium
across  as  soon  as  possible,  or  to  prevent  his  getting  out  at
all.”  ^

Where  is  the  peace,  as  to  which  Balbus  said  that  he  was
in  a state  of  anxiety  ? Could  there  be  anything  more  vin-
dictive, more  ruthless  ? Moreover,  a certain  person  told  me
on  good  authority  that  Caesar  gives  out  that  he  is  avenging
Cn.  Carbo,  M.  Brutus,^  and  all  those  on  whom  Sulla,  with
Pompey’s  assistance,  had  wreaked  his  cruelty;  that  Curio
Was  doing  nothing  under  his  leadership  which  Pompey  had
not  done  under  Sulla’s ; that  he  was  seeking  the  restoration

^ Caesar  occupied  nine  days  in  this  work,  which  was  only  half  com-
pleted then.  He  did  not  really  expect  to  be  able  thoroughly  to  block
the  harbour.  His  object  was  to  frighten  Pompey  into  leaving  Italy,
thus  leaving  him  free  to  enter  Rome  himself  and  secure  his  position  in
the  West  generally  {B.  C.  i.  25-28).

^ Carbo  was  put  to  death  by  Pompey  in  B.c.  82  or  the  beginning  of
B.c.  81  at  Cossyra.  There  were  two  men  named  M.  Brutus  who  owed
their  death  to  Pompey,  the  former  a partisan  of  Carbo,  who  committed
suicide  off  Lilybaeum  rather  than  fall  into  Pompey’s  hands ; the  other,
the  father  of  the  tyrannicide,  whom  Pompey  put  to  death  at  Regium
B.c.  77  during  the  troubles  caused  by  Lepidus,  he  having  surrendered,
it  is  said,  on  promise  of  his  life.

348

CICERO’S  LETTERS  B.c.  49,  .^.t.  57

of  those  whose  exile  had  not  been  inflicted  upon  them  by
earlier  laws,  while  Pompey  had  restored  men  who  had  been
traitors  to  their  country ; that  he  complained  of  the  violence
used  to  secure  Milo’s  exile,  but  that,  nevertheless,  he  would
harm  no  one  unless  he  appeared  in  array  against  him.

This  is  the  story  told  by  a certain  Baebius,  who  left  Curio
on  the  13th,  a man  who  is  not  without  some  sense,  but  yet
not  capable  of  inventing  this  out  of  his  own  head.  I am
quite  at  a loss  what  to  do.  From  Brundisium,  indeed,  I
suppose  Pompey  has  already  started.  Whatever  has  hap-
pened, we  shall  know  in  two  days.  I haven’t  a line  from  you,
not  even  by  Anteros.  No  wonder  : for  what  is  there  for  us
to  write  about?  Nevertheless,  I don’t  omit  a single  day.

P.S. — After  this  letter  was  written,  I got  a letter  from
Lepta  before  daybreak  dated  from  Capua  on  the  15  th  of
March.  Pompey  has  embarked  from  Brundisium,  but  Caesar
will  be  at  Capua  on  the  26th  of  March.

CCCLXXII  (A  IX,  15)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)
Formia:,  25  March

After  I had  despatched  the  letter  informing  you  that
Caesar  would  be  at  Capua  on  the  26th,  I received  one  from
Capua  saying  that  he  would  be  in  Curio’s  Alban  villa  on  the
28th.^  When  I have  seen  him  I shall  go  to  Arpinum.  If
he  grants  me  the  indulgence  I ask  for,^  I shall  avail  myself
of  his  terms : if  not,  I shall  take  my  own  line  without  con-
sulting anyone  but  myself.^  Caesar,  as  he  has  informed  me,
has  stationed  a legion  at  Brundisium,  Tarentum,  and

* Messrs.  Tyrrell  and  Purser  adopt  a conjecture  of  Madvig’s,  et  hie
copiammihi  et  in  Albano,  etc.,  which  will  mean  : a letter  informing  me
“that  I can  have  an  interview  with  Caesar  either  here  or  in  Curio’s
Alban  villa.”

^ !.e.,  leave  to  absent  himself  from  the  senate,  and  to  take  neither
side  in  the  war.

^ Lit.  “ I shall  ask  and  obtain  something  from  myself.”  He  means.

A IX,  15

TO  ATTICUS

349

Sipontum  respectively.  He  appears  to  me  to  be  closing  up
exits  by  sea,  and  yet  himself  to  have  his  eyes  on  Greece
rather  than  on  Spain.  But  these  considerations  are  still
remote.  For  the  present  I am  at  once  excited  by  the  idea
of  meeting  him  (and  that  is  now  close  at  hand),  and  alarmed
as  to  his  first  political  steps.  For  he  will,  I presume,  want
a decree  of  the  senate,  and  also  a decree  of  the  augurs  : we
shall  be  hurried  off  to  Rome  or  molested,  if  we  hold  aloof,
with  a view  of  either  the  praetor  holding  an  election  of  con-
suls or  naming  a dictator,  neither  of  which  is  constitutional.^
Although,  if  Sulla  was  able  to  secure  being  named  dictator
by  an  interrex^  why  should  he  not  be  able  to  do  so  ? I see
no  way  out  of  it,  except  either  meeting  the  fate  of  Q.  Mucius
from  the  one,  or  of  L.  Scipio  ^ from  the  other.  By  the  time
you  read  this,  I shall  perhaps  have  had  my  interview  with
him.  “ Endure  ! still  worse  a fate  — no,  not  even  my  own
old  misfortune  ! In  that  case  there  was  a hope  of  a speedy
return,  there  was  universal  remonstrance.  In  the  present
instance  I am  eager  to  quit  the  country,  with  what  hope  of
return  I cannot  ever  conceive.  Again,  not  only  is  there  no
remonstrance  on  the  part  of  townsmen  and  countryfolk,  but,
on  the  contrary,  they  are  actually  afraid  of  Pompey  as  blood-
thirsty and  enraged.  Nevertheless,  nothing  makes  me  more
wretched  than  to  have  stayed  here,  and  there  is  nothing  that
I more  earnestly  desire  than  to  fly  away,  not  so  much  to
share  in  a war  as  in  a flight.  But  you  were  for  putting  off
all  plans  until  such  time  as  we  knew  what  had  happened  at
Brundisium.  Well,  we  now  know  : but  we  are  as  undecided
as  ever.  For  I can  scarcely  hope  that  he  will  grant  me  this
indulgence ; although  I have  many  fair  pleas  for  obtaining
it.  However,  I will  at  once  send  you  a verbatim  report  of
everything  he  says  to  me  and  I to  him.  Pray  strive  with
all  the  affection  you  have  for  me  to  assist  me  by  your  caution
and  wisdom.  Caesar  is  travelling  hither  at  such  a pace,  that
I am  unable  to  have  an  interview  even  with  Titus  Rebilus,

apparently,  that  he  will  go  to  Pompey,  but  he  doesn’t  want  to  say  so
clearly.

' See  pp.  330-33 1;

Who  was  proscribed  by  Sulla.  For  Scsevola  see  p.  282.

^ Homer,  Odyss.  xx.  18  : rsTXaOi  Kpaditj,  kuI  Kvvrepov  dWo  ttot
tT\r]Q.  “ Endure,  oh  heart ! still  worse  hast  borne  before.”

350

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  .«T.  57

as  I had  settled  upon  doing.  I have  to  conduct  the  whole
business  without  preparation.  Yet,  as  the  hero  in  the  Odyssey
says :

“ Some  my  own  heart,  and  some  will  God  suggest.”^

Whatever  I do  you  shall  know  promptly.  The  demands  of
Caesar  sent  to  Pompey  and  the  consuls,  for  which  you  ask,  I
do  not  possess  : nor  did  Lucius  Caesar  bring  them  in  writing.^
I sent  you  at  the  time  an  account  from  which  you  might
gather  what  the  demands  were.  Philippus  is  at  Naples,
Lentulus  at  Puteoli.  As  to  Domitius,  continue  your  in-
quiries as  to  where  he  is,  and  what  he  contemplates  doing.

You  say  that  I have  written  more  bitterly  about  Dionysius
than  suits  my  character.  See  what  an  old-fashioned  man
I am  ! I thought,  upon  my  honour,  that  you  would  be
annoyed  at  this  affair  more  than  I was  myself.  For,  besides
the  fact  that  I think  you  ought  to  be  moved  by  an  injury
done  me  by  anyone,  this  man  has  also  in  a certain  sense
outraged  yourself  in  having  behaved  badly  to  me.  But
what  account  you  should  take  of  this  it  is  for  you  to  judge.
However,  in  this  matter  I don’t  wish  to  lay  any  burden  upon
you.  For  my  part,  I always  thought  him  half  cracked,  now
I think  him  a scoundrel  and  a good-for-nothing  besides :
and  yet,  after  all,  not  a worse  enemy  to  me  than  to  himself.
What  you  said  to  Philargyrus  was  quite  right : you  certainly
have  a clear  and  good  case  in  proving  that  I had  been
abandoned  rather  than  had  abandoned.  When  I had
already  despatched  my  letter  on  the  25th,  the  servants
whom  I had  sent  with  Matius  and  Trebatius  brought  me
a letter,  of  which  this  is  a copy  :

“Matius  and  Trebatius  to  Cicero  Imperator.

“After  leaving  Capua  we  heard,  while  on  the  road,  that
Pompey,  with  all  the  forces  he  had,  started  from  Brundisium

^ Mentor  (or,  rather,  Athene  in  the  guise  of  Mentor),  Odyss,  iii.  27.
TrjXsfiax’  oWa  fiiv  ovtoq  kvl  ^psa'i  oyai  vorjceig
dXXa  Se  Kui  daifxujv  vTToOrjaeTai.

^ The  text  of  this  passage  is  hopelessly  corrupt.  I have  taken  tenta-
tively Schlitz’s  reading,  neqtie  descripta  attulit  ilia  Lucius.  The  refer-
ence is  thus  to  the  proposals  sent  in  January  by  Cajsar  to  the  consuls
and  Pompey  by  L.  Caesar  and  the  praetor  Roscius  (Caes.  B.  C.  i.  9-10  j
Letter  CCCXIV,  p.  257).

A IX,  15,  16

TO  ATTICUS

351

on  the  15th  of  March:  that  Caesar  next  day  entered  the
town,  made  a speech,  hurried  thence  for  Rome,  intending
to  be  at  the  city  before  the  ist  of  April  and  to  remain  there
a few  days,  and  then  to  start  for  Spain.  We  thought  it  the
proper  thing  to  do,  since  we  were  assured  of  Caesar’s  approach,
to  send  your  servants  back  to  you,  that  you  might  be  informed
of  it  as  early  as  possible.  We  do  not  forget  your  charges,
and  we  will  carry  them  out  as  circumstances  shall  demand.
Trebatius  is  making  great  exertions  to  reach  you  before
Caesar.  After  this  letter  had  been  written  we  received
tidings  that  Caesar  would  stop  at  Beneventum  on  the  25th
of  March,  at  Capua  on  the  26th,  at  Sinuessa  on  the  27th.
We  think  you  may  depend  on  this.”

CCCLXXIII  (A  IX,  16)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  26  March

Though  I have  nothing  to  write  to  you  about,  yet  I send
you  this  that  I may  not  omit  a single  day.  On  the  27th  it
is  announced  that  Caesar  will  stop  at  Sinuessa.  I received
a letter  from  him  on  the  26th,  in  which  he  now  talks  of
looking  forward  to  my  “resources,”  not  my  “aid,”^  as  in
his  former  letter.  I had  written  to  compliment  him  on  the
moderation  of  his  conduct  at  Corfinium,  and  he  answered
me  as  follows:

“C^SAR  Imperator  to  Cicero  Imperator.

“You  judge  me  quite  accurately — for  my  character  is
well  known  to  you — when  you  say  that  nothing  is  more
remote  from  my  disposition  than  cruelty.  For  myself,  as  I
take  great  delight  in  this  policy  for  its  own  sake,  so  your
approval  of  my  action  gives  me  a triumphant  feeling  of  glad-

^ The  distinction  between  the  plural  opes  and  the  singular  opem  can
hardly  be  given  by  one  word  in  English.

352

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

ness.  Nor  am  I shaken  by  the  fact  that  those,  who  were
allowed  to  go  free  by  me,  are  said  to  have  departed  with
the  intention  of  renewing  the  war  against  me : for  there  is
nothing  I like  better  than  that  I should  be  what  I am,  they
what  they  are.  I should  be  much  obliged  if  you  would
meet  me  at  the  city,  that  I may,  as  ever,  avail  myself  in  all
matters  of  your  counsels  and  resources.  Let  me  assure  you
that  nothing  gives  me  more  pleasure  than  the  presence  of
your  son-in-law  Dolabella.  This  additional  favour  I shall
owe  to  him  : ^ for  it  will  be  impossible  for  him  to  act  other-
wise, considering  his  great  kindness,  his  feeling,  and  his
cordial  goodwill  towards  myself.”

CCCLXXIV  (A  IX,  17)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

FoRMiiE,  27  March

I AM  expecting  Trebatius  on  the  27th,  the  day  I write  this
letter.  From  his  report  and  the  letter  from  Matius  I shall
consider  what  line  to  take  in  my  conversation  with  Caesar.
What  an  unfortunate  crisis ! I feel  no  doubt  that  he  will
urge  me  to  come  to  the  city.  For  he  ordered  a notice  to
be  put  up  at  Formiae,  among  other  places,  that  he  desired  a
full  meeting  of  the  senate  on  the  ist.  Well,  then,  ought  I
to  refuse  him  ? But  why  anticipate  ? I will  write  you  word
at  once  of  all  that  occurs.  I will  judge  from  what  he  says
whether  I am  to  go  to  Arpinum  or  elsewhere.  I want  to
give  my  son  his  toga  virilis.  I think  of  doing  it  there.
Pray  consider  what  should  be  my  next  step,  for  troubles
have  made  me  stupid.  I should  like  to  know  from  Curius
whether  you  have  received  any  news  of  Tiro.  For  to  me
Tiro  has  himself  written  in  such  a tone  as  to  alarm  me
about  his  health.  Those,  too,  who  come  from  those  parts
report  that  he  is  in  a critical  condition.  This  anxiety,  in  the

^ I.e.y  Cicero’s  presence  at  Rome.

A IX,  17,  18

TO  ATTICUS

353

midst  of  my  other  great  ones,  gives  me  much  uneasiness  :
for  in  my  present  position  his  services,  as  well  as  his  fidelity,
would  have  been  of  great  advantage.

CCCLXXV  (A  IX,  18)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Arpinum,  29  March

I FOLLOWED  your  advice  in  both  particulars : for  I spoke  in
such  a manner  as  rather  to  gain  his  respect  than  his  thanks,
and  I stuck  to  the  resolution  of  not  going  to  Rome.  I found
myself  mistaken  in  one  respect — in  thinking  that  he  would
be  easily  satisfied.  I never  saw  anything  less  so.  He  kept
remarking  that  he  was  condemned  by  my  decision,  that  the
rest  would  be  the  slower  to  come,  if  I did  not  do  so.  I re-
marked that  their  case  was  unlike  mine.  After  much  dis-
cussion he  said,  “ Come,  then,  and  discuss  the  question  of
peace.”  “ At  my  own  discretion  ? ” said  I.  “ Am  I to  pre-
scribe to  you  ? ” said  he.  “ My  motion  will  be  this,”  said  I,
“that  the  senate  disapproves  of  any  going  to  Spain  or  tak-
ing armies  across  to  Greece,  and,”  I added,  “ I shall  make
many  regretful  remarks  as  to  Gnaeus.”  Thereupon  he  said,
“Of  course,  I don’t  wish  such  things  said.”  “So  I sup-
posed,” said  I,  “but  I must  decline  being  present  there,
because  I must  either  speak  in  this  sense,  and  say  many
things  which  I could  not  possibly  pass  over,  if  present,  or
I must  not  come  at  all.”  The  upshot  was  that,  by  way
of  ending  the  discussion,  he  requested  that  I would  think
it  over.  I couldn’t  say  no  to  that.  So  we  parted.  I feel
certain,  therefore,  that  has  no  love  for  me.  But  I felt
warm  satisfaction  with  myself,  which  hasn’t  been  the  case
for  some  time  past.  For  the  rest,  good  heavens  ! What  a
crew  ! What  an  inferno ! to  use  your  word.  . . What  a

^ Some  other  words  {in  qua  erat  erosceleri)  occur  here,  manifestly
corrupt,  of  which  nothing  can  be  made.

II.  A A

354

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

gang  of  bankrupts  and  desperadoes  ! What  is  one  to  say  of
a son  of  Servius,  a son  of  Tullus  having  been  in  the  camp  by
which  Pompey  was  besieged  ? Six  legions ! He  is  extra-
ordinarily vigilant,  extraordinarily  bold : I see  no  limit  to
the  mischief.  Now,  at  any  rate,  it  is  time  for  you  to  bring
out  your  counsels.  This  is  where  you  drew  the  line.  Yet
his  closing  remark  in  our  interview,  which  I had  almost  for-
gotten to  mention,  was  very  offensive,  that  “if  he  was  not
allowed  to  avail  himself  of  my  counsels,  he  would  avail  him-
self of  such  as  he  could,  and  would  scruple  at  nothing.”
“ So  you  have  seen  with  your  own  eyes,”  say  you,  “ that  the
man  is  such  as  you  described  him  to  be.  Did  it  cost  you  a
sigh  ? ” Yes,  indeed.  “ Tell  me  the  rest.”  Well,  he  went
straight  off  to  his  villa  at  Pedum,  I to  Arpinum.  Next
I await  the  “twittering  swallow” — to  which  you  refer. ^
“ Come,”  you  will  say,  “ don’t  cry  over  spilt  milk  : “ even
the  leader  himself,  whom  we  are  following,  has  made  many
mistakes.”

But  I wait  for  a letter  from  you.  For  you  can’t  say,  as  in
former  ones,  “ Let  us  see  how  this  turns  out.”  The  final
test  was  to  be  our  meeting,  and  in  that  I feel  certain  I have
offended  him.  All  the  more  prompt  must  be  my  next  step.
Pray  send  me  a packet,  and  full  of  politics  ! I am  very
anxious  for  a letter  from  you.

^ AaXaysvtrav  illam,  which  seems  a certain  restoration  of  the  Greek
letters  of  the  MSS.,  as  is  explained  by  Letter  CCCLXI,  p.  326,
where  he  quotes  another  part  of  the  Greek  epigram  (Anth.  x.  i),  on
the  season  for  sailing  announced  by  the  swallow,  harbinger  of  spring  :

6 ttXooc  iipcuoQ'  Kal  yap  XaXayevcra  x^XiSujv
-ijSr]  jxkfi(SXu)Ktv  x<^

Xetfiunkg  d'  avOevai,  aealyTjKEv  da  OdXacrcra
Kvpaai  icai  rprjx^^  TTvavfiaTi  (Spacaopavr].

“ See  the  meads  bloom  ! the  time  has  come  for  sailing  :

The  twittering  swallow  hails  spring  here  at  last.

Hushed  is  the  sea,  the  soft  west  wind  prevailing,

Late  swollen  with  waves  and  lashed  with  bitter  blast.”

Of  course,  Cicero  means  that  he  will  sail,  as  soon  as  weather  permits,
to  join  Pompey.

^ Actum  ne  agas  (see  p.  322).  It  should  be  noticed  that  in  this
account  of  the  interview  with  Caesar  the  name  of  Caesar  does  not  occur,
perhaps  from  caution.

A IX,  i8,  19

TO  ATTICUS

355

CCCLXXVI  (A  IX,  19)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Arpinum,  I April

Being  debarred  from  Rome,  I gave  my  son  his  toga  virilis
at  Arpinum  in  preference  to  any  other  place,  and  my  fellow
townsmen  were  gratified  at  the  compliment : though  I ob-
served everywhere  that  both  they  and  others  whom  I passed
in  my  journey  were  in  low  spirits  and  much  dejected.  So
melancholy  and  shocking  is  the  contemplation  of  this
tremendous  disaster.  Levies  are  being  held,  the  men  are
being  drafted  into  winter  quarters.  These  are  measures
which,  even  when  taken  by  loyal  citizens  at  a time  of  regular
war  and  with  due  consideration,  are  yet  in  themselves  a
source  of  annoyance — how  unpopular  do  you  suppose  they
are  in  the  present  instance,  when  they  are  being  carried  out
by  men  of  reckless  character,  in  an  abominable  civil  war,
and  in  the  most  offensive  manner?  Don’t  imagine  that
there  is  a single  scoundrel  in  Italy  who  is  not  to  be  found
among  them.  I saw  them  en  masse  at  Formise.  I never,
by  Hercules ! believed  them  to  be  human  beings,  and  I
knew  them  all : but  I had  never  seen  them  collected  in
one  place.  Let  us  go,  then,  whither  we  have  resolved
to  go,  and  leave  all  that  is  ours  behind  us.  Let  us  start
to  join  him,  to  whom  our  arrival  will  give  greater  satis-
faction than  if  we  had  been  together  from  the  first.  For
at  that  time  we  were  in  the  highest  hopes,  now  I,  at  any
rate,  have  none ; nor  has  anyone  except  myself  left  Italy,
unless  he  regarded  Caesar  as  his  personal  enemy.  Nor,
by  Hercules  ! do  I do  this  for  the  sake  of  the  Republic,
which  I regard  as  completely  abolished : but  to  prevent  any-
one thinking  me  ungrateful  to  the  man,  who  relieved  me
from  the  miseries  which  he  had  himself  inflicted  upon  me  :
and  at  the  same  time  because  I cannot  endure  the  sight  of
what  is  happening,  or  of  what  is  certain  to  happen.  Why,

I believe  that  by  this  time  some  decrees  of  the  senate  have

356

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

been  passed,  I hope  they  may  be  in  the  sense  of  Volcatius’s
proposal/  But  what  does  it  matter?  Everyone’s  opinion
is  the  same.  But  Servius  will  be  the  most  implacable  of  all,
for  he  has  sent  his  son  with  Pontius  Titinianus  ^ to  crush,
or  at  any  rate  to  capture,  Gnaeus  Pompeius.  Yet  the  latter
acts  from  a motive  of  fear : but  the  former  ? But  let  us
cease  shewing  temper,  and  let  us  at  last  thoroughly  realize
that  we  have  nothing  left,  except  what  I could  least  have
wished — life.  As  for  us,  since  the  Upper  Sea  is  beset,  we
will  sail  by  the  Lower,  and  if  it  turns  out  to  be  difficult  to
start  from  Puteoli,  we  will  make  for  Croton  or  Thurii,  and
like  good  citizens,  devoted  to  our  country,  we  will  play  the
pirate.  I don’t  see  any  other  way  of  carrying  on  this  war.
We  will  go  to  Egypt  and  ensconce  ourselves  there.  We
cannot  possibly  be  his  match  on  land : of  peace  there  is  no
assurance.  But  enough  of  these  lamentations.  Pray  give  a
letter  to  Cephalio  on  everything  that  has  been  done,  and
even  about  what  men  say,  unless  they  have  become  entirely
tongue-tied.  I have  followed  your  advice,  and  especially  in
the  fact  that,  in  my  interview  with  him,  I both  maintained
my  proper  dignity  and  stuck  to  my  refusal  to  go  to  Rome.
As  to  the  rest,  pray  write  to  me  with  the  most  particular
care — for  by  this  time  the  worst  has  come  to  the  worst —
what  course  you  approve,  and  what  your  opinion  is.  There
can,  of  course,  be  now  no  hesitation : still,  if  anything  does
occur  to  you,  or  rather  whatever  occurs  to  you,  pray  write
me  word.

^ Perhaps  in  favour  of  sending  commissioners  to  treat  with  Pompey.
Such  a proposal  was  made  in  the  senate.  Caesar  tells  us  that  he  spoke
in  favour  of  it  himself,  but  he  does  not  mention  the  proposer  (Cses.
B.  C.  i.  32,  33).

^ Adopted  son  of  Q.  Titinius.  Servius  is  Ser  Sulpicius  Rufus.  See
last  letter,  p.  354.

A IX,  19;  X,

TO  ATTICUS

357

CCCLXXVII  (A  X,  1)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Laterium,  3 April

Having  arrived  at  my  brother’s  house  at  Laterium  on  the
3rd  of  April,  I received  your  letter  and  felt  a moment  of
relief — a thing  that  hadn’t  happened  to  me  since  these
disasters.  For  I value  very  highly  your  approval  of  my
firmness  of  mind  and  my  course  of  action.  As  your  an-
nouncement that  our  friend  Sextus  also  approves,  the  joy
that  that  gives  me  is  as  though  I imagined  myself  to  be
receiving  the  approbation  of  his  father,  for  whom  I always
had  a peculiar  and  special  regard.  It  was  he,  as  I am  often
accustomed  to  recall,  who,  in  old  times,  on  the  famous
5th  of  December,  when  I said,  “ What  to  do  then,  Sextus  ? ”
answered  me  by  quoting  :

“ Ah,  not  a coward’s  death,  nor  shorn  of  fame.

But  after  some  high  deed  to  live  for  aye.”  ^

His  influence,  therefore,  is  still  living  for  me,  and  his  son,
who  is  extremely  like  him,  has  the  same  importance  in  my
eyes  as  he  once  had.  Pray  give  him  my  very  kindest
regards.

You  certainly  defer  giving  advice,  though  not  to  a very
distant  date ; for  I imagine  by  this  time  that  that  suborned
peacemaker  ^ has  had  his  say,  and  that  some  decision  has

^ Homer,  II.  xxii.  304.

/i?)  [Lav  aairovdi  ye  Kal  a/cXeiw?  dTroXoifirjv^
dXkd  fisya  ri  Kai  iaaoiLevoiai  TTvOeaQai.

Cicero  omits  the  word  dnoXolpriv,  which  he  expects  Atticus,  as  usual,
to  supply,  but  not  from  such  design  (I  think)  as  Prof.  Tyrrell  suggests.
The  speaker  is  Sextus  Peducaeus,  the  circumstance  the  question  of  how
to  deal  with  the  Catilinarian  conspirators.  Peducseus  means,  “Strike
hard,  whatever  the  consequences  to  yourself.”  Quotations  seldom
exactly  represent  a man’s  meaning.  They  only  suggest  it.

^ Probably  Curio  is  meant,  whose  support  Csesar,  as  we  have  heard,
had  purchased  in  the  previous  year.  Others  suggest  Lepidus.

358

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

been  arrived  at  in  the  convention  of  senators — for  I don’t
consider  it  a senate — nevertheless,  you  do  keep  one  in  sus-
pense as  to  what  it  is  to  be,  yet  the  less  so  because  I feel  no
hesitation  as  to  what  we  ought  to  do.  For  when  you  write
word  that  a legion  and  Sicily  are  being  offered  to  Flavius,
and  that  that  business  is  already  being  carried  out,  what
crimes  must  you  think  are  partly  being  actually  proposed
and  meditated,  partly  will  crop  up  in  the  future  ? I,  for  my
part,  shall  disregard  the  law  of  Solon — your  countryman,
and  presently,  I think,  to  be  mine — who  punished  by  dis-
franchisement the  man  who,  in  a case  of  civil  disturbance,
took  neither  side.  Unless  you  think  otherwise,  I shall  hold
aloof  both  from  the  one  and  the  other.  But  one  of  the  two
courses  is  more  decidedly  resolved  upon  in  my  mind,  and
yet  I will  not  anticipate.  I shall  await  your  advice  and  the
letter  (unless  you  have  by  this  time  sent  another)  which  I
asked  you  to  deliver  to  Cephalio.  You  say,  not  because  you
have  heard  it  from  anyone  else,  but  because  it  is  your  personal
belief,  that  I shall  be  drawn  into  any  negotiation  there  may
be  about  peace.  I have  no  idea  at  all  of  any  negotiation
for  peace  being  possible,  since  it  is  Caesar’s  most  fixed  de-
termination, if  he  can,  to  strip  Pompey  of  his  army  and
province,^  unless,  perchance,  that  well-paid  friend  of  yours
can  persuade  him  to  keep  quiet  long  enough  to  allow  com-
missioners to  go  and  return.  I see  nothing  to  hope  for  or
to  think  of  as  possible.  Nevertheless,  this  is  itself  a point
for  an  honest  man  to  consider : it  is  important  and  among
the  problems  of  V haute  politique''- — whether  one  ought  to
appear  at  the  council-board  of  a tyrant,  if  he  is  going  to
discuss  some  subject  good  in  itself.  Wherefore,  if  anything
should  turn  up  of  a sort  to  lead  to  my  being  summoned —
which  for  my  part  does  not  give  me  any  anxiety,  for  I have
said  what  I intended  saying  about  peace,  and  Caesar  himself
emphatically  repudiated  it — but  if  anything  should  turn  up,
write  and  tell  me  in  any  case  what  you  think  I ought  to  do.
For  nothing  has  as  yet  occurred  to  me  requiring  more  de-

^ Spain,  which  was  being  governed  for  Pompey  by  three  legates,
forced  by  Caesar  in  the  following  summer  to  surrender.

■ Tyrrell  and  Purser  give  a different  complexion  to  this  sentence  by
introducing  ut  non  before  magnum^  and  sit  after  it,  “ Even  supposing  it
not  to  be  a problem  of  haute  politique P etc.

AX,  I,  2 TO  ATTICUS  359

liberation.  I rejoice  that  you  are  pleased  with  the  words  of
Trebatius,  a good  man  and  a good  citizen ; and  your  own
frequent  exclamation  of  “excellent”  has  been  the  one  thing
up  to  now  that  has  given  me  pleasure.  I am  looking  eagerly
for  a letter  from  you,  which,  indeed,  I feel  sure  is  already  on
its  way.  You,  along  with  Sextus,  have  maintained  the  same
dignified  resolve  as  you  enjoin  upon  me.  Your  friend  Celer
is  rather  a man  of  learning  than  of  good  sense.  What  Tullia
has  told  you  about  our  young  men  is  true.  What  you  men-
tion ^ in  your  letter  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  so  formidable
in  fact  as  in  sound.  It  is  this  state  of  distraction  in  which
we  now  are  that  is  a kind  of  death.  I had  two  alternatives
before  me — either  to  continue  active  political  life  among
the  disloyal  with  freedom  of  action,  or  to  side  with  the
loyalists  at  whatever  risk.  Let  me  either  follow  the  fool-
hardy counsels  of  the  loyalists,  or  attack  the  reckless
measures  of  the  disloyal.  Either  is  dangerous  : but  what  I
am  now  doing  is  discreditable  and  yet  not  safe.  I think  that
your  friend  who  sent  his  son  to  Brundisium  ^ to  negotiate  a
peace  (I  am  quite  of  your  opinion  as  to  peace,  that  it  is  a
palpable  pretence,  and  that  war  is  being  prepared  with  the
utmost  energy)  will  be  commissioned,  not  myself ; of  which
as  yet  no  word,  to  my  great  relief,  has  been  said.  I there-
fore think  it  the  less  necessary  to  write,  or  even  to  consider
what  I should  do,  if  I should  happen  to  be  commissioned.

CCCLXXVIII  (A  X,  2)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Arcanum,  6 April

Having  received  your,  letter  on  the  5th  of  April,  which
Cephalio  brought,  and  intending  to  stop  the  next  day  at
Minturnae,  meaning  to  start  back  thence  at  once,  I broke

^ A word  here  is  in  the  MSS.  maconi^  of  which  nothing  can  be  made.
Various  emendations  have  been  suggested,  but  none  are  satisfactory.
Perhaps  vapKrjfia  or  vdpKOideg,  “numbness.”

^ Servius  Sulpicius  Rufus  (see  p.  397).

36o

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

my  journey  at  my  brother’s  house  at  Arcanum,  in  order
that,  until  I got  more  certain  intelligence,  I might  be  in  a
more  retired  place,  and  yet  all  the  preparations  should  go  on
which  do  not  require  my  presence.  The  “ twitterer  ” ^ is
now  here,  and  I am  all  eagerness  to  be  gone ; and  yet  I have
no  idea  of  destination  or  route.  But  these  points  I and
those  who  understand  such  things  will  have  to  settle.  Yet
pray,  to  the  best  of  your  power,  continue  to  aid  us  as  before
with  your  advice.  Things  are  in  an  impossible  tangle.
Everything  has  to  be  left  to  chance.  We  are  struggling
along  without  any  hope.  If  anything  better  turns  up,  it  will
be  a surprise.  I would  rather  Dionysius,  of  whom  Tullia
has  written  me  word,  had  not  set  out  to  join  me.  The
truth  is  that  it  is  not  a suitable  time,  nor  do  I wish  that
my  discomforts — especially  considering  their  gravity — should
furnish  a spectacle  to  a man  who  is  not  my  friend,  and  I
don’t  want  you  to  be  at  enmity  with  him  on  my  account.

CCCLXXIX  (A  X,  3)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Arcanum,  7 April

Though  I have  absolutely  nothing  to  write  about,  yet  there
are  these  remaining  points  which  I want  to  know — whether
Caesar  has  started ; in  what  position  he  has  left  the  city ; in
Italy  itself,  whom  he  has  placed  at  the  head  of  each  region
or  department  of  business ; and  who  were  sent  to  Pompey
and  the  consuls  as  peace  commissioners,  in  accordance  with
the  decree  of  the  senate  ? So  to  ascertain  these  facts  I make
a point  of  sending  this  letter  to  you.  You  will  be  doing  me,
therefore,  a great  service,  and  one  I shall  be  grateful  for,  if
you  will  inform  me  on  these  points  and  any  other  that  it  is
necessary  to  know.  I shall  stay  in  Arcanum  until  I get  the
information.

^ See  p.  354.

A X,  3,  3 a,  4

TO  ATTICUS

361

CCCLXXX  (A  X,  3 a)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Arcanum,  7 April

I AM  dictating  this  letter  on  the  7 th  of  April — the  second  on
the  same  day — and  I wrote  a longer  one  the  day  before  with
my  own  .hand.  They  say  that  you  have  appeared  at  the
Regia,  ^ and  I don’t  blame  you,  seeing  that  I have  not  shrunk
from  incurring  the  like  criticism.”  But  I await  a letter  from
you.  I really  don’t  see  now  what  1 have  to  expect,  but
nevertheless,  even  if  there  is  nothing  to  say,  I should  like
^ ou  to  write  and  tell  me  only  that.  Caesar  writes  to  say  that
he  excuses  my  non-appearance,  and  declares  that  he  doesn’t
take  it  at  all  amiss.  I am  not  disturbed  by  what  he  tells
me  about  Tullus  and  Servius,  that  they  have  grumbled  at
his  not  having  given  them  the  same  licence  as  he  did  to
me.  Absurd  fellows  ! To  send  their  sons  to  besiege  Gnaeus
Pompeius,^  and  then  to  scruple  about  coming  to  the  senate
themselves  ! However,  I am  sending  you  a copy  of  Caesar’s
letter.

CCCLXXXI  (A  X,  4)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  14  April

I HAVE  received  a large  number  of  letters  from  you  on  the
same  day,  all  carefully  written ; one,  however,  which  amounts
to  a volume,  deserving  to  be  read  again  and  again,  as  I am
doing.  The  labour  of  writing  it  was  not  thrown  away,  and
I am  excessively  obliged  to  you.  Wherefore,  as  long  as  cir-
cumstances allow  of  it,  that  is,  as  long  as  you  know  where  I

^ The  official  residence  of  Caesar  as  Pontifex  Maximus.

^ That  is,  by  having  an  interview  with  Caesar.

^ P.  354-

362

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

am,  I earnestly  beg  of  you  to  repeat  the  experiment  as  often
as  possible.  Yes,  indeed  : let  there  be  once  for  all  an  end,
if  possible,  to  these  daily  lamentations,  or  at  any  rate  some
sort  of  restraint  in  them,  which  at  least  is  possible.  For  it
is  not  now  the  rank,  the  honours,  or  the  position  in  life  which
I have  lost  that  I am  thinking  of,  but  what  I have  actually
attained  to,  the  services  I have  performed,  the  reputation  in
which  I have  lived : in  fine,  the  difference,  even  in  these
disastrous  circumstances,  between  myself  and  those  through
whom  I have  lost  all.  These  are  the  men  who  thought  that,
without  expelling  me  from  the  state,  they  could  not  maintain
the  free  gratification  of  their  desires ; and  you  see  to  what
this  close  alliance  and  unprincipled  coalition  of  theirs  has
come  !

The  one  leader  is  in  a fever  of  mad  fury  and  crime  : there
is  no  slackening  with  him : his  hand  grows  heavier  every
day.  Not  long  ago  he  expelled  Pompey  from  Italy.  Now
on  one  side  of  the  empire  he  is  for  pursuing  him,  on  the
other  for  stripping  him  of  his  province.  He  no  longer  re-
fuses, he  even  in  a sense  demands,  to  have  the  title  of  tyrant,
as  he  already  is  one  in  fact.  The  other — the  man  who  once
upon  a time  did  not  so  much  as  raise  me  up  when  I threw
myself  at  his  feet — the  man  who  said  he  could  do  nothing
against  Caesar’s  wish — having  evaded  the  hand  and  sword  of
his  father-in-law,  is  now  preparing  war  by  land  and  sea ; not
an  unjust  one  on  his  part  indeed,  but  both  righteous  and
even  necessary,  but  yet  one  fatal  to  his  fellow  citizens  unless
he  prove  victorious,  fraught  with  disaster  even  if  he  is
victorious.

Not  only  do  I not  rate  the  achievements  of  these  supreme
commanders  as  superior  to  my  own  : I do  not  even  consider
that  their  present  position  is  any  better,  though  they  seem
to  be  in  a very  brilliant  one,  and  I to  be  struggling  with  a
harder  fate.  For  who  can  be  happy  who  has  caused  either
the  abandonment  or  the  invasion  of  his  country  ? And  if,  as
you  remind  me,  I was  right  in  saying  in  these  books  that  the
only  good  was  virtue,  the  only  evil  vice,  certainly  both  those
men  are  in  the  highest  degree  miserable,  for  to  both  the
safety  and  dignity  of  their  country  have  always  been  subor-
dinate to  their  own  power  and  their  private  advantage.  I
am  therefore  sustained  by  the  purity  of  my  conscience,  when

A X,  4

TO  ATTICUS

363

I reflect  that  I either  performed  the  most  eminent  services
to  the  state,  when  I had  the  power,  or  at  least  never  har-
boured any  but  loyal  thoughts ; and  that  the  Republic  has
been  wrecked  by  precisely  the  storm  which  I foresaw  fourteen
years  ago.  With  such  feelings,  then,  as  my  companions,  shall
I set  out,  not  indeed  without  a bitter  pang,  and  that,  not  so
much  for  my  own  or  my  brother’s  sake  (for  our  life  is  prac-
tically over)  as  for  our  sons,  for  whom  at  times  it  seems  to
me  that  we  were  bound  to  have  secured,  among  other  things,
the  integrity  of  the  constitution.  Of  them  the  one,  because
he  is  not  after  all  more  dutiful  than  he  is,  gives  me  extra-
ordinary pain  : while  the  other — Oh  dear ! Oh  dear  ! it  is
the  keenest  sorrow  of  my  life — corrupted  no  doubt  by  our
system  of  indulgence,  has  gone  very  far,  to  a point  indeed
which  I do  not  venture  to  describe.^  I am  expecting,  too,
a letter  from  you : for  you  said  that  you  would  write  at
greater  length  when  you  had  seen  the  young  man  himself.
All  my  indulgent  conduct  to  him  has  been  accompanied
with  considerable  strictness,  and  it  is  not  one  only  or  a small
peccadillo  of  his  that  I have  come  down  upon,  but  many
and  very  serious  ones ; his  father’s  gentleness  to  him  also
ought  to  have  secured  his  affection,  rather  than  such  unfeel-
ing disrespect.  The  fact  is  that  his  writing  to  C^sar  caused
us  such  serious  annoyance,  that,  while  we  concealed  it  from
you,  we  yet,  I think,  made  his  own  life  unpleasant.  This
recent  journey  of  his,  however,  and  his  pretence  of  loyalty
to  us  ^ I do  not  venture  to  characterize.  I only  know  that
after  visiting  Hirtius  he  was  invited  to  an  interview  by
Caesar,  that  he  talked  to  him  about  my  feeling  as  being  en-
tirely opposed  to  his  own  views,  and  of  my  design  of  quitting
Italy.  Even  this  I do  not  write  with  confidence.  Well,  it
is  not  my  fault,  it  is  his  natural  disposition  that  must  cause
us  alarm.  It  was  this  that  corrupted  Curio  and  the  son  of
Hortensius,  not  their  fathers’  fault.  My  brother  is  prostrate

^ Neither  Cicero’s  son  nor  his  nephew,  apparently,  were  keen  enough
anti-Csesarians.  His  son  gave  him  much  anxiety  by  his  conduct  in  early
life,  and  the  nephew  not  only  now  shewed  his  Caesarian  leanings,  but
after  Pharsalia  turned  fiercely  on  his  uncle,  as  having  involved  them
in  a losing  cause,  and  was  joined  in  that  by  his  father  Quintus.

^ Young  Quintus  had  insisted  on  going  to  Rome  to  interview  Caesar,
professing  to  plead  his  father’s  and  uncle’s  cause,  but  really,  Cicero
thinks,  denouncing  them  and  repudiating  their  policy.

3^4

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  .ET.  57

with  grief,  and  is  not  so  much  afraid  for  his  own  life  as  for
mine.  To  this  misery  pray,  pray,  bring  any  consolations
that  you  can ; above  all  I should  prefer  one — the  assurance
that  the  story  told  us  is  false  or  exaggerated.  If  it  is  true,  I
don’t  see  what  is  to  happen  in  our  present  state  of  life,  when
we  are  practically  exiles.  For  if  the  Republic  had  still  had
any  existence,  I should  have  been  at  no  loss  what  to  do  either
by  way  of  severity  or  indulgence.  Whether  it  is  the  influence
of  anger,  or  pain,  or  fear,  I have  written  this  in  a tone  of
greater  severity  than  either  your  affection  for  him  or  mine
would  seem  to  warrant.  If  it  is  true,  you  must  pardon  me  :
if  false,  I shall  be  only  too  glad  to  be  relieved  of  my  mistake
by  you.  But  whatever  the  truth  of  the  matter  may  be,  you
must  not  attribute  any  blame  to  his  uncle  or  father.

I had  written  so  far  when  a message  was  brought  from
Curio’s  house  that  he  was  coming  to  call  on  me.  He  had
arrived  at  his  Cuman  villa  yesterday,  that  is,  the  13th.  If
his  conversation,  therefore,  furnishes  me  with  any  subject
worth  writing  to  you,  I will  append  it  to  this  letter.

Curio  passed  by  my  villa  and  sent  me  a message  to  say
that  he  was  coming  presently,  and  hurried  on  to  Puteoli  to
make  a public  speech  there.  He  made  his  speech,  returned,
and  paid  me  a very  long  visit.  Monstrous  ! You  know  our
friend  : he  made  no  concealments.  To  begin  with,  he  said
that  it  was  absolutely  certain  that  all  who  had  been  con-
demned under  the  lex  Pompeia  ^ were  being  recalled,^  and
that  accordingly  he  would  avail  himself  of  their  services  in
Sicily.  As  to  the  Spains,  he  had  no  doubt  about  their  being
Caesar’s ; and  from  them  Caesar  would  himself  march  with
an  army  wherever  Pompey  was  : that  an  end  would  be  put
to  the  whole  mischief  by  the  latter’s  death : that  in  an
access  of  anger  Caesar  had  really  wished  the  tribune  Metellus
to  be  killed,^  and  that  it  was  within  an  ace  of  being  done :

^ The  law  passed  by  Pompey  in  his  third  consulship  (b.c.  52)  on
bribery  and  violence.  The  Ccesarian  view  was  that  the  laws  had  been
passed,  and  the  trials  held,  under  terrorism,  as  Pompey  had  an  armed
guard  in  the  city.

^ This  measure  was  carried  out  by  Antony  under  Csesar’s  direction
(2  Phil.  § 56  seq,).  See  p.  396.

^ When  Caesar  was  at  Rome  after  Pompey ’s  flight  from  Brundisium,
he  found  it  impossible  to  get  the  measures  he  wished  passed  in  the

A X,  4

TO  ATTICUS

365

if  it  had  been  done,  there  would  have  followed  a serious
massacre:  that  a great  many  people  advised  one  : that  Caesar
himself  was  not  by  taste  or  nature  averse  from  bloodshed,  but
thought  clemency  would  win  him  popularity  : if,  however,  he
once  lost  the  affection  of  the  people,  he  would  be  cruel : he
was,  again,  much  disturbed  by  finding  that  he  had  caused
ill-feeling  among  the  populace  itself  by  taking  the  treasury,
and  therefore  that,  though  he  had  quite  made  up  his  mind
to  address  the  people  before  leaving  Rome,  he  had  not
ventured  to  do  so,  and  had  started  with  very  disturbed
feelings.^  When  again  I asked  what  he  saw  in  the  future,
what  final  result,  and  what  sort  of  a constitution,  he  openly
confessed  that  there  was  no  hope  left.  He  expressed  fear
of  Pompey’s  fleet,  and  said  that,  if  it  put  out  to  sea,  he
should  abandon  Sicily.  “What  is  the  meaning  of  your
lictors  ? ” said  I.  “ If  derived  from  the  senate,  why  laurelled  ?
If  from  Caesar,  why  six  ? ” “I  wanted,”  said  he,  “ to  get  my
authority  from  a decree  of  the  senate,  though  by  a snatch
vote,  for  it  could  not  be  done  otherwise.  But  Caesar  now  dis-
likes the  senate  much  more  than  ever.  ‘Everything,’  he
says,  ‘will  in  future  come  from  me.’”  “But  why  six?”^
“ Because  I did  not  want  twelve ; I might  have  had  them.”
Then  I said,  “ How  I wish  I had  asked  him  for  what  I hear
Philippus  ^ has  succeeded  in  getting  ! But  I was  afraid  to

senate,  because  his  enemies  put  up  the  tribune  L.  Csecilius  Metellus  to
veto  every  proposal  (Csesar,  B.  C.  i.  33).

^ This  is  a striking  comment  upon  Caesar  by  one  of  his  own  partisans  ;
and,  though  Caesar  falsified  it  by  persistent  clemency  to  most  of  his
citizen  opponents,  there  are  circumstances  in  the  Gallic  campaigns
which  make  us  hesitate  to  acquit  Caesar  altogether  of  cruelty.  Curio’s
character,  however,  takes  much  from  his  credibility  as  a witness  or
critic.

^ Curio  was  going  to  Sicily  with  imperium.  The  governor  of  Sicily
was  regularly  a praetor  or  propraetor,  and  would  have  six  lictors.  But
Curio,  not  having  been  elected  praetor,  or  nominated  by  the  senate,  was
really  a legatns  of  Caesar’s,  and  might  have  whatever  status — pro  consume
or  pro  prcBtore — that  Caesar  chose.  If  Curio  had  only  the  six  lictors  by
way  of  posing  as  a propraetor  constitutionally  nominated  by  the  senate,
then  the  laurels  were  out  of  place  : for  such  successes  as  he  had  gained
were  gained  before  the  senate  could  have  nominated  him,  and  were  also
over  citizens,  for  which  no  insignia  of  victory  were  ever  assumed.

^ Married  to  Atia,  niece  of  Caesar  and  mother  of  Augustus.  He  was
a strong  Optimate,  and  was  allowed  by  Caesar  to  live  where  he  chose
away  from  Rome,  and  take  no  part  in  the  quarrel.

366

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

ask,  as  I had  made  no  concession  to  him.”  “ He  would  have
gladly  given  you  leave,”  said  he  : “ indeed,  consider  that  you
have  obtained  it;  for  I will  write  and  tell  him,  exactly  as
you  like,  that  we  have  spoken  on  the  subject.  What  does
it  matter  to  him,  since  you  do  not  attend  the  senate,  where
you  are  ? Nay,  at  this  very  moment  you  would  not  have
damaged  his  cause  in  the  least  by  having  quitted  Italy.”
In  answer  to  this  I said  that  I was  looking  out  for  some
retired  and  solitary  spot,  chiefly  because  I still  had  lictors.
He  commended  my  design.  “What  do  you  say  to  this,
then  ? ” said  I.  “ My  course  to  Greece  lies  through  your
province,  since  the  coast  of  the  Mare  Superum  is  guarded
by  troops.”  “Nothing  I should  like  better,”  said  he.  On
this  subject  he  spoke  at  great  length  and  in  a very  courteous
tone.  So  then  I have  gained  this  much,  that  I can  sail  not
only  in  safety,  but  even  without  concealment.  All  other
subjects  of  discussion  he  put  off  till  the  next  day ; and,  if
any  of  them  seem  worth  a letter,  I will  write  and  tell  you.
But  there  are  some  things  which  I omitted  to  ask  him  ;
whether  Caesar  intended  to  wait  for  an  interregnum^  or
what  he  meant  by  saying,  as  he  did,  that  he  was  offered
the  consulship,  but  ref^used  it  for  the  next  year.  And  there
are  other  points  on  which  I will  question  him.  To  crown
all  he  swore — as  he  usually  makes  no  difficulty  of  doing — that
Caesar  must  be  very  fond  of  me.  “ Why,  what,”  continued
he,  “did  Dolabella  write  to  me?”  “Pray  tell  me  what.”
He  then  declared  that  Dolabella  had  written  to  say  that,
for  having  desired  me  to  come  to  the  city,  Caesar  had
thanked  him  warmly,  and  not  only  expressed  approbation,
but  joy.  In  short,  I was  relieved.  For  the  suspicion  of
domestic  treachery  and  of  the  conversation  with  Hirtius
was  removed.^  How  I long  for  young  Quintus  to  be  worthy
of  us,  and  how  I encourage  myself  to  believe  what  is  in  his
favour  ! But  need  he  have  visited  Hirtius  ? There  is,  no
doubt,  some  motive  or  other ; but  I would  wish  it  as  slight
as  possible.  And,  after  all,  I am  surprised  at  his  not  yet
having  returned.  But  we  shall  see  about  all  this.  Please

^ He  thinks  that  if  his  nephew  Quintus  had,  as  he  suspected,  abused
him  to  Caesar  or  his  friend  Hirtius,  Caesar  would  not  have  spoken  thus
kindly  of  him.

ax,4;f,viii,  i6  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  367

put  the  Oppii  at  Terentia’s  service.  For  that  is  the  only
danger  in  the  city  now.^  For  myself,  however,  give  me  the
benefit  of  your  advice,  as  to  whether  I should  go  to  Rhegium
by  land,  or  start  straight  from  this  place  on  board  ship,  and
on  other  points ; for  I am  still  staying  here.  I shall  have
something  to  write  to  you  about  as  soon  as  I have  seen
Curio  again.  Pray  be  as  careful  as  ever  to  let  me  know
how  Tiro  is.

CCCLXXXII  (F  VIII,  16)

M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMI^E)

On  the  Road  to  Spain, ^ (16)  April

Being  mortally  alarmed  by  your  letter,  in  which  you  shewed
that  your  mind  was  filled  with  gloomy  ideas,  without  saying
outright  what  they  were,  and  yet  betraying  the  kind  of  action
which  you  were  contemplating,  I write  this  letter  to  you  on
the  spot.  In  the  name  of  your  fortunes  and  your  children,
my  dear  Cicero,  I beg  and  beseech  you  not  rashly  to  im-
peril your  safety  and  security.  I protest  in  the  name  of
gods  and  men,  and  of  our  friendship,  that  I told  you
beforehand,  and  that  my  warning  was  not  given  inconsider-
ately, but  that  after  meeting  Caesar,  and  ascertaining  what
his  vie^w  would-be,  if  he  gained  the  victory,  I informed  you
of  you* think  that  Caesar  will  maintain  the  same

policy  in  letting  his  adversaries  go  and  offering  terms,  you
are  mistajcen.-  His  thoughts,  and  even  his  words,  forebode
nothing  but  severity  and  cruelty.  He  left  town  incensed
with  the  senate:  he  was  thoroughly  roused  by  the  recent
tribunician  intercessions  : ® there  will  be  no  place,  by  heaven,

^ The  money  difficulty.  The  Oppii  were  money-lenders  (see  pp,
249,  289).  I translate  the  MS.  reading,  unum  pericuhim.  Gro-
novius  conjectured  vanum^  “the  danger  of  remaining  in  the  city  is
now  groundless.”  I think  Cicero,  however,  means  that  Terentia’s  only
difficulty  will  be  to  get  ready  money.

^ Probably  near  Marseilles,  where  Caesar  stopped  on  his  way  to  Spain
for  some  weeks  to  organize  its  siege.

^ The  intercessions  of  Metellus.  See  previous  letter,  p.  364.

368

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  /ET.  S7

for  mediation.  Wherefore,  if  you  love  yourself,  if  you  love
your  only  son,  if  your  family  and  your  remaining  hopes  are
dear  to  you ; if  I,  or  that  excellent  man  your  son-in-law,
have  any  influence_with  you — and  you  surely  ought  not  to
wish  to  ruin  usi/ln  order  to  force  us  to  choose  between
tdatliihg^  and  jibandoning  the  cause,  / on  the  triumph  of
^ which  our  safety  depends,  or  harbouring  an  unnatural  wish
against  your  safety.  Finally  consider  this  : whatever  offence
your  hesitation  has  caused  Pompey  you  have  already  in-
curred; it  would  be  a piece  of  most  consummate  folly  to
act  against  Caesar  now  that  he  is  victorious,  when  you
refused  to  attack  him  while  his  fortunes  were  doubtful — to
join  the  men  after  they  have  been  driven  into  flight,  whom
you  refused  to  follow  when  they  were  holding  their  ground,
“^ake  care  lest,  while  feeling  ashamed  of  not  being  a good
enou^  Optimate,  you  fail  to  selecLth^^^j/ 'course  for  y our-
self. ^SlBut  if  I can’t  persuade  you  to  take  my  vice  m toio^
at  lea^t  wait  till  it  is  known  how  we^  get  on  in  the  Spanish
provinces,  which  I have  to  tell  you  will  be  ours  as  soon  as
Caesar  arrives.  What  hope  your  people  have  when  the
Spains  are  lost  I don’t  know.  Of  what,  then,  you  can
be  thinking  to  join  men  in  so  desperate  a position,  on
my  honour,  \ cannot  imagine.  What  you  told  me,  though
not  in  s»  many  words,  Caesar  had  already  heard,  and  he
had  scarcely  said  “ good  morning ! ” to  me  when  he  men-
tioned what  he  had  heard  about  you.  I said  I did  not
know  anything  about  it,  -but  yet  bagged  him  to  write  you
a letter  as  the  best  method  of  inducing  you  to  stay  in  the
country.  (pe  is  taking  me  into  Spain  with  him.  For  if  he
were  not  doing  so,  before  going  to  Rome,  I should  have
hastened  to  visit  you,  wherever  you  were,  and  should  have
pressed  this  upon  you  personally,  and  tried  with  might  and
main  to  keep  you  from  going.  Pray,  my  dear  Cicero,
reflect  again  and  again,  and  do  not  utterly  ruin  yourself  and
all  your  family,  nor  knowingly,  and  with  your  eyes  open,
put  yourself  into  a situation  from  which  you  can  see  no
possible  retreat.  But  if,  on  the  one  hand,  you  are  shaken
by  the  remarks  of  the  Optimates,  or,  on  the  other,  are
unable  to  endure  the  intemperance  and  offensive  behaviour
of  certain  persons,  I think  you  should  select  some  town
not  affected  by  the  war,  while  this  controversy  is  being

F VII,  i6;  A X,  5

TO  ATTICUS

369

fought  out,  which  will  be  settled  almost  directly.  If  you  do
this,  you  will,  in  my  opinion,  have  acted  wisely,  and  will
not  offend  Caesar.

CCCLXXXIII  (A  X,  5)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  16  April

About  my  plans  as  a whole  I have  written  to  you,  I think,
before  in  sufficient  detail.  About  the  day  of  my  departure
I can  state  nothing  for  certain,  except  this : not  before  the
new  moon.  Curio’s  conversation  on  the  second  day’s  inter-
view amounted  to  much  the  same,  except  that  he  indicated
still  more  candidly  that  he  did  not  see  what  was  to  be  the
end  of  the  business.

As  to  your  charge  to  me  to  control  Quintus  . . . ’tis  a
case  of  asking  for  Arcadia.^  However,  I will  omit  nothing.
And  would  that  you — but  I will  not  be  over  troublesome.  I
at  once  forwarded  the  packet  to  Vestorius,  and,  indeed,  he
was  always  asking  for  it.  Vettienus  was  more  obliging  in
what  he  said  to  you  than  in  what  he  had  written  to  me.
But  I cannot  ■vV'onder  enough  at  the  man’s  carelessness.  For
Philotimus  having  told  me  that  he  could  buy  that  lodge  of
Canuleius  for  50  sestertia,  and  could  get  it  for  even  less,  if
I asked  Vettienus  to  act,  I did  ask  the  latter  to  obtain  a
deduction  from  that  sum  if  he  could.  He  promised  to  do
so.  He  told  me  that  he  had  bought  it  for  30  sestertia,  and
asked  me  to  let  him  know  to  whom  I wished  it  conveyed ;
saying  that  the  day  for  payment  was  the  13th  of  November.
I wrote  back  somewhat  crossly,  and  yet  with  a familiar

^ You  ask  me  to  do  what  is  very  difficult.  This  is  explained  by
Herodotus,  i.  66,  where  the  Delphic  oracle  is  said  to  have  answered  a
Spartan  envoy  who  asked  for  Arcadia  :

“ Arcady  askest  thou,  truly  a great  boon,  give  it  I will  not.”

’ApKaSiav  fi  diTHQ,  fisya  alriig^  ovroi  dojaio.

BB

II.

370

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

jest/  For  the  present,  as  he  is  acting  handsomely,  I refrain
from  finding  any  fault  with  the  man,  and  I have  written  to
tell  him  that  you  have  given  me  full  information.  Pray  let  me
know  about  your  journey,  what  you  are  thinking  of  doing,
and  when.

1 6 April.

CCCLXXXIV  (A  X,  8 b)

C^SAR  TO  CICERO  (AT  FORMIC)

On  the  road  to  Spain,  i6  April

CiESAR  imperator  greets  Cicero  imperator.  Although  I
had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  you  were  not  likely  to  do
anything  unadvisedly  or  imprudently,  yet,  being  made
anxious  by  common  report,  I thought  that  I ought  to  write
to  you  and  to  appeal  to  you,  in  the  name  of  our  mutual
kindness,  not  to  go  anywhere  now  that  fortune  has  declared
in  my  favour,  that  you  had  not  thought  yourself  bound  to
go  even  when  it  was  still  uncertain.  For  you  will  have  at
once  committed  a somewhat  serious  offence  against  our
friendship,  and  have  adopted  a course  far  from  beneficial  to
yourself : since  you  will  make  it  clear  that  you  have  not
followed  fortune — for  all  the  good  luck  has  notoriously  been
on  our  side,  all  the  bad  on  theirs — nor  the  merits  of  the  cause,
for  they  are  the  same  now  as  when  you  judged  it  best  not
to  assist  at  their  deliberations : but  you  will  shew  that  you
have  condemned  some  act  of  mine,  and  that  is  the  heaviest

^ As  Vettienus  got  the  lodge  for  ;^240  instead  of  ;i^450,  it  is  not  easy
to  see  why  Cicero  was  offended.  At  the  end  of  Letter  CCCXCV  it
appears  that  one  offence  was  that  he  addressed  the  letter  to  “Cicero
proconsul  ” instead  of  “ imperator.”  Another,  perhaps,  was  something
unceremonious  in  the  style  of  the  letter  itself,  or  unbusinesslike  in  the
arrangement  for  payment.  The  lodge  purchased  was  one  of  those  small
houses  of  call  {deversoria)  which  rich  men  purchased  along  the  great
high  roads,  in  which  to  put  up  for  the  night,  rather  than  burden  their
friends  who  might  have  villas  in  the  neighbourhood  (see  vol.  i.,  p.  256).
Italy  was  not  without  inns,  rather  celebrated  for  goodness  and  cheapness
(Polyb.  ii.  15),  but  men  of  high  position  seemed  to  think  it  undignified
to  use  them.

A X,  8 b,  6

TO  ATTICUS

371

blow  you  can  inflict  on  me.  In  the  name  of  our  friendship,
I beg  you  not  to  do  so.  Finally,  what  can  be  more  becoming
to  a good  man,  and  a peaceable  and  quiet  citizen,  than  to
hold  aloof  from  civil  strife  ? It  is  a thing  some  would  have
been  glad  to  do,^  but  could  not  on  account  of  the  danger.
For  yourself,  when  you  have  satisfied  yourself  as  to  the
evidence  which  my  life  furnishes,  and  the  decision  at  which
my  friendship  for  you  has  arrived,^  you  will  find  nothing  at
once  safer  and  more  honourable  than  to  abstain  entirely
from  active  intervention  in  the  fray.

On  the  march,  16  April.

CCCLXXXV  (A  X,  6)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuM^,  April  (before  the  27TH)

Up  to  this  time  the  only  thing  stopping  me  is  the  weather.
I am  not  going  in  for  any  sharp  practice.  Let  what  will
happen  in  Spain,  nevertheless  my  decision  stands — -partons  I
I have  explained  all  my  ideas  to  you  in  a previous  letter.
Therefore,  this  is  a short  one,  as  also  because  I am  in  haste
and  more  busy  than  usual.  As  to  young  Quintus,  “ I am
doing  my  best  ” — you  know  the  rest.^  Your  next  piece  of
advice  is  at  once  friendly  and  wise : but  everything  else  will
be  plain  sailing,  if  I only  keep  on  my  guard  against  him.^  It
is  no  easy  task : there  are  many  perplexing  traits  in  his
character  : no  simplicity,  no  straightforwardness.  I could
wish  that  you  had  undertaken  the  management  of  the  young

^ He  seems  to  mean  himself.

^ It  is  difficult  to  be  certain  what  Caesar  means  by  iudicio  amiciiia.
I think  he  refers  to  his  decision  to  allow  Cicero  to  abstain  from  the
senate  and  to  give  him  no  active  countenance.  He  appeals  to  his  life
as  shewing  that  he  will  keep  his  word  to  Cicero,  and  to  this  decision  to
allow  of  Cicero’s  neutrality  as  a proof  of  his  friendliness.

^ Ter.  Adelph.  414,  Fit  sedulo,  nihil  pratermitto,  consuefacio.  But
it  is  not  certain  that  this  is  the  quotation,  or  whether  there  is  really
any  quotation.

* The  younger  Quintus.

372

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  .^T.  57

man.  For  his  father  is  too  indulgent : whenever  I tighten
the  rein,  he  slackens  it  again.  If  I had  been  able  to  act
without  his  father,  I should  have  controlled  him : and  this
you  can  do.  But  I excuse  you : it  is,  I say,  no  light  task.
I regard  it  as  certain  that  Pompey  is  going  through  Illyricum
into  Gaul.^  By  what  route  and  whither  I am  to  go  now,  I
shall  consider.

CCCLXXXVI  (F  IV,  I)

TO  SERVIUS  SULPICIUS  RUFUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  April  (towards  the  end)

My  intimate  friend  Gains  Trebatius  has  written  to  me  to  say
that  you  have  inquired  of  him  where  I was,  and  that  you
regretted  that,  owing  to  the  state  of  your  health,  you  had
not  seen  me  after  my  arrival  at  the  city  walls,  and  that  at
the  present  time  you  wished,  if  I came  nearer,  to  consult  with
me  on  what  was  the  duty  of  us  both.  Oh  that  it  had  been
possible,  Servius,  for  us  to  converse  before  the  ruin — that
is  the  word  ! — had  been  completed.  We  should  surely  have
contributed  some  assistance  to  the  falling  Republic.  For  I
am  fully  informed,  though  absent  myself,  that,  foreseeing
these  disasters  long  before,  you  were  the  supporter  of  peace
both  during  and  after  your  consulship.  I,  however,  though
approving  your  policy  and  holding  the  same  opinion  myself,
was  unable  to  do  any  good.  For  I arrived  late  in  the  day ;
I was  isolated ; I was  regarded  as  imperfectly  acquainted
with  the  facts  : I had  suddenly  plunged  into  a scene  of  mad
passion  for  war.  Now,  since  it  seems  impossible  for  us  to
furnish  any  support  to  the  Republic,  if  there  is  any  measure
within  our  power  to  take  in  our  own  particular  interests — I
don’t  mean  to  maintain  our  old  position,  but  to  express  our
grief  in  the  manner  most  honourable  to  ourselves — there  is
no  one  in  the  world  with  whom  I should  think  it  proper  to
confer  in  preference  to  yourself.  For  you  do  not  forget  the

' This,  of  course,  turned  out  to  be  a false  report.

F IV,

TO  SERVIUS  SULPICIUS  RUFUS

373

examples  of  the  most  illustrious  men — whom  we  ought  to
resemble — nor  the  maxims  of  the  greatest  philosophers,  whom
you  have  always  worshipped.  And,  in  fact,  I should  myself
have  written  to  you  before  to  warn  you  that  your  going  to
the  senate — or  rather  to  the  convention  of  senators^ — would
have  no  result,  had  I not  been  afraid  of  annoying  the  man
who  was  urging  me  to  imitate  you.  Him  indeed  I gave
clearly  to  understand,  when  he  asked  me  to  attend  the
senate,  that  I should  say  precisely  what  you  said  about
peace,  and  about  the  Spains.  You  see  how  the  matter
stands : the  whole  world  is  parcelled  out  among  men  in
military  command,  and  is  ablaze  with  war  : the  city,  without
laws,  law  courts,  justice,  or  credit,  has  been  abandoned  to
plunder  and  fire.  Accordingly,  nothing  occurs  to  me,  I
don’t  say  to  hope,  but  scarcely  even  to  venture  to  wish.  If,
however,  you,  in  your  supreme  wisdom,  think  it  of  any
advantage  that  we  should  have  a discussion,  though  I am
thinking  of  going  still  farther  from  the  city,  the  very  name
of  which  I do  not  now  like  to  hear  mentioned,  I will  yet
come  nearer;  and  I have  instructed Trebatius  not  to  decline
to  bring  any  message  you  wished  to  send  me  : and  I should
like  you  to  do  so,  or  to  send  me  any  of  your  own  friends
that  you  can  trust,  so  that  you  may  not  be  obliged  to  leave
the  city,  or  I to  approach  it.  I pay  you  the  same  high
compliment  as  I perhaps  claim  for  myself,  in  feeling  sure
that  whatever  we  mutually  agree  upon,  will  have  the  approba-
tion of  all  the  world.  Farewell.

^ See  ante^  p.  358.  Cicero  professes  to  hold  that  the  meeting  could
not  be  called  a “ senate  ” in  the  absence  of  the  consuls,  many  other
magistrates,  and  a considerable  number  of  the  ordinary  members.
But  the  praetor  Lepidus  had  the  legal  right  of  summoning  it,  and  there
was  no  law  demanding  the  presence  of  other  magistrates.

374

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

CCCLXXXVII  (A  X,  7)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE  (late  in  April)

Yes,  I quite  approve  of  your  staying  in  Apulia  and  Sipontum,
and  of  your  avoiding  committing  yourself ; and  I do  not
think  your  case  is  on  all  fours  with  mine.  Not  but  that  in
regard  to  the  constitution  the  right  course  is  the  same  for
us  both — but  there  is  now  no  question  of  the  constitution.
It  is  a contest  of  rival  kings,  in  which  the  more  moderate
king,  and  the  more  virtuous  and  clean-handed  of  the  two,
has  been  defeated,  the  one,  too,  whose  defeat  involves  the
necessary  destruction  of  the  very  name  of  the  Roman  people  :
while,  if  he  does  conquer,  he  will  use  his  victory  after  the
manner  and  precedent  of  Sulla. ^ Therefore  in  this  quarrel
you  must  not  openly  profess  adherence  to  either  side,  and
must  wait  on  events.  My  position,  however,  is  different,
because,  being  under  the  bond  of  an  obligation,  I cannot
shew  myself  ungrateful,  and  yet  do  not  meditate  being  at
the  seat  of  war,  but  at  Malta  or  some  similar  retired  place.
“ Do  you  do  nothing  to  help  the  man,”  you  will  say,  “ to
whom  you  do  not  wish  to  be  ungrateful  ? ” Nay,  I think  he
would  perhaps  have  been  glad  if  I had  done  less.  But  as
to  this  we  shall  see.  Let  me  only  get  out  of  the  country,
and  I have  a better  opportunity  of  doing  so  now  that  Dola-
bella  is  on  the  Adriatic,  Curio  in  the  Sicilian  straits.  How-
ever, I have  had  a certain  revival  of  hope  from  the  fact  that
Servius  Sulpicius  wishes  an  interview  with  me.  I have  sent
my  freedman  Philotimus  with  a letter  to  him  : if  he  chooses
to  play  the  man,  we  shall  have  a notable  tete-d-tUe : other-
wise ...  I shall  be  the  same  as  ever.  Curio  has  been
staying  with  me : his  idea  is  that  Caesar  is  in  low  water  from
having  offended  the  multitude : and  he  was  nervous  about
going  to  Sicily,  if  Pompey  should  begin  naval  operations.

^ That  is,  he  will  put  to  death  the  members  of  the  popular  party.
Cicero  has  before  expressed  his  horror  of  the  violent  language  he  hears
is  being  used  by  Pompey’s  entourage.  See,  for  instance,  pp.  326,  334.

AX,  7;  F IV,  2 TO  SERVIUS  SULPICIUS  RUFUS  375

I gave  it  to  young  Quintus  when  he  returned  ! I perceive
that  it  was  a piece  of  avarice  on  his  part,  and  a hope  of  a
large  bounty.  This  is  a serious  evil  enough,  but  the  crime
which  I feared  I hope  he  did  not  commit.^  However,  I
think  you  are  convinced  that  this  vice  has  not  arisen  from
my  indulgence,  but  from  his  natural  disposition : still
I will  school  and  control  him.  As  to  the  Oppii  of  Velia,
please  consult  with  Philotimus,  and  arrange  as  you  think
proper.  I shall  look  on  Epirus  as  at  my  service,  but  I
seem  destined  to  quite  a different  voyage.

CCCLXXXVIII  (F  IV,  2)

TO  SERVIUS  SULPICIUS  RUFUS  (AT  ROME)
CuMiE,  28  April

I RECEIVED  your  letter  on  the  28th  of  April,  while  at  my
Cuman  villa.  As  soon  as  I had  read  it  I perceived  that
Philotimus,  considering  that  he  had,  as  you  say,  received
verbal  instructions  from  you  on  every  point,  had  made
a great  mistake  in  not  having  come  to  me  personally,  but
sending  your  letter,  which  I understood  to  have  been  the
shorter  because  you  had  imagined  that  he  would  deliver  it.
However,  after  I had  read  your  letter,  your  wife  Postumia
and  our  dear  Servius  called  on  me.  Their  opinion  was
tha,tj^(pu  should  come  to  Cumae,  and  they  even  urged  me  to
write  and  tell  you  so.  You  ask  what  my  advice  is  : it  is  of
such  a nature,  that  it  is  easier  to  adopt  it  myself  than  to  give
it  to  another.  What  measure  could  I venture  to  urge  on  a
man  possessed  of  your  supreme  influence  and  knowledge  of
affairs  ? If  we  ask  what  is  most  right,  the  answer  is  plain  :
if  what  is  expedient,  it  is  doubtful.  But  if  we  are  the  men
we  really  ought  to  be — holding,  that  is,  the  faith  that
nothing  is  expedient  except  what  is  right  and  virtuous —
there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  we  ought  to  do.  You
express  your  opinion  that  my  case  is  closely  connected  with

^ /.e.,  denouncing  his  uncle  to  Caesar.

376

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

yours.  Well,  at  least  we  both  made  the  same  mistake,
though  with  the  very  best  intentions.  For  both  of  us
continually  advised  a peaceful  solution ; and  since  nothing
was  more  to  Caesar’s  advantage,  we  thought  that  we  were
obliging  him  by  supporting  peace.  How  grossly  mistaken
we  have  been,  and  to  what  a pass  things  have  come,  you
now  see.  Nor  do  you  only  perceive  what  is  actually  going
on  and  what  has  gone  on,  but  also  what  the  course  of  affairs
and  the  ultimate  result  will  be.  Therefore  you  must  either
approve  the  measures  now  being  taken,  or  be  a party  to
them  in  spite  of  disapproving  them.  The  one  alternative  in
my  eyes  is  discreditable,  the  other  is  dangerous  as  well.  I
can  only  come,  therefore,  to  one  conclusion — that  I ought
to  quit  the  country.  All  that  I have,  I think,  to  consider
in  so  departing  is  the  method  to  adopt,  and  the  country  to
which  to  go.  Surely  there  never  were  circumstances  of
greater  distress,  or  even  a question  more  difficult  to  settle.
For  no  decision  is  possible  that  does  not  fall  foul  of  some
great  difficulty.  For  you,  my  opinion  is — if  you  will  agree
with  me — that,  if  you  have  made  up  your  mind  as  to  what
you  think  you  ought  to  do,  in  a way  which  separates  your
plan  from  mine,  you  should  save  yourself  the  trouble  of  the
journey  here : but  if  there  is  anything  you  wish  to  impart  to
me,  I shall  expect  you.  Of  course,  I should  like  you  to
come  as  soon  as  you  can  conveniently  to  yourself,  as  I per-
ceived was  the  wish  both  of  Servius  and  Postumia.  Fare-
well !

CCCLXXXIX  (F  V,  19)

TO  L.  MESCINIUS  RUFUS
CuMiE,  April  (end)

Though  I never  doubted  your  great  affection  for  me,  yet  I
learn  it  better  every  day  of  my  life,  and  I never  forget  what
you  once  said  in  a letter,  that  you  would  be  more  zealous  in
shewing  me  attention  than  you  had  been  in  the  province
(though,  to  my  mind,  nothing  could  exceed  your  loyalty  in

F V,  19

TO  L.  MESCINIUS  RUFUS

377

the  province),  in  proportion  as  your  judgment  could  now  be
more  independent.  Accordingly,  your  former  letter  gave  me
great  pleasure,  because  it  shewed  me  that  my  arrival  was
affectionately  looked  forward  to  by  you,  and  that,  when
things  turned  out  differently  from  what  you  had  expected,
you  were  greatly  rejoiced  at  the  line  I took.  So,  also,  this
last  letter  is  extremely  valuable  to  me  from  the  expression  at
once  of  your  judgment  and  your  affection  : of  your  judg-
ment, because  I learn  that,  as  all  gallant  and  good  men  are
bound  to  do,  you  hold  nothing  to  be  expedient  except
what  is  right  and  virtuous;  of  your  affection,  because  you
promise  to  stand  by  me,  whatever  course  of  policy  I shall
adopt.  Nothing  could  be  more  gratifying  to  me,  nor,  as  I
think,  more  honourable  to  yourself.  My  own  course  has
long  been  decided.  I have  not  written  to  tell  you  of  it
before,  not  because  you  were  one  to  be  kept  in  the  dark,
but  because  the  communication  of  a policy  at  such  a time
seems  in  a certain  sense  to  be  an  exhortation  to  duty,  or
rather  a summons  to  share  in  either  danger  or  labour.  See-
ing, however,  that  your  goodwill,  kindness,  and  affection  for
me  are  what  they  are,  I gladly  embrace  such  a heart.  But
I do  so  on  this  condition,  for  I will  not  abandon  my
habitual  modesty  in  asking  favours : if  you  do  what  you
profess,  I shall  be  grateful;  if  not,  I shall  pardon  you,
and  consider  that  you  were  unable  to  deny  the  latter  to
your  fears,  the  former  to  me.  For  it  is  in  sober  earnest  an
extremely  difficult  case.  The  right  thing  to  do  is  clear : as
to  the  expedient  thing,  though  it  is  obscure,  yet,  if  we  are
the  men  we  ought  to  be,  that  is,  worthy  of  our  philosophical
studies,  we  cannot  entertain  a doubt  that  the  most  ad-
vantageous course  is  the  course  of  strictest  honour.  Where-
fore, if  you  determine  to  join  me,  come  at  once.  But  if  you
wish  to  act  with  me  and  to  go  to  the  same  place,  but  cannot
do  so  just  yet,  I will  keep  you  fully  informed  on  every  point.
Whichever  way  you  decide  I shall  look  upon  you  as  my
friend,  but  as  the  closest  possible  friend  if  you  decide  on
the  course  which  I desire.

37S

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  MT.  57

CCCXC  (A  X,  8 a)

M.  ANTONIUS  TO  CICERO  (AT  CUM^)
Campania  (end  of  April)

Had  I not  been  warmly  attached  to  you — much  more
warmly,  indeed,  than  you  suppose — I should  not  have  been
alarmed  at  the  rumour  which  has  reached  me  about  you,
especially  as  I thought  it  was  without  foundation.  But  just
because  I am  so  exceedingly  devoted  to  you,  I cannot  con-
ceal the  fact  that  even  a report,  however  groundless,  is  a
serious  thing  in  my  eyes.  I cannot  believe  that  you  are
about  to  cross  the  sea,  considering  how  highly  you  value
Dolabella  and  your  dear  Tullia,  and  how  highly  you  are
valued  by  me,  to  whom,  by  heaven,  your  rank  and  reputa-
tion are  almost  dearer  than  they  are  to  yourself.  Neverthe-
less, I did  not  think  that  it  would  be  friendly  in  me  not  to
be  rendered  anxious  by  the  talk  even  of  men  of  low  character.
And,  indeed,  I have  been  the  more  zealous,  because  I con-
sidered that  I had  thrust  upon  me  a somewhat  difficult  part
to  play,  owing  to  the  misunderstanding  between  us,  which  was
the  result  of  jealousy  on  my  part  rather  than  of  any  wrong
done  me  by  you.^  For  I want  to  convince  you  that  no  one
IS  dearer  to  me  than  you  are,  except  my  Caesar,  and  that  my
conviction  at  the  same  time  is  that  Caesar  gives  M.  Cicero  a
very  high  place  among  his  friends.  Wherefore,  my  dear
Cicero,  I beg  you  not  to  take  any  compromising  step ; and
not  to  place  any  reliance  on  the  man  who,  to  do  you  a

^ We  have  no  references  in  previous  letters  to  any  misunderstanding
between  Antony  and  Cicero,  but  in  the  second  Philippic,  §§  2,  48,  49,
Cicero  says  that  Antony  was  an  intimate  friend  of  P.  Clodius  in  B.c.  58,
that  he  (Cicero)  had  interfered  to  break  off  his  connexion  with  the  younger
Curio,  and  had  a controversy  with  him  in  regard  to  a lawsuit  with  one
Sicca,  a freedman  of  Antony’s.  Again,  in  B.c.  53,  they  had  both
been  candidates  for  the  augurship,  though  Antony  retired  from  the
canvass.  The  ZrjXorvTria  may  refer  either  to  Curio  or  the  augurship.
Antony  was  now  a tribune,  but  had  been  left  in  charge  of  Italy  with
the  rank  of  propraetor.

A X,  8 a,  8

TO  ATTICUS

379

favour,  first  inflicted  an  injury  upon  you ; and,  on  the  other
hand,  not  to  fly  from  one  who,  even  supposing  he  loses  all
affection  for  you — which  is  impossible — will  yet  desire  your
safety  and  your  highest  honour.  I have  taken  pains  to  send
my  most  intimate  friend  Calpurnius  ^ to  you,  that  you  may
know  that  your  life  and  honour  are  great  objects  with  me.

CCCXCI  (A  X,  8)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  2 May

The  state  of  affairs  itself,  as  well  as  your  remark  and  my
own  observation,  make  it  clear  that  the  time  has  come  to
put  an  end  to  our  correspondence  on  subjects  which  it
would  be  dangerous  to  have  intercepted.  But  as  my  dear
Tullia  keeps  writing  to  me  begging  me  to  wait  and  see  how
things  go  in  Spain,  and  always  adds  that  this  is  your  opinion
also,  and  since  I have  gathered  this  also  from  your  own
letter,  I do  not  think  it  out  of  place  to  write  and  tell  you  ^
what  I think  on  that  point.  This  advice  of  yours  would  be
prudent,  as  it  seems  to  me,  only  if  I intended  to  shape  my
course  of  policy  in  accordance  with  the  result  of  the  Spanish
affair,  which  is  impossible.  For  it  is  inevitable  either  that
Caesar — what  I should  like  best — is  driven  from  Spain,
or  that  the  campaign  there  will  be  a protracted  one,  or
(as  he  seems  to  feel  certain)  that  he  gets  Spain  into  his
hands.  If  he  is  driven  out,  how  can  I then  join  Pompey
with  any  grace  or  honour,  when  I should  think  even  Curio
himself  would  desert  to  him?  If,  again,  the  war  is  pro-
tracted, what  am  I to  wait  for,  and  how  long?  The  only
alternative  is,  if  we  are  beaten  in  Spain,  to  keep  quiet.  My
view  is  quite  the  other  way.  For  I think  myself  more
bound  to  abandon  Caesar  when  he  is  victorious  than  when
he  is  beaten,  and  not  more  when  his  success  is  still  un-

^ Perhaps  the  L.  Calpurnius  Piso  spoken  of  afterwards  as  Antony’s
legaius  and  familiaris  (lo  Phil,  § 13  ; 12  Philip.  §1).

38o

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

certain,  than  when  he  is  quite  sure  of  it/  For,  if  Caesar
conquers,  I foresee  massacre,  an  attack  on  private  wealth,
a recall  of  exiles,  repudiation  of  debts,  promotion  to  office
of  the  lowest  dregs,  and  a despotism  intolerable,  I don’t
say  to  any  Roman,  but  even  to  a Persian.  Will  it  be  pos-
sible for  my  indignation  to  remain  silent  ? Will  my  eyes  be
able  to  endure  the  sight  of  myself  delivering  my  vote  by
the  side  of  Gabinius — or,  in  fact,  of  his  being  called  on
before  me  ? Of  your  client  Sext.  Clodius  ^ in  attendance  ?
Of  C.  Ateius’s  client  Plaguleius?  And  so  on  with  the
whole  list.  But  why  collect  the  names  of  my  opponents,
when  I shall  be  unable  to  see  in  the  senate-house  without
pain  my  friends  whom  I have  defended,  or  to  associate  with
them  without  dishonour.^  Nay,  what  if  I am  not  even  sure
that  I shall  be  allowed  to  come  ? His  friends  write  me  word
that  he  is  by  no  means  satisfied  with  my  conduct  in  not
having  appeared  in  the  senate.  Am  I,  nevertheless,  to  think
about  making  advances  to  him  with  a risk  to  myself,  after
refusing  to  be  united  to  him  when  it  was  to  my  advantage  ?
Besides,  observe  that  the  decision  of  the  whole  controversy
does  not  depend  on  Spain,  unless  you  really  think  that
Pompey  will  throw  down  his  arms  if  that  is  lost ! On  the
contrary,  his  view  is  entirely  that  of  Themistocles : for  he
holds  that  the  master  of  the  sea  must  inevitably  be  master
of  the  empire.  Accordingly,  his  object  has  never  been  to
retain  Spain  for  its  own  sake : the  equipment  of  a fleet  has
always  been  his  first  care.  He  will  take  to  the  sea,  there-
fore, as  soon  as  the  season  permits,  with  an  enormous  fleet,
and  will  approach  the  shores  of  Italy  : and  what  then  will
be  our  position  who  remain  there  doing  nothing  ? It  will
be  impossible  for  us  to  be  any  longer  neutral.  Shall  we  resist
the  fleet  then  ? What  could  be  a greater  crime,  or  even  so
great  ? In  fact,  what  could  be  more  ignominious  ? I did  not
shrink  from  opposing  Caesar  when  I was  isolated : shall  I do

* Reading,  with  Schiitz,  nec  dubitantem,  etc.,  for  et.

“ Sex.  Clodius  was  one  of  the  followers  of  P.  Clodius,  and  had  been
condemned  under  the  lex  Pompeia  after  the  trial  of  Milo.  See
2 Phil.  § 8.

^ Because,  though  they  were  his  friends,  and  had  been  defended  by
him,  they  had  been  legally  condemned,  and  their  recall  by  Caesar’s  bare
authority  would  be  looked  upon  as  offensive  to  a friend  of  the  constitu-
tion.

A X,  8

TO  ATTICUS

381

so  now  with  the  support  of  Pompey  and  the  rest  of  the
nobles  ?>  If,  however,  putting  the  question  of  duty  aside,  I -
must /t£ke  account  of  danger  : it  is,  if  I do  wrong,  that  there
is  danger  from  these  last,  from  him^  if  I do  right : nor  in  such
miserable  circumstances  can  any  policy  be  discovered  so  free
from  danger,  as  to  make  me  doubt  that  I should  shun  doing
disgracefully,  when  it  is  dangerous,  what  I should  have
shunned  doing,  even  had  it  been  safe.  “ Not  if  I had  crossed
the  sea  along  with  Pompey?”  That  was  impossible  in  any
case  : you  have  only  to  count  the  days.  But  all  the  same —
for  let  me  confess  the  truth  (I  do  not  even  atttempt  con-
cealment), supposing  it  possible — I was  mistaken  in  a point  /
in  which,  perhaps,  I ought  not  to  have  been  mistaken  : I
thought  that  there  would  be  a reconciliation,  and  in  that  case
I did  not  want  to  have  Caesar  incensed  with  me,  while  he  was
friends  with  Pompey.^  For  I had  learnt  to  see  how  exactly
alike  they  were.  It  was  from  dread  of  this  that  I drifted
into  this  waiting  policy.  But  now  I have  everything  to  gain
by  hastening,  everything  to  lose  by  delay.  And,  neverthe-
less, my  dear  Atticus,  there  are  auguries  also  which  incite  me
to  action  with  a certain  hope,  and  no  doubtful  one,  auguries
not  such  as  our  college  derives  from  Attus,®  but  those
of  Plato  on  tyrants.^  For  I see  clearly  that  he  can  by  no
possibility  keep  his  position  much  longer  without  bringing
on  his  own  collapse,  even  though  we  do  not  exert  ourselves  : ^
seeing  that  at  the  very  heyday  of  his  success,  and  with
the  charm  of  novelty  upon  him,  in  six  or  seven  days,  he
brought  upon  himself  the  bitterest  hatred  even  of  that  needy

The  text  of  this  sentence  is  hopelessly  corrupt.  But  the  general
sense  is,  I think,  something  like  what  I have  given.  Cicero’s  argument
is  : “ The  only  motive  for  putting  oneself  in  opposition  to  Pompey ’s
fleet  must  be  fear  of  Caesar.  Now  I shewed  when  I was  all  alone  at
Formiae  that  I would  not  give  in  to  him  : shall  I do  so  now  that  there
are  Pompey  and  the  rest  to  support  me  ? ”

^ Cicero  here  lets  out  his  true  motives.  The  plea  of  time  and  oppor-
tunity he  feels  to  be  hollow.  His  real  motive  was  the  uncertainty  as  to
which  was  the  safer  course,  while  he  was  also  no  doubt  torn  by  the
conviction  that  the  truly  loyal  side  was  that  of  Pompey.

® Attus  Naevius,  the  famous  augur  in  the  time  of  the  Tarquins.

Referring  apparently  to  Plato’s  Republic,  viii.  562  to  ix.  580 ; but
the  inevitable  shortness  of  a tyrant’s  sway  is  not  much  brought  out  in  this
passage  of  Plato.  It  is  rather  the  misery  of  his  own  feelings  that  is
dwelt  upon.

382

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

and  reckless  city  rabble  itself,  and  had  to  drop  so  quickly
two  of  his  assumptions — of  clemency  in  the  case  of  Metellus,^
of  wealth  in  the  matter  of  the  treasury.^  Of  what  sort,
again,  will  he  find  his  confederates  or  subordinates,  which-
ever you  please  to  call  them,  if  those  are  to  rule  provinces,
of  whom  not  one  could  manage  his  own  estate  two  months  ? J
I need  not  enumerate  all  the  points,  which  no  one  sees
more  clearly  than  yourself.  Still,  put  them  before  your
eyes  : you  will  at  once  understand  that  this  despotism  can
scarcely  last  six  months.  If  I turn  out  to  be  mistaken  in
this,  I will  bear  it,  as  many  most  illustrious  men,  eminent
in  the  state,  have  borne  it,  unless  you  should  actually  think
that  I prefer  the  fate  of  Sardanapalus — to  die  in  his  own
bed,  rather  than  in  an  exile,  as  was  the  fate  of  Themis-
tocles  / who  though  he  had  been — in  the  words  of  Thucy-
dides^— “ the  best  judge  on  the  shortest  reflexion  of  the
question  of  the  moment,  and,  in  regard  to  the  future,  by
much  the  shrewdest  at  conjecturing  what  was  to  happen,”
yet  fell  into  misfortunes  which  he  would  have  avoided,  if
nothing  had  ever  escaped  him.  Though  he  was  a man,  as
the  same  writer  says,  “who,  however  obscure  the  subject,
saw  the  better  and  the  worse  course  more  clearly  than  any-
one,” yet  did  not  see  how  to  avoid  the  jealousy  of  the
Lacedaemonians,  nor  of  his  own  fellow  citizens,  nor  what
promise  to  make  to  Artaxerxes.  Nor  would  that  night
have  been  so  fatal  to  Africanus/  nor  that  day  of  Sulla’s
triumph  so  disastrous  to  Gaius  Marius,  the  craftiest  of  men,
if  neither  of  them  had  ever  been  mistaken.  However,  I
encourage  myself  by  that  prophetic  utterance  (of  Plato)
which  I mentioned.  I am  not  deceived  about  it,  nor  will
it  happen  otherwise.  Fall  he  must,  either  by  the  hands  of
his  opponents  or  by  his  own,  who,  indeed,  is  his  own  most

’ L.  Caecilius  Metellus,  the  tribune  (see  p.  364).  His  opposition  in
the  senate  on  Caesar’s  visit  to  Rome  in  April  seems  to  have  nearly  cost
him  his  life.

^ By  his  seizing  the  treasury.  See  p.  365.

^ Thucydides,  i.  138.

^ P.  Scipio  Africanus  the  younger,  after  delivering  a speech  in  defence
of  the  rights  of  the  Italians,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed.  Popular  rumour
attributed  his  death  to  assassination  at  the  hands  of  Carbo,  to  which
belief  Cicero  often  refers.  By  the  Sullanus  dies  Cicero  seems  to  mean
Sulla’s  first  march  upon  Rome,  when  Marius  fled  and  went  into  exile.

A X,  8

TO  ATTICUS

383

dangerous  enemy.  I only  hope  it  may  happen  while  we  are
still  alive.  Yet  it  is  time  for  us  to  be  thinking  of  that  con-
tinuous life  of  the  future,  not  of  this  brief  span  of  our  own.^
But  if  anything  happens  to  me  before  that  occurs,  it  will  not
have  made  much  difference  to  me  whether  I live  to  see  it,
or  have  seen  it  long  before.  That  being  so,  I must  not
allow  myself  to  submit  to  men,  against  whom  the  senate
armed  me  with  authority  “ to  see  that  the  Republic  took
no  harm.”

All  my  interests  have  been  confided  to  you,  though  they
need  no  recommendation  of  mine,  considering  your  affection
for  me.  Nor,  by  Hercules,  can  I hit  upon  anything  to  write  :
for  I am  sitting  waiting  “ sailing  orders.”’  Yet  I never  felt
more  bound  to  tell  you  anything  than  that  none  of  all  the
delightful  services  you  have  done  has  been  more  grateful  to
my  feelings,  than  your  most  delicate  and  careful  attentions
to  my  Tullia.  She  has  herself  been  exceedingly  charmed
with  them — as  I have  been  no  less.  What  high  qualities  she
has  shewn  ! How  admirably  she  faces  the  public  disaster  !
How  admirably  her  domestic  difficulties!  What- spirit  she
has  displayed  in  the  matter  of  my  departure  ! She  loves
me  dearly,  she  has  the  deepest  sympathy  with  my  feelings —
yet  she  will  have  me  act  rightly  and  preserve  my  reputation.
But  don’t  let  me.  enlarge  too  much  on  this  theme,  lest  I
should  at  this  juncture  rouse  my  own  self-pity.  If  you  get
any  surer  intelligence  about  Spain,  or  anything  else,  pray
write  and  tell  me  while  I am  still  in  the  country ; and,
perhaps,  at  the  moment  of  my  departure  I shall  send  you
some  intelligence,  the  more  so  that  Tullia  thinks  that  you  are
at  present  not  thinking  of  leaving  Italy.  I must  put  before
Antony,  as  I did  before  Curio,  my  wish  to  reside  in  Malta,
and  my  determination  not  to  take  part  in  this  civil  war.  I
only  hope  I may  find  him  as  complaisant  and  good-natured
to  me  as  I did  Curio.  He  is  said  to  be  intending  to  come
to  Misenum  on  the  2nd,  that  is,  to-day : but  he  has  sent
me  a disagreeable  letter  in  advance,  of  which  I inclose  a
copy.^

^ Cicero  is  thinking,  not  of  a future  life — in  the  Christian  sense — but
of  the  eternity  of  fame  : as  he  says  elsewhere  that  he  cared  more  for
what  people  said  of  him  600  years  hence  than  what  they  said  now.

2 Letter  CCCXC.

384

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

CCCXCII  (A  X,  9)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuM^,  3 May

The  arrival  of  Philotimus — why,  what  a fellow  ! how  insipid  !
what  lies  he  keeps  telling  for  Pompey ! — frightened  all  my
party  to  death.  For  myself,  I have  become  hardened.  None
of  my  party  doubted  that  Csesar  had  curtailed  his  marches  :
according  to  him,  he  is  absolutely  flying.  None  doubted
Petreius  having  effected  a junction  with  Afranius  : he  brings
no  tidings  of  the  kind.  In  short,  they  have  also. been  con-
vinced of  this — that  Pompey,  at  the  head  of  a large  force,
had  marched  into  Germany  by  way  of  Illyricum ; for  that
was  announced  on  good  authority.  Well,  then,  I must
make  for  Malta,  I think,  until  we  get  fresh  news  from
Spain.  This,  indeed,  I almost  think  from  Caesar’s  own
letter  that  I may  do  with  his  approval:  for  he  says  that
I cannot  take  a more  honourable  or  safer  course  than  to
abstain  from  the  combat  altogether.  You  will  say,  “ What
has  become,  then,  of  that  resolution  of  yours,  which  you
described  in  your  last  ? ” It  is  here,  and  still  unchanged.
But  would  that  I had  to  decide  for  my  own  person  only !
The  tears  of  my  family  at  times  weaken  my  resolution,
who  beseech  me  to  wait  for  the  result  in  Spain.  Caelius’s
letter,  indeed,  which  was  expressed  in  moving  terms,  con-
taining an  identical  appeal — that  I would  not  so  rashly
abandon  my  property,  my  only  son,  and  all  my  family
— our  boys  read  with  floods  of  tears.  Though  my  own
son  is,  in  fact,  the  braver  of  the  two,  and  for  that  very  reason
affects  me  more  violently.  His  only  anxiety  is  for  my  dignity.
To  Malta,  then,  and  thence  wherever  it  shall  seem  good  !
However,  even  now  pray  write  something,  and  especially  if
there  is  any  news  from  Afranius.  On  my  part,  if  I have  any
conversation  with  Antony,  I will  write  and  tell  you  the
result.  Yet  I will  be  cautious  as  to  trusting  him,  as  you
warn  me.  For  the  policy  of  entire  concealment  is  difficult,
and  dangerous  into  the  bargain.  I intend  to  wait  for  Ser-

AX,  9;Fn,  i6  TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS

385

vius  Sulpicius  till  the  15th;  both  Postumia  and  his  son
Servius  urge  me  to  do  so.  I am  glad  your  quartan  ague  is
better.  I send  you  also  a copy  of  Cselius’s  letter.^

CCCXCIII  (F  II,  16)

TO  M.  C^LIUS  RUFUS  (IN  GAUL)

CuMiE  (May)

Your  letter  ^ would  have  given  me  great  pain,  had  it  not
been  that  by  this  time  reason  itself  has  dispelled  all  feelings
of  annoyance,  and  had  not  my  mind,  from  long  despair  of
public  safety,  become  callous  to  any  new  sorrow.  Neverthe-
less, I do  not  know  how  it  happened  that  you  conceived
from  my  former  letter  the  suspicion  which  you  mention  in
yours.  For  what  did  it  contain  beyond  a lamentation  over
the  state  of  the  times,  which  do  not  cause  me  greater  anxiety
than  they  do  you  ? For  I know  the  keenness  of  your  intellect
too  well  to  suppose  that  you  do  not  see  what  I see  myself.
What  surprises  me  is  that,  knowing  me  as  thoroughly  as  you
ought  to  do,  you  could  be  induced  to  think,  that  I was
either  so  shortsighted  as  to  abandon  a fortune  in  the  ascend-
ant for  one  on  the  wane  and  all  but  entirely  sunk;  or  so
inconsistent  as  to  throw  away  the  favour  already  gained  of  a
man  at  the  height  of  prosperity,  and  so  be  untrue  to  myself,
and — a thing  which  I have  from  the  beginning  and  ever
since  avoided — take  part  in  a civil  war.  What,  then,  do  you
mean  by  my  “lamentable”  design?  Is  it  that  of  retiring,
perhaps,  to  some  secluded  spot  ? For  you  know  how  it  not

See  Letter^CCCLXXXII,  p.  367.  This  letter  to  Cselius  is  far  more
discreditable  to'^Cicero  than  the  most  pitiful  of  his  letters  from  exile.
There  is  hardly  a\o/d  in  it  which  is  not  false,  or  a suggestio  falsi.  It
was  meant  to  be  sh^n  to  Caesar,  and  is  a sad  piece  of  trimming.  It  is
astonishing  that  he  sluHild  have  sent  Atticus  a copy  of  it,  when  he  re-
membered what  he  had  written  continually  to  him.  The  idea  of  Malta,
if  really  entertained,  was  only  a passing  one.  His  real  hesitation  was
as  to  going  to  Pompey.

II.

CC

336

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  /ET.  57

only  turns  my  stomach — as  it  used  at  one  time  to  turn  yours
also — but  sickens  my  very  eyes  to  see  the  insolent  conduct
of  mere  upstarts.  I have  the  additional  gene  of  the  pro-
cession of  lictors,  and  the  title  of  imperator^  by  which  I am
addressed.  If  I had  been  without  that  burden,  I should  have
been  content  with  any  retreat,  however  humble,  in  Italy.
But  these  laurelled  fasces  of  mine  not  only  attract  the  eyes,
but  now  also  provoke  the  remarks  of  the  malevolent.  And
though  that  is  so,  I yet  never  thought  of  leaving  the  country
without  the  approbation  of  your  party.  But  you  know  my
small  estates : I am  obliged  to  stay  on  them,  not  to  be
troublesome  to  my  friends.  Now  the  fact  of  my  finding  it
pleasantest  to  reside  in  my  marine  villa  causes  some  to
suspect  me  of  an  intention  to  embark  on  a voyage : and,
after  all,  perhaps  I should  not  have  been  unwilling  to  do  so,
had  I been  able  to  reach  peace : for  how  could  I consist-
ently sail  to  war  : especially  against  a man  who,  I hope,  has
forgiven  me,  on  the  side  of  a man  who  by  this  time  cannot
possibly  forgive  me  ?

In  the  next  place,  you  might  without  any  difficulty  have
understood  my  feeling  at  the  time  of  your  visit  to  me  in  my
Cuman  villa.  For  I did  not  conceal  from  you  what  Titus
Ampius  had  said : ^ you  saw  how  I shrank  from  leaving  the  city
after  hearing  it.  Did  I not  assure  you  that  I would  endure
anything  rather  than  quit  Italy  to  take  part  in  a civil  war  ?
What,  then,  has  occurred  to  make  me  change  my  resolve  ?
Has  not  everything  been  rather  in  favour  of  my  abiding  by
my  opinion  ? Pray  believe  me  in  this — and  I am  sure  you  do
think  so — that  among  these  miseries  I seek  for  nothing  but
that  people  should  at  length  understand  that  I have  preferred
peace  to  everything  : that,  when  that  was  given  up  in  despair,
my  first  object  was  to  avoid  actual  civil  war.  Of  this  con-
sistent conduct  I think  I shall  never  have  cause  to  repent.  I
remember,  for  instance,  that  our  friend  Q.  Hortensius  used
to  plume  himself  on  this  particular  thing,  that  he  had  never
taken  any  part  in  a civil  war.  In  this  matter  my  credit  will
be  more  brilliant,  because  it  was  attributed  to  want  of  spirit
in  his  case : in  mine  I do  not  think  that  this  idea  can  pos-
sibly be  entertained./  Nor  am  I terrified  by  the  considera-

^ Who  advocated  uncompromising  resistance  to  Coesar.

F II,  l6

TO  M.  C'ELIUS  RUFUS

387

tions  which  you  put  before  me,  with  the  most  complete
fidelity  and  affection,  with  the  view  of  alarming  me.  For
there  is  no  sort  of  violence  that  does  not  seem  to  be  hanging
over  the  heads  of  all  in  this  world-wide  convulsion ; and  this,
indeed,  I would  with  the  greatest  pleasure  have  averted  from
the  Republic  at  the  cost  of  my  private  and  domestic  losses,
even  those  against  which  you  bid  me  be  on  my  guard.  To
my  son,  whom  I rejoice  to  see  enjoying  your  affection,  I
shall  leave,  if  the  Republic  survives  in  any  shape,  a suf-
ficiently noble  inheritance  in  the  memory  of  my  name  : but
if  it  entirely  disappears,  nothing  will  happen  to  him  apart
from  the  rest  of  the  citizens.  You  ask  me  to  have  some
regard  to  my  son-in-law — a most  excellent  young  man,  and
very  dear  to  me : can  you  doubt,  when  you  know  how  much
I regard  both  him,  and  of  course  my  dear  Tullia,  that  this
subject  gives  me  the  keenest  anxiety?  The  more  so,  that  in
the  universal  disaster  I yet  used  to  flatter  myself  with  this
little  grain  of  hope,  that  my,  or  rather  our,  Dolabella  would
be  freed  from  those  embarrassments  which  he  had  brought
upon  himself  by  his  own  liberality.  Pray  ask  him  how  he
got  through  the  settling  days,  while  he  was  in  the  city.  How
disagreeable  they  were  to  him,  and  how  derogatory  to  my-
self as  his  father-in-law  ! Accordingly,  I am  neither  waiting
for  the  result  of  the  Spanish  campaign,  as  to  which  I am  fully
convinced  that  the  truth  is  as  you  say,  nor  am  I meditating
any  astute  policy.  If  there  is  ever  to  be  a state,  there  will  be
doubtless  a place  for  me  : . but  if  there  is  not,  you  will  yourself,
as  I think,  make  for  the  same  lonely  retreats  in  which  you
will  hear  that  I have  taken  up  my  abode.  But  perhaps  I
am  talking  wildly,  and  all  these  troubles  will  end  better.  For
I remember  the  expressions  of  despair  among  those  who  were
old  men  when  I was  a youth : perhaps  I am  now  imi-
tating them,  and  indulging  in  the  usual  weakness  of  my  time
of  life.  I wish  it  may  be  so.  But  nevertheless  ! — I suppose
you  have  heard  that  a purple-bordered  toga  is  being  woven
for  Oppius.^  For  our  friend  Curtius  thinks  of  a double-
dyed  one : but  the  hand  that  should  dye  it  keeps  him  wait-
ing.^ I put  in  this  seasoning  of  joke  to  shew  you  that,  in

‘ That  is,  Oppius,  a partisan  of  Cassar’s,  and  generally  spoken  of  in
connexion  with  Balbus,  is  to  have  some  curule  office  by  Caesar’s  favour.

“ M.  Curtius  Postumus,  who  had  also  joined  Caesar,  was  to  have  an

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

388

spite  of  my  indignation,  I am  still  in  the  habit  of  laughing.^
As  to  what  you  say  in  your  letter  about  Dolabella,  I advise
you  to  look  to  it  as  closely  as  if  your  own  interests  were
at  stake.  My  last  remark  shall  be  this  : I shall  do  nothing
wild  or  inconsiderate.  However,  I beg  you,  in  whatever
country  I may  be,  to  protect  me  and  my  children,  as  our
friendship  and  your  honour  demand.

CCCXCiV  (A  X,  10)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuM^,  3 May

How  blind  of  me  not  to  have  seen  this  before ! I send
you  Antony’s  letter.  After  I had  written  again  and  again
to  say  that  I was  not  entertaining  any  plans  against  Caesar,
that  I remembered  my  son-in-law,  remembered  our  friend-
ship, that,  if  I had  been  otherwise  minded,  I might  have
been  with  Pompey,  but  that,  as  I had  to  my  disgust  to
move  about  accompanied  by  lictors,  I wished  to  be  away
from  Italy,  but  had  not  made  up  my  mind  even  to  that —
see  what  an  admonitory  tone  ^ he  adopts  in  reply  !

“Your  decision  is  perfectly  right.  For  the  man  who
wishes  to  be  neutral  remains  in  the  country : he  who  leaves
it  appears  to  express  a judgment  on  one  side  or  the  other.
But  it  is  not  my  duty  to  determine  whether  a particular  person

augurship  (see  p.  396).  The  augurs  wore  a toga  dyed  in  some  special
way  with  two  colours,  which  in  Letter  XXXV  he  calls  5<j3a0ov  (vol.  i.,
p.  98).  By  infector,  “dyer,”  Cicero  seems  to  mean  Caesar,  who  was
to  give  him  the  promotion.

^ The  jest  consists  in  the  jocose  description  of  Oppius  and  Curtius —
Oppius  as  ordering  a new  toga,  and  Curtius  as  sending  his  toga  to  be
dyed,  and  being  kept  waiting  by  the  dyer  (?.<?.,  Caesar).  He  seasons
the  bitter  herbs  of  his  letter  with  a dressing  of  jest.  He  uses  a word
{adspersi)  specially  applied  to  “ dressing”  salads  or  vegetables  with  oil
or  vinegar  or  the  like.  Cp.  pro  Cluent.  71,  Conditor  totius  negotii
Gtittam  aspergit  huic  Bulbo.

^ TrapaivETiKtJjQ.  Antony,  as  propraetor  in  charge  of  Italy,  was  for  the
moment  able  to  make  things  disagreeable  for  Cicero  if  he  chose.

A X,  10

TO  ATTICUS

389

has  the  right  to  go  or  not,  Caesar  has  assigned  me  my  rdle^
which  is  that  I should  not  allow  anyone  at  all  to  quit  Italy.
Therefore  it  matters  little  that  I approve  your  idea  in  the
present  instance,  since  I have,  nevertheless,  no  power  to
grant  you  any  exemption.  My  opinion  is  that  you  should
communicate  with  Caesar  direct  and  ask  his  leave.  I feel
no  doubt  that  you  will  obtain  it,  especially  as  you  promise
that  you  will  take  our  friendship  into  consideration.”

There ’s  a Laconic  despatch  for  you  ! ^ In  any  case  I will
wait  for  the  man  himself.  He  is  to  arrive  on  the  3rd,  that
is,  to-day.  To-morrow,  therefore,  he  will  perhaps  come  to
see  me.  I will  test  him  : I will  listen  to  what  he  has  to  say :
I will  declare  loudly  that  I am  in  no  hurry,  that  I will  com-
municate with  Caesar.  I will  lie  perdu  somewhere  with  the
smallest  number  of  attendants  possible : at  any  rate,  let
these  men  be  ever  so  reluctant  to  allow  it,  from  this  country
I will  wing  my  way,  and  oh  that  it  might  be  to  Curio  ! ^
Don’t  mistake  what  I say.  Something  worthy  of  me  shall
be  effected.

This  is  a new  and  heavy  anxiety : I am  much  distressed
by  your  strangury.  Take  medical  advice,  I beseech  you,
whilst  it  is  in  an  early  stage.  I am  delighted  with  your
letter  about  the  Massilians.^  I beg  you  to  let  me  know  if
you  get  any  news.  I should  have  liked  to  have  Ocella  with
me,  if  I could  manage  it  without  any  concealment ; and  I
had  extracted  from  Curio  a promise  that  I should.  Here  I
am  waiting  for  Servius  Sulpicius,  for  I am  requested  to  do
so  by  his  wife  and  son,  and  I think  it  is  necessary  to  see
him.  Antony,  for  his  part,  is  carrying  about  Cytheris  with  him
with  his  sedan  open,  as  a second  wife.^  There  are,  besides,
seven  sedans  in  his  train,  containing  friends  female  or  male.

^ (TfcuraXrjv  Aukuivik^v,  a staff  round  which  the  writing  material  was
rolled,  so  arranged  that  it  could  not  be  read  when  unrolled.

2 To  Sicily,  on  his  way  to  Malta.

“ Who  had  closed  their  gates  to  Csesar,  and  were  now  being  besieged
by  Caesar’s  officers,  Dec,  Brutus  and  Trebonius.

^ Antony  was  married  to  his  cousin  Antonia,  whom  he  afterwai'ds
divorced.  He  did  not  marry  Fulvia — who  was  at  this  time  the  wife  of
Curio — for  at  least  four  years  afterwards.  Cytheris  was  an  actress,  and
is  said  by  Servius  (on  Virgil,  Eclog.  x.)  to  have  been  the  Lycoris  of  the
poet  Callus.  For  Antony’s  intrigue  with  her  see  2 Phil.  §§  58,  77,
where  this  description  is  repeated.

390

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

See  in  what  disgraceful  circumstances  we  are  being  done
to  death : and  doubt,  if  you  can,  that  if  Caesar  returns
victorious,  he  will  use  the  sword.  For  my  part,  I will
withdraw  myself  in  a cock-boat,  if  I can’t  get  a ship,
from  their  parricidal  proceedings.  But  I shall  know  more
when  I have  had  my  interview  with  him.  Our  young
nephew  I cannot  help  loving,  but  I see  clearly  that  he  does
not  love  me.  I never  saw  a case  of  such  want  of  principle,
of  such  aversion  to  his  own  relations,  and  of  such  brooding
over  mysterious  designs.  What  an  overpowering  number  of
anxieties  ! But  it  will  be  my  care,  as  it  is  now,  to  correct
him.  His  natural  abilities  are  admirable  : it  is  his  character
that  wants  attention.

CCCXCV  (A  X,  II)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

Cuma:,  4 May

After  I had  sealed  my  previous  packet,  I changed  my
mind  about  intrusting  it  to  the  man  to  whom  1 had  in-
tended doing  so,  because  he  was  a stranger.  Accordingly,
it  was  not  despatched  the  same  day.  Meanwhile  Philo-'
timus  arrived  and  delivered  me  a letter  from  you.  What
you  say  in  it  about  my  brother  does  not,  indeed,  shew  as
much  firmness  on  his  part  as  one  could  wish,  yet  it  does
not  imply  any  arriere  pensk^  any  treachery,  or  any  obstinate
aversion  from  good,  nothing  that  you  cannot  turn  in  any  direc-
tion you  please  in  one  conversation.  In  short,  he  holds  all
his  family  in  great  affection — even  those  with  whom  he  is
too  often  angry — me  he  loves  more  dearly  than  himself.
His  having  written  about  his  boy  in  one  tone  to  you,  and
in  another  to  the  boy’s  mother,  I see  no  reason  to  blame.

I am  vexed  at  what  you  say  about  the  journey  and  your
sister,  and  the  more  so  that  the  state  of  my  affairs  is  such
that  I can  apply  no  remedy  to  those  things.  For  I cer-
tainly would  have  done  so.  But  you  see  my  unfortunate
position  and  the  desperate  state  of  my  affairs.  His  financial

AX,  II

TO  ATTICUS

391

position  is  not  of  such  a nature — for  I hear  frequently  from
him  personally — as  to  prevent  his  being  eager  to  repay  you,
and  being  really  anxious  on  that  point.  But  if  such  a man
as  Q.  Axius,  because  I am  thus  in  exile,  does  not  pay  me
thirteen  sestertia,  which  I lent  his  son,  and  pleads  the  hard-
ness of  the  times,  if  Lepta  and  everybody  else  do  the  same,  it
is  wont  to  make  me  feel  some  surprise  when  he  tells  me  that
he  is  being  pressed  for  an  insignificant  sum  of  twenty  sestertia.
For  you,  of  course,  see  what  his  difficulties  are.  However,
he  is  directing  the  money  to  be  paid  in  any  case  to  your
order.  Do  you  think  him  slow  or  close  in  business  of  that
kind?  No  one  is  less  so.  Enough  about  my  brother.  As
for  his  son : his  father  has  always  spoilt  him,  but  his  in-
dulgence is  not  responsible  for  his  being  untruthful,  or
grasping,  or  wanting  in  affection  for  his  family,  though  it
perhaps  does  make  him  headstrong  and  self-willed,  as  well
as  aggressive.  Accordingly,  these  latter  also  are  traits  in  his
character,  which  are  the  results  of  over-indulgence,  but  they
are  pardonable — we  must  admit — considering  what  young
men  are  nowadays.  Those  traits,  however,  which  to  me,  at
least,  who  love  him,  are  more  distressing  than  the  very  evils
surrounding  us,  do  not  arise  from  excessive  compliance  on
my  part : for  they  have  roots  of  their  own,  which,  however,
I would  assuredly  have  torn  up,  had  I been  allowed  to  do
so.  But  my  circumstances  are  such  that  I must  put  up  with
anything.  My  own  son  I keep  under  control  without  diffi-
culty. He  is  the  most  tractable  boy  possible ; but  my  re-
morseful pity  for  him  makes  me  less  determined  in  politics,
and  the  more  he  desires  me  to  be  staunch,  the  more  I fear
turning  out  a cruel  father  to  him.

However,  Antony  arrived  yesterday  in  the  evening.  Pre-
sently perhaps  he  will  call  on  me,  or,  maybe,  will  not  take
even  that  trouble,  since  he  has  written  to  say  what  it
is  his  pleasure  should  be  done.  But  you  shall  know  the
result  at  once.  Secrecy  is  my  only  course  now.  What
can  I do  about  the  boys  ? Shall  I trust  them  to  a small
vessel?  What  sort  of  courage  do  you  think  I shall  have
in  the  voyage?  Why,  I remember  while  sailing  in  that
open  Rhodian  vessel  in  the  summer  how  anxious  I was  :
what  do  you  think  will  be  the  case  in  a small  despatch
boat  in  the  dangerous  season  of  the  year  ? Misery  on  every

392

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

side ! Trebatius  is  with  me,  a right  good  man  and  good
citizen.  What  frightful  news  he  brings  me,  good  heavens  !
Is  even  Balbus  thinking,  then,  of  an  entree  into  the  senate  ?
But  I will  give  him  a letter  himself  for  you  to-morrow.  Yes,
I believe  Vettienus  is,  as  you  say,  friendly  to  me.  I an-
swered him  with  rather  a peppery  jest,  because  he  wrote
to  me  somewhat  abruptly  about  providing  for  payment  of
the  money.  Pray  smooth  him  down,  if  he  took  it  less  good-
temperedly  than  one  could  wish.  I addressed  him  as  mone-
talis^  because  he  addressed  me  as  proconsul.  But  as  he  is
a good  fellow  and  attached  to  me,  let  me  keep  my  affection
for  him  too.  Farewell.

CCCXCVI  (A  X,  12)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuM^,  5 May

What  is  to  become  of  me?  Who  is  there,  I don’t  say
more  unfortunate,  but  in  a more  degraded  position  ? Antony
says  that  he  has  received  express  orders  about  me,  and,
nevertheless,  he  has  as  yet  not  been  to  see  me,  but  told
Trebatius  this  fact.  What  am  I to  do  now?  Nothing
succeeds  with  me,  and  the  plans  which  I form  with  the
greatest  care  are  just  those  which  fail  in  the  most  shocking
manner.  Why,  I thought  when  I had  got  Curio’s  consent,
that  I had  succeeded  entirely.  He  had  written  about  me
to  Hortensius.  Reginus  was  wholly  in  my  interests.*  I

^ Cicero,  in  jest,  gives  him  the  title  of  triumvir  nwnetalis,  “a  com-
missioner of  the  mint,”  as  though  he  “coined  money”  out  of  his
debtors.  Or  perhaps  he  was  really  in  that  office,  the  title  of  which  it
was  not  usual  to  append  to  letters.  Cicero  was  apparently  annoyed  at
not  being  addressed  as  imperator^  as  was  usual  for  a man  who  had
received  that  title  from  his  soldiers,  while  still  retaining  his  provincial
imperium.  This  Caesar  is  always  careful  to  add.  Or  it  may  have  been
unusual,  and  therefore  rather  discourteous,  to  use  such  titles  at  all  in  a
business  letter.  Is  there,  perhaps,  a pun  on  moneo,  as  the  dunning
letter  “reminded  ” Cicero  of  his  obligations?  For  the  transaction  see
Letter  CCCLXXXIII.

- Reginus  had  command  of  ships  in  the  Tuscan  Sea,  and  Cicero
hoped  would  allow  of  his  voyage  to  Sicily,  where  Curio  was.

A X,  12

TO  ATTICUS

393

never  imagined  that  Antony  would  have  anything  to  do  with
the  western  sea.  Which  way  am  I to  turn  now?  I am
watched  on  every  side.  But  enough  of  tears  ! Well,  then,
I must  steal  away  and  creep  stealthily  into  some  merchant
vessel : I must  not  expose  myself  to  the  suspicion  of  having
connived  at  my  being  prevented  from  going.  I must  make
for  Sicily.  If  I once  get  there,  I shall  then  have  a greater
step  in  my  power.  If  things  would  only  go  as  they  should
in  Spain  ! However,  I only  hope  the  news  about  Sicily
may  prove  true : but  as  yet  we  have  had  no  luck.  The
Sicilians  are  said  to  have  rallied  round  Cato,  to  have  begged
him  to  hold  out,  making  all  manner  of  promises.  Affected
by  this,  he  is  said  to  have  begun  holding  a levy.^  I don’t
believe  it,  however  distinguished  the  authority  ! I am  aware
that  this  province  was  at  least  capable  of  being  held.  How-
ever, we  shall  presently  have  news  from  Spain.  We  have
C.  Marcellus  here,  who  is  entertaining  the  same  thoughts  as
myself,  either  sincerely,  or  making  a good  pretence  of  doing
so.  I have  not,  however,  seen  him  personally,  but  have
been  told  this  by  one  of  his  most  intimate  friends.  Pray
send  me  any  news  you  have : if  I take  any  active  step,  I
will  at  once  let  you  know.  I will  treat  young  Quintus  with
more  strictness.  Would  that  I could  do  any  good  ! How-
ever, pray  some  time  or  other  tear  up  the  letters  in  which
I have  written  about  him  in  a tone  of  severity,  for  fear  of
anything  getting  out  at  any  time.  I will  do  the  same  with

am  still  waiting  for  Servius,^  nor  do  I hear  anything
satisfactory  from  him.  You  shall  know  whatever  does
occur.  Without  doubt  I must  confess  to  having  made  a
mistake.  For  the  first  time?  Or  on  one  subject?  Nay,
the  more  deeply  I have  reflected  on  a thing,  the  more  un-
wisely has  its  execution  invariably  been.  But

“ The  past  is  past ; though  grieved,  I’ll  let  it  be.”®

Let  US  only  take  care  not  to  come  to  grief  in  the  future.

^ Cato  as  a matter  of  fact  abandoned  Sicily  to  Curio  without  a blow,
A specimen  of  the  idle  rumours  afloat  at  such  a time.

® Servius  Sulpicius  (see  Letter  CCCLXXXVIII).  Tyrrell  makes
this  a separate  letter.  It  may  be  so.  But  it  is  possible  also  that  he  is
answering  a letter  from  Atticus  which  arrived  while  he  w’as  writing.

® dWd  rd  fxkv  TrpOTSTvxOai  idaofiev,  dxvvfievoL  rrep  (Horn.  //.  xvii.  1 1 2).

394

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  ^T.  57

Well,  you  bid  me  make  provision  for  my  journey.  What
am  I to  provide  ? The  possible  accidents  cover  so  wide  a
field,  that,  if  I shrink  from  them,  I must  remain  stationary
with  dishonour  and  sorrow ; if  I pay  no  heed  to  them.,  there
is  danger  of  my  falling  into  the  hands  of  unprincipled  men.
Only  see  in  what  a miserable  position  I am ! At  times  I
think  that  I should  absolutely  desire  to  receive  some  injury,
however  mortifying,  from  the  Caesarians,  to  convince  people
that  I have  become  an  object  of  hatred  to  the  tyrant.  But  if
the  voyage,  on  which  I set  my  hopes,  had  been  open  to  me,
I would  have  certainly  effected  something,  as  you  wish  and
advise,  to  justify  my  delay.  But  the  closeness  of  the  watch
set  upon  me  is  surprising,  and  even  Curio  himself  is  an
object  of  suspicion.  So  the  two  alternatives  are  to  take  the
high  hand,  or  to  act  secretly.  If  the  former,  I must  have
favourable  weather.  The  latter  means  concealment  from
those  men : ’ and  if  any  contretemps  occurs  in  doing  that,
you  must  see  in  what  an  undignified  position  I shall  be.  I
am  at  the  mercy  of  circumstances,  and  must  not  shrink
from  a somewhat  bold  course.  I often  think  of  Caelius,”
and,  if  ever  I have  the  like  opportunity,  I will  not  let  it
slip.  I hope  Spain  is  safe.  The  action  of  the  Massilians
is  at  once  glorious  in  itself,  and  a proof  to  me  that  things
are  going  well  in  Spain.  They  would  not  have  been  so
bold,  if  it  had  been  otherwise : and  they  would  be  sure  to
know,  for  they  are  close  at  hand  as  well  as  careful.^  Again,
I am  glad  of  your  remark  as  to  the  popular  dislike  expressed
in  the  theatre.  Even  these  legions,  which  he  took  over  in

’ The  text  here  is  very  corrupt.  The  translation  is  only  conjectural.
I think  the  words  must  somehow  refer  to  his  voyage,  not  to  his  general
policy.  See  p.  398.

^ It  is  quite  uncertain  to  whom  this  refers.  It  is  suggested  that  it  has
reference  to  one  of  the  three  leaders  of  armies  against  Sulla  mentioned
by  Plutarch  {^Pomp.  vii.)  ; but  most  texts  there  have  Cloelius  (KXoiXtoc).
Cicero  recurs  again  several  times  in  other  letters  of  this  period  to  him,
and  he  must,  therefore,  whoever  he  was,  have  shewn  some  intention  of
resisting  usurpation  in  arms.  We  shall,  however,  find  Cicero  declining
to  avail  himself  of  armed  assistance  offered  him  at  Pompeii.

^ Marseilles  received  the  senatorial  governor  of  Gallia,  Ahenobarbus,
and  closed  its  gates  to  Caesar  (see  p.  389).  Cicero  seems  not  to  know
the  facts  accurately  as  yet,  but  to  imagine  that  the  prolonged  resist-
ance of  Marseilles  was  in  consequence  of  some  failure  of  Caesar’s  in
Spain.

A X,  12,  13

TO  ATTICUS

395

Italy,  I can  see  are  very  much  disaffected  to  him.  How-
ever, he  has  no  worse  enemy  than  himself.  I quite  agree
with  your  dread  that  he  may  run  amuck.  If  he  once  feels
desperate,  he  certainly  will  do  so.  All  the  more  reason  for
effecting  something  in  the  spirit  (and,  I hope,  with  better
fortune)  of  Caelius.  But  one  thing  at  a time : whatever  it
may  be,  you  shall  at  once  know  all  about  it.  I will  furnish
young  Quintus  with  supplies,  as  you  request,  and  will
undertake  the  Arcadian  task,  or  the  whole  Peloponnesus,
if  you  like.^  Yes  : he  has  ability,  if  he  had  but  character.'^
. . . And  if  he  hasn’t  any  as  yet,  he  may  acquire  it,  or
virtue  is  not  teachable,^  which  I cannot  be  persuaded  to
believe.

CCCXCVII  (A  X,  13)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  7 May

Your  letter  was  very  gratifying  to  my  Tullia,  and,  by
Hercules,  to  me  also.  A letter  from  you  always  brings  a
ray  of  hope.  Pray  write,  therefore,  and  if  you  can  suggest
anything  hopeful,  don’t  omit  to  do  so.  No,  don’t  be
afraid  of  Antony’s  lions.^  He  is  a charming  fellow  ! Just
listen  to  a statesman’s  conduct  of  affairs  ! He  sent  round
a letter  summoning  ten  leading  men  and  the  quattuorviri
from  the  muncipal  towns.  They  came  to  his  villa  in  the
morning.  In  the  first  place,  he  remained  asleep  till  nine

^ Explained  by  Letter  CCCLXXXIII,  p.  369,  where  Cicero  says  that
Atticus’s  request  to  him  to  manage  young  Quintus  was  as  unreasonable
as  the  Spartan’s  asking  for  Arcadia.

- Some  Greek  letters  here  are  not  intelligible.
apart]  non  est  diSaKrov.  See  the  discussion  in  Plato’s  Protageras,

^ The  form  of  the  sentence  shews  that  this  is  an  answer  to  some
remark  of  Atticus,  who  had  heard  the  common  gossip  of  Antony’s  having
a chariot  drawn  by  lions.  It  is  placed  at  a later  date  by  Plutarch
{An^.  ix.),  but  this  passage  seems  to  shew  that  the  story  belongs  to  his
tribuneship,  when  he  had  proprsetorian  powers  in  Italy  from  Csesar.
Pliny  (TV.  If.  viii.  55),  however,  assigns  it  to  the  period  after  the  battle
of  Pharsalia.

396

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.C.  49,  JETT.  57

o’clock.  Then  on  the  announcement  that  the  men  had
arrived  from  Naples  and  Cumae — for  Caesar  is  angry  with
these  towns — he  ordered  them  to  come  again  next  day :
he  wanted  to  take  a bath  and  to  cure  a looseness  of  the
bowels.^  This  was  yesterday.  To-day,  however,  he  pur-
poses crossing  to  ^naria.  He  intends  promising  the  exiles
there  that  they  shall  be  recalled.

But  enough  of  that.  To  return  to  ourselves : I have
received  a letter  from  Q.  Axius.  Thanks,  about  Tiro.
Vettienus  is  a good  fellow.  I have  repaid  Vestorius.  Servius
is  said  to  have  stopped  at  Minturnse  on  the  6th  of  May,  to-
day he  is  to  stop  with  C.  Marcellus  in  his  villa  at  Liternum.
Early  to-morrow,  therefore,  he  will  see  me  and  will  give  me
a theme  for  a letter  to  you.  For  at  the  present  moment  I
can’t  think  of  anything  to  write  to  you  about.  One  thing
does  surprise  me,  that  Antony  has  not  sent  me  even  a
message,  especially  as  he  has  paid  a great  deal  of  attention
to  me.  No  doubt  he  is  charged  with  some  still  sterner
order  as  to  me.  He  doesn’t  wish  to  say  “ No  ” to  me  face
to  face.  I never  meant  to  ask  him  the  favour,  nor,  if  he  had
granted  it,  should  I have  trusted  his  word.  However,  I will
think  out  some  plan.  Please  tell  me  any  news  from  the
Spains : for  by  this  time  it  will  be  possible  for  some  to  be
heard : and  everybody’s  idea  is  that,  if  all  is  well  there,
there  will  be  no  more  trouble.  I,  however,  don’t  regard
our  cause  as  won  if  we  retain  them,  nor  utterly  desperate
if  we  lose  them.  Silius  and  Ocella  and  the  rest,  I suppose,
are  detained.  I observe  that  you  also  are  hindered  by
Curtius,^  though,  as  I think,  you  have  a passport.^

^ Cicero  remarks  on  Antony’s  rudeness  to  the  people  of  the  country
towns  again  in  B.c.  44  (2  Phil.  §§  105,  106).  The  quattuorviri  were
the  yearly  elected  magistrates  of  a municipium.

^ Apparently  M.  Curtius  Postumus,  whom  we  heard  of  before  as  a
Caesarian,  and  expecting  priestly  office  (p.  388).  He  is  trying  (by  per-
suasion only)  to  prevent  Atticus  from  leaving  Rome.  Tyrrell,  how-
ever, supposes  it  to  be  some  unknown  debtor  of  Atticus,  whose  non-
payment keeps  Atticus  in  Rome.  But  Atticus  was  much  too  rich  a man
to  be  detained  by  one  unpaid  debt.

^ Some  unintelligible  Greek  letters  {^Kiraovov)  have  been  emended  in
several  (unsatisfactory)  ways.  The  sense  required  is  shewn  from  Letter
CCCCII  (end).  Cicero  imagines  that  Atticus  has  obtained  a special
permit  or  diploma  to  leave  Italy.  He  may  well  have  done  so,  as  a man
of  business,  known  not  to  take  part  in  politics.

A X,  13,  14

TO  ATTICUS

397

CCCXCVIII  (A  X,  14)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuM^,  8 May

What  a miserable  state  of  existence ! To  be  so  long  in
fear  is  a greater  evil  than  the  very  thing  which  is  feared.
Servius  having  arrived,  as  I told  you  before,  on  the  15th  of
May  came  to  see  me  next  day.  Not  to  keep  you  in  sus-
pense, we  arrived  at  no  conclusion  as  to  our  policy.  I
never  saw  anybody  so  completely  beside  himself  with  fear ;
and  yet,  by  Hercules,  he  feared  nothing  that  was  not  a
legitimate  object  of  fear : “ Pompey  was  angry  with  him,
Caesar  no  friend  to  him : the  victory  of  either  one  or  the
other  was  alarming,  both  because  of  the  cruel  nature  of  the
one,  the  unscrupulousness  of  the  other,  and  also  because  of
the  financial  embarrassment  of  both,  which  could  be  relieved
from  no  source  except  that  of  the  property  of  private  per-
sons.” And  these  remarks  were  accompanied  with  such
floods  of  tears,  that  I wondered  they  had  not  run  dry  from
such  protracted  misery.  For  my  part,  even  the  inflamma-
tion of  the  eyes,  which  prevents  my  writing  to  you  with  my
own  hand,  is  not  accompanied  with  a single  tear,  but  is
very  often  troublesome  from  keeping  me  awake.  Wherefore
any  consolations  you  can  think  of  collect  and  write,  not
from  philosophy  and  books — for  of  that  I have  a stock  at
home,  though  somehow  or  other  the  medicine  is  less  potent
than  the  disease  : rather  search  for  such  news  as  that  about
Spain  or  Marseilles.  Servius,  indeed,  brings  a very  satis-
factory report  about  them,  and  also  tells  me  that  there  is
good  authority  for  the  story  of  the  two  legions.  That  is  the
sort  of  news,  if  you  have  any,  and  more  like  it.  And,  in-
deed, something  must  be  heard  before  many  days  are  over.

But  I return  to  Servius.  We  in  the  end  adjourned  our
conversation  to  the  next  day : but  he  is  slow  about  leaving
Italy.  “ He  would  much  rather  die  in  his  own  bed,  what-
ever is  to  happen.”  He  feels  a painful  hesitation  as  to  his

398

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

son’s  service  at  Brundisium/  There  was  one  thing  that
he  declared  with  the  utmost  determination : if  the  con-
demned men  were  restored,  he  would  go  into  exile.  To
this  I replied  that  “ that  would  certainly  take  place ; and
what  was  already  being  done  was  no  less  offensive,”  and  I
mentioned  a number  of  instances.  However,  these  argu-
ments did  not  increase  his  resolution,  only  his  terror : so
that  I think  he  is  rather  to  be  kept  in  the  dark  about  my
plan,  than  invited  to  adopt  the  same.  So  there  is  not  much
to  be  got  from  him.  In  obedience  to  your  hint  I will  turn
my  thoughts  to  Caelius.

CCCXCIX  (A  X,  IS)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuM^,  12  May

Whilst  Servius  was  still  with  me,  Cephalio  arrived  with
your  letter  of  the  loth,  which  inspired  me  with  a strong  hope
of  a change  for  the  better  in  regard  to  the  eight  cohorts  ;
for  those,  too,  which  are  stationed  in  these  parts  are  said  to
be  wavering.  On  the  same  day  Funisulanus  brought  me  a
letter  from  you,  in  which  the  same  news  was  repeated  still
more  positively.  I gave  him  full  satisfaction  as  to  his  own
business,  ascribing  the  full  credit  to  you.  Up  to  this  time  I
have  had  reason  to  be  discontented  with  him,  for  he  owes  me
a large  sum  of  money  and  is  not  considered  to  be  well  off.
Now  he  says  he  will  pay  me : that  a man  to  whom  he  had
lent  money  was  slow  in  paying ; that,  if  you  have  in  your
hands  what  his  debtor  has  paid,  you  are  to  give  it  to  letter-
carriers  for  me.  The  amount  you  will  learn  from  Philo-
timus’s  man  Eros.  But  let  us  return  to  more  important
matters.  The  Caelian  plan,  which  is  your  idea,  is  coming
to  fruition.  Accordingly,  I am  distracted  as  to  whether  to
wait  for  a favourable  wind.  What  is  wanted  is  a standard  :
men  will  flock  to  it.  I quite  agree  with  your  advice  to  set

^ See  p.  356.

A X,  15

TO  ATTIC  US

399

out  openly,  and  so  I think  I shall  start.  Meanwhile,  how-
ever, I am  awaiting  a letter  from  you.  Servius’s  advice
doesn’t  ease  matters  at  all.  Every  kind  of  objection  is
obtruded  in  every  opinion  he  utters.  I never  knew  anyone
more  timid  except  Gains  Marcellus,^  who  is  sorry  that  he  was
ever  consul.  What  a mean  fellow  ! why,  he  is  even  said  to
have  encouraged  Antony  to  prevent  my  departure,  in  order,
I suppose,  to  stay  himself  with  greater  decency.  Antony,
however,  started  for  Capua  on  the  loth.  He  sent  me  a
message  to  say  that  he  had  been  deterred  by  a feeling  of
shame  from  calling  on  me,  because  he  thought  that  I was
angry  with  him.  So  I shall  go,  and  in  the  way,  too,  which
you  think  right,  unless  some  hope  shall  have  been  mean-
while presented  to  me  of  undertaking  some  still  more  im-
portant part.^  But  that  will  scarcely  be  the  case  so  soon.
Alienus  the  praetor,  however,  thinks  that  some  one  of  his
colleagues  would  do  it,  if  I don’t.  Anyone  you  please,  so
long  as  it  is  some  one.

In  regard  to  your  sister,  I commend  you.  As  to  the
young  Quintus,  I am  doing  all  I can.  I hope  things  are
better.  As  to  my  brother  Quintus,  let  me  tell  you  that  he
is  in  considerable  anxiety  about  raising  money  to  pay  his  debt,
but  as  yet  has  squeezed  nothing  out  of  L.  Egnatius.  Axius
is  modest  about  the  twelve  sestertia  ! For  he  repeatedly  put
in  his  letter  a request  that  I would  pay  Gallius  whatever
he  wanted.  Could  I have  done  otherwise,  if  he  had  not
mentioned  it  ? And,  in  fact,  I often  promised : but  he
wanted  that  round  sum  promptly.  They  should  have  rather
come  to  my  assistance  at  this  time  of  difficulty,  heaven  con-
found them ! However,  more  of  this  another  time.  I am
very  glad  that  you,  and  Pilia  too,  are  relieved  of  your
quartan  ague.  Whilst  bread  and  other  stores  are  being  got
on  board,  I intend  to  make  an  excursion  to  my  Pompeian
villa.  Please  thank  Vettienus  for  his  kindness.  If  you
can  find  anyone  to  bring  it,  send  me  a letter  before  I leave
the  country.

^ C.  Claudius  Marcellus,  the  consul  of  b.c.  50,  not  the  C.  Claudius
Marcellus,  consul  B.c.  49.  The  latter  was  already  with  Pompey.

^ He  seems  to  mean,  being  deputed  to  Caesar  or  Pompey  to  endeavour
to  make  peace.

400

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

CCCC  (a  X,  16)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  14  May

I HAD  just  despatched  a letter  to  you  on  a variety  of  subjects,
when  Dionysius  arrived  at  my  house  very  early  in  the
morning.  I would  not  only  have  shewn  myself  placable  to
him,  but  would  have  pardoned  him  altogether,  had  he
arrived  in  the  frame  of  mind  described  by  you.  For  in
your  letter  received  at  Arpinum  you  said  that  he  was  coming
and  was  prepared  to  do  whatever  I wished.  For  my  part,
I wished,  or  rather  desired,  that  he  should  stay  with  me :
and  it  was  because,  on  his  coming  to  my  Formian  villa,  he
had  refused  point  blank  to  do  so,  that  I used  to  write  to  you
somewhat  sharply  about  him.  Well,  he  said  very  little,  but
the  upshot  of  his  remarks  was  that  I must  excuse  him,  that
his  private  affairs  prevented  his  going  with  me.  I answered
shortly : I felt  much  pained : I quite  understood  that  my
position  roused  his  contempt.  You  will  perhaps  be  surprised,
but  I assure  you  that  I feel  this  to  be  among  the  heaviest  blows
which  this  crisis  has  inflicted  upon  me.  I hope  he  may  be
loyal  to  you : that  is  equivalent  to  wishing  you  to  remain
prosperous  : he  will  be  so,  just  as  long  as  you  are.

I hope  my  design  will  be  free  of  all  risk : for,  on  the  one
hand,  I have  kept  it  dark ; and,  on  the  other,  I shall  not,  I
think,  be  very  closely  watched.  May  I only  have  a voyage
such  as  I wish  ! For  all  the  rest — as  far,  that  is,  as  they  can
be  provided  for  by  prudence — measures  shall  be  taken.  Pray,
as  long  as  I am  in  the  country,  write  and  tell  me  not  only
anything  you  know  or  have  heard,  but  also  what  you  fore-
see will  happen.  Cato,  who  might  have  held  Sicily  without  any
trouble — and,  if  he  had  held  it,  all  loyalists  would  have  joined
him — sailed  from  Syracuse  on  the  23rd  of  April,  as  Curio
has  written  to  tell  me.  I only  hope,  as  the  phrase  is,  that
Cotta  may  hold  Sardinia  ; for  there  is  a rumour  going  about.
Oh,  if  that  were  to  be  so,  what  a stigma  on  Cato  ! In  order
to  allay  suspicion  of  my  leaving  the  country,  or  of  what  I

A X,  i6,  17

TO  ATTICUS

401

am  thinking  of  doing,  I started  for  my  Pompeian  villa  on
the  1 2 th  of  May,  with  a view  of  staying  there,  while  the
necessary  preparations  for  my  voyage  were  being  made/^  On
my  arrival  at  my  villa  people  came  to  see  me : “The  cen-
turions of  the  three  cohorts  stationed  at  Pompeii  ” — this  is
what  our  friend  Ninnius  ^ reported  to  me — “wished  to  visit
me  the  next  day  : they  were  desirous  of  putting  themselves
and  the  town  in  my  hands.”  I,  however,  I can  tell  you,
was  off  from  my  villa  next  morning  before  daybreak,  to  pre-
vent them  having  any  opportunity  of  seeing  me  at  all.  For
what  was  the  good  of  three  cohorts  ? Or  even  if  there  were
more,  what  equipment  had  they  ? I thought,  indeed,  of
those  exploits  of  Caelius,^  which  I found  mentioned  in  your
letter  received  as  soon  as  I arrived  at  my  Cuman  villa,  which
I did  on  the  same  day : yet  at  the  same  time  it  might  have
been  a trap  to  catch  me.^  I therefore  removed  all  suspicion.
But  while  I was  on  my  return  journey,  Hortensius  had
arrived  and  had  turned  out  of  his  road  to  call  on  Terentia,
and  used  very  courteous  expressions  about  me.  However,
I believe  I shall  see  him  \ for  he  has  sent  a servant  to  tell
me  that  he  is  coming  to  my  house.  This  is  better  behaviour
than  that  of  my  fellow  augur  Antony,  among  whose  lictors  an
actress  is  riding  in  a sedan.  As  you  are  free  of  your  quartan
ague,  and  have  not  only  got  rid  of  your  new  disease,  but
also  of  your  cold,  be  sure  you  present  yourself  before  me  in
Greece  full  of  vigour,  and  meanwhile  let  me  have  some-
thing by  way  of  a letter.

CCCCI  (A  X,  17)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  16  May

On  the  14th  Hortensius  came  to  call  on  me  after  I had
written  my  letter.  I only  wish  the  rest  of  his  conduct  had

^ L.  Ninnius  Quadratus,  tribune  in  b.c.  57  and  a supporter  of  Cicero.
See  pp.  394,  398.

^ A ruse  of  some  of  his  enemies  to  make  him  commit  himself  against
Cresar,  and  so  compel  Caesar  to  treat  him  with  severity.

II.  D D

402

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  JET.  57

been  the  same.  You  could  hardly  conceive  such  epanouisse-
ment ! I mean,  I can  tell  you,  to  make  use  of  it.^  Then
came  Serapion  with  your  letter,  before  opening  which  I re-
marked to  him  that  you  had  written  to  me  about  him  before,
as  you  had  done.  Then,  after  opening  the  letter,  I told  him
the  rest  of  your  compliment  to  the  last  syllable : and,  by
Hercules,  I esteem  him  to  be  a good,  learned,  and  honest
man.  And,  what  is  more,  I think  of  using  his  ship  and
taking  him  with  me  on  my  voyage.  The  inflammation  in  my
eyes  frequently  recurs,  not,  indeed,  to  a very  painful  extent,
but  enough  to  prevent  my  writing.  I am  glad  that  your
health  is  re-established,  both  from  your  old  complaint  and
your  more  recent  troubles.  I could  wish  I had  Ocella  with
me.  For  I think  the  weather  here  is  going  to  be  slightly
calmer.  At  present  the  equinox -is  delaying  us,  which  has
been  very  stormy.  After  that,  if  there  is  a brisk  wind,'^  I
can  only  hope  that  Hortensius  may  remain  in  the  same  mind  :
since  up  to  this  time  nothing  could  exceed  his  courtesy.
You  wonder  at  what  I said  about  a “passport,”  as  though  I
had  insinuated  some  grave  charge  or  other  against  you.  For
you  say  you  “can’t  make  out  how  it  ever  came  into  my
mind.”  Well,  since  you  had  mentioned  in  your  letter  that
you  were  thinking  of  leaving  the  country,  and  since  I had
been  told  that  no  one  could  do  so  without  one,  I thought,  of
course,  that  you  had  one,  and  also  because  you  had  taken  out
a passport  for  the  boys.  That  was  the  ground  of  my  belief,
and,  nevertheless,  I wish  you  would  write  and  tell  me  what
you  are  thinking  of  doing,  and  above  all  what  news  is  now
stirring.

1 6 May.

^ Hortensius,  son  of  the  great  orator,  was  in  command  of  the  juare
inferum  in  Coesar’s  interest.  He  might,  therefore,  if  he  chose  to  be  dis-
agreeable, prevent  Cicero’s  voyage.  His  wild  conduct  and  character
were  described  in  Letter  CCLXHI,  which  accounts  for  Cicero’s  relief  at
finding  him  a little  more  decent  in  conduct  than  Antony,  as  referred  to
in  the  last  letter.

^ Si  oKpakg  erit.  The  Greek  word  is  used  by  Homer  as  an  epithet
for  a wind  {aKpoQ...apfii).  Some  translate  : “ if  there  is  fair  weather.”
The  mention  of  the  equinox  at  this  date  shews  how'  far  the  calendar
was  wnong.

A X,  17,  18

TO  ATTICUS

403

CCCCII  (A  X,  18)

TO  ATTICUS  (AT  ROME)

CuMiE,  19  May

My  Tullia  was  confined  on  the  19th  of  May — a boy,  a seven
months’  child.  I have  reason  to  be  thankful  that  she  had  a
good  delivery.  The  child  itself  is  a poor  little  weakling.
An  astonishingly  dead  calm  has  as  yet  kept  me  from  start-
ing, and  has  been  a greater  impediment  than  the  watch  kept
upon  me.  For  all  that  talk  of  Hortensius  was  mere  persi-
flage. The  truth  will  turn  out  to  be  this  : that  most  dissolute
of  men  has  been  corrupted  by  his  freedman  Salvius.^  Ac-
cordingly, henceforth  I shall  not  write  and  tell  you  what  I
am  going  to  do,  but  only  what  I have  done.  For  all  the
eavesdroppers  of  Corycus  ^ seem  to  be  listening  to  what  I say.
Do  you,  however,  I beg,  continue  to  tell  me  any  news  there
are  of  Spain,  or  anything  else ; but  don’t  expect  a letter
from  me,  except  when  I have  arrived  at  my  wished-for
destination,  or  in  case  I can  send  anything  during  my  voyage.
Even  this  I write  with  fear  and  trembling : so  slowly  and
heavily  does  everything  drag  on.  The  foundation  was  badly
laid,  the  rest  follows  suit.  I am  now  making  for  Formise :
perhaps  the  Furies  will  follow  me  there  too.^  However,  to
judge  from  Balbus’s  conversation  with  you,  my  idea  of
Malta  does  not  find  favour.  Can  you  doubt,  therefore,  that
he  regards  me  as  an  enemy  ? I have,  to  be  sure,  written  to
Balbus  telling  him  that  you  had  mentioned  to  me  in  a letter
both  his  kindly  feeling  and  his  suspicion.  I thanked  him.
On  the  second  point  I cleared  myself  with  him.  Did  you

^ The  text  of  these  sentences  is  doubtful.

^ KojpvKaloi  became  a proverbial  term  for  spies  or  eavesdroppers,  says
Stephanos  of  Byzantium,  from  the  piratic  folk  of  Corycus  in  Ionia,  who
listened  for  the  arrival  of  merchant  vessels,  in  order  to  plunder  them  :
or,  as  others  explain,  because  they  spied  out  the  merchant  vessels  and
gave  information  to  the  pirates.

. ^ He  may  allude  to  the  entrance  to  the  infernal  regions  near  Lake
Avernus,  not  far  from  Cumae.  He  more  than  once  alludes  to  the  Furies
in  connexion  with  civil  strife,  e.g. , pro  Sitlla,  § 76.

404

CICERO’S  LETTERS

B.c.  49,  ^T.  57

ever  know  anyone  more  unlucky?  I won’t  say  more,  lest
I should  make  you  suffer  too.  I am  overpowered  with  the
thought  that  the  time  has  come  when  I no  longer  have  the
power  of  acting  either  with  courage  or  with  prudence.

CCCCIII  (F  XIV,  7)

TO  TERENTIA  (AT  CUM^E)

FoRMiyE,  7 June

All  those  uneasy  feelings  and  melancholy  thoughts,  by
which  I kept  you  in  such  extreme  distress,  which  makes
me  more  uneasy  than  anything — as  well  as  Tulliola,  who  is
dearer  to  me  than  life  itself — I have  got  rid  of  and  ejected.
The  reason  of  it  all  I discovered  the  day  after  I parted
from  you.  I threw  up  sheer  bile  during  the  night : I was
at  once  so  much  relieved,  that  I really  think  some  god
worked  the  cure.  Pray  make  full  and  pious  acknowledg-
ment to  the  god  (Apollo  or  ^sculapius),  according  to  your
wont.  I hope  I have  a very  good  ship.  I write  this  at  the
moment  of  embarkation.  Presently  I will  compose  a large
number  of  letters  to  our  friends,  to  whose  protection  I will
commend  you  and  our  dear  Tulliola  with  the  greatest
earnestness.  I would  have  added  exhortations  to  you  with
a view  to  raising  your  courage,  had  I not  known  that  you
were  more  courageous  .than  any  man.  And,  after  all,  I hope
affairs  are  of  such  a nature,  that  I may  venture  to  expect
you  to  be  as  comfortable  as  possible  there,  and  myself  to  be
at  last  likely,  in  company  with  men  like-minded  with  myself,
to  be  acting  in  defence  of  our  country.  Let  your  first  care
be  your  health  ; next,  if  it  seems  to  you  possible,  make  use
of  the  villas  farthest  removed  from  men  in  arms.  You  can
with  advantage  use  the  place  at  Arpinum  with  your  town
establishment,  if  the  price  of  food  goes  up.  Our  charming
young  Cicero  sends  his  warmest  love.  Good-bye,  good-
bye.

7 June.

APPENDIX

THE  ACTA  PUBLICA

Records  of  the  proceedings  of  the  senate,  the  comitia^  -and  the
courts  had  always  been  kept  by  the  magistrates  or  officials
concerned,  just  as  those  of  the  sacred  colleges.  These  records
no  doubt  could  be  consulted,  but  the  duty  of  the  officials  con-
cerned was  limited  to  the  depositing  and  safe  keeping  of  them  :
they  were  not  charged  with  making  them  known  to  the  public.
A change  in  this  respect  was  one  of  the  first  acts  of  Caesar  in
his  consulship  of  B.c.  59.  He  ordered  that  all  official  acts  of
the  people,  as  well  as  those  of  the  senate,  should  be  collected
and  made  public  {tit  tarn  senatus  quam  populi  ditirna  acta  coti-
fierent  et  publicarentur,  Suet.  lul.  20).  It  is  only  after  that
year,  therefore,  that  mention  of  them  occurs  in  the  correspond-
ence. There  does  not  seem  any  proof  that  these  acta  were
officially  promulgated  in  the  provinces.  Rather,  it  seems  that
the  magistrates,  as  well  as  others  who  were  abroad,  made  their
arrangements  with  certain  scribes  in  Rome  to  copy  the  official
announcements  and  forward  them,  and  Cicero  constantly  as-
sumes that  such  persons  receive  them  (see  Fam.  12,  8 ; 12,  22,
§ I ; 12,  23,  § 2 ; 12,  28,  § 3).  When  Cicero  refers  to  them
simply  as  acta^  he  seems  always  to  mean  the  acta  of  the  senate
(see  vol.  i.,  pp.  146,  163,  207).  When  he  means  other  acta —
such  as  elections,  laws,  or  trials — he  speaks  of  them  as  acta
urbana^  or  reriim  urbanariitn  acta  (vol.  ii.,  p.  151  ; cp.  Fam.  12,
23,  p.  187).  Besides  this,  Cicero  had  had  a private  arrangement
with  Caslius  to  cause  a budget  of  news  to  be  made  up  for  him
periodically.  This  contained  all  kinds  of  gossip,  social  as  well
as  political  (see  vol.  ii.,  pp.  15,  33,  177).  C^sar  appears  to  have
had  also  a special  report  made  to  him  of  the  acta  diurna  (see
Letter  CCCCLXX,  Fam.  9,  16,  § 4),  a practice  continued  by
Augustus,  who,  however,  stopped  the  publication  of  the  acta
senatus  (Suet.  Atig.  36  and  64).  During  the  empire  the  acta
ut'bana  contained  notice  of  births  and  other  events  in  the  im-
perial family  (see  Suet.  Tib.  8,  Cal.  8),  as  well  as  a great  variety
of  other  facts  (see  Tac.  Ann.  12,  24  ; 13,  31).  Tiberius  not  only
reintroduced  the  practice  of  publishing  the  acta  senatus.^  but
appointed  a senator  specially  to  edit  them  (Tac.  Ann.  5,  4).  For

406

CICERO’S  LETTERS

the  inclusion  of  judicial  proceedings  in  the  acta  wbana^  see
Asconius,  Miloniatia,  19  and  47;  cp.  Pliny,  Ep,  7,  33;  and  of
those  in  a popular  assembly,  Ascon.  49.

[Other  allusions  to  the  acta  senatus  and  acta  diurna  will  be
found  in  Asconius,  44 ; Pliny,  Ep.  9,  15  ; Seneca,  Benef.  2,  10 ;
3,  16;  Quintil.  9,  3;  Juvenal  2,  136;  7,  104;  Ammianus,  22,
3,  4.]

END  OF  VOL.  II.

CHISWICK  PRESS  CHARLES  WHITTINGKAM  AND  CO,
TOOKS  COURT,  CHANCERY  LANE,  LONDON.

I o

PA

6308

E5S5

V.2

cop.

Cicero,  ^’Wcus  Tullius
The  letters  of  Cicero.
V.  2

4.

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

NoT  C^k)C£L.

kii.  out.

.

N<s</  It3
