This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http : //books . google . com/

i

i««««««3Eiffla-.

i|pp 9k'

»

*»*M WNT or cusm

THE LETTERS OF CICERO

IXSBQD^: GBOiL:;^ 1^11 AST scxs

THE LETTERS OF

CICERO

THE \\TIOLE EXTANT CORRESPONDENCE
IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH
BY

EVELYN S. SHUCKBURGH, M.A.

LATE FSLLOW OP EMMANUEL COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE
iCTHOR OP A TRANSLATION OP FOLTBIUS, A BISTORT OP ROMF, STC.

IN FOUR VOLUMES

Vol. I. B.C. 6S'^2

LONDON

GEORGE BELL AND SONS

1908

V(.

c.l

PREFACE

THE object of this book is to give the English-speaking
public, in a convenient form, as faithful and readable
a copy as the translator was capable of making of a docu-
ment unique in the literature of antiquity. Whether we
r^ard the correspondence of Cicero from the point of view
of the biographer and observer of character, the historian,
or the lover of belles lettres^ it is equally worthy of study.
It seems needless to dwell on the immense historical im-
portance of letters written by prominent actors in one of
the decisive periods of the world's history, when the great
Republic, that had spread its victorious arms, and its law
and discipline, over the greater part of the known world,
was in the throes of its change from the old order to the
new. If we would understand — as who would not? — the
motives and aims of the men who acted in that great drama,
there is nowhere that we can go with better hope of doing
so than to these letters. To the student of character also
the personality of Cicero must always have a great fascination.
Statesman, orator, man of letters, father, husband, brother,
and friend — in all these capacities he comes before us with
singular vividness. In every one of them he will doubtless
rouse different feelings in different minds. But though he
will still, as he did in his lifetime, excite vehement disap-
proval as well as strong admiration, he will never, I think,
appear to anyone dull or uninteresting. In the greater part
of his letters he is not posing or assuming a character ; he
lets us only too frankly into his weaknesses and his vanities,
as well as his generous admirations and warm affections.
Whether he is weeping, or angry, or exulting, or eager for
compliments, or vain of his abilities and achievements, he
\& not a phantasm or a farceur, but a human being with
fiercely-beating pulse and hot blood.
The difficulty of the task which I have been bold enough

\i FLZFAIZ

to nnder^fa is wsZ fanm r: s^T'-kst^l znf usax ^rwjhsT},
though psrbzpB ncc ftrntr ±i£ df^ff.:!:? of irj vo^ One
who nndeitfikes 13 txprsss tbt izinngris af iiafljquily in
modtsn idiom goes do ids ibsc v-i±: bis epes open, and has
no right 21 erey snnnbiing-buazix: or TrrftT to hfmoam his
unhappy fate. So aiso v^ :^ paL ' ii'rr a r rrfrirnltirs pre-
sented by the great fonofr x Lsrn srrie — his oonslant
use of soperiatiTes. his dor-rimg and ^Tr-'SHrTg of nevlj
synonymons terms, the endjess yafv*g of meanizig in such
common words as ff^cimm. ^pdn, .r^/rrirm. kxwufmfm, d^
mitas^ and the like — all these n>e m-rstE'j has to take in
the day's work. Finally, there aie n^e hard imts to end: —
often very hard — presented by oogrrpDOD of the tciit. Sodi
problems, thoc^i, rdatirdy with ocher ancaent vuk:^ not
peihaps excessiveiy ntnneioas, axe ya szmdently nmnenws
and sufficiently difficult. Bzit besides d»se, viuch aic the
natmal incidents of such woriu there is d>e speaal difficulty
that the letters are fireqaecily assweis to othexs which we
do not possess, and which alone can fcBy oqiiain the mean-
ing of sentences which must resnain enigmatical to is; cr
they refer to matteis by a woid or phrase of almost Ide-
graphic almiptness, widi which the recipient was wdl ac-
quainted, but as to idiich we are reduced to guessing.
When, however, all such insoluble difficulties are allowed
for, which after all in absolute bulk are Teiy smaD, there
should (if the present version is at all wonhy) be enoog^
that is perfectly plain to everyone, and geneially of the
highest interest.

I had no intention of writing a commer;taiy on the
language of Cicero or his COTrespondents, and my transla-
tion must, as a rule, be taken for the only expression of my
judgment formed after reading and weighing the arguments
of commentators. I meant only to add notes <mi peisoos
and things enabling the reader to use the letten for bio-
graphical, social, and historical study. I should have liked
to d(5dicate it by the words Boswellianus BosweUiams. Bot
I fotmd that the difficulties of the text compelled me to
add a word here and there as to the solution of them which
I jireferred, or had myself to suggest. Such notes are very
rare, and rather meant as danger signals than critical dis-
cussions. I have followed in the main the chronological

PREFACE Vli

arrangement oi the letters adopted by Messrs. Tyrrell and
Purser, to whose great work my obligations are extremely
numerous. If, as is the case, I have not always been able
to accept their conclusions, it is none the less true that
their brilliant labours have infinitely lightened my task, and
perhaps made it even possible.

I ought to mention that I have adopted the English mode
of dating, writing, for instance, July and August, though
Cicero repudiated the former and, of course, never heard of
the latter. I have also refrained generally from attempting
to represent his Greek by French, partly because I fear I
should have done it ill, and partly because it is not in him
as in an English writer who lards his sentences with French.
It is almost confined to the letters to Atticus, to whom Greek
was a second mother-tongue, and often, I think, is a quota-
tion from him. It does not really represent Cicero's ordinary
style.

One excuse for my boldness in venturing upon the work is
the fact that no complete translation exists in English. Mr.
Jeans has published a brilliant translation of a selection of
some of the best of the letters. But still it is not the whole.
The last century versions of Melmoth and Herberden have
many excellences; but they are not complete either (the
letters to Brutus, for instance, having been omitted by them),
and need, at any rate, a somewhat searching revision. Be-
sides, with many graces of style, they may perhaps prove
less attractive now than they did a century ago. At any
rate it is done, and I must bear with what equanimity
nature has given me the strictures of critics, who doubtless
will find, if so minded, many blemishes to set off against,
and perhaps outweigh, any merit my translation may have.
I must bear that as well as I may. But no critic can take
from me the days and nights spent in close communion
with Rome's greatest intellect, or the endless pleasure of
solving the perpetually recurring problem of how best to
transfer a great writer's thoughts and feelings from one
language to another :

** Caesar in hoc potuit iuris habere nihil "

LETTERS IN VOLUME I

Numbei

K umber

ir

tthis

in this

Translation

Translation

Fam. I.

X

94

Fam. VII.

13 ...

. 170

»>

2

95

»»

14 ...

. 171

»»

3

96

»»

IS ... .

. 173

»>

4

97

»

16 ...

. 156

i»

5,

98

»»

17 ...

. 145

»>

5b

102

f»

18 ...

. 172

>>

6

103

99

23 ...

. 125

»>

7

"3

99

26 ...

. 93

»>

8

116

Fam. XIII.

6a ...

.. 114

„ >»

9

152

>,

6b ...

•: VI

Fam. II.

I

165

»»

40 ...

*>

2

. 167

99

41 ...

54

f>

3

168

»»

42 ...

. 53

>»

4 ..

174

»»

49 ...

. 162

It

5

175

99

60 ...

. 163

_ »»

6

176

>»

73 ...

.. 164

Fam. III.

I

180

}>

74 ...

.. 127

Fam. V.

I

13

»

75 ...

. 177

ft

2

14

Fam. XIV.

I

.. 81

f>

3

112

*}

2

. 78

it

4 ...

88

>»

3 ...

. 83

9t

5

17

99

4 ...

. 61

tf

6

15

Fam. XVI.

10

p. 386

>«

7

12

»>

13 ...

p. 384

>»

8

130

»>

14 ...

p. 385

»

12

108

»>

16 ...

p. 387

»>

17

178

Q. Fr. I.

I

. 29

»»

18

179

i»

2

. 52

Fam, VII.

I

126

»»

3 ...

. 65

»i

2

181

»>

4 ...

71

ly

5

133

Q. Fr. II.

I

92

))

6

135

f»

2

. 99

>i

137

»

3 ... .

. lOI

ti

•.• ••<

139

*»

4 ...

. 104

fi

9

144

»>

5

. 105

*y

10

160

If

6

. 116

If

II

166

»»

7 ... .

. 119

»>

12

169

»

8 ...

. 122

LETTERS IN VOLUME I

Number

Number

in this

in this

Transktioo

TranslaiioQ

Q. Fr. IL

9 ..

... 131

Att. 11. 13 ...

... 39

If

lO ..

... 132

14 ...

... 40

»»

II

' ... 134

99 15 ...

... 41

t»

12

... 138

16 ...

... 42

91

13

... 140

99 17 ...

... 43

»»

14 ..

... 141

18 ...

44

^ •• —

15 ..

... 146

99 19 ...

... 4.>

Q. Fr. III.

I

... 147

99 20 ...

... 46

99

2

... 149

99 21

... 47

f»

3 "

. ... 150

99 22

... 48

99

4

... 151

23 ...

... 49

99

99

1}-

. ... 154

99 24 ...
25 ...

... 50
... 51

>>

7 ..

... 155

Att. III. I ...

... 58

»>

8 ...

... 158

>» 2

... 56

99

9 ..

... 159

>9 3 ...

55

Petit. Cons

P- 367

»9 4

57

Att. L

I

10

5 ...

... 59

99

2

II

6 ...

... 60

99

3 ..

... 8

7 ...

... 62

99

4 ..

... 9

8 ...

... 63

99

1 •

I

9 ...

... 64

99

6

2

,, 10 ...

... 66

99

7 ..

3

99 II

... 67

99

8 ..

... 5

>9 12

... 68

99

9 ..

4

13 ...

... 70

»>

lO

6

99 14 ...

... 69

99

II

... 7

15 ...

... 72

»9

12

... 16

16 ...

... 73

99

13 ..

... 18

17 ...

... 74

99

14 ..

... 19

18 ...

... 75

99

15 ..

20

19 ...

... 76

99

i6 ..

21

„ 20 ...

... 77

99

'7 ••

22

99 21

... 79

99

i8 ..

... 23

99 22

... 80

99

19 ..

... 24

23 ...

... 82

. »>

20 ..

... 25

24 ...

... 84

Att n.

I

26

99 25

... 85

it

2 ..

... 27

99 26

... 86

99

3 ..

... 28

99 27 ...

... S7

99

4 ...

... 30

Att. IV. I ...

... 89

99

1 •••

... 31

99 2

... 90

99

6 ...

... 32

3 ...

... 91

99

7

... 33

99 4a ...

... 100

91

8

... 34

4 b ...

... 106

99

9 ...

... 35

99 5

... 107

99

lO ...

... 37

99 6

... 109

99

II

... 38

7 ...

... IIO

♦9

12 ...

... 36

8a ...

... Ill

LETTERS IN VOLUME I

XI

Att. IV.

Number

in this

Translation

8b

"7

9

121

lO

I20

II

123

12

124

13

"9

Att. IV.

in this

Translation

14

137

15^

143

16
17 (

T42, 148, 157

i8

»53

INTRODUCTION

THE correspondence of Cicero, as preserved for us by
his freedman Tiro, does not open till the thirty-ninth
year of the orator's l^fe, and is so strictly contemporary, deal-
ing so exclusively with the affairs of the
S^h^ C^r^'^^ moment, that little light is thrown by it on
r^pondence. ^^^ previous life. It does not become con-
tinuous till the year after his consulship (b.c.
62). There are no letters in the year of the consulship itself
or the year of his canvass for the consulship (b.c. 64 and 63).
It begins in B.C. 68, and between that date and b.c. 65 there
are only eleven letters. We have, therefore, nothing exactly
contemporaneous to help us to form a judgment on the great
event which coloured so much of his after life, the suppres-
sion of the Catilinarian conspiracy and the execution of the
conspirators, in the last month of his consulship. But setting
aside the first eleven letters, we have from that time forward
a correspondence illustrating, as no other document in an-
tiquity does, the hopes and fears, the doubts and difficulties,
of a keen politician living through the most momentous
period of Roman history, the period of the fall of the
Republic, beginning with Pompey's return from the East in
B.C. 62, and ending with the appearance of the young
Octavian on the scene and the formation of the Triumvirate
in B.C. 43, of whose victims Cicero was one of the first and
most illustrious. It is by his conduct and speeches during
this period that Cicero's claim to be a statesman and a
patriot must be judged, and by his writings in the same
period that his place in literature must chiefly be assigned.
Before b.c. 63 his biography, if we had it, would be that of
the advocate and the official, no doubt with certain general
views on political questions as they occurred, but not yet
comm'.tted definitely to a party, or inclined to regard politics
as the absorbing interest of his life. In his early youth his

x\v

INTRODUCTION

hero had been his fellow townsman Marius, in whose honour
he composed a poem about the time of taking the /aga virilis*
But it was as the successful general, and before the days of
the civil war. And though he served in the army of Sulla in
the Marsic war^B.c, 90-88), he always regarded his cruelties
with horror, however much he may have aften^vards approved
of certain points of his legislation. It was not till the
consulship that he became definitely a party man ' and an
Optimate, and even then his feelings were much distracted
by a strong belief — strangely iil-founded^that Pompey
would be as successful as a statesman as he had been fortunate
as a general For him he had also a warm personal attach-
ment, which never seems to have wholly died out, in spite
of much petulance of language. This partly accounts for
the surrender of B.C. 56, and his acquiescence in the policy
of the triumvirs, an acquiescence never hearty indeed, as far
as Csesar and Crassus were concerned, but in which he con-
soled himself with the belief that nothing very unconstitu-
tional could be done while Pompey was practically directing
affairs at Rome.

It is through this period of political change and excite-
ment that the correspondence will take us,
The ^''^^*5*"^^ with some important gaps indeed, but on the
Correspondence. ^^'^^^^^ fullest when it is most wanted to
shew the feelings and motives guiding the
active politicians of the day, or at any rate the eifect which
events had upon one eager and acute intellect and sensitive
heart. One charm of the correspondence is variety. There
is almost every sort of letter. Those to Atticus are un-
studied, spontaneous, and reflect the varying moods of the
writer. At times of special excitement they follow each
other day by day, and sometimes more than once in the
same day; and the writer seems to conceal nothings how-
ever much it might expose him to ridicule, and to the charge
of fickleness, weakness, or even cowardice. Those addressed
to other friends are sometimes familiar and playful, some-

^ That Cicero up to the time of his consulship had been connected
rather with the populares is illustrated by Quint us {de Petit, i.) urgittg
hJm to make it clear that he had never been a demagogue, but thai if
he had ever spoken "in the spirit of the popular party » he had done so
with the view of attracting Pompey."

4

INTRODUCTION XV

times angry and indignant. Some of them are careful and
elaborate state papers, others mere formal introductions and
recommendations. Business, literature, and philosophy all
have their share in them ; and, what is so rare in ancient
literature, the family relations of the writer, his dealings with
wife, son, and daughter, brother and nephew, and sons-in-
law, are all depicted for us, often with the utmost frankness.
After reading them we seem to know Cicero the man, as
well as Cicero the statesman and orator. The eleven letters
which precede the consulship are happily, from this point of
view, addressed to Atticus. For it was to Atticus that he
wrote with the least concealment, and with the confidence
that any detail, however small, which concerned himself
would be interesting to his correspondent. It is well, there-
fore, that, though we thus come into his life when it was
more than half over, we should at once hear his genuine
sentiments on whatever subjects he may be speaking.
Besides his own, we have about ninety letters to Cicero from
some of the chief men of the day — Pompey, Caesar, Cato,
Brutus, Antony, and many others. They are of very various
excellence. The best of them are by much less known men.
Neither Pompey nor Caesar were good letter-writers, or, if
the latter was so, he was too busy to use his powers.
The letters begin, then, in B.C. 68, when Cicero was in

his thirty-seventh year. He was already a
Cicero's position man of established reputation both as a
pevious to the pleader and a writer. Rhetorical treatises
^r'^^ldence (^-C 86), translations from Xenophon and
in B.C. 68. Plato (b.c. 84), and from the poems of Aratus

(e.g. 81), had given evidence of a varied
literary interest and a promise of future eminence, while his
success as an advocate had led to the first step in the official

cursus honorum by his becoming a quaestor
Qosestor, B.C. 75. in B.C. 75. The lot assigned Lilybaeum as

his sphere of work, and though the duties of
a quaestor in Sicily were not such as to bring a man's name
much before the Roman public, Cicero plumes himself, as
was not unusual with him, on the integrity and energy which
he displayed in his administration. He has indeed the
honesty to tell against himself the story of the acquaintance
who, meeting him at Puteoli on his return journey, asked

XVI

INTRODUCTION

him what day he had left Rome and what was the news
there. When he answered rather crossly that he had jusl
coqie from Sicily, another acquaintance put in with *' Why,
of course. Didn't you know he has just been qusestor ai
Syracuse/" At any rate he had done sufficiently well in
Lilybaeum to give him his next step, the ledileship to which
he was elected B.C. 70, and to induce the Sicilians to apply
to him, when in tliat year they desired the prosecution of the
extortionate Verres, His energy and success in this business
raised him, without question, to the first rank of advocates,
and pledged him to a righteous pohcy in regard to the
government of the provinces.

Still Cicero was a n^vus homo^ and the jealous exclusive-

ness of the great families at Rome might yet
Cicero's Boyhood prevent his attainment of the highest office
and Educaiioa, of all When the correspondence opens he

is a candidate for the praetorship, which he
obtained without difficulty, at the head of the poll. But his
birth might still be a bar to the consulship. His father,
M. Tullius, lived at Arpinum, an ancient city of the Volscians
and afterwards of the Samnites, which had long enjoyed a
partial, and from b.c 188 a complete, Roman franchise, and
was included in the Cornelian tribe, Cicero's mother's
name was Helvia, of whom we know nothing but the one
anecdote told by Quintus {Fam. xvi. 26), who says that she
used to seal the wine jars when they were emptied, so that
none might be drained without her knowing it — a testimony
to her economy and careful housewifery. His father had
weak health and resided almost entirely in his villa at
Arpinum, which he had considerably enlarged, much de-
voted to study and literature {de Leg, ii, i). But though
he apparently possessed considerable property, giving him
equestrian rank, and though Cicero says that his family was
very ancient, yet neither he nor any of his ancestors had
held Roman magistracies. Marcus and his brother Quintus
^vere the first of their family to do so, and both had to
depend on character and ability to secure their elections.
But though the father did nothing for his sons by hold-
ing curule office himself, he did the best for their educa-
tion that was possible, Cicero calls him opHmus ei prud-
€7iHsumus^ and speaks with gratitude of what he had do

INTRODUCTION

X^l

for his sons in this respect. They were sent early to Rome
to the house of C. Acuieo, a learned jurisconsult, married to
a sister of Helvia ; and attended— with their cousins, the
sons of Aculeo — the best schools in the dty/ The young
Marcus shewed extraordinary ability from the first, and that
avidity for reading and study which never forsook him. As
a young man he diligently attended the chambers of re-
nowned jurisconsults, especially those of the elder and
younger Scaevola, Crassus, and Antonius, and soon found
that his calh'ng in Ufa was oratory. It was not till he was
twenty-eight years old, however — when he had already
written much and pleaded many cases — that he went on a
visit of between two and three years to Greece, Asia, and
Rhodes, to study in the various schools of rhetoric and
philosophy, and to view their famous cities (b.c 79-77). It
was after his return from this tour that his age (he was now
thirty-one) made the seeking of office at Rome possible
From that time his election to the several offices — quaestor-
ship, sedileship, prsetorship, consulship — ^followed without
any repulse, each in the first year of his age at which he was
legally capable of being elected.

He had doubtless made the acquaintance of Titus Pom-
^ onius, afterwards called Atticus, early in life. But it seems
'^that it was their intimacy at Athens (b.c. 79), where Atticus,
who was three years his senior, had been residing for several
years, that began the very dose and warm friendship which
lasted with nothing but the slightest and most passing of
clouds till his death. His brother Quintus was married to
Pomponia, a sister of Atticus ; but the marriage turned out
unfortunately, and was a strain upon the friendship of Cicero
and Atticus rather than an additional bond. This source of
uneasioess meets us in the very first letter of the corre-
spondence, and crops up again and again till the final rupture
of the ill-assorted union by divorce in b.c 44. Nothing,
- however, had apparently interrupted the correspondence of
I the two friends, which had been going on for a long time
■ before the first letter which has been preserved.

The eleven letters, then, which date before the consulship,
' us Cicero in full career of success as an advocate and

* Dt Oral, ir. 1% i, 2.

b

XVIU

INTRODUCTION

rising official, not as yet apparently much interested in

politics, but with his mind, in the interva
Qcero the sue- of forensic business, engaged on the adorn-
ccssfiil Advocate, ment of the new villa at Tusculum, the

first of the numerous country residences
which his growing wealth or his heightened ideas of the dig-
nity of his position prompted him to purchase, Atdcus is
commissioned to search in Athens and elsewhere for objects
of art suitable for the residence of a wealthy Roman, who at
the same time was a scholar and man of letters. He is
beginning to (6el the charm of at any rate a temporary
retreat from the constant bustle and occupations of the city.
Though Cicero loved Rome, and could hardly conceive of
life unconnected with its business and excitements,^ and
eagerly looked for news of the city in his absence, yet there
was another side to his character. His interest in literature
and philosophy was quite as genuine as his interest in the
forum and senate-house. When the season came for tem-
porarily withdrawing from the latter, he returned to the
former with eager passion. But Tusculum was too near Rome
to secure him the quiet and solitude necessary for study and
composition. Thus, though he says (vol. i., p. 4), ** I am so
delighted with my Tusculan villa that I never feel really
happy till I get there/' he often found it necessary, when
engaged in any serious literary work, to seek the more com-
plete retirement of Formic, Cumse, or Pompeii, near all of
which he acquired properties, besidgs an inheritance at
Arpinum.^ But the important achievements in literature were
still in the future. The few letters of B.a 68-67 ^re full of
directions to Atticus for the collection of books or works of

art suitable to his house, and of matters of
Death of Cicero*fe private interest. They are also short and
Father. sometimes abrupt. The famous allusion to

his father's death in the second letter of this
collection, contained in a single line— pater twins decessit a,d,

* ** The city, the city, my dear Rufus — ^stick to that, and live in iti
full light. ResidcDce elsewhere — as I made up nay mind early in life —
is mere eclipse and obscurity to those whose energy is capable of shining
at Rome." — Fam. '\L 12 (vol. ii,, p. 166).

• Even at these he found troublesome people to interrupt 1
vol. i., pp. loz, 104.

M.

—

INTRODUCTION

XIX

III Kai. Z>ecemMs — followed by directions to Atticus as to
Larticles of veriu for his villa, has much exercised the minds
'of admirers, who do not like to think Cicero capable of such
a cold-hearted sentence. It is certainly very unlike his usual
manner.* He is more apt to exaggerate than understate his
emotions ; and in the first letter extant he speaks with real
feeling of the death of a cousin. Elsewhere — as we have
seen — he refers to his father with respect and gratitude.
How then are we to account for such a cold announcement ?
Several expedients have been hit upon. First, to change de-
ussit to disassif, and to refer the sentence to the father's quit-
ting Rome, and not Ufe ; in which case it is not easy to see
why the information is given at all. Second, to suppose it to
be a mere answer to a request for the information on the
part of Atticus ; in which case the date must refer to some
previous year, or the letter must be placed considerably
later, to allow of time for Atticus to hear of the death and
to write his question. In favour of the first is the fact that
Asconius (§82) says that Cicero lost his father when he
was a candidate for the consulship (b.c, 64}, Some doubt
has been thrown upon the genuineness of the passage in
Asconius; and, if that is not trustworthy, we have nothing
dse to help us. On the whole I think we must leave the
^Announcement as it stands in all its baldness. Cicero's
It her had long been an invalid, and Atticus may have been
^am*are that the end was expected. He would also be
ited with the son's feelings towards his father, and
may have held it unnecessary to enlarge upon them,
^ possible, too, that he had already written to tell Atticus
he death and of his own feelings, but had omitted the
^ date, which he here supphes. Whatever may be the true
ca^Uimtion — impossible now to recover^ — everything we
Ibiow of Cicero forbids us to reckon insensibility among his
bolts, or reserve in expressing his feelings among his char-
Dctcristics.
Ib the next year (b.c 67) we find Cicero elected to the
f, after at least two interruptions to the comi/ia,

* Yet ihe aonouocemeiit of the birth of his son {p. 16) and of the
COf^ncment of TuUia (vol. ii, p. 403) are almost equally

XX

INTRODUCTION

which^ though not aimed at himself, gave him a foretaste of
the political troubles to come a few years later. He is, how-
ever, at present simply annoyed at the incon-
The Pnetorehip, venience, not yet apprehensive of any harm
BX. 66. to the constitution. The double postpone-

ment, indeed, had the effect of gratifying his
vanity : for his own name was returned three times first of the
list of eight His praetorship (bx. 66) passed without any start-
ling event The two somewhat meagre letters which remain
belonging to this year tell us hardly anything. Still he began
more or less to define his political position by advocating the
kx Manilla^ for putting the Mithridatic war into the hands
of Pompey ; and one of his most elaborate forensic speeches
—that for Cluentius — ^was delivered in the course of the
year : in which also his brother Quintus was elected to the
aedileship.

So far Cicero had risen steadily and without serious diffi*
culty up the official ladder. But the stress
^ ^^'^ f was now to come. The old families seem not
thc^^OTsulship!'^ ^^ have been so ready to oppose the rise of
the HGvus komo to the pnetorship. It was
the consulship on which they tried to keep a tight hand-
Accordingly, immediately after the year of his prsetorship,
we find him anxiously looking out for support and inquiring
who are likely to be his competitois* The interesting point
in regard to this is his connexion with Catiline. In his
speech in the senate delivered in the following year {in toga
Candida^ B.C. 64) he denounced Catiline in the most violent
language, accusing him of every conceivable crime ; yet in
B.C. 65 he not only contemplated being elected with him with-
out any ejcpression of disgust, but even considered whether
he should not undertake his defence on some charge that was
being brought against him— perhaps for his conduct during
the Sullan proscriptions. To whitewash Catiline is a hopeless
task ; and it throws a lurid light upon the pohtical and moral
sentiments of the time to find Cicero even contemplating
such a conjunction.

After this, for two years, there is a break in the corre-
spondence. Atticus had probably returned to Rome, and if
there were letters to others (as no doubt there were) th^
have been lost. A certain light is thrown on the proceed-

INTRODUCTION

XXI

the year of candidature (b.c, 64) by the essay " On

the duties of a candidate," ascribed to his brother Quintus,
who was himself to be a candidate for the prastorship in the
next year (b.c. 63). We may see from this essay that Pompey
was still regarded as the greatest and most influential man
at Rome ; that Catiline's character was so atrocious in the
eyes of most, that his opposition was not to be feared ; that
Cicero's " newness " was a really formidable bar to his elec-
tion, and that his chief support was to be looked for from
Itiie individuals and companies for whom he had acted
as counsel, and who hoped to secure his services in the
future* The support of the nobles was not a certainty.
There had been a taint of popularity in some of Cicero's
Utterances, and the writer urges him to convince the con-
iulars that he was at one with the Optimates, while at the
iame time aiming at the conciliation of the equestrian order*
This was, in fact, to be Cicero's pohtical position in the future*
.The party of the Optimates — in spite of his disgust at the
'ndtflerence and frivolity of many of them — was to be his
: his favourite constitutional object was to be to
the equites and the senate on good terms : and
his greatest embarrassment was how to reconcile this posi-
tion with his personal loyalty to Pompey, and his views
ts to the reforms necessary in the government of the pro-
L tinces,

^ft For the momentous year of the consulship we have no

^P letters. His brother Quintus was in Rome as

^Thc Consulship, candidate and then praetor-designate ; Atticus

_ a,c, 65. was also in Rome ; and the business, as well

as the dignity of a consul, were against any-

ng like ordinary correspondence* Of the earlier part of

be consulship we have little record. The speeches against

lulfus were delivered at the beginning of the year, and com-

tit CiceTO pretty definitely to a policy as to the ager puhlims

-which was, to his disgust, entirely reversed by the triumvirs

B.a 59— but they do not shew any sense of coming

Cicero, however, throughout his consulship took a

nite line against the popuiares. Not only did he

inus Postumus, when accused by Caesar of the

of Saturninus, and address the people against

^flering violence to L» Roscius on account of the unpopular

INTRODUCTION

The Conspiracy
of Catiline.

contemplatioo.

hx thtatralis^ but he even resisted the restoration to^their
civil rights of the sons of the men proscribed by SulJa,
avowedly on the ground of the necessity of maintaining the
established order, though he knew and confessed the justice
of the proposal.^

Any movement, therefore, on the side of the popular
party had now his opposition with which to
reckon. He professes to have known very
early in his year of office that some more
than usually dangerous movement was In
We cannot well decide from the violent
denunciation of Catiline contained^ — to judge from extant
fragments — in the speech in toga Candida^ how far Cicero was
really acquainted with any definite designs of his. Roman
orators indulged in a violence of language so alien from
modern ideas and habits, that it is difficult to draw definite
conclusions. But it appears from Sallust that Catiline had»
in a secret meeting before the elections of B.C. 64, professed
an intention of going all lengths in a revolutionary programme ;
and, if that was the case, Cicero would be sure to have
had some secret information on the subject. But his hands
were partly tied by the fact that the comitia had given him
a colleague — C. Anton i us — deeply implicated in Catiline's
policy, whatever it was. Pompey, whom he regarded as
the champion of law and order, was in the East \ and Cati-
line's candidature — and it was supposed his policy also —
had had the almost open support of the richest man id
Rome, M. Licinius Crassus, and of the most influential
man of the popuiareSy C. lulius C^sar. In the house of
one or the other of them, indeed, the meeting at which
Catiline first unfolded his purposes was believed to have
been held. Still Catiline had not been guilty of any overt
act which enabled Cicero to attack him. He had, indeed,
been informed, on very questionable authority, that Cati-
line had made a plot to assassinate him while holding the
elections, and he made a considerable parade of taking pre-
cautions for his safety — letting it be seen that he wore a
cuirass under his toga, and causing his house to be guarded
by the younger members of his party. The elections.

^ See Ati. '\u i, vol i., p. 62 ; Plut. Cic. 13 ; Cic. m Pis, g 4.

INTRODUCTION

XXIU

according to Plutarch, had at least been once post-
poned from the ordinary time in July, though this has been
denied,* At any rate it was not till they had taken place
and Catiline had been once more rejected, that any definite
step is alleged to have been taken by him, such as Cicero
could lay hold of to attack him. On the 20th of October,
in the senate, Cicero made a speech warning the Fathers of
the impending danger, and on the aist called upon CatiUne
for an explanation in their presence. But, after all, even
the famous meeting of the sth of November, in the house
of M. Porcius Laeca, betrayed to Cicero by Fulvia, the mis-
tress of Q, Curius, would not have sufficed as grounds for
the denunciation of the first extant speech against Catiline
(7th of November), if it had not been for something else.
For some months past there had been rumours of risings in
various parts of Italy ; but by the beginning of November
it was known that C, Manlius (or Mallius) had collected a
band of desperadoes near Faesulse, and, having established
there a camp on the 27th of October, meant to advance on
Rome, Manlius had been a centurion in Sulla's army, and
had received an allotment of confiscated land in Etruria ;
but, like others, had failed to prosper. The movement was
ooe boro of discontent vnth embarrassments which were
mostly brought about by extravagance or incompetence.
But the rapidity with which Manlius was able to gather a
formidable force round him seems to shew that there were
genuine grievances also affecting the agricultural classes in
Etruria generally. At any rate there was now no doubt
that a formidable disturbance was brewing; the senate
voted that there was a fumultuSy authorized the raising of
troops, and named commanders in the several districts
affected. It was complicity in this rising that Cicero now
sought to establish against Catiline and his partisans in
Rome, The report of the meeting in the house of Laeca
ga%-e him the pretext for his first step — a fiery denunciation
of Cariline in the senate on the 7th of November, Catiline
left Rome, joined the camp of Manlius, and assumed the
|ens2gns of imperium. That he was allowed thus to leave

Dh Eni$Uhungsgeichichte cUr catiUnartschen Vtrschwiirung^ by
Di* Coostantin John, 1876. I am still of opinion that Plutarch's state-
t can be strongly supported.

XXIV

INTRODUCTION

the city is a proof that Cicero had as yet no informati<
enabling hina to act at once. It was the right of every
citizen to avoid standing a trial by going into exile. Cati-
line was now under notice of prosecution for vis, and when
leaving Rome he professed to be going to Marseilles, which
had the ius extiiL But when it was known that he had
stopped short at Fsesulae, the senate at once declared both
him and Manlius hostes^ and authorized the consuls to pro-
ceed against them. The expedition was intrusted to An-
tonius, in spite of his known sympathy with Catiline, while
Cicero was retained with special powers to protect the city.
The result is too well known to be more than glanced at
here* Catiline's partisans were detected by letters confided to
certain envoys of the Allobroges, which were held to convict
them of the guilt of treason, as instigating Catiline to march
on Rome, and the senate of the Allobroges to assist the
invasion by sending cavalry to Faesulse.

The decree of the senate, vidtant consnUs, etc.^ had come to
be considered as reviving the full impertum
of the consul, and investing him with the
power of life and death over all citizens.
Cicero acted on this (questionable) constitu-
tional doctrine. He endeavoured, indeed, j
to shelter himself under the authority of ^jm
senatorial vote. But the senate never haJ^
the power to try or condemn a citizen. It
could only record its advice to the consul. The whole
legal reponsibility fox the condemnation and death of the
conspirators, arrested in consequence of these letters, rested
on the consul. To our moral judgment as to Cicero*s con-
duct it is of primary importance to determine whether or not
these men were guilty : to his legal and constitutional posi-
tion it matters not at all Nor was that point ever raised
against him. The whole question turns on whether the
doctrine was true that the senatus consuHmn uUimum
gave the consul the right of inflicting death upon citizens
without trial, />., without appeal to the people, on the
analogy of the dictator seditionis sedandm causae thus practic-
ally defeating that most ancient and cherished safeguard of
Roman liberty, the ius proimati&nis. The precedents
were few, and scarcely such as would appeal to popular

Execution of the

conspirators,

December,

B.c. 63.

Its legal

grounds and

consequences.

lu pupuiai

INTRODUCTION

XXV

The murder of Tiberius Gracchus had been
jfiacio approved by the senate in B.c. 133-2. In the
case of Gaius Gracchus, in B.C. 121, the senate had voted
uH consul Ophnius rempubUcam defendertt^ and in virtue of
that the consul had authorized the killing of Gaius and his
friends: thus for the first time exercising imperium sine
pr&socatione. Opimius had been impeached after his year
of office, but acquitted, which the senate might claim as a
confirmation of tlie right, in spite of the lex of Gaius
Gracchus, which confirmed the right of provocatio in aU
cases. In B,c 100 the tribune Satuminus and the praetor
Glaucia were arrested in consequence of a similar decree,
which this time joined the other magistrates to the consuls
as authorized to protect the Republic : their death, how-
ever, was an act of violence 00 the part of a mob. Its
l^altty had been impugned by Caesar's condemnation of
Rabirius, as du(mir capitalist but to a certain extent con-
firmed by the failure to secure his conviction on the trial of
his appeal to the people. In B.C. 88 and 83 this decree of
the senate was again passed, in the first case in favour of
SuUa against the tribune Sulpicius, who was in consequence
put to death \ and in the second case in favour of the
consuls (partisans of Marius) against the followers of Sulla.
Again in b.c. 77 the decree was passed in consequence of
the insurrection of the proconsul Lepidus, who, however,
escaped to Sardinia and died there.

Id every case but one this decree had been passed against
^H the po|»ular party. The only legal sanction given to the
^■exercise of the imperium sine provocatione was the acquittal
^■of the consul Opimius in B.C. 120. But his acquittal
flowed much to the exertions of the consul and the senatorial
^Vpauty* The equestrian jurymen afterwards had their re-
■ venge. To rely upon such precedents required either great
boldness (never a characteristic of Cicero), or the most pro-
found conviction of the essential righteousness of the
Pleasure, and the clearest assurance that the safety of the
e — the supreme law — justified the breach of every con-
^stilurional principle. Cicero was not left long in doubt as
1 to whether there would be any to question his proceeding.
On the last day of the year, when about to address the
people as was customary, on laying down his consulship,

XXVI

INTRODUCTION

the tribune Q* Caecilius Metellus Nepos forbade him to
speak, on the express ground that he "had put citizens
to death uncondemned " — quod ctves indemnatos necavisseL
Cicero consoled himself with taking the required oath as to
having observed the laws, with an additional declaration
that he had "saved the state," Nevertheless, he must have
felt deeply annoyed and alarmed at the action of Metellus,
for he had been a iegatus of Pompey, and was supposed to
represent his views, and it was upon the approbation and
support of Pompey, now on the eve of his return from the
Eastj that Cicero particularly reckoned.

The letters in our collection now recommence. The first

of the year (b.c» 62) is one addressed to
Letters after Pompey, expressing some discontent at the_
B.C; 63. qualified manner in which he had written o] '

recent events, and affirming his own convictioi
that he had acted in the best interests of the state and with
universal approval. But indeed the whole correspondence
to the end of Cicero's exile is permeated with this subject
directly or indirectly. His quarrel with Metellus Nepos
brought upon him a remonstrance from the latter's brother
(or cousin), Metellus Celer (Letters XIII, XIV), and when
the correspondence for b.c. 61 opens, we find him already on
the eve of the quarrel with Publius Clodius which was to
bring upon him the exile of B.C. 58.

P, Clodius Pulcher was an extreme instance of a

character not uncommon among the nobility
I Publius Clodius in the last age of the Republic. Of high
* Pulcher. birth, and possessed of no small amount of

ability and energy, he belonged by origin
and connexion to the Optimates ; but he regarded pohtics as
a game to be played for his personal aggrandizement, and
public office as a means of replenishing a purse drained by
boimdless extravagance and self-indulgence. His record
had been bad. He had accompanied his brother-in-law
Lucullus, or had joined his staff, in the war with Mithradates,
and had helped to excite a mutiny in his army in revenge
for some fancied slight. He had then gone to Cilicia, where
another brother-in-law, Q. Marcus Rex, was propraetor, and
while commanding a fleet under him had fallen into the
hands of pirates, and when freed from them had goi

rRODUCTION

XXVlt

»

I

?nt1y in a private capacity— to Antioch, where he again
excited a mutiDy of Syrian troops engaged in a war against
the Arabians (b.c. 70-65). On his return to Rome he
attempted to make himself conspicuous by prosecuting
Catiline, but accepted a bribe to withdraw. In B.C. 64, on
the staff of the governor of Gallia Narbonensis, he Is
accused of having enriched himself with plunder. For a
time after that he was still acting as a member of the party
of the Optimates ,- seems to have supported Cicero during
the Catiline conspiracy ; and in b.c, 62 stood for the
quasstorship and was elected. His violation of the mysteries
was alleged to have been committed in December of that
year, and before he could go to the province allotted to him as
quaestor in Sicily he had to stand a trial for sacrilege. Such
an offence — penetrating in disguise into the house of the
Pontifex Maximus, when his wife was engaged in the secret
rites of the Bona Dea — would place him under a curse, and
not only prevent his entering upon his qusestorship, but
would disfranchise and politically ruin him. Clodius would
seem not to have been a person of sufficient character or
importance to make this trial a political event. But not
only had he powerful backers, but his opponents also, by
proposing an innovation in the manner of selecting the
jurors for trying him, had managed to give a spurious poli-
tical importance to the case. One of the most brilliant of the
early letters (XV, p, 37) gives us a graphic picture of the
trial. Clodius was acquitted and went to his province, but
returned in B.C. 60, apparently prepared for a change of
parties. Cicero and he had quarrelled over the trial. He
had said sarcastic things about the sacred consulship, and
Cicero had retaliated by bitter speeches in the senate, and
by giving evidence at the trial of having seen Clodius in
Rome three hours before he professed to have been at
Interamna, on the day of the alleged sacrilege. It is per-
haps possible that his alibi may have been true in substance,
for he may have been well out of Rome on his way to
Interamna after seeing Cicero. But, however that may be,
he nourished a grudge against Cicero, which he presently
had an opportunity of satisfying. The year of his return ta
Rome from Sicily (b.c. 60) was the same as that of Csesar's
letorn from Spain. Pompey — who had returned the year .

CXVlIl

INTRODUCTION

sfore— was at enmity with the senate on account of the
difficulties raised to the confirmation of his acta and the allot-
ments for his veterans, Csesar had a grievance because of
the difficulties put in the way of his triumph. The two
coalesced, taking in the millionaire Crassus, to forni a
triumvirate or coalition of three, with a view to getting
measures they desired passed, and offices for themselves or
their partisans. This was a great blow to Cicero, who dung
feverishly to Pompey as a political leader, but could not
follow him in a coalition with Caesar : for he knew that the
object of it was a series of measures of which he heartily
disapproved. His hope of seeing Pompey coming to act
as acknowledged leader of the Optimates was dashed to the
ground. He could not make up his mind wholly to abandon
him, or, on the other hand, to cut himself adrift from the
party of Optimates, to whose policy he had so deeply com-
mitted himself. Clodius was troubled by no such scruples.
Perhaps Caesar had given him substantial reasons for his
change of policy. At any rate, from this time forward he
acts as an extreme popularis — much too extreme, as it
turned out, for Pompey*s taste. As a patrician his next
step in the official ladder would naturally have been the
sedileship, But that peaceful office did not suit his present
purpose. The tribuneship would give him the right to
bring forward measures in the comitia tributa^ such as he
desired to pass, and would in particular give him the oppor-
tunity of attacking Cicero. The difficulty was that to
become tribune he must cease to be a patrician. He could
only do that by being adopted into a plebeian gens. He
had a plebeian ready to do it in B.C. 59. But for a man
who was sui iuris to be adopted required a formal meeting
of the old comitia curiata^ and such a meeting required the
presence of an augur, as well as some kind of sanction of
the pontifices. Caesar was Pontifex Maximus, and Pompey
was a member of the college of augurs. Their influence
would be sufficient to secure or prevent this being done.
Their consent was, it appears, for a time withheld. But
Caesar was going to Gaul at the end of his consulship, and
desired to have as few powerful enemies at Rome during his
absence as possible. Still he had a personal feeling for
Cicero, and when it was known that one of Clodius*s objects

INTRODUCTION

XXIX

^

in seeking to become a plebeian and a tribune was to
attack him, Csesar offered him two chances of honourable
retreat — first as one of the commissioners to administer his
land law, and again as one of his legcUi in Gaul But
Cicero would not accept the first, because he was vehemently
opposed to the law itself : nor the second, because he had no
taste for provincial business, even supposing the proconsul
to be to his liking ; and because he could not believe that
P. Clodius would venture to attack him, or would succeed if
he did- Ca?sar*s consulship of B.C. 59 roused his worst fears
for the Repubhc \ and, though he thought little of the states-
manship or good sense of Caesar's hostile colleague Bibulus,
he was thoroughly disgusted with the policy of the triumvirs^
with the contempttious treatment of the senate, with the high-
handed disregard of the auspices — by means of which Bibulus
tried to invalidate the laws and other acta of Caesar — and with
the armed forces which Pompey brought into the campus^
nominally to keep order, but really to overawe the comitia^
and secure the passing of Caesar's laws. Nor was it in his-
nature to conceal his feelings. Speaking early in the year
in defence of his former colleague, C. Antonius, accused of
ntas for his conduct in Macedonia, he expressed in no
iblful terms his view of the political situation. Within a
lew hours the words were reported to the triumvirs, and all
formalities were promptly gone through for the adoption of
Clodius. Csesar himself presided at the comitia curiaia^
Pompey attended as augur, and the thing was done in a
few minutes. Even then Cicero does not api>ear to have
been alarmed, or to have been fully aware of what the
object of Publius was. While on his usual spring visit to
his seaside villas in April (b.c. 59), he expressed surprise at
hearing from the young Curio that Clodius was a candidate
for the tribuneship (vol. i., p. 99). His surprise no doubt was
more or less assumed : he must have understood that
Clodius's object in the adoption was the tribunate, and
must have had many uneasy reflexions as to the use which
he would make of the office when he got it. Indeed there
was not very much doubt about it, for Publius openly
avowed his intentions. We have accordingly numerous
references, in the letters to Atticus, to Cicero's doubts about
the course he ought to adopt Should he accept Ceesar's

XXX

INTRODUCTION

offer of a legation in Gaul, or a free and votive legation ?
Should he stay in Rome and fight it out ? The latter course
was the one on which he was still resolved in July, when
Clodius had been, or was on the point of being, elected
tribune (p. no). He afterwards wavered (p. 113), but was
encouraged by the belief that all the " orders " were favour-
able to him, and were becoming alienated from the triumvirs
(pp. 117, 1 19), especially after the affair of Vettius (pp. 122-
1 24), and by the friendly disposition of many of the colleagues
of Clodius in the tribuneship. With such feeUngs of con-
fidence and courage the letters of b,c. 59 come to an end.
The correspondence only opens again in April of B,c 58,

when the worst has happened, Clodius
The Exile, Apnl, entered upon his tribuneship on the loth
l',c[ ly^^""^""^^' of December, b.c. 59, and lost little time in

proposing a law to the comitia for the trial
of any magistrate guilty of putting citizens to death without
trial {qui dves indemnatos necavisset). The wording of the
law thus left it open to plead that it applied only to such
act as occurred after its enactment, for the pluperfect ne-
cavisset in the dependent clause answers to the future perfect
in a direct one. And this was the interpretation that Caesar,
while approving the law itself, desired to put upon it^ He
again offered Cicero a legation in Gaul, but would do no-
thing for him if he stayed in Rome ; while Pompey, who
had been profuse in promises of protection^ either avoided
seeing Cicero, or treated his abject entreaties with cold
disdain/"* Every citizen, by a humane custom at Rome,
had the right of avoiding a prosecution by quitting the city
and residing in some town which had the ius exiiii. It is
this course that we find Cicero already entered upon when
the correspondence of the year begins. In the letters of
this year of exile he continually reproaches himself with not
having stayed and even supported the law, in full confidence
that it could not be applied to himself. He attributes his
having taken the less courageous course to the advice of his

* Cesar said, ow /*i)v max 7rpoiri}KHv im mc irapeXijXvfiotf* roiovrip
rtva vo/ioi' (rw77p«^fcr0ai (Dio, xxxviii. 17).

' **The man who did not so much as raise me up, when I threw
myself at his fc€t,*' — AtL x. 4 (vol. ii,, p, 362). Similar allusions to.
Pompey's conduct to him on the occasion often occur.

INTRODUCTION

XXXI

b

I

friends, who were actuated by jeaJousy and a desire to get
rid of him. Even Atticus he thinks was timid, at the best,
in advising his retiremeot It is the only occasion in all the
correspondence in which the least cloud seems to have
rested on the perfect friendship of the two men. Atticus
does Dot appear to have shewn any annoyance at the
querulous remarks of his friend. He steadily continued to
write, giving information and advice, and made no difficulty
in supplying his friend with money. During Cicero's ab-
serjce Atticus became still more wealthy than before by
inheriting the estates of his cross-grained uncle Csecilius,
But he was always careful as to the investment of his money
and he would not, perhaps^ have been so ready to trust
Cicero, had he not felt confidence in the ultimate recovery
of his civil status. Still his confidence was peculiarly wel-
come at a time which would have been otherwise one of
great pressure. For Clodius had followed up Cicero's re-
tirement with the usual kx in regard to persons leaving
Rome to avoid a trial — a prohibition " of fire and water "
within a fixed distance from Italy, which involved the con*
fiscation of all his property in Italy. His villas were dis-
mantled, his town house pulled down, and a vote of the
people obtained by Clodius for the consecration of its site
as a templum dedicated to Liberty, and a scheme was formed
and the work actually comtnenced for occupying part of it
by an extension of an existing porticus or colonnade (the
forticus Catuii) to contain a statue of Liberty. That this
coosecration was regular is shewn by the pleas by which it
ifas afterwards sought to reverse it.^ When Cicero was
recalled the question came before the pontiiicesj who de-
cided that the consecration was not valid unless it had been
done by the ** order of the people." It could not be denied
on the face of it that there had been such an order, Cicero
was obliged to resort to the plea that Clodius^s adoption
had been irregular and invalid, that therefore he was not
legally a tribune, and could not take an order of the people.
Finally, the senate seems to have decided that its restoration
to Cicero was part of the general restittitio in iniegrmn
IPOted by the €omitia ctnturiata ; and a sum of money was

* Sec voL L, p. 190.

xxxit

INTRODUCTION

assigned to him for the rebuilding of the house. Clodius
refused to recognize the validity of this decree of the senate,
and attempted by violence to interrupt the workmen engaged
on the house. We have a lively picture of this in Letter XCI
(vol L, pp. 194-196).
The letters from Cicero as an exile are painful reading
for those who entertain a regard for his char-
E^*i^^?T*^»^* acter. It was not unnatural, indeed, that he
LV-LXXXVIII). should feel it grievously. He had so com-
pletely convinced himself of the extra-
ordinary value of his services to the state, of the import-
ance of his position in Roman politics, and of the view
that the Optimates would take of the necessity of retain-
ing him, that to see himself treated like a fraudulent or
unsuccessful provincial governor, of no importance to
anyone but himself, was a bitter blow to his self-esteem.
The actual loss was immense. His only means were now
the amount of money he had been able to take with him,
or was able to borrow. All was gone except such property
as his wife retained in her own right He was a depend-
ent upon her, instead of being her support and the master
of his own household. The services of freedmen^readily
rendered when he was prosperous — would now be a
matter of favour and personal attachment, which was not
always sufficient to retain them. The " life and light " of
the city, in which no man ever took a more eager interest
and delight, were closed to him. He was cut oflf from his
family, and from familiar intercourse with friends, on both
of which he was much dependent for personal happiness.
Lastly, wherever he lived, he lived, as it were, on sufferance,
no longer an object of respect as a statesman, or the source
of help to others by his eloquence. But, disagreeable as all
this was to a man of Cicero^s sensitive vanity, there was
something still worse. Even in towns which were the legal
distance from Italy he could not safely stay, if they were
within the jurisdiction of one of his personal enemies, or
contained other exiles, w^ho owed him an ill turn* He
was protected by no law, and more than one instance of
such a man's falling a victim to an enemy's dagger is re-
corded. Cicero's first idea was to go to Malta : but Malta
was for some purposes in the jurisdiction of the governor of

INTRODUCTION

XXXIU

cily, and the governor of Sicily (C. VergUius *) objected eo
is passing through Sicily or staying at Malta. We have no
leasoo for supposing Vergilius personally hostile to Cicero,
'ut he may have thought that Cicero's services to the
idlians in the case of Verres would have called out some
expression of feeling on their part in his favour, which
vould have been awkward for a Roman governor. Cicero
therefore crossed to Epirus, and travelled down the Eg-
nadan road to Thessalonica. This was the official capital
of the province of Macedonia, and the quaestor in Mace-
ckmia, Gnaeus Plandus, met Cicero at Dyrrachium, in-
vited him to fix his residence there with him^ and accom-
panied him on his journey. Here he stayed till November
m a state of anxiety and distress, faithfully reflected in his
liters, waiting to hear how far die elections for b.c, 57 would
result in putting his friends in office, and watching for ahy^
poUtiJCaJ changes that would favour his recall : but prepared
to go still farther to Cyzicus, if the incoming governor,
L. Calpurnius Piso, who, as consul in b.c, 58 with Gabinius,
h:id shewn decided animus against him, should still retain
iing in Macedonia. Events, however, in Rome

t^ the summer and autumn of B.c. 58 gave him belter
hopes. Clodius, by his violent proceedings, as well as by
his legislation, had alienated Pompey, and caused him to
^urotir Cicero's recall. Of the new consuls Lentulus was
his friend, and Q, Csecihus Metellus Nepos (who as tribune
io B.C 65-63 had prevented his speech when laying down his
consulship) consented to waive all opposition, A majority
of the new ^bunes were also favourable to him, especially
P. Sestius and T. Annius Milo; and in spite of constant
cps and downs in his feelings of confidence, he had on the
whole coiacliided that his recall was certain to take place,

I Towards the end of November he therefore travelled back
to Dyirachium, a h'dera avi/as in which he had many friends,
«zid where he thought he might be safe, and from which he
could cross to Italy as soon as he heard of the law for his
1 recall haviiig been passed. Here, however, he was kept
*iitiiig through many months of anxiety, Clodius had
tiamged to make his recall as difficult as possible. Re

' Sec VOL i.» pp^ 129, 138 ; cp, /n? J^nc. §§ 95-96.
c

XXXIV

INTRODUCTION

bad, while tribune, obtained an order from the people for*
bidding the consuls to bring the subject before the senate,
and Piso and Gabinius had during their year of office pleaded
that law as a bar to introducing the question.

The new consols were not, or did not consider themselves,

so bound, and Lentulus having brought the
The Recall, subject forward, the senate early passed a

August, B.C 57. resolution that Cicero's recall was to take

precedence of all other business. In accord-
ance with the resolution of the senate, a law was proposed
by the consul Lentulus in the comitia centuriata, and
probably one by Milo to the tributa. But Clodius, though
no longer armed with the tribuneship, was not yet beaten.
He obtained the aid of some gladiators belonging to hia
brother Appius, and more than once interrupted and dis-
persed an assembly of the comiHa. In the riots thus occa-
sioned blood was shed on both sides, and Cicero's brother
Quintus on one occasion nearly lost his life. This was the
beginning of the series of violent contests between Clodius
and Milo J only ended by the murder of the former on the
Appian road in B,c. 52. But Clodius was a candidate for
the aedileship in this year (aa 57), and could be barred
from that office legally by a prosecution for vis^ of which
Milo gave notice against him. It was, perhaps, a desire
to avoid this, as much as fear of Milo's counter exhibition
of violence, that at length caused him to relax in his opposi-
tion, or at any rate to abstain from violently interrupting the
comitia. Accordingly, on the 4th of August, the law pro-
posed by both consuls, and supported by Pompey, was
passed unanimously by the centuries. Cicero, we must
presume, had received trustworthy information that this was
to be the case (shewing that some understanding had been
come to with Clodius, or there would have been no certainty
of his not violently dispersing the comitia again), for on that
same day he set sail from Dyrrachium and landed at Brun-
disium on the 5th. His triumphant return to Rome is
described in the eighty-ninth letter of this collection. For
Pompey 's share in securing it he expressed, and seems really
to have felt, an exaggerated gratitude, which still influenced
him in the unhappy months of b.c. 49, when he was hesi*
tating as to joining him beyond seas in the civil war.

INTRODUCTION

XXXV

But though Clodius had somehow been prevented from
hindering his recall, he by no means relaxed his hostility*
He not only tried to excite the populace against him by
arguing that the scarcity and consequent high price of com,
from which the people were at that time suffering, was in
some way attributable to Cicero*s policy, but he also op-
posed the restoration of his house ; and when a decree of
the senate was passed in Cicero's favour on that point,
brought his armed ruffians to prevent the workmen from
going on with the rebuilding, as well as to molest Cicero
himself (vol. L, p. 195). This was followed by a determined
opposition by Milo to the holding of the elections for b.c
56^ until his prosecution of Clodius de vi should have been
tried. Clodius, however, was acquitted,^ and, being elected
aedile, immediately commenced a counter accusation against
Jlilo for vis. He impeached him before the comitia in
ary (b.c. 56), on which occasion Pompey spoke in
s defence in the midst of a storm of interruptions got
the friends of Clodius (vol. i., pp. 214, 217). Milo
[so acquitted, and the rest of Clodius's aedileship seems
t51have passed without farther acts of open violence.
But Cicero had now other causes of anxiety. He had
spoken in favour of the commission offered
ICicero and the to Pompey in RC. 57 for superintending the
FtiizmTirs^ corn-supply of Rome (£«r(z a««e7;w?). Pompey

was to have fifteen legates, a good supply of
[ps and mem, and considerable powers in all corn-growing
countries in the Mediterranean, Cicero supported this»
piitly from gratitude to Pompey, but partly also from a wish
Id promote his power and influence against the ever-increas-
ing influence and fame of Caesar. He secretly hoped that
1 jealousy might grow up between them ; that Pompey
would be drawn closer to the Optimates ; and that the
|imion of the triumvirate might be gradually weakened and
ly disappear. Pompey was thoroughly offended and
led by the insults offered him by the Clodian mob| and
[odius's own denunciations of him ; and if he could be
convinced that these were suggested or approved by Csesar
01 Cras»uSj it would go far to withdraw him from friendship

^ Fam. i 9, 15 (voL L, p. 316).

XXXVl

INTRODUCTION

with either of them- With Crassus, indeed, he had never
been on cordial terms : it was only Caesar's influence that
had caused him to form any union with him. Caesar, on
the other hand, was Ukely to be uneasy at the great power*
which the cura annofue put into Pompey^s hands ; and at
the possible suggestion of offering him the dictatorship, if the
Clodian riots became quite intolerable. On the whole,
Cicero thought that he saw the element of a very pretty quarrel,
from which he hoped that the result might be ** liberty " —
the orderly working of the constitution, that is, without the
irregular supremacy of anyone, at any rate of anyone of the
popular party. He had, however, a delicate part to play.
He did not wish or dare to break openly with Caesar, or to
speak too openly to Pompey; and he was conscious that
the intemperance, folly, or indifference of many of the
Optimates made it difficult to reckon on their support, and
made that support a very questionable benefit if accorded.
But though his letters of this period are full of expressions
indicating doubt of Pompey and irritation with him, yet he
seems stiU to have spoken of him with warmth on pubUc
occasions, while he avoided mentioning Csesar, or spoke of
him only in cold terms.

The hope, however, of detaching Pompey from Caesar
was dashed by the meeting at Luca in April,
B.C. 56, at which a fresh arrangement was
made for the mutual advantage of the trium-
virs. Csesar got the promise of the introduc-
tion of a law giving him an additional five
years of command in Gaul^ with special
privileges as to his candidature for the con-
sulship of BX. 48 J while Pompey and Crassus bargained
for a second consulship in B.C. 55, and the reversion of the
Spains (to be held as a single province) and Syria respec-
tively, each for five years. The care taken that none of the
three should have imperium overlapping that of the others
was indeed a sign of mutual distrust and jealousy. But the
bargain was made with sufficient approval of the members
of the party crowding Luca to secure its being carried out
by the comitia. The union seemed stronger than ever ;
and Cicero at length resolved on a great change of attitude.
Opposition to the triumvirs had been abandoned, he saw,

Renewal of the
Triumvirate at
Luca, Aprilj
B,c. 56, and
Cicero's change
of policy.

INTRODUCTION

XXXVlt

by the very party for whom he had been incurring the
enmity of Pompey and Cssar. Why should he hold out
any longer? ** Since those who have no power," he writes
to Atticus in April, ** refuse me their affection, let me take
caie to secure the affection of those who have power. You
will say, * I could have wished that you had done so before,*
I know you did wish it, and that I have made a real ass of
myself." ' This is the first indication in the letters of the
change. But it was soon to be publicly avowed. The
opposition to the consulship of Pompey and Crassus was so
riolent that no election took place during BX, 56, and they
were only elected under the presidency of interreges at the
beginning of February, B.C. 55. But by the iex Sempronia
the senate was bound to name the consular provinces— />.,
I the provinces to be governed by the incoming consuls after
their year of office — before the elections, and in his speech
on the subject (de Provinciis Consularibus\ delivered appar-
ently in July, B.C. 56, Cicero, while urging that Piso and
Gflbinius should have successors appointed to them in
XIacedonia and Syria, took occasion to announce and de-
fend his own reconciliation with Caesar, and to support his
continuance m the governorship of Gaul Shortly after-
wardSj when defending the citizenship of L, Cornelius
Balbusi he delivered a glowing panegyric on Porapey's
character and services to the state* This was followed by
4 complete abstention from any farther opposition to the
carrying out of Caesar's law for the allotment of the Cam-
paoian land — a subject which he had himself brought be-
fore the senate only a short time before, and on which he
iGAUy continued to feel strongly.* Cicero's most elaborate
defence of his change of front is contained in a long letter
to P. lientulus Spinther, written two years afterwards.'^ The
gist of it b much the same as the remark to Atticus ah-eady

* Letter CVII, vol. i., pp. 219, 220.

* I its capture in Ibe second Punic War, Capua had ceased
to hi . . p orate existence, and its territory had been a^r publicus^
^ cmt h-i ifB^mis {arator^Y Caesar had restored its corporate existence
tv niAkiag it a cal&ma, and much oi Ihe land had been allotted to
mtnai of hfs crwn and Pompe/s armies, The state thus lo^it the
fftf aC the land, one of the few sources of revenue from Italy now
4imvn hf the exchecjuer of Rome.

* Leller CLII, vol, L, pp> 310324

xxxvni

INTRODUCTION

quoted, " Pompey and Caesar were all-powerful, and couM
not be resisted without civil violence, if not downright civil
war. The Optimates were feeble and shifty, had shewn in-
gratitude to Cicero himself, and had openly favoured his
enemy Clodius. Public peace and safety must be the
statesman's chief object, and almost any concession was to
be preferred to endangering these/' Nevertheless, we can-
not think that Cicero was ever heartily reconciled to the
policy, or the unconstitutional preponderance of the trium-
virs. He patched up some sort of reconciliation with
Crassus, and his personal affection for Pompey made it
comparatively easy for him to give him a kind of support
Qesar was away, and a correspondence filled on both sides
with courteous expressions could be maintained without
seriously compromising his convictions. But Cicero was
never easy under the yoke. From b.c, 55 to B.C. 52 he
sought several opportunities for a prolonged stay in the
country, devoting himself— in default of politics — to litera-
ture. The fruits of this were the de Oratore and the de Re-
publica^ besides poems on his own times and on his consul-
ship. Still he was obliged from time to time to appear in
the fomm and senate-house, and in various ways to gratify
Pompey and Csesar. It must have been a great strain upon
his loyalty to this new political friendship when, in b.c» 54,
Pompey called upon him to undertake the defence of
P, Vatinius, whom he had not long before attacked sa
fiercely while defending Sestius. Vatinius had been a
tribune in b,c. 59, acting entirely in Caesar's interests, and
Cicero helieved him to have been his enemy both in the
matter of his exile and in the opposition to his recall. He
had denounced him in terms that would have made it
almost impossible, one would think, to have spoken in his
defence in any cause whatever. At best he represented all
that Cicero most disliked in politics ; and on this very elec-
tion, to the prgetorship, for which he was charged with
bribery {de sodalitiis)^ Cicero had already spoken in strongly
hostile terms in the senate. For now undertaking his de-
fence he has, in fact, no explanation to give to Lentulus
(vol. i,, p. 319)^ and he was long sore at having been forced
to do it. Through b.c. 54 and 53 he was busied with his
d€ Republican and was kept more in touch with Caesar by

"• nn-^

INTRODUCTION

XXXIX

^:

^
^

the fact that his brother Quintus was serving as legatus to
the latter in Britain and Gaul, and that his
Quintus Cic«K) friend Trebatius (introduced by himself) was
Gaul- seeking for promotion and profit in Caesar's

camp. But even his brother's service with
CK"**r did not eventually contribute to the formation of
cordi;3u ^-^eiing on his part towards Caesar, whom he could
not help admiring, but never really liked. For Quintus,
though he distinguished himself by his defence of his camp
in the autumn of B.C. 54, lost credit and subjected himself
to grave rebuke by the disaster incurred in B.C. 53, near
Aduatuca {Tongres\ brought about by disregarding an ex-
press order of Caesar's. There is no allusion to this in the
extant correspondence, but a fragment of letter from Csesar
to Cicero (nequepro canto ac diligente se castris continuit^\
seems to shew that Caesar had written sharply to Cicero on
his brother's faux pas^ and after this time, though Cicero
met Caesar at Ravenna in B.C. 52, and consented to support
the bill allowing him to stand for the consulship in his
absence,^ there is apparent in his references to him a return
to the cold or critical tone of former times. But of course
there were other reasons.
Pompey's six months' sole consulship of b.c 52 (**that
divine third consulship "), the rumour of his
dictatorship, and the growing determination
of the Optimates to play off Pompey against
Caesar (Crassus having disappeared) and to
insist on Caesar resigning his province and
anny before the end of his ten years' tenure, and before
standing for a second consulship, caused Cicero's hope of a
final dissolution of the unconstitutional compact to revive
a^io ; and made him draw more and more closely to Pom-
pey as the chief hope of the hni. In the beginning of the
year he had found himself in opposition, or quasi-opposi-
bon, to Pompey in regard to the prosecution of Milo for
the murder of Clodius. But though in the previous year
he had declared that the election of Milo to the consulship
was of the utmost importance to his own position and the

Quoted by Fla^vios Cfaarisius, Ars Gramm, L« p. ia6 {ed. Kid).
* VoL ti., p* 204-

Pompey^s third
Coctstilship and
the trixl of
Mik», fi.c. 52.

INTRODUCTION

CllicU, B.C. 51-

Bofetf of the state,^ now that it was rendered impossible b^^
Milo's condemnation, he seems to have placed all his hopes
on Pompey. Unfortunately, there is here a break in the
I ^XHTespondence. There is no letter of the last six months
of B.c 53, and only four (perhaps only diree) of b,c. 5a/
So that the riots which prevented Mile's election, the death
of Clodius and the riots following it, and the consequent
«ole consulship of Pompey, with the tatter's new legislation
and the trial of Milo — all have to be sought for elsewhere.
The last letter of this volume and of this year, addressed to
M. Marius in December, B.c, 52, aUudes to the condemna-
tion of Milo, and to the numerous prosecutions following it
" Here, in Rome, I am so distracted by the number of trials,
the crowded courts, and the new legislation, that I daily
offer prayers that there may be no intercalation." '

When the correspondence opens again in the spring of
B.C. 51 an event has happened, of no par-
Cicero appointed ticular importance in itself, but of supreme
Proconsul of interest to Cicero, and very fortunate for the
readers of the correspondence. One of
Pom pay's new laws ordained that no one
was to take a province till the fifth year after laying down
his consulship or praetorship. Pompey broke his own law
by keeping his province, the Spains — his position in regard
to them was altogether exceptional — but, in order to carry
out the law in other cases, the senate arranged that ex-consuls
and ex-prsetors who had not been to provinces should in turn
draw lots for vacant governorships. Cicero and Bibulus
appear to have been the senior consulares in that position,
and with much reluctance Cicero allowed his name to be
cast into the urn. He drew Cilicia and Bibulus Syria* He
says that his motive was a desire to obey the wishes of the
senate. Another motive may have been a desire to be away
from Rome while the controversy as to Csesar's retirement
from his province was settled, and to retrieve a position of
some poUtical importance, which he had certainly not in-
creased during the last few years. When it came to the

1 Vol. i.,p. 357.
« CLXXVIll-CLXXXI.
(CLXXVIII) is not ceruua.
• VoL i., p. ^^.

Tlie date of the letter to P. Sittins

INTRODUCTION

Xli

PlGtual startj however, he felt all the gine of the business —
I tbe formation and control of his staff, the separation from
friendSj and the residence far from the " light and life '* of
Rome, among officials who were certainly commonplace and
probably corrupt, and amidst a population, perhaps acute
and accomplishedj but certainly servile and ill content, and
[ in some parts predatory and barbarous. At the best, they
r would be emphatically provincial, in a dreary sense of the
lironL He felt unequal to the worry and bore of the whole
rbusiness, and reproached himself with the folly of the under-
talcing. Of course, this regret is mingled with his usual self-
congratulation on the purity with which he means to manage
province. But even that feeling is not strong enough to
prevent his longing earnestly to have the period of banish-
ment as short as possible, or to prevent the alarm with which
he hears of a probable invasion by the Parthians, One effect
of his almost two years' absence from Rome was, I think, to
deprive him of the power of judging clearly of the course of
events. He had constant intelligence and excellent corre-
spondents^ — especially Caelius — still he could not really grasp
what was going on under the surface : and when he returned
to find the civil war on the point of breaking out, he was,
after all, taken by surprise, and had no plan of action ready.
I This, as well as his government of the province, will be fully
illustrated in the next volume of the correspondence.

The persons to whom the chief letters are addressed in
this volume, besides Atticus, are Cicero*s
^ Gcoo^s CofT«- brother Quintus and P. Lentulus Spinther.
^^o^vs* There are two excellent letters to M, Marius,

and one very interesting^ though rather sur-
prising, epistle to L. Lucceius. Others of more than average
iober^c are to Terentia, M. Fadius Gallus, C. Scribonius
Qiik>» and Tiro.
Atticus (b.c. 109-32) is a man of whom we should be

glad to know more than we do. He was the

\ Pompcnhis friend of all the leading men of the day —

Pompey, Csesar, Cicero, Antony, Brutus —

father-in-law of Agrippa, and survived to be

1 constant correspondent of Augustus, between b.c. 43 and

Ml death in b.c 3^. He was spared and respected by both

adfi

INTRODUCTION

sides in the civil wars, from Sulla to the Second Triumvirate.
The secret of his success seems to have been that he was no
man*s rival. He resolutely declined all official employment,
even on the staff of his brother-in-law Quintus Cicero* He
committed himself to no side in pohtics, and, not being in
the senate, had no occasion by vote or speech to wound the
feelings of anyone- So, too, though he cared for literature,
it was rather as a friendly critic of others than as an author.
He did, it is true, compile some books on Roman history, on
historical portraits, and certain family biographies ; but they
were not such as made him a rival of any of his contempo-
raries* They were rather the productions of a rich amateur,
who had leisure to indulge a quasi-literary taste, without any
thought of joining the ranks of professed writers* Thirdly,
he had great wealth, partly inherited, partly acquired by
prudent speculation in the purchase of town properties, or
in loans to states or public bodies on fair terms : and this
wealth was at the service of his friends, but not in the lavish or
reckless manner, which often earns only ingratitude without
being of any permanent service to the recipients. He lent
money, but expected to be repaid even by his brother-in-law.
And this prudence helped to retain the confidence, while his
sympathetic temperament secured the Uking, of most
Again, he had the valuable knack of constantly replenishing
the number of his friends among men junior to himselK
His character attracted the liking of Sulla, who was twenty-
seven years his senior, and he remained the close friend of
his contemporaries Hortensius and Cicero (the former five
years his senior, the latter three years his junior) till the day
of their death. But we also find him on intimate terms with
Brutus, twenty-four, and Octavian, forty-six years junior to
himself. Lastly, he was nol too much at Rome. More than
twenty years of his earlier manhood (b.c, 87-65) were spent
in Greece, principally at Athens, partly in study and partly
in business. And Athens at this rime, long deprived of
pohrical importance, had still the charm not only of its
illustrious past, but also of its surviving character as the
home of culture and refinement. When he at length returned
to Rome in B.C. 65, he had aheady purchased a property in
Epirus, near Buthrotum (see p. 3), where he built a villa, in
which he continued to spend a considerable part of his

INTRODUCTION

xliil

^

Lmmg years. This was sufficiently remote, not only
from Rome, but from the summer residences of the Roman
nobles, to secure his isolation from the intrigues and enmities
of Roman society. He did not indeed — as who does ? —
always escape giving offence At the very beginning of the
correspondence we hear of his vain attempts to mollify the
anger of L. Lucceius — how incurred we do not know ; and
Quintus Cicero, of whose sharp temper we hear so much,
was on more than one occasion on the point of a rupture
with him. But his family life was generally as pleasing as
his connexion with his friends. With his mother, who lived
to a great age, he boasted that he had never been reconciled,
because he had never quarrelled. He was the only one who
could get on with the crusty uncle Csecilius. In the dehcate
matter of his sister Pomponia's differences with her husband
Quintus Cicero, he seems to have acted with kindness as
well as prudence^ and though he married late in life
(B.C 56, when he was in his fifty-third year), he appears to
have made an excellent husband to Pilia and a very affec-
tionate father to his daughter. His unwearied sympathy
with the varied moods of Cicero — whether of exultation,
irritation, or despair — and the entire confidence which
Cicero feels that he will have that sympathy in every case,
are creditable to both. It is only between sincere souls that
one can speak to the other as to a second self, as Cicero often
alleges that he does to Atticus.

Of Quintus Cicero, the next most important correspond*
ent in this volume, we get a fairly clear picture,
Qjiintas Tullitts Four years younger than his famous brother
GccrcK (b. B.C. 102), he foUowed him at the due dis-

tance up the ladder of official promotion to
ihip, to which he was elected in the year of his
consulship. There, however, Quintus stopped. He
never seems to have stood for the consulship. He had no
oratorical genius to give him reputation in the forum, nor
were his literary productions of any value, either for style or
od^nality* His abilities for administration, as shewn in his
three years' government of Asia, appear to have been respect-
able, but were marred by faults of temper, which too often
betrayed him into extreme violence of language. In military
command he shewed courage and energy in defending his

xliv

INTRODUCrrON

camp in the rising of the Gauls in the winter of
but he spoilt the reputation thus gained by the mistake
committed in the autumn of B.a 53, which cost the loss of
a considerable number of troops, and all but allowed the
roving Germans to storm his camp. He remained another
year in Gaul, but did nothing to retrieve this mistake. In
militajy affairs fortune rarely foi^ives. In politics he seems
to have contented himself generally with saying ditto to his
brother. And this continued to be the case up to PharsaUa,
After that, finding himself on the losing side, he turned
somewhat fiercely upon the brother, whom he regarded as
having misled him ; and for a time there was a miserable
breach between them, which, however, did not last very long.
When the end came it found the brothers united in heart as
in misfortune. His private happiness was marred by an
uncongenial marriage. Pomponia — sister of Atticus— seems
to have been as high-tempered as her husband, and less
placable. The constant quarrels between them exercised
the patience both of Cicero and Atticus, and crop up
all through the correspondence. One effect of them was
the loss of all control over their son, who, being called
upon to smooth over the differences between father and
mother, naturally took up at an early age a line of his own,
and shewed a disposition to act independently of his elders.
The letters to Terentia do not fill much space in the

correspondence, and are rarely interesting. Mar*-
Terentia. ried about B.a So, Cicero seems to have lived

io harmony with her at least till the time of
his return fi-om exile, during which unhappy period he
acknowledges the activity of her exertions in support of
his recall, and the drain which his ruin was making upon her
resources. Terentia had a large private fortune, and appar-
ently used it liberally in his service. Nevertheless, immedi-
ately on his return from exile, there seems to have been some
cause of coldness between the husband and wife. He darkly
alludes to certain domestic troubles in the first letter to
Atticus written from Rome (vol i., p, 189), and repeats the
hint in the next (p. 193), When he landed at Brundisium it
was Tullia, not Terentia, who came to meet him (p. 187), and
for some time after she appears to be presiding in his house
rather than Terentia (see pp, 224, 257). Whatever the cause

J

INTRODUCTION

xlv

of this coldness wm, however, it appears to have been
removed for a time. He kept ap a correspondence with her
while he was in Cilicia (b.c 51-50), and though he does not
seem pleased at her having arranged the marriage of Tullia
with Dolabella, headdresses her warmly when about to return^
and was met by her on landing. During the five or six
months that followed, before Cicero left Italy to join Pompey,
there is no indication of any alienation ; but the short notes
from Pompey's camp, and in the first half of B.c 47, are cold
and conventional, and on his return to Brundisium after
Pharsalia, and daring his lengthened stay there, he appears
[ to have declined to allow her to come and see him. Soon
after his return to Rome, in September, B.C. 47, matters
came to a climax. Perhaps some of the mischief was caused
.by the mismanagement or dishonesty of Terentia*s steward,
I Philotimus^ of whom we hear a good deal in the letters from
Cilicia : but whatever was the origin of the quarrel, Cicero
I asserts that on his return he found his affairs in a state of
' utter disorder. It may well have been that, like other ad-
herents to the losing cause, he had to suffer from loss of any
property that could be easily laid hands on in Rome, and
that Terentia had had no power to save it. But Cicero, rightly
or wrongly, attributed the embarrassment which he found
awaiting him to his wife. He says in a letter to Gnaeus Plan-
cius ; ' "I should not have taken any new step at a time of such
general disaster had I not on my return foimd my private affairs
in as sorry a position as the public. The fact is, that when I
saw that, owing to the criminal conduct of those to whom my
life and fortunes ought, in return for my never-to-be-forgotten
lervices, to have been their dearest object, there was nothing
nh within the walls of my house, notliing that was not the
subject of some intrigue, I made up my mind that X must
arm myself by the faithful support of new marriage connexions
l^pinst the perfidy of the old/* This is a lame excuse for a
of sixty separating from the companion of his whole
\ Tnanhood, and in the eyes of Roman Society it was rendered
«ill more questionable by a prompt marriage with a young
gul, rich, and his own ward : from whom, however^ he soon
igain divorced himself, angered, it is said, by her want of

' heitcT DXXXIII (/aw. iv. 14), about January, B.C. 45,

xlvi

INTRODUCTION

feeling at the death of TuUia, Terentia long survived her
husband, living, we are told, to be over a hundred years old.
Divorce was, of course, not regarded in these days of the
[ Hepubhc as it had once been, or as it is now among our-
selves ; still we should have been glad, both for his fame and
his happiness, if the few years remaining to him had not
had this additional cloud. A man of sixty embarking on
such matrimonial enterprise is not a dignified spectacle, or
one pleasing to gods and men.

The other correspondents may be dismissed in few words*

P. Cornelius Lentulus Sfinther, to
E Cornelius whom some of the longest letters are ad-
SpSi^S dressed, represents the high aristocracy, to

which Cicero wished to commend himself,
though seeing keenly the weakness which underlay their
magnificence. The part played by Lentulus in politics had
been showy, but never founded on steadfast principle. He
owed his earlier promotions to Caesar's influence, but in his
consulship of bx, 57 had taken the side of the aristocracy
in promoting the recall of Cicero, though he had gone
against their sentiment by supporting Pompey^s appoint-
ment to the £ura annomB. But as he was going to Cilicia
in B.C. 56, Lentulus wished to have the lucrative task of
restoring Ptolemy Auletes to the throne of Egypt, from
which he had been righteously driven by his subjects.
Therefore it was all to the good that Pompey should have
business at home preventing him from taking this in hand.
How Lentulus was baulked in this desire will appear in the
letters. He no doubt had his foil share of the LeniuHias
distinguishing his family. But all was forgiven by Cicero
to a man who had promoted his recall, and he takes
great pains to justify to Lentulus his own change of policy
in regard to the triumvirs after b.c 56. When the civil w^
began Lentulus joined Domitius at Corfinium, and witi
him fell into Caesar's hands, and was dismissed unharme
He afterwards joined Pompey in Epirus, intent on succeed-
ing Caesar as Pontifex Maxim us, as soon as the latter hadj
been satisfactorily disposed of After Pharsalia he soug"
refuge at Rhodes, but was refused sanctuary by the islandei^
and was eventually put to death, though we do not know f
whom {Att xi. 13 ; Fam. ix. 18).

INTRODUCTION

xlvii

fit Fadiaa
G»Uus, M.
Man us, L.
Lncceius,
C. Scribomus
Curio, C
Trebadus Testa*

M. Fadius Gallus, the Epicurean, and M. Marius, the
valetudinarian and wit, were among friends
valued for their personal and agreeable quali-
ties rather than for any public or political
importance attaching to them. The same
may be said of L. LuccEius, of whose
Roman history Cicero thought so well, that
he wrote a remarkable letter begging for an
honourable place in it for his consulship,
as Pliny did to Tacitus.^ C Scribonius Curio, son of a
great friend of Cicero, after Bijeunesse orageuse^ returned to
Rome from his quaes torship in Asia, in B.C. 53, to take up the
inheritance of his father, which he quickly dissipated. Cicero
seems to have had a high idea of his abilities, and to have
believed him capable of taking the lead of the Optimates.
But in his tribuneship of B.C. 51-50 he disappointed all
sach hopes by openly joining Caesar's party, and resisting
all attempts to recall him. He joined Caesar at Ravenna
as soon as his tribuneship was out, and urged him to inarch
oti Rome, In b.c, 49 he was sent to secure Sicily and
[ Africa. The first he did, but in the second he perished in
j battle against the senatorial governor and king luba.
I Cicero's relation to C. Trebatius Testa, a learned juriscon-
I'sult, was apparently that of a patron or tutor, who, thinking
I that he has found a young man of ability, endeavours to
rposh him. He sent him with a letter of introduction to
' Oesar, who was good-natured, though rather sarcastic as to
the scope for legal abilities to be found in Gaul. He gave
fcam, however, a military tribuneship, without exacting
military duties, and apparently kept on good terms with
ham, for he employed him in b.c. 49 to communicate his
wish to Cicero as to his remaining at Rome. Cicero's
letters to him, though numerous, are not among the most
Biloestiog. They are full of banter of a rather forced and
dull kind ; and Cicero was evidently annoyed to find that
has scheme for advancing Trebatius in Caesar's province had
]}0t been very successful. The friendship, however, sur-
wed the civil war, and we find Cicero in B.a 44 dedicating
Us T^Asar to Trebatius.

^ Vol- J., p. z^i Plby, Ep., vii. 33,

** TuLLius, of all the sons of royal Rome
That are, or have been, or are yet to come.
Most skilled to plead, most learned in debate,-*
Catnllus hails thee, small as ttum art great
Take thou from him his thanks, his Ibnd regards^
The first of patrons from the least of bards. '

Catullus, zliz. (J. K S.)

CICERO'S LETTERS

I (A I, 5)

This opening of the correspondence finds Qceto, now m his thirty-
ninth year, in the midst of his official career. He had aheady been
gusestor |B,c. 75) and sedile (b,c. 69), and was looking
BX.68. Oms., forward to his election to the prxtorship in the next year
Mcte^^*" (B.C. 67). He had already nsen almost to the highest
Q. Marciiu place in his profession as advocate^ and had partly de-
^K^K. livered, partly published his great indictment of Verres

only a year a^o. He is married to Terentia (b.c. So),
\kd4 has one dattghter, Tulha or TuOiola^ bom on August 5, probably
I the next year (b.C- 79), His intimacy with T. Pompomus Atticus
[(three years his senior), perhaps begun at school, had lasted at least
I eleven years, from the time when he met him at Athens |b.c. 79), and
pnth him had been initiated in the Eleusinian mysteries {de Leg. 2,

L36). There too they had both seen much of the writer's cousin
icius, whose death he deplores in this letter {de Fin, 5, § i). Atticus
Ittad lived abroad in Athens and Bpirus, with occasional visits home
whom B,a 88 to b.c 65, in which latter year he seems to have returned
IfDt a more lengthened stay (Nep, Aif, 4). The two friends have
litreftdy corresponded frequently, hut this is the first letter preserved.

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)
Rome

WE are such intimate friends tliat more than almost
anyone else you can appreciate the grief as well as
I the actual public and private loss that the death of my cousin
Indus is to me. There is absolutely no gratification which
ly human being can receive from the kindly character of
another that I have not been accustomed to receive from

Iidm. I am sure, therefore, that yoii will share my grief.
For, in the first place, whatever affects me affects you ; and
pn the second place, you have yourself lost in him a friend
ind coiinexiOD of the highest character and most obliging
L 1. B

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,c. 68, MT, 38

disposition, who was attached to you from personal inchna-
tion, as well as from my conversation.

As to what you say in your letter about your sister,* she
will herself bear me witness what pains I have taken that my
brother Quintus should show her proper affection. Think-
ing him somewhat inclined to be angry with her, I wrote to
him in such a way as I thought would not hurt his feelings
as a brother, while giving him some good advice as my
junior, and remonstrating with him as being in the wrong»
The result is that, from frequent letters since received from
him, I feel confident that everything is as it ought and as we
should wish it to be-
As to the freqoency of my letters you have no ground for
your complaint. The fact is our good sister Pomponia never
informed me of there being a courier ready to take a letter.
Farthermore, I never chanced to know of anyone going to
Epirus,^ and I was not till recently informed of your being
at Athens.

Again, as to the business of Acutilius which you had
left in my hands. I had settled it on my first visit to
Rome after your departure. But it turned out that, in the
first place, there was no urgency in the matter, and, in
the second place, as I felt confidence in your judgment, I
preferred that Peducseus * rather than myself should advise
you by letter on the subject For having submitted my
ears to Acutilius for several days (and I think you know hlfl
style), I should scarcely have regarded it as a hardship to
write you a letter describing his grumblings after patiently
enduring the bore (and it was rather a bore, I can tell you)
nf hearing them. Moreover, though you find fault with me,
allow me to observe that I have had only one letter from

* Pomponia, manied to Cicero*s yoni^er brother Qtiinlus. We shall
frequently hear of this unfortunate marriage. Quintus was four years
younger than his brother, who had apparently arranged the ina.tch, and
felt therefore perhaps somewhat responsible for the result (Nep. Ait 5).

^ Atticus had estates and a villa near Buthrotum in Epirus,^ —
Butrinia in Albania, opposite Corfu.

^ This is probably SexL Peducseus the younger, an intimate friend of
Atticus (Nep. Att. 21); his father h&d been prsetor in Sicily when
Cicero was qujestor (B.C. 76-75)^ the son was afterwards a partisan of
Cssar in the Civil War, governor of Sardinia^ B.C. 48, and proprB gtor
in Spain, B.a 39 ^"

I

M u 5

TO ATTICUS

[you, though you had greater leisure for writing, and more
[opportunity of sending letters.

As to what you say in your letter, ** Even if anyone is

linclined to be offended with you, I ought to bring him to a

■better mind " — I understand to what you allude, and I have

luot neglected the matter. But the truth is that the extent

his displeasure is something surprising. However, I

Ihave not omitted to say anything there was to say in your

If: but on what points I am to hold out your wishes, I

' COQSider^ ought to be my guide. If you will wTite me word

distinctly what they are, you will find that I have had no

^ desire to be more exacting, and in the future shall be no

yielding, than you wish/

As to the business of Tadius. He tells me that you have

[written him word that there was no need of farther trouble,

'since the property is secured by prescription. I am sur-

pirised that you do not know that in the case of a statutory

wardship of an unmarried girl prescription cannot be

pleaded.*

am glad you like your purchase in Epirus. What I

aiaissioned you to get for me, and anything you see

r Bailable to my Tusculan villa, I should be glad if you will,

you say in your letter, procure for me, only don't put

yotirself to any inconvenience. The truth is, there is no

oclier place that gives me complete rest after all my worries

tod hard work.

I am e^qiecting my brother Quintus every day, Terentia

\ a severe attack of rheumatism. She is devoted to you,

your sister^ and your mother, and adds her kindest

in a postscript So does my pet Tulliola. Love

, and be assured that I love you as a brother.

* Tht person alluded to is L. Lucceius, of whom we shall hear a^in.
' f LctUss V, VII, VIII, CVIII. What his quarrel with Atticus was
ivt, we do noi know.

PnsBcnpCive right to properly was acquired by possession («JMr) of

Bat no such right could be acquired to the property of a

" ship {pro Flacce^ % 84).

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 68, i«T.

II (A I, 6)

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome, December

I won't give you any excuse hereafter for accusing me of
neglecting to write. It is you that must take care that wit(
all your leisure you keep up with me.

JRabirius's house at Naples/ for the improvement of wh
you have designs drawn out and completed in imaginatio
has been bought by M. Fonteius* for 130,000 sester^
(about ^1^040), I wished you to know this in case yd
were still hankering after it.

We may be quite satisfied, I think, with my brothe
feelings towards Pomponiau He is with her at present in^
his villa at Arpinum, and has Decimus Turanius with hii%j
who is great in bdies ieitres^

The date of my father's death was the 28th of Novemt

That is about all my news. If you light on any artid^
of vertu suitable for a gymnasiums which would look well f
the place you wot of,^ please don't let them slip. I am !
delighted with my Tusculan villa that I never feel re
happy till I get there. Let me know exactly what you
doing and intending to do about everything.

* C. Rabirius, whom Cicero defended in B*c. 63, when prosecutt
by Cassar for his share m tbc murder of Satarainus (B.C. 100). F
lived) we know, in Campania, for his neighbours came to give eviden
in his favour at the trial.

" M. Fonteius made a fortune in the province of Gaul beyond
Alps, of wbich he was propraetor, B.C. 77-74- ^^ B.C. 69 he had b
accused of malversation, and defended by Cicero* After his acquittal I
seems to be buying a seaside residence in Campania, as so many of T
men of fashion did.

' Cicero*s "gymnasiom" was some arrangement of buildings
plantations more or less on the model of the Greek gymnasia, at bif '
TttACulan villa.

-7,9

TO ATTICUS

HI (A I, 7)

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome, December

All 's well at your mother's/ and I keep an eye on her. I
have undertaken to pay L. Cincius 20,400 sesterces" to
your credit on the Ides of Febniary. Pray see that I receive
at the earliest possible opportunity what you say in yomr
letters that you have bought and secured for me, I should
also be very much obliged if you would, as you promised,
think over the means of securing the library for me. My
hope of getting the one enjoyment which I care for, when I
come to retire, depends entirely on your kindness.

i

m,c^. Oois.,
C CdpnriuiLS
PLw,

M.AdUus
Gbfariow

IV (A I, 9)

The year of Cicero's election to the prselorship* It ia
the year also of Pompey's great commission by the lex
Gabinia against the Pirates. But Cicero does not teem
as yet much concerned with ** foreign politics.^

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)
Rome

, I GJET letters from you far too seldom considering that you
can much more easily find people starting for Rome
than I to Athens : considering, too, thai you are more
certain of my being at Rome than I of your being at
Athens. For instance, it is owing to this uncertainty on
my part that this very letter is somewhat short, because not

I * The mother of Atticus lived to be ninety^ dyiog in B.C. 33, not long
\ before Atticus himself, who at her funeral declared that '* he had never

been reconciled to her, for he hsA never had a word of dispute with her "

<Kep. AtL 17).
• * This sum (about ^163) is for the works of art purchasad for the

( *titer by Atticus.

e

CICBRO'fe LETTERS

B^cfi^.

bdiig WOK IS to vliere joa ste^ I doo*t diofxe mj con-
fidfitfial talk to fidl inio itnnge luiDds* The Me^g^ric
stauaa and the H^nnae^ wfakii joa meiitioiied in your
|ed»S| I am naitiDg fcr imgiatiCTitfy^ ADfthiag joo have of
the «ne kmd wfidi nu^ strike yoct as mrtky of my
" AraAfnia,* do not hesitaie to send, and have complete
confidence in my mooefcliesL My present del^t is to
pick op anything partinilaily anitable to a ''gymnasttuiL''
Lentahis promifles the use of fais ^up^ I beg you to be
aealoas in these manefs. TbyillBsbegsyoa(andIalsoathis
fequesl) to ^ him some wiiting^ of the fimnoflpidje;.^

V(AI,8)

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome

All well at yoor house. Your mother and sister are
regarded with affection by nae and my brother Quintus. I
have spoken to Acutilius, He says ^at he has not heard
from his agent, and professes surprise that you should make
any difficulty of his having refused to guarantee you against
£uther demands. As to the business of Tadius^ the an-
nouncement in your letter that you have settled the matter
out of court I saw gratified and pleased him very much.
That friend of mine ^ — a most excellent man, upon my
honour, and most warmly attached to me — ^is very angry
with you* If I could but know how much you care about it,
I should be able to decide how much trouble I am to take
in ^e matter. 1 have paid L. Cincius the 20,400 sesterces

*- IliyOhis (sometiincs written Chilius), a Greek poet living at Rome.
See Letters XVI and XXI. The Eumolpidse were a family of priests at
Athens who had charge of the temple of Demeter at Eleosis. The
w^TfHa Evfickfndt^ (the phrase used by Cicero here) may be either booki
of rttoai or records such as priests usually kept : wdrpia is an appropriale
word for such rituals or records handed down by priests of one race or
fiunily.

* Locceiii»a as in the first letter and the next.

J 1. ^ 10

TO ATTICUS

for the Megaric statues in accordance with your letter to me,
As to your Hermae of Pentelic marble with bronze heads,
about which you wrote to me— I have fallen in love with
them on the spot. So pray send both them and the
statues, and anything else that may appear to you to suit
the place you wot of, ray passion, and your taste — as large a
supply and as early as possible. Above all^ anything you
thmk apfjropriate to a gymnasium and terrace. I have such
a passion for things of this sort that while I expect assist-
ance from you, I must expect something like rebuke from
others. If Lentulus has no vessel there, put them on
board anyone you please. My pet TuUiola claims your
present and duns me as your security. I am resolved,
however, to disown the obligation rather than pay up
for youu

VI (A I. lO)
TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

TUSCULUM

"Being in my Tusculan villa" (that's for your "being io
the Ceramicus ")^however, 1 being there, a courier sent by
your sister arrived from Rome and delivered me a letter from
you, announcing at the same time that the courier who was
going to you started that very afternoon* The result is that,
though I do send an answer, I am forced by the shortness
of the time to write only these few words. First, as to
softening my friend^s feeling towards you, or even recon-
ciling him outright, I pledge you my word to do so. Though
I have been attempting it already on my own account, I will
now urge the point more earnestly and press him closer, as
I think I gather from your letter that you are so set upon it
This much I should like you to realize, that he is very
deeply offended ; but since I cannot see any serious ground
for It, I feel confident that he will do as I wish and yield to
my influence. As for my statues and Hermeracles, pray put
ihcm on board, as you say in your letter, at your very

s

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 67, Mr. ;

earliest conveniencej and anything else you light upon th
may seem to you appropriate to the place you wot
especially anything you think suitable to a palaestra
gymnasium. I say this because I am sitting there as
write, so that the very place itself reminds me. Besid
these, I commission you to get me some medallions to
into the walls of my little entrance-court, and two engrave
stone-curbs. Mind you don*t engage your library to anjj
one, however keen a lover you may find ; for I am hoardic
up my little savings expressly to secure that resource for i
old age. As to my brother, I trust that all is as I have ev
wished and tried to make it. There are many signs of tti
result — not least that your sister is enceinte. As for my ele
tion, I don't forget that I left the question entirely to yc
and I have all along been telling our common friends that ]
have not only not asked you to come, but have positivelj|
forbidden you to do so, because I understood that it
much more important to you to carry through the busine
you have now in hand, than it is to me to have you at m|
election* I wish you therefore to feel as though you ha
been sent to where you are in my interests. Nay, you
find me feeling towards you, and hear of it from othe
exactly as though my success were obtained not only
your presence, but by your direct agency.

TuUiola gives notice of action against you. She is du
mng me as your surety.

VII (A I, II)

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome

I WAS doing so before spontaneously, and have been since
greatly stirred by your two letters, with their earnest expres-
sions to the same effect. Besides, Sallustius has been
always at my side to prompt me to spare no pains to induce
Lucceius to be reconciled to you. But after doing every*

II

TO ATTICUS

ling that could be done, not only did I fail to renew his
d feelings towards you, but I could not even succeed in
tcitdng the reason of his alienation. On his part, how-
he keeps harping on that arbitration case of his,
id the other matters which I knew very well before you
ffc Rome were causing him offence. Still, he has cer-
inly got something else fixed deeper in his mind ; and this
1 letters from you, and no commissioning of me will
literate as easily as you will do in a personal interview, I
n't mean merely by your words, but by the old familiar
tpression of your face — ^if only you think it worth while, as
u will if you will Us ten to me, and be witling to act with
ur habitual kindness. Finally, you need not wonder why
; is that, whereas I intimated in my letters that I felt hope-
jl of his yielding to my influence, I now appear to have no
uch confidence ; for you can scarcely beheve how much
more stubborn his sentiment appears to me than I expected,
and how much more obstinate he is in this anger. However,
all this will either be cured when you come, or will only be

E infill to the party in fault.
As to the sentence in your letter, ** you suppose by this
ae I am praetor-elect,** let me tell you that there is no class
people at Rome so harassed by every kind of unreasonable
difficulty as candidates for office ; and that no one knows
when the elections will be/ However, you will hear all this
from Philadelphus. Pray despatch at the earliest oppor-
tunity what you have bought for my **Academia," I aro
surprisingly delighted with the mere thought of that place,
^o say nothing of its actual occupation. Mind also not to
■et anyone else have your books. Reserve them, as you
Kay in your letter, for me. I am possessed with the utmost
■Dnging for them, as I am with a loathing for alTairs of every
^iher kind, which you will find in an incredibly worse
position than when you left them.*

I * The comitia were twice postponed this year. Apparently the
Hothig for Cicero had in each case been completed, so that he is able to
Hiy that he was " thrice returned at the head of the poll by an unanimous
^ote" {d£ Imp. P<mip, % 2). The postponement of the elections was

Cobably connected with the struggles of the senate to hinder the legis-
ion (as to bribery) of the Tribune, Gaius Cornelius (Dio, 36, 3S-39),
K * The first alluLsloQ in these letters to the disturbed position of public

10

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 66, JBrr. 40

VIII (A I, 3)

In this year Cicero was pnetor, and delivered his first extant public
speech {apud p&pulum) in support of the Itx Manilia^ which gave

Pompey the command in the Mithridatic War with the
Ji^^- Cca«», provinces of Asia and Bithynia. The strict Optimates
LopMus^^^"* opposed it, Cicero supported it on the grounds of the
L. Volcatiuft importance of the war and the proofs Pompey had already
TtiUus. given of military ability, courage, personal prestige, and

good fortune. He takes occasion to point out the mischief
done to the Roman name by oppressive or fraudulent goveraors and
imperators. In this same year he delivered one of his ablest speeches
in court in defending A, Cluentius Habitus on a charge of poisoning.
At the consular elections this year the two first elected were disabl^
for bribery.

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome, January

I HAVE to inform you of the death of your grandmother
frotn pining at your long absence, and at the same time
because she was afraid that the Latin towns would revolt
and fail to bring the victims up the Aiban Mount I
presume that L, Saufeius will send you a letter of con-
dolence on the subject/ I am expecting you here in the
course of January — -is it a mere rumour or does it come from
letters of yours to others ? For to me you have not men-
tioned the subject. The statues which yoo got for me have
been landed at Caieta. I haven't seen them, for I have

aSaiis. See the passage of IHo quoted in the previous note* There
were so many riot5 in the interval between the proclamation and the
holding of the elections, not without bloodshed, that the senate voted
the consuls a guard,

^ The point of this frigid joke is not clear. Was the grandmotbef
really dead ? What was she to do with the I>atin/mi£?f Mr, Strachan
Davidson's explanation is perbaj^s the best, that Cicero means that the
old lEKiy was thinking of the Social War in B.C. 89, when the loyalty of
the Latin towns must have been a subject of anxiety. She is in her
dotage and only remembers old scares. This is understanding civitaUs
with Latina. Others understand feria or muUeres. Saufeius^ a
Roman eques, was an Epicurean, who would hold death to be no evil.
He was a close friend of Atticus, who afterwards saved his property
from confiscation by the Triumvirs (Nep. AH, 12).

^ >. 3. 4

TO ATTICUS

It

been unable to leave Rome. I have sent a man to clear the
freightage- I am exceedingly obliged to you for having taken
JO mudb trouble to get them, and so reasonably. As to
your frequent remarks in your letters about pacifying my
^end, I have done everything I could and tried every
xpedient ; but he is inveterate against you to a surprising
e, on what suspicions, though I think you have been
lyou shall yet leara from me when you come, I failed
^store Sallustius ^ to his old place in his affections, and
yet he was on the spot. I tell you this because the latter
used to find fault with me in regard to you. Well, he has
found by personal experience that h€ is not so easy to pacify,
' that on my part no zeal has been lacking either on his
|Df your behalf. I have betrothed Tulliola to C. Piso Fnigii
\ of Lucius,'

IX (A I, 4)

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome

VofU keep on making me expect you again and again. Only
4e other day, when I thought you on the point of arriving
I was stiddenly put off by you d)l Quintilis (July). Now,
however, I do think that you should come at the time you
meotioa if you possibly can. You will thereby be in time
fat my brother Quintus's election, will pay me a long-
* ' visit, and will settle the dispute with Acutilius,
(latter Peducseus also suggested my mentioning to you,
Ibf I think it is full time that you settled that affair. My
offices are at your service and always have been so.
at Rome I have conducted the case of Gaius Macer
i a popular approval surpassing belief and unparalleled*
Dugh I had been inclined to take a lenient view of his
yet I gained much more substantial advantage from

^Cfl^iiii ^AlJustius, a ieamed friend of Cicero's, of whom we shall

I lis Pi«o» quaestor B.c. 58, died in B.C. 57. The marriage
t^k«C ID B.C. 63*

CICERO S LETTERS

the popular approval on his condemnation than I should
have got from his gratitude if he had been acquitted.^ I am
very glad to hear what you say about the Hermathena. It
is an ornament appropriate to my "Academia" for two
reasons : Hermes is a sign common to all gymnasia, Minerva
specially of this particular one. So I would have you, as
you say, adorn the place with the other objects also, and the
more the better. The statues which you sent me before 1
have not yet seen. They are in my villa at Formiae, whither
I am at this moment thinking of going, I shall get them
all transferred to my Tusculan villa. If I find myself with
more than I want there I shall begin adorning Caieta.
Please reserve your books, and don^t despair of my being
able to make them mine. If I succeed in that, I am
superior to Crassus in wealth and look down on everybody's
manors and pastures.^

I

X (A I. I)

The election to the consulship is not till the next year (bx. 64), twit I

Cicero is already making preparation for it, an<3 looking J

out for support. In July his only son was bom. He '

does not refer to the so-called "first C&tilinarian con»

spiracy," but mentions Catiline as a possible competitor,

and even contemplates defending him on some charge

brought against him to prevent his standing for the

B.C.65. Cois..

L- Aurcliiu

Gotta,

L. MAEilius

Torquatuft.

consulship*

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome, July

The state of things m regard to my candidaturej in

I know that you are supremely interested, is this, as far as

* The annalist C, Licinius Macer wzs impeached d^ repetundis (he
was praetor about B.C. 70 or 69, and afterwards had a province), and
finding that he was going to be condemned, committed suicide. He
was never therefore condemned regularly (Val. Max. ix. la? ', Plut. Cu*
9). Cicero presided at the court as prietor.

• The books must have been a very valuable collection. Of Cicero
would hardly have made so much of being able to buy them, considerins
his lavish orders for statues or antiques.

J

TO ATTICUS

13

can be as yet conjectured. The only person actiially can-
irassing is P. Sulpicius Galba.* He meets with a good old-
-fashioned refusal without reserve or disguise. In the general
opinion this premature canvass of his is not unfavourable to
rmy iBterests; for the voters generally give as a reason for
' their refusal that they are under obligations to me. So I
hope my prospects are to a certain degree improved by the
report getting about that my friends are found to be numerous.
My intention was to begin my own canvass just at the very
dme that Cincius ^ tells me that your servant starts with this
lletter, namely, in the campus at the time of the tribunidan
'elections on the 17th of July. My feUow candidates, to men-
tion only those who seem certain^ are Galba and Antonius and
r Q. Cornificius,* At this I imagine you smiling or sighing.
I Well, to make you positively smite your forehead, there are
"^ people who actually think that Caesonius* will stand, I
don't think Aquilius will, for he openly disclaims it and has
allied as an excuse his health and his leading position at
the bar. Catiline wiD certainly be a candidate, if you can
im^ne a jury finding that the sun does not shine at noon.
As for Aufidius and Palicanus,* I don't think you will expect
to bear from me about them. Of the candidates for this
year's election Caesar is considered certain. Thermus is
looked upon as the rival of Silanus." These latter are so
weak both in friends and reputation that it seems/aj impossibU
to bring in Ctirius over their heads. But no one else thinks so.
.What seems most to my interests is that Thermus should get

Oae of the judices rejected by Veires on his triai^ a pontifex and

^ A^at of Atticusp

' O Antooius (uncle of M* Antonius) was elected with Cicero. Q.
Cotm6dxis had been tr. pL in b.c 69. See Letter XVIII.

* M- Casomns, Cicero's coUeague in the sedileship. He had lost
oedit as one of the lunianum coiuilium in the trial of Oppianicus.

* AuSdius Lurco, tr. pL B.c, 61 » M» Lolltus PalicaDtis, tr. pL
ione jtAis previously.

* L. lahus Ocsar, actually consul in B,a 64, brotbcf-in-law of
Leatnhift the Catilinarian conspirator, was afterwards Ugatus to bis
distsnt Idnsman, lulius Cssar, in GauL A. Minucius Thermus, defended
bf Cicero in 6»c. 59, but the identification is not certain, D. lunius
Susans got the consulship in the year after Cicero (b«c, 62), and as
oonailHlcsignate spoke in favour of executing the Catilinarian con-

H

CICERO'S LETTERS

B*C, 65, iBT. 41

in with Caesar. For there is none of those at present canva
^ ing who, if left over to my year, seems likely to be a stronga
[candidate, from the fact that he is commissioner of the 1
\j*latninta^ and when that has been finished, I shall be great]
[Relieved to have seen him elected consul this election** Sue
[ in outline is the position of affairs in regard to candidat(
I up to date. For myself I shall take the greatest pains
[carry oot all the duties of a candidate, and perhaps,
I Gau! seems to have a considerable voting power, as soon a?
I business at Rome lias come to a standstill I shall obtain a
iibera legatio and make an excursion in the course of September
I to visit Piso/ but so as not to be back later than January.
I When I have ascertained the feelings of the nobility I will
f write you word. Everything else I hope will go smoothly, at
I any rate while my competitors are such as are now in town.
I You must undertake to secure for me the entourage of our
friend Pompey, since you are nearer than L Tell him
I shall not be annoyed if he doesn't come to my election '
So much for that business. But there is a matter fil
which I am very anxious that you should forgive me* You
uncle Caecilius having been defrauded of a large sum of
money by P. Varius, began an action against his cousii
A. Caninius Satyrus for the property which (as he alleged) 1 "
latter had received from Varius by a collusive sale. He wH
joined in this action by the other creditors, among whom we^
LucuOus and P. Scipio, and the man whom they though
•would be official receiver if the property was put up for 1
Lucius Pontius ; though it is ridiculous to be talking ah

* The text is corrupt ib all MSS. I have assumed a reading, i
thing of this sort, quis cum erii ahoiuta^ sane faciU ac iihetUer i
nunc fieri consuUm vidcrim. This at stny rate gives nearly the requir<
sense, which is that Cicero regards the influence which Thermus w
rain by managing the repair of the Flaminia as likely to make him i
formidable candidate, and therefore he would be glad to seehira elected in
the present year 65 {nunc) rather than wait for the next, his own yea

' C. Calpurnius Piso, consul in BX. 67, then proconsul of Gal
Transalpina (Narbonensis). He was charged with embeizlement in 1 ^^_
province and defended h^ Cicero in B.C. 63. There were no voles in
Transalpine Gaulj but Cicero means in going and coming to canvass the
Cispadane cities,

• Pompey was this year engaged in the Mithridatic War, But Cicero
may have thought it likely that he or some of his staflf would pass through
Athens and meet Atticus.

J

TO ATTICUS

15

at this stage in the proceedings. Csecilius asked
ear for him against Satyrus. Now, scarcely a day
passes that Satynis does not call at my house. The chief
object of his attentions is L. Domitius/ but I am next in his
regard. He has been of great service both to myself
and to my brother Quintus in our elections. I was very
much embarrassed by my intimacy with Satyrus as well as
Ibat with Domitius, on whom the success of my election
depends more than on anyone else. I pointed out these
bets to Caecilius ; at the same time I assured him that if the
case had been one exclusively between himself and Satyrus,
1 would have done what he wished. As the matter actually
stood, all the creditors being concerned — and that too men
of the highest rank, who^ without the aid of anyone specially
retained by Caecilius^ would have no difficulty in maintaining
their common cause — it was only fair that he should have
consideration both for ray private friendship and my present
■ 1 ation. He seemed to take this somewhat less courteously
i:i I could have wished, or than is usual among gentlemen ;
and from that time forth he has entirely withdrawn from the
inlimacy with me^ which was only of a few day's standing.*
Pray forgive me, and believe that I was prevented by nothing
twit natural kindness from assailing the reputation of a friend
in so vital a point at a time of such very great distress, con-
sidering that he had shewn me every sort of kindness and
illention. But if you incline to the harsher view of my
oonddct, take it that the interests of my canvass prevented
me. Yet, even grandng that to be so, I think you should
psrdoo me, '* since not for sacred beast or oxhide shield," *
¥00 see in fact the position I am in, and how necessary I
' it, not only to retain but even to acquire all possible
of popularity. I hope I have justified myself in

' L, Domitius Alienobarbus, prsetor in B.c, 58, and constil B.C. 54,
[drill* ^, fighting against C^^ar.

^^, a rich uncle of Atticus, so cxoss-grainEd tliat no one
Wi Auicus couJd get on with him, to whom he accordingly left hislaige
I ketanc (Nep» Att. $).

* Horn, /L judu 159, Achilles pursuing Hector:

•• Since not for sacred beast or oxhide shield
They strove,— man's guerdon for the fleet of foot ;
Their stake was Hector's soul, the swift steed's ford."

^Jte

jH

t6

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C, 65, JET, i

your eyes, I am at any rate anxious to have done so.
Hermathena you sent I am delighted with : it has be
placed with such charming effect that the whole gymnasii:
seems arranged specially for it* I am exceedingly obligd
to yon.

XI (A I, 2)

TO ATTICUS (AT ATHENS)

Rome, July

I HAVE to inform you that on the day of the election
L. lulius Caesar and C. Marcius Figulus to the consulship
I had an addition to my family in the shape of a baby bo
Terentia doing well.

Why such a time without a letter from you? I hall
already written to you fully about my circumstances.
this present time I am considering whether to undertake 1
defence of my fellow candidate, CatiHne." We have a ju
to our minds with full consent of the prosecutor. I hop
that if he is acquitted he will be more closely united wit!
me in the conduct of our canvass ; but if the result
otherwise I shall bear it with resignation. Your early retu
is of great importance to me, for there is a very strong id^

^ Reading eius avMij^a^ and taking the latter word in the commq
sense of "ornament"; the Herraathena is so placed that the who'
gymnasium is as it were an oraament to it, designed to set it
instead of its being a mere omatnent to the gymnasium, Profcs
Tyrrell, however, will not admit that the words can have this or 1
meaning, and reads, jrJXiov Ava^fiOf "sun light ^' — "the whole gym
si urn seems as bright as the sun " — a curious eflfect, after all, for 1
itatue to have.

* Asconlus assigns this to the accusation of embeirlement in Afric
But that seems to have been tried in the previous year^ or earlier in th
year. The new impeachment threatened seems to have been connected
with his crimes in the proscriptions of Sulla (Dio, xxxvii. 10). Cicero
may have tboueht of defending him on a charge relating to so distant a
period, just as nedid Rabirius on the charge of murdering Satuminus
(BX, icx>}, though he had regarded his guilt in the case orextortion ii|
Africa as glaring.

A I, a TO ATTICUS 17

prevailing that some intimate friends of yours, persons of
hi^ rank, will be opposed to my election. To win me their
&?our I see that I shall want you very much. Wherefore
be sure to be in Rome in January, as you have agreed
to be.

We have no letters to or from Cicero in the years b,c. 64 and 63,^
partly, no doubt, because Atticus was in Rome a great deal during these
years. We take up the correspondence, therefore, after
■jC 6a. CosB., an interval of two years, which in many respects were the
sianS!" ™^* important in Cicero's life. In B.C. 64 he attained

Lli^iM his chief ambition by being elected to the consulship,
Mnrauu but we have little trace of his public actions that year,

only the fragments of one speech remaining, in defence of
Q» GalUus on a charge of ambitus. The animus of the popular party,
knrever, is shewn "Sf the prosecution of some surviving partisans of
Sdk on charges of homicide, among them Catiline, who by some means
CM^ied conviction (Dio, xxxvii 10). In the year of the consulship
(B.C. 63) some of Cicero's most important speeches were delivered.
The three on the agrarian proposals of Rullus present him to us for the
fint tune as discussing an important (question of home politics, the
di^Miad of the ager }udluus, a (question which had become a^ain
prominent owing to the great additions made to it by the confiscations
of Sulla. He also defended C. Rabirius, prosecuted by Labienus
for die mnrder of Saturninus as long ago as B.C. 100, and later in
the year defended Murena on a charge of ambitus. Finally, the four
dtmnanan speeches illustrate the event which coloured the whole of
Goeio's life. In B.C. 62 his brother Quintus was praetor and Cicero
Offended in his court P. Sulla, accused of complicity with Catiline.
On the a^tJi of December (b.c. 63) the tribune Q. Oedlius Metellus
Nqxis prevented Cicero from making a speech when laying down his
eomdsnip, and went on to propose summoning Pompey to Rome, " to
protect the lives of the citizens." This led to scenes of violence, and
lletellos fled to Pompey, who reached Italy late in the year B.C. 62
from the East.

* The essay on the duties of a candidate attributed to Quintus is
bndly a letter, and there is some doubt as to its authenticity. I have
thoefore Kltgatod it to an appendix.

4S

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 62, MT, 44

XII (F V, 7)

TO CN. POMPEIUS MAGNUS

Rome

Mi Tuliius Cicero^ son of Marcus^ greets Cn, Pampeius^ ,
of Cneius^ Imperai^r.

If you and the army are well I shall be glad. From yoi
official despatch I have, in common with everyone else,
received the liveliest satisfaction ; for you have given us
that strong hope of peace, of which, in sole reliance on you,
I was assuring everyone. But I must inform you that your
old enemies — now posing as your friends — have received a
stunning blow by this despatch, and, being disappointed in
the high hopes they were entertaining, are thoroughly de-
pressed. Though your private letter to me contained a
somewhat slight expression of your affection, yet I can
assure you it gave me pleasure \ for there is nothing in
which I habitually find greater satisfaction than in the con-
sciousness of serving my friends ; and if on any occasion I
do not meet with an adequate return, I am not at all sorry
to have the balance of kindness in my favour. Of this I feel
no doubt — ^ven if my extraordinary zeal in your behalf has
failed to unite you to me — that the interests of the state will
certainly effect a mutual attachment and coalition between us.
To let you know, however, what I missed in your letter 1
will write with the candour which my own disposition and
our common friendship demand. I did expect some con-
gratulation in your letter on my achievements, for the sake
at once of the des between us and of the Republic. This I
presume to have been omitted by you from a fear of hurting
anyone^s feelings. But let me tell you that what I did for
the salvation of the country is approved hy the judgment
and testimony of the whole world. You are a much greater
man than Africanus, but I am not much inferior to Lrelius
either \ and when you come home you will recognize that I

ff.7»l

Q. METELLUS TO CICERO

19

traTe acted with such prudence and spirit, that you wi!l not
[bow be ashamed of being coupled with me in politics as well
|S£ in private friendship.

xin (F V, I)

Q. METELLUS CELER TO CICERO

Cisalpine Gaul

Q, MeUllus Celer, son of QuintuSy proc&nsul^ greets
M. Tullius Cicero }

Ir you are well I am glad, I had thought, considering our
nutuai regard and the reconciliation effected between us,
3t I was not likely to be held up to ridicule id my
ce, nor my brother attacked by you in his civil exist-
fence and property for the sake of a mere word. If his own
ni^ character was not a sufficient protection to him, yet
Kther the position of our family, or my own loyal conduct
you and the Republic, ought to have been enough to
apport him. As it is, I see that he has been ruined and I
ndoned by the last people in the world who ought to
have done so 1 am accordingly in sorrow and wearing
mourning dress, while actually in command of a province and
army and conducting a war. And seeing that your conduct
.in this affair has neither been reasonable nor in accordance

* Q. Metellus Ccler had been pnetor in B,c 63 and was now (B.c
62)» as proconsul in Gallia Cisalpina, engaged against the remains of the
CfttdiQanan conspiracy. Meanwhile his brotlier {or cousin) Q. Cssciltm
""tidlus Nepos, a tribune, after trying in vain to bring Cicero to tria!
ihe execution of the coBspirators, at last proposed to summon
upey 10 Rome to prevent danger to the lives of citizens. Thii
apt fed to riots ana contests with Cato,, and Ncpos finally fled from
\t to Pompey. By leaving Rome he broke the law as to the
bibunes, and the senate declared his office vacant, and this letter would
I seem to shew that the senate declared him a public enemy. This
r of remonstrance is peremptory , if not insolent, in tone^ and the
\ will observe that the formal sentcnccSj dropped in more familiar
\ QAPcfuliy iise<L

20

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 62, ^T.

with the milder methods of old tunes, you must not be sur-
prised if you live to repent it I did not expect to find you
so fickle towards me and mine. For myself, meanwhile,
neither family sorrow nor ill-treatment by any individual
shall withdraw me from the service of the state.

XIV (F V, 2)

TO Q. METELLUS (IN CISALPINE GAUL)

Rome

M. TuIHuSy son of Marats^ to Q, Metelltis Cehr^ son of
Quifi/uSf proconsul^ wishes health.

If you and the army are well I shall be glad. You say
in your letter that you " thought, considering our mutuai
regard and the reconciliation effected between us, that you
were not likely to be held up to ridicule by me.** To what
you refer I do not clearly understand, but I suspect that you
have been informed that, while arguing in the senate that
there were many who were annoyed at my having saved the
state, I said that your relations, whose wishes you had been
unable to withstand, had induced you to pass over in silence
what you had made up your mind you ought to say in the
senate in my praise. But while saying so I also added
this — -that the duty of supporting the Republic had been so
divided between us that I was defending the city from internal
treachery and the crime of its own citizens, you Italy firom
armed enemies and covert conspiracy ; * yet that this assoda-
tion in a task so noble and so glorious had been impe ^ ^
by your relations, who, while you had been compliment
by me in the fullest and most laudatory terms, had
afraid of any display of mutual regard on your part
put to my credit As this sentence betrayed how muc
had looked forward to your speech, and how mistaken 1 1

^ Metellus had been employed with Antonius against the camfl
Fsesulse, but was now engaged against some Alpine tribes.

■ f V, a

TO Q. METELLUS

21

been in that expectation, my speech caijsed some amuse-
ment, and was received with a moderate amount of laughter;
but the laugh was not against you, it was rather at my mis-
take, and at the open and naive confession of my eagerness
to be commended by you. Sorely it cannot but be a com-
{lUment to you that in the hour of my greatest triumph
Qd glory I yet wished for some testimony of approval from
OUT lips. As to your expression, "consider'mg our mutual
rd " — I don't know your idea of what is ** mutual " in
I friendship j mine is an equal interchange of good feeling.
[Now if I were to mention that I passed over a province for
lyour sake» you might think me somewhat insincere ; for, in
[point of fact, it suited my convenience, and I feel more and
[more every day of my life the advantage and pleasure which
il have received from that decision. But this I do say — the
jmoment I had announced in public meeting my refusal of
|& province, I began at once thinking how I might hand it
n to you. I say nothing as to the circumstances of your
allotment: I only wish you to suspect that nothing was
in that matter by my colleague without my cognizance,
Recall the other circumstances : how promptly I summoned
ate on that day after the lots had been drawn, at what
1 1 spoke about you. You yourself said at the time that
ecch was not merely complimentary to you, but abso-
L reflexion on your colleagues. Farther, the decree of
Date passed on that day has such a preamble that, so
it is extant J there can never be any doubt of my
ices to you. Subsequently, when you had gone out of
loira, I would have you recall my motions in the senate,
lity speeches in public meetings, my letter to yourself. And
Dg reviewed all these together, 1 would like you to
yourself whether you think that your approach to
the last time you came quite shewed an adequate
for all these services.^ Again, as to your expression,
} reconciliation effected between us " — I do not under-
wby you speak of " reconciliation " in the case of a
bdship that had never been broken. As to what you
that your brother Metellus ought not ** to have been

' Uttcn MeCellus was commanding asainst Catiline, it is suggested that
biesrdkd lowflrds Rome to support his brother, but this is conjecture.

22

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 62, Mr> t

attacked by me for a mere word," in the first place I wou
like to assure you that your feeling and fraternal partiality-i
so full of human kindness and natural affection — meet witj
my warmest approbation ; in the next place I must cla
your indulgence if I have in any matter opposed yc
brother in the interests of the Republic, for my devotion 1
the Republic is paramount. If, however, it is my person
safety that I have defended against a most ruthless assault (
his, I think you should be content that I make no compla
even to you of your brother's injurious conduct. Nc
when I had become aware that he was deliberately ma
every preparation to use his tribunician office to my ruin,1
appealed to your wife Claudia ^ and your sister Mucia* (a
whose kindness to me for the sake of my friendship
Pompey I had satisfied myself by many instances) to dett
him from that injurious conduct And yet, as I am
you have heard, on the last day of December he inflicte
upon me — a consul and the preserver of my country-
indignity such as was never inflicted upon the most
loyal citizen in the humblest office : that is to say,
deprived me when laying down my office of the privilege (
addressing the people— an indignity, however, which afl
all redounded to my honour. For, upon his forbidding 1
to do anything but take the oath, I pronounced an oath at
once the most absolutely true and the most glorious in a
loud voice — an oath which the people swore also in a
loud voice to be absolutely true. Though I had actually
suffered this signal indignity, I yet on that same day sent
common friends to Metellus to persuade him to alter his
resolution; to whom he answered that he was no longer
free to do so. And, in fact, a short time previously
he Aad said in a public meeting that a man who had
punished others without trial ought not himself to be
allowed tha privilege of speech. What a model of con-
sistency ! What an admirable citizen ! So he deemed the

* Sister of P, Clodius. Of this famous woman we shall hear often
again. She is believed to be the Lesbia of Catullus, and she is die
** Palatine Medea" of the speech p-o Ctziia. Yet, iu spite of Cicero'i
deaiinciations of her, he seems at one time to have been so fond of her

society as to roinse Terentia^s jealousy,
■ Wife of Pom pey^Kii voiced by bim

on hi« return from the East

rv,a

TO Q- METELLUS

23

1 who had saved the senate from massacre, the city froni
jndiary, Italy from war, deserving of the same penalty
inflicted by the senate, with the unanimous approval
cf all loyal citizens, upon those who had intended to set
^■ire to the city, butcher magistrates and senate, and stir
^kp a formidable war ! Accordingly, I did withstand your
^trother Metellus to his face: for on the ist of January,
r in the senate, I maintained a debate with him on the
I state of the Repubhc, such as taught him that he had
to contend with a man of courage and firmness. On the
3;rd of January/ on again opening the debate, he kept
harping on me and threatening me at every third word
of his speech ; nor could any intention be more deUberate
than hi? was to overthrow me by any means in his power,
HOC by calm and judicial argument, but by violence and mere
browbeating. If I had not shewn some boldness and spirit
in opposing his intemperate attack, would not everyone have
iuded that the courage I had displayed in my consul-
was the result of accident rather than design ? If you
not know that Metellus was contemplating these
measures in regard to me, you must consider that you have
been kept in the dark by your brother on matters of the
utmost importance : if, on the other hand, he did intrust
any part of his designs to youj then surely I ought to be
regarded by you as a man of placable and reasonable temper
for not addressing a word of reproach to you even on
SQch occurrences as these. Understanding then that it was
by DO ** mere word '' (as you express it) of Metellus that I
VIS roused, but by his deliberate policy and extraordinary
animo^ty towards me, next observe my forbearance — if
*' forbeaiunce " is the name to be given to irresolution and
laxity under a most galhng indignity. I never once delivered
a voie in a speech against your brother: every time a
fiioiicxn was before the house I assented without rising to
those whose proposal appeared to me to be the mildest. I
will also add that, though in the circumstances there was no
obligation upon me to do so, yet so far from raising
objections I actually did my best to secure that my enemyj

* Oo the OJSXi meeling of the senate. The second was a digs c^mUialis
4swlikli the senate usually did not meet (Cses. B. Civ, i* i).

'■r-^Tg-^

CICERC/S LETTERS

a.c.6x, AT.i

becamie he

penalties by a decree of ti^

yaar faratiier, ^ooki be ndiei^

Wberefcne IM

ooly defeDtkd
from jour broth^s attack; nor have I beco *^&dde^ (to
qitoce your word), bat, oo the cxaitxsxy, so caoostanf, that I
■BBiained faithful to my feiendship to jan, tfaoa^ l^t with-
out aoj lign of kindness from yoa. For insiazice, at this
iiioixieiit» tfaoog^ fom letter amouiits almost to a thteax^ I
am wndng back an answer such as you see. I not only
pardon your vexation, I even applaud it in the highest
degree; for my own heart tells me how strong is the
influence of h^atemal afiection. I ask you in your turn to
put a hberaJ construction upon my vexation, and to con*
elude that when attacked by your relatives with bitterness,
with vindictiveness^ and without cause, I not only ought not
to retract anything, but, in a case of that kind, should even be
able to rely upon the aid of youiself and your army. I have
always wished to have you as a friend : I have taken pains to
make you understand that I am a warm friend to you. I
abide by that sentiment, and shall abide by it as long ^you
will let me ; and I shall more readily cease to be angry with
your brother for love of you, than I shall from anger with
him abate in the smallest degree my kindness for you.

XV (F V, 6)

TO F. SESTIUS^ (IN MACEDONIA)

Rome, December

Dkcius the copyist has been to see me, and begged me
to try and secure that no successor should be appointed
to you this turn* Though I regarded him as a man of good

* For the riots caused by his contests with Cato (on which the
■enate seems Lo have pa&seJ the stnaius catisullum uUwt$tm\ and for
his having left Rome while tribune,

* P, Sestiui WHS serving as prcx|U3estor in Macedonia under Gaius
Antonius* As tribune in B,c. 57 be worked for Cicero*s recalli Imt wai
afterwards prosecuted «^ vt, and defended by Cicero.

f V, 6

TO P. SESTIUS

25

character and attached to you, yet, remembering the tenor of
your previous letter to me, I could not feel certain that the
wish^ of a cautious man of the world like yourself had
undergorie so complete a change. But after your wife
Cornelia had called on Terentia, and I had had a conversa-
tion with Q. Cornelius, I took care to be present at every
meetiDg of the senate, and found that the greatest trouble
ffzs to make Fufius the tribune, and the others to whom

DU had written, believe me rather than your own letter.

The whole business has, after all, been postponed till January,
but there is no difficulty about it Roused by your con-

atulations — for in a letter sometime ago you wished me
good luck on the completion of my purchase of a house from
^rassxis — ^I have bought that very house for 3,500 sestertia
' (about j^2 8, 000), a good while subsequent to your congratu-
Lbboix Accordingly, you may now look upon me as being
ISO deeply in debt as to be eager to join a conspiracy if any-
looe would admit me ! But, partly from personal dislike they
jihui their doors in my face and openly denounce me as the
Ipunisher of conspiracy, partly are incredulous and afraid that
1 1 am setting a trap for them ! Nor do they suppose that a man
I cm be short of money who has relieved the money-lenders
I from a state of siege. In point of fact, money is plentiful at
[six per cent,, and the success of my measures has caused me
I to be regarded as a good security. Your own house, and
I all the details of its construction, I have examined and
I Singly approve. As for Antonius,^ though everyone notices
I his want of attention to my interests, I have nevertheless
}<klended him in the senate with the utmost earnestness
I md persistence, and have made a strong impression on the
I senate by my language as well as by my personal prestige,
I Pray write to me more frequently.

* Gains Antomus, Cicero's colleague In the consulship. He had the
_ Otince of Macedonia after the consulship, Cicero having voluntarily
ivillidimira in his favour to secure hb support against Catiline. ScandsJ
^flod that he hud bargained to pay Cicero lar^e sums from the profits of
*ie pfovince. He governed so corrupUy and unsuccessfully that he wa*
I Hi fetom ooodemned of maUsias,

2$

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 6l, vKT. I

XVI (A I, 12)

ITie letters of this year are niuch concerned wilb the sacrilege of
P. Clodius, who, it was alleged, had been detected In disguise in the
house of the Pontifex Maximus luHus Caesar, when his
B.C. 6i. Coss,» *if^ w^s celebrating the mysteries of the Bona Dea,
M- Pairtus Piso, from which males were excluded. His trial was made
Mc^aU ^"* the occasion of bitter party struggles, and by giving evid-
ence in contradiction of Clod i us s alibi Cicero incurred
his enmity, and eventually, therefore, his own exile,
Qnintus is proprator in Asia, Caesar in Spain. Pompey reached Rome
early this year. The ordo equtster is much irritated with the senate
on ^e question of the contracts for the collection of the Asiatic taxes.

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)
Rome, i January

4

The Teucris^ business hangs iire, and Cornelius has not
called on Terentia since. I suppose I must have recourse
to Considios, Axius, and Selicius : * for his nearest relations
can't get a penny out of Caecilius ^ under twelve per cent. But
to return to my first remark i I never saw anything more
shameless, artful, and dilatory. '* I am on the point of send-
ing my freedman," ** I have commissioned Titus " — excuses
and delays at every turn ! But perhaps it is a case oiPkomme
propose^*" for Pompey^s advance couriers tell me that he
means to move in the senate that a successor to Antonius
ought to be named, and the prsetor intends to bring the
proposal before the people at the same time. The facts arc

* From expressions in the following letters it seems certain that thii
refers to money expected from Gaius Antonius ; but we have no mean& of
deciding whether or no Teticris is a pseudonym for some agent. Cicero
had undertaken to be the advocate and supporter of Antonius, and though
as an actual patronus m court he could not take money, he may have
felt justified in receiving supplies from him. Still, he knew the character
of Antonius, and how auch wealth was likely to be got, and it is not»
pleasant affair.

■^ Money-lenders*

* The rich and cross-grained ancle of Atticus. See Letter X.

* Cicero quotes half a Greek verse of Menander^s, ravrofiarov
leaving Atticus to fill up the other two words, caXXiw ^ovKivtra
** Chance designs better than we ourselves,*

J

^AU 12

TO ATTICUS

27

such that I cannot defend him in view of the opinion either
of the aristocrats or the people, and, what is more than
anything else, that I have no wish to do so. For a thing
has happened into the truth of which I charge you to look
thoroughly. I have a freedman, who is a worthless fellow

Ilnough ; I mean Hilanis, an accountant and a client of
^ur own. The interpreter Valerius gives me this informa-
tion about him, and Thyillus writes me word that he has
been told the same story : that the fellow is with Antonius,
and that Antonius, in exacting money payments, frequently
remarks that a part is being coDected for me, and that I
have sent a freedman to look after our common interests.
1 felt exceedingly disturbed, and yet could not believe it ;
but at any rate there has been some gossip of the sort
Pray took into the whole matter, learn the truth, find out the

k author, and get the empty-headed idiot out of the country,
if you possibly can. Valerius mentions Cn. Plancius as
the origin of this gossip, I trust you thoroughly to in-
vestigate and find out what is at the bottom of it. I have
gocxi reason to believe that Pompey is most kindly disposed
to me. His divorce of Mucia is strongly approved.^ I
appose you have heard that P. Clodius, son of Appius, was
I caught in woman's clothes at Gains Caesar's house, while the
H-state function was going on, and that he was saved and got
H out by means of a maid-servant ; and that the affair is causing
B immense scandal. I feel sure you will be sorry for it." I
^bave nothing else to tell you. And, indeed, at the moment
of writing, I am in considerable distress : for a delightful
youth, my reader Sosthenes, has just died, and his death
has aJSTected me more than that of a slave should, I think,
do. Pray write often. If you have no news, write just what
comes uppermost.
^ I January, in the consulship of M. Messalla and M, Piso,

H * Mucia was suspected of intriguing with lulius Csesar.
^1 * The chief festival of the Bona Dea (Tellus) -was in May. The
^Bodetiimti^) referred to here took place on the night between the 3rd
^Hifid 4tli of December. It was a state function {pro populd)^ and was
^P cdefamted io the presence of the Vestals and the wife of the consul or

mtor nrbanus, in ta domo qua est in imp€Ho. As Caesar was Pontifex
' Muimus, M well as praetor urbanus, it took place in the Rigi^t ^^

Pontiflri official house (Plutarch, Cie. 19 ; Dio, xxxviL 35),

28

CICERO'S LETTERS

6X. 6l, ^ET. 45

XVII (F V, 5)

TO C. ANTONIUS (IN MACEDONIA)

Rome, January

M, Cicero wishes health to Gains Antonius^ son of Marcus^
Imperator,

Though I had resolved to write you nothing but formal
letters of introduction (not because I felt that they had much
weight with you, but to avoid giving those who asked me for
them an idea that there had been any diminution in our
friendship), yet since Titxis Pomponios is starting for your
province, who knows better than anyone else all that I feel
and have done for you, who desires your friendship and is
most devotedly attached to me, I thought I must write
something, especially as I had no other way of satisfying
Pomponios himself Were I to ask from you services of the
greatest moment, it ought not to seem surprising to anyone :
for you have not wanted from me any that concerned youi
interests, honour, or position. That no return has been
made by you for these you are the best witness : that some-
thing even of a contrary nature has proceeded from you I
have been told by many. I say ** told," for I do not venture
to say " discovered," ^ lest I should chance to use the word
which people tell me is often falsely attributed to me by you.
But the story which has reached my ears I would prefer your
learning from Pomponius (who was equally hurt by it) rather
than from my letter. How singularly loyal my feelings have
been to you the senate and Roman people are both witnesses.
How far you have been grateful to me you may yourself
estimate : how much you owe me the rest of the world
estimates. I was induced to do what I did for you at first
by affection, and afterwards by consistency. Your future,
believe me, stands in need of much greater zeal on my part,

* The word {comperisse) used by Cicero in regard to the Cutilinariaa
Cimspiracy ; it hud apparently become a subject of rather malignant chuff.

FT, 5; A I, 13

TO ATTICUS

29

greater firmness and greater labour.^ These labours, unless
Kk shall appear that I am throwing away and wasting my
^LiaiDs, I shall support with all the strength I have ; bat if I
^Bee that they are not appreciated, I shall not allow you — the
^Kery person benefited ^ — to think me a fool for my pains.
What the meaning of all this is you will be able to ieam from
Pomponius. In commending Pomponius to you, although
I am sure you will do anything in your power for his own
sake, yet I do beg that if you have any affection for me
left, you will display it all in Pomponius's business. You
can do me no greater favotu^ than that.

I

XVIII (A I. 13)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome, 27 January

I HAVE now received three letters from you— one by the
hands of M, ComeliuSj which you gave him, I think, at
Three Taverns ; a second which your host at Canusium de*
livered to me ; a third dated, according to you, from on board
your pinnace, when the cable was aheady slipped,^ They
were all three, to use a phrase from the schools of rhetoric
flavoured with the salt of learning, and illumined with the
marks of affection. In these letters, indeed, I am urgently
' by you to send answers, but what renders me rather
, in this respect is the difficulty of finding a trust-
worthy carrier. How few of these gentry are able to convey
1 letter rather weightier than usual without lightening it by
skimming its contents ! Besides, I do not always care to

^ Cicero is hinting at the danger of prosecution hanging over the
liead of Antonius^

' Reading ti^i ipn (not ipsa)^ with Tjrrrell.

' Orm saiuia. Or, if ancara sublata be read, "when the anchor was
already weighed-" In either case it means ** just as you were starting."
Anicus wrote otx board, and gave the letter to a carrier to take on

30

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 6l, MT, i

send ^ whenever anyone is starting for Epirus : for I suppose
that, having offered victims before your Amaltheia,^ you at
once started for the siege of Sicyon, And yet I am not
even certain when you start to visit Antonius or how much
time you are devoting to Epirus. Accordingly, I don't
venture to trust either Ach^eans or Epirotes with a letter
somewhat more outspoken than usuaL Now some events
^ave occurred since you left me worth my writing to you,
but they must not be trusted to the risk of a letter being
lostj opened, or intercepted.

Well^ then, to begin with : I was not called upon to
speak first, and the pacifier of the Allobroges* was pre-
ferred to me, and though this met with some murmurs
of disapprobation from the senate, I was not sorry it was
done. For I am thereby freed from any obligation to shew
respect to an ill-conditioned man, and am at liberty to sup-
port my position in the Republic in spite of him. Besides,
the second place has a dignity almost equal to that of
princeps senaius^ and does not put one under too much
of an obligation to the consul. The third called on was
Catulus ; the fourth, if you want to go still farther, Hor-
tensius. The consul himself^ is a man of a wnaD and
ill-regulated mind, a mere buffoon of that splenetic kind
which raises a laugh even in the absence of wit : it is his face
rather than his facetiousness * that causes merriment : he
takes practically no part in public business, and is quite
aJienated from the Optimates. You need expect no service
to the state from him, for he has not the will to do any, nor

* A word lost in the text-

* See end of Letter XXI. Cicero playfiiUy supposes that Atticus onl"
stayed in his villa io Epinis to offer sacrifices to the nymph in his
gymnasium, and then hurried off to Sicyon, where people owed him

' money which he wanted to get. He goes to Antonius first to get his
. luthority for putting pressure on Sicyon, and perhaps even some miUtoiy

force.
' C. Cdpumius Piso (consul B.C. 67), brother of the consul of the

year, had been governor of Gallia Narbonensis (B.C. 66-65 J, ^Lnd had

suppressed a rising of the Allobroges, the tnost troublesome tribe in the

province, who were, in fact, again in rebellion .

* M- Pupius Piso.

" **By the expression of bis face mthet than the force of bis cs*
pressioos *' (Tyrrell )» ^

*^i3

TO ATTICUS

31

' any damage, for he hasn't the courage to inflict it. His
c>lleagU6, however, treats me with great distinction, and is
so a zealous supporter of the loyalist party. For the
fesent their disagreement has not come to much; but I
ear that this taint may spread farther. For I suppose you
jive heard that when the state function was being performed
1 Caesax^s house a man in woman's dress got in, and that

Vestals having performed the rite again, mention was
le of the matter in the senate by Q. Comificius — he was
the first, so don't think that it was one of us consulars —
ad that on the matter being referred by a decree of the
Isenate to the [Virgins and] pontifices, they decided that a
sacrilege had been committed: that then, on a farther
decree of the senate, the consuls published a bill : and
that Caesar divorced his wife. On this question Piso,
from friendship for P. Clodius, is doing his best to get the
bill promulgated by himself (though in accordance with a
decree of the senate and on a point of religion) rejected,
Messalla as yet is strongly for severe measures. The
loyalists hold aloof owing to the entreaties of Clodius :
bands of ruffians are being got together : I myself, at first a
stem Lycurgus, am becoming daily less and less keen
about it: Cato is hot and eager. In short, I fear that
between the indifference of the loyalists and the support
of the disloyal it may be the cause of great evils to the
Republic, However, your great friend"* — do you know whom
I mean? — of whom you said in your letter that, **not ven-
turing to blame me, he was beginning to be complimentary,"
is now to all appearance exceedingly fond of me, embraces

^ loves and praises me in public, while in secret (though

Ijle to disguise it) he is jealous of me. No good-breed*

ing, 00 straightforwardness, no political morality, no distinc-
tioii| no courage, no liberality ! But on these points I will
wrife to you more minutely at another time ; for in the first
pbce I am not yet quite sure about them, and in the next
{ilace 1 dart not intrust a letter on such weighty matters to
such a casuaJ nobody's son as this messenger.

The prsetors have not yet drawn their lots for the provinces.
The DiAttier remains just where you left it. The description

See p. 27, note 3.

Pompcy,

C3CEItO*S U,I1EK5

B.C. 6i, JCT. 45

of the scenexj of Mffyrwn wad Pttfeeoli wfakh yoa ask for I
win tndxide in mf speeds* I Ind Mktmdj noticed the mis-
take in the dsite^ yd oi December. The points in my
ywiiei vUdi jcKt praise; bdieve me, I Hked v^iy much
myself hot dad not TCBUne to say so before. Now, how-
ever^ jstbey hare lecsmd join- appityvsl, I think them much
more '^Attk'* than ef<er. To the speech in answer to Metellus*
I have made some additions. ll»e book shaU be sent you,
since afiectiGo for me glides jo«i a taste for rbetoria What
news have I for you? Let me see. Oh, yes ! The consul
MeaaBa has boogjit Amonkis^ boose for 3^400 sestertia
(about ;£2 7,200). What is dial to me? yoa will say.
Why, dios mndb. The price has convinced people that I
made no bad baigain, ai^ they begin to ondefstand that in
making a purchase a man may properly use his friends'
means to get what suits his position. The Teucris affair
drags on, yet I have hopes. Pray settle the business you
have in hand. You shall have a more outspoken letter
soon.

27 January I in the consulship of M, Messalla and M. Piso.

XIX (A I, 14)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)
Rome, 13 February

4

I FKAR it may seem affectation to tell you how occupied I
have been ; but I am so distracted with business that I have
only just found time for this short letter, and that has been

* Or, ** inclose with my speech " ; in both cases the dative orati^ni
mem is pcctiliar. No speech exists containing such a description* but
we have only two of the previous year extant {pr& Flacco and pi^
Archia Potta^ Cicero was probably sending it, whichever it was, to
Atticus to be copied by his librarii^ and published. Atticus had
apparently some other works of Cicero's in liand^ for which he had sent
him some "queries.*"

* Apparently the speech in the senate referred to in Letter XIV,
p. 23» spoken on 1st January, B.C. 62. Metellus had prevented his
conho the day before.

AI*t4

TO ATTICUS

33

»

stolai from the most urgent engagements, I have already
described to you Pompey's first public speech— it did not
please the poor, nor satisfy the disloyal, nor find favour with
fiit wealthy, nor appear sound to the loyalists ; accordingly,
he is down in the world, ^ Presently, on the instigation of
ihe consul Piso, that most insignificant of tribunes, Fufius,
brought Pompey on to the platform. The meeting was in the
drcus Fiatftinius, and there was in the same place that day a
crowd of market people — a kind of tiers htatJ^ He asked him
to say whether he approved of the jurymen being selected by
Ihepoetor, to forma panel for the prsetor himself to employ.
That was the regulation made by the senate in the matter
of Oodius's sacrilege. Thereupon Pompey made a highly
aristocratic" speech, and replied (and at great length) that
all matters the authority of the senate was of the greatest
eight in his eyes and had always been so. Later on the
nsul Messalla in the senate asked Pompey his opinion as
the sacrilege and the bill that had been published. His
speech in the senate amounted to a general commendation
of all decrees of the house, and when he sat down he said
tome, "I think ray answer covers your case also," * When
Crassus observed that Pompey had got a cheer from the idea
in men's minds that he approved my consulships he rose also
to his feet and delivered a speech in the most complimentary
tenns on my consulship, going so far as to say that he owed
It to me that he was still a senator j a citizen, nay, a free
man; and that he never beheld wife, home^ or country
without beholding the fruits of my conduct. In short:
that whole topic, which I am wont to paint in various colours
ID my speeches (of which you are the Aristarchus), the fire,
the sword — ^you know my paint-pots — he elaborated to the
highest pitch. I was sitting next to Pompey. I noticed
that he was agitated, either at Crassus earning the gratitude
whkh he had himself neglected, or to think that my achieve-

* The letter giving this description is lost, I think frigjtbai is epis-
ttf nnperfect— •* Ae is in the cold shade," not, " il feU flat/'
' «ttr^vp«C- Cicero uses ihe word (an honourable one in Greek)
^ ^ontenifiCiumsly of the rabble brotight together at a market.

' Ptoiipey's general commendatioo of the decrees of the senate would

^dade Uiote regarding the Catiline conspirators, and he therefore

c^nied to kuive latisfied Ciceru.
I, D

iJ

u

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.c 61, ^T. 45

ments were, after all, of such magnitude that the senate was so
glad to hear them praised, especially by a man who was the
less under an obligation to praise me, because in everything
I ever wrote ^ my praise of Pompey was practically a
reflexion on him. This day has brought me very close to
Crassus, and yet in spite of all I accepted with pleasure any
compliment— open or covert— from Pompey. But as for
my own speech, good heavens ! how I did ** put it on " for
the benefit of my new auditor Pompey 1 If I ever did
bring every art into play, 1 did then — period, transition,
enthymeme, deduction ^ everything* In short, I was
cheered to the echo. For the subject of my speech was the
dignity of the senate, its harmony with the equites, the
unanimity of Italy, the dying embers of the conspiracy, the
fall in prices, the establishment of peace. You know my
thunder when these are my themes. It was so loud, in fact,
that I may cut short my description, as I think you must
have heard it even m Epirus. The state of things at Rome
is this: the senate is a perfect Areopagus. You cannot
conceive an)rthing firmer, more grave, or more high-spirited.
For when the day came for proposing the bill in accordance
with the vote of the senate, a crowd of our dandies with their
chin-tufts assembled, all the Catiline set, with Curio's girlish
son at their head, and implored the people to reject it,
Moreover, Piso the consul, who formally introduced the bill,
spoke against it Clodius^s hired ruffians had filled up the
entrances to the voting boxes. The voting tickets were so
manipulated that no "ayes" were distributed. Hereupon
imagine Cato hurrying to the rostra, delivering an admirable
mvective against the consul, if we can call that an **iih
vective " which was really a speech of the utmost weight and
authority, and in fact containing the most salutary advice

^ Meis omnibus litter is ^ the MS. reading. Prof. Tyrrell's emen-
dation, arationibus rtuis^ amnihus iitteris, ** in my speeches, every letter
of them," seems to me even harsher than the MS., a gross exa^eratioili
and doubtful Latin. Meis litteris is well supported by liters j&nmG
et senaiof-ue of de Off. 2, § 3, and though it is an unusual mode of
referring to speeches, we must rcmemtier that they were now published
and were "literature." The particular reference is to the speech /*»
Impefio Pompeii^ in which, among other things, the whole credit of the
reduction of Sparlacus^s gladiators is given to Pompey, whereas tlie
burnt of the war had been borne by Crassus.

.2^

J

TO ATTIC US

35

He is followed to the same effect by your firiend Hortensius,
tnd many loyalists besides, among whom, however, the
Lcoiitribution of Favonius was conspicuous. By this rally of
i&e Optimates the camitia is dissolved, the senate summoned,
Dn the question being put in a full house — in spite of the
opposition of Piso, and in spite of Clodius throwing himself
at the feet of the senators one after the other^tbat the
consuls should exliort the people to pass the bill^ about
fifteen voted with Curio, who was against any decree being
on the other side there were fully four hundred. So
ihevote passed. The tribune Fufius then gave in/ Clodius
' livered some wretched speeches to the people, in which

bestowed some injurious epithets on Lucullus, Horten-
sius, C» Piso, and the consul Messalla ; me he only charged
with having "discovered" everything.^ In regard to the
assignation of provinces to the praetors, the hearing legations,
and other business, the senate voted that nothing should be
brought before it till the bill had been brought before the
people* There 's the state of things at Rome for you. Yet
pray listen to this one thing more which has surpassed my
liopes. Messalla is a superlatively good consul, courageous,
&fra, painstaking; he praises, shows attachment to, and
nitates tne. That other one (Piso) is the less mischievous

ause of one vice— ^he is lazy, sleepy, un business -like, an

X faineant^ but in intention he is so disaffected that he has
ikegon to loathe Pompey since he made the speech in which
Some praise was bestowed on the senate. Accordingly, he
has alienated all the loyalists to a remarkable degree. And
bis action is not dictated by love for Clodius more than by
a taste for a profligate policy and a profligate party. But he
nobody among the magistrates like himself, with the

^)t exception of the tribune Fufius. The tribunes are

ellent, and in Cornutus we have a quasi-CaEo. Can I

'more?

Norw to return to private matters. **Teucris" has ful-

Fis^os, Ihough Cicero does not say so^ must have vetoed the decree,
I in the face of such a majority withdrew his veto. The practice
to have been, in case of tribunician veto, to take the vote,
fmialncd as an auctoritas senaius, but was not a senatus con-
V ittil^t the tribune was induced to withdraw.
' C^mperiise, See Letter XVII, note i, p. 28,

you

the rc-
i for 725
Id wdL lib Toscitlaii
^ tteloini boiaseof
It IsKtiist he is an
I «fl ilo mj best Be
F h0v jm nCi where yoQ •

»1J

XX (A 1, 15)

TO ATTICDS (IN EPIRUS)

RoM^ 15 Maxcs

You hafe betid that my dearest brother QoiDtns has j
Asia ; for I do ooc doobc that mnkoor has conveyed
Dews to jou qiiidDer than a letter fiom any of us. N^
then, ocxisidem^ how desitoos of a good leputation he a
I have €¥9 be^ and how uoiisiially Philhellenic we
and have the repotatioD of being, and considering how 1
there are whose enmity we have incurred for the sake of I
Republic, "call to mind all your valour,"* to secure us j
praise and affection of all concerned. I will write at j^
length to you on these points in the letter which I shall |
to Quintus himself,' Please let me know what you have <
about the business I confided to you, and also in your i
affair; for I have had no letter from you since you
Brundisium. I am very anxious to hear how you are.
15 March,

* S«e Letters XVI and XVIII, pp. 26, 3a.

* wavroifiQ <ipln}c ut/iv^jceo (Horn. //, xxii. 8).

* The aJlotmeot of provinces had been put off (see last letter) dill
affair of Clmlius's trial was settled ; consequently Quintus would j
have much time for preparation, and would soon set out. He ^
cross to Dyrrachium, and proceed along the via Egnaiia to Thessalo
He mif^t meet Atdcus at Dyrrachium, or go out of bis way to <
him a( Buthrotum.

>l«i5»t6

TO ATTICUS

37

XXI (A I, i6)

TO ATTICUS

Rome (May)

tov ask nie what has happened about the trial, the result
' which was so contrary to the general expectation, and at
same time you want to know how I came to make a
irorse fight of it than usual I will answer the last first,
Iter the manner of Horner,^ The fact is that, so long as I
to defend the authority of the senate,* I battled with
i gallantry and vigour that there were shouts of applause
■fnd crowds round me in the house ringing with my praise.
Nay, if you ever thought that I shewed courage in political
» you certainly would haveadmired my conduct in that
For when the culprit had betaken himself to public
ngs^ and had made an invidious use of my name, im-
1 gods 1 What battles ! What havoc ! What sallies I
de upon Piso, Curio, on the whole of that set I How I
'fefi upon the old men for their instabiHty, on the young for
ibar profligacy I Again and again, so help me heaven 1
1 regretted your absence not only as the supporter of my
policy, bat as the spectator also of my admirable fighting.
However, when Hortensius hit on the idea of a law as to
the sacrilege being proposed by the tribune Fufius, in which
Ibac was no difference from the bill of the consul except
M fo the kind of jurymen — on that point, how^ever, the whole
question turned — and got it carried by sheer fighting, be-
csuse he had persuaded himself and others that Ae could
not get an acquittal no matter who were the jurymen, I
df^w in my sails, seeing the neediness of the jurors, and
give oo evidence beyond what was so notorious and weU
1 that I could not omit it,' Therefore, if you ask the

' Wn^r wp6repov 'Oft^pixQs,

' ThAt it, the resolution of the senate, that the consuls should
Eea^par to get the bill passed.
r* CSeero deposed to having seen Clodius in Rome three hours after
thai be was at Interamna (ninety miles ofT), thus spoiling his

38

CICERO S LETTERS

B.C, 6lj /ET, 45

reason of the acquittal— to return at length to the fonner of
the two questions— it was entirely the poverty and low character
of the jury. But that this was possible was entirely the result
of Hortensius's policy. In his alarm lest Fufius should veto
the law which was to be proposed in virtue of a senatorial
decree, he failed to see that it was better that the culprit
should be left under a cloud of disgrace and dishonour than
that he should be trusted to the discretion of a weak jur)\
Bot in his passionate resentment he hastened to bring the
case into court, saying that a leaden sword was good enough
to cut his throat. But if you want to know the history
of the trial, with its incredible verdict, it was such that
Hortensius's policy is now blamed by other people after the
event, though I disapproved of it from the first. When the
rejection of jurors had taken place, amidst loud cheers and
counter-cheers — the accuser like a strict censor rejecting the
most worthless, the defendant like a kind-hearted trainer of
gladiators all the best — as soon as the jury had taken their
seats, the loyalists at once began to feel distrust. There
never was a seedier lot round a table in a gambling hell
Senators under a cloud, equites out at elbows, tribunes who
were not so much made of money as " collectors *' of it, ac-
cording to their official title/ However, there were a few
honest men in the panel, whom he had been unable to drive
off it by rejection, and they took their seats among their un-
congenial comrades with gloomy looks and signs of emotion,
and were keenly disgusted at having to rub elbows with such
rascals. Hereupon, as question after question was referred
to the panel in the preliminary proceedings, the severity of
the decisions passes belief : there was no disagreement id

^ The difficulty of this sentence is well known. The juries were
made up of three ^fffwrris— senators, equites, and trihtni ararii,
the exact meajiing <A iribuni israrii is not known, beyond the fact \
they formed an ordo^ comiug immediately below the equites, PossHJI
they were old tribal officers who had the duty of distributing pay \
collecting taxes (to which the translation supposes a punning reference
and as such were required to be of a census immediately below that J
the equites. I do not profess to be satisfied, but I cannot think
Professor Tyrrell *s proposal makes matters much easier — triburU
torn ararii^ ui appdlatUur^ quam arati ; for his trairslation of itrati\
** bribed'* is not better supported, and is a less natural deduction f
" moneyed. "

I ^rir^ in

iroting,
accuse]
Need

TO ATTXCUS

39

iroting, the defendant carried none of his points, while the
accuser got even more than he asked. He was triomphant.
Need I say more ? Hortensius would have it that he was
the only one of us who had seen the truth. There was not
a man who did not think it impossible for him to stand his
Iiial without being condemned a thousand times over.
Farther, when 1 was produced as a witness, I suppose you
have been told how the shouts of Clodius's supporters were
answered by the jury rising to their feet to gather round me,
and openly to ofifer their throats to P. Clodius in my defence*
This seemed to me a greater compliment than the well-
known occasion when your fellow citizens^ stopped Xeno-
crates from taking an oath in the witness-box, or when, upon
the accounts of Metellus Numidicus ^ being as usual handed
round, a Roman jur\^ refused to look at them. The compliment
paid me, I repeat, was much greater. Accordingly, as the jury-
men were thus protecting me as the mainstay of the country,
it was by their voices that the defendant was overwhelmed,
And with him all his advocates suffered a crushing blow. Next
day my house was visited by as great a throng as that which
escorted me home when I laid down the consulship, Oui
eminent Areopagites then exclaimed that they would not come
into court unless a guard was assigned them. The question
Wts put to the whole panel : there was only one vote against
the need of a guard. The question is brought before the
seziaie: the decree is passed in the most solemn and laudatory
tersis : the jurymen are complimented : the magistrates are
Goouxti^oned to carry it out : no one thought that the fellow
would venture on a defence. ** Tell me, ye Muses, now
how fiist the fire befell I"' You know Bald-head, the
Kanoeian millionaire,* that panegyrist of mine, whose com-

* /!«,, tlic Athenians, Xetiocrates of Calchedon {BX. 396-314)^
fCsMinf; nt Athens, is said to have been so trusted that his word was
taken aa a witness withont an oath (Diog. Laert. iv. ii. 4).

* Q, Oecilitis Numidicus, consul B.C. 109, commaQded against
Ti^sniuu The event referred to in die text is said to have occurred
on his trial iU rep€tundis^ after his return from a province which he
Itel held as proprietor (Val. Max, ii. z. i].

■ Ham. iL xvi. 112:

refereace J^^fnyn^^Jo^l^H^ very

40

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 6l« ^/ET. 45

pUmentary oration I have already mentioned to you in a
letter. In two days* time, by the agency of a single slave,
and one, too, from a school of gladiators, he settled the
whole business — he summoned them to an interview, made
a promise, offered security, paid money down. Still farther,
good heavens, what a scandal ! even favours from certain
ladies, and introductions to young men of rank, were thrown
in as a kind oi pourboire to some of the jurors. Accordingly,
with the loyalists holding completely aloof, with the forum
full of slaves, twenty-five Jurors were yet found so courageous
that, though at the risk of their lives, they preferred even
death to producing universal ruin. There were thirty-one
who were more influenced by famine than fame. On seeing
one of these latter Catulus said to him, ** AVhy did you ask
us for a guard ? Did you fear being robbed of the money?"
There you have, as briefly as I could put it, the nature of the
trial and the cause of the acquittal

Next you want to know the present state of public affairs
and of my own. That setdement of the Republic — firmly
established by my wisdom, as you thought, as I thought by
God's— which seemed fixed on a sure foundation by the
unanimity of all loyalists and the influence of my consul-
ship^that I assure you, unless some God take compassion
on us, has by this one verdict escaped from our grasp : if
** verdict " it is to be called, when thirty of the most worth-
less and dissolute fellows in Rome for a paltry sum of
money obliterate every principle of law and justice, and
when that which every man— I had almost said every
animal — knows to have taken place, a Thalna, a Plautus,
and a Spongia, and other scum of that sort decide not to
have taken place. However, to console you as to the
state of the Republic, rascaldom is not as cheerful and exult-
ant in its victory as the disloyal hoped after the infliction
of such a wound upon the Republic. For they fully expected
that when religion, morality, the confidence in the law courts,
and the prestige of the senate had sustained such a crushing
fall, victorious profligacy and lawless lust would openly exact

old commentators say that he is here called tx Nanmianis because
he made a large sum of money by the property of one Nanncius,
who was among those proscribed by Sulla, His calling Cni&sus hit
**lianegyri5t'* is explained by letter XIX, pp. 33-34,

A

41, t6

TO ATTICUS

41

;e from all the best men for th e mortifi cation which the

ictness of my consulship had branded in upon all the worst.

*^And it is once more I — for I do not feel as if I were boasting

TOiTigloriously when speaking of myself to you, especially in

a letter not intended to be read by others — it was I once

more, I say, who revived the fainting spirits of the loyalists,

L cheering and encouraging each personally. Moreover^ by

» my denunciations and invectives against those corrupt jurors

I left none of the favourers and supporters of that victory a

lOfd to say for themselves. I gave the consul Piso no rest

liere, I got him deprived of Syria, which had been

Jy plighted to him, I revived the fainting spirit of the

ale and recalled it to its ancient severity. 1 overwhelmed

Hodius in the senate to his face, both in a set speech, very

weighty and serious, and also in an interchange of repartees,

which I append a specimen for your delectation. The

; lose all point and grace without the excitement of the

ntest, or, as you Greeks call it, the ay^y. Well, at the

faceting of the senate on the 15th of May, being called on

my opinion, I spoke at considerable length on the

. interests of the Republic, and brought in the following

ge by a happy inspiration : ** Do not, Fathers, regard

elves as fallen utterly, do not faint, because you have

ved one blow. The wound is one which I cannot

iiise, but which I yet feel sure should not be regarded

with extreme fear : to fear would shew us to be the greatest

of cowards, to ignore it the greatest of fools. Lentulus was

twice acquitted, so was CatiUne, a third such criminal has

now been let loose by jurors upon the Republic, You are

I mistaken, Clodius : it is not for the city but for the prison

I that the jurors have reserved you, and their intention was

I not to retain you in the state, but to deprive you of the

privilege of exile. Wherefore, Fathers, rouse up all your

I courage, hold fast to your high calling. There still remains

[ in the Republic the old unanimity of the loyalists : their

f feelings have been outraged, their resolution has not been

weakened : no fresh mischief has been done, only what was

actually existing has been discovered. In the trial of one

profligate many like him have been detected.'* — But what

MQ I about ? I have copied almost a speech into a letter.

1 return to the duel of words. Up gets our dandified young

42

CICERO'S LETTERS

3.a 6i, AT, 4|

gentleman, and throws in my teeth my having been at Baiae*
It wasn't true, but what did that matter to him ? " It is as
though you were to say," replied I, *'that I had been in dis-
guise 1 " ** What business," quoth he, " has an Arpinate with
hot baths?" "Say that to your patron," said I, "who coveted
the watering-place of an Arpinate," ^ For you know about
the marine villa, "How long," said he, "are we to put up
with this king?" "Do you mention a king," quoth I,
" when Rex ^ made no mention of you ? " He, you know, had
swallowed the inheritance of Rex in anticipation. " You have
bought a house," says he, " You would lliink that he said,"
quoth I, " you have bought a jury," " They didn't trust
you on your oath," said he. " Yes," said I, " twenty-ftve
jurors did trust me, thirty-one didn't trust you, for they took
care to get their money beforehand," Here he was over-
powered by a burst of applause and broke down without a
word to say.

My own position is this : with the loyalists I hold the
same place as when you left town, with the tagrag and bob-
tail of the city I hold a much better one than at your de-
parture. For it does me no harm that my evidence appears
not to have availed. Envy has been let blood without causing
pain, and even more so from the fact that all the supporters
of that flagitious proceeding confess that a perfectly notorious
fact has been hushed up by bribing the jury. Besides, the
wretched starvehng mob, the blood-sucker of the treasury^
imagines me to be high in the favour of Magnus — and indeed
we have been mutually united by frequent pleasant inter-
course to such an extent, that our friends the boon com-
panions of the conspiracy, the young chin-tufts, speak of him
in ordinary conversation as Gnseus Cicero. Accordingly,
both in the circus and at the gladiatorial games, I received a
remarkable ovation without a single cat-calL There is at
present a lively anticipation of the elections, in which, con-
trary to everybody's wishes, our friend Magnus is pushing the
claims of Aulus-s son ;^ and in that matter his weapons are

' C, Curio, the elder, defended Clcnlius. He had bought the viila of
Marius (a native of Arpinum) at Baiae.

^ Q. Marcius Rex married a sister of Clodius, and dying, left him no
lecacy.

' L. Afranius.

At, t6

TO ATTICUS

43

neither his prestige nor his popularity, but those by which
Philip said that any fortress could be taken — if only an ass
laden with gold could make its way up into it. Farthermore,
that precious consul, playing as it were second fiddle to
^Pompey,* is said to have undertaken the business and to
ave bribery agents at his house, which I don't believe*
But two decrees have already passed the house of an un-
pular character, because they are thought to be directed
" nst the consul on the demand of Cato and Domitius ^ —
ae that search should be allowed in magistrates' houses,
. second, that all who had bribery agents in their houses
_Jguilty of treason. The tribune Lurco also, having entered
his office irregularly in view of the ^Han law, has been
iTeheved from the provisions both of the Julian and Fufian
Ikws, in order to enable him to propose his law on bribery,
I which he promulgated with correct auspices though a cripple,'
I Accordingly, the camitia have been postponed to the 27th
lof July. There is this novelty in his bill, that a man who
Ihas promised money among the tribes, but not paid it, is not
liable, but, if he has paid, he is liable for life to pay 3,00a
jiesterces to each tribe. I remarked that P. Clodius had
lobeyed this law by anticipation, for he was accustomed to
^inise, and not pay. But observe t Don't you see that
onsulship of which we thought so much, which Curio
[of old to call an apotheosis, if this Afranius is elected,
come a mere farce and mockery? Therefore I think
Pshould play the philosopher, as you in fact do, and not
fcare a straw for your consulships !

Vou say in your letter that you have decided not to go to
[ AiB. For my part I should have preferred your going, and
It featf that there may be some offence * given in that matter.
iKerertheJess, I am not the man to blame you, especially con-

^ Rea'fiog deuHoris kistrionh similis^ *'like an inferior actor."
' Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, married to Cato's sister. Consul
I IX, 54* A strong aristocrat and vehement opponent of Cossar.
I ' An&dJiis Lmrco had apparently proposed his law on bribery betweeik
Ittttiaeiifthe notice of the elections {indiciio) and the elections them-
Itihes, which was against a provision of the Uges ^^lia it Fufia, What
lliibfc»ch of the law was in entering on his office originally we do not
'mow: perhaps some neglect 6f auspices, or his personal deformity.
* /^, to Quint as Cicero, now proprsetor in Asia, who apparently
lliied his brolher-in-law to come to Asia in some official capacity.

44

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.C. 6l, MT. 45

sidering that I have not gone to a province myself. I shall
be quite content with the inscriptions you have placed in your
Amaltheium/ especially as Thyillus has deserted me and
Archias written nothing about me. The latter, I am afraid,
having composed a Greek poem on the Luculli, is now turn-
ing his attention to the Caecilian drama.* I have thanked
Antonius on your account, and I have intrusted the letter to
MalHus. I have heretofore written to you more rarely because
I had no one to whom I could trust a letter, and was not
sure of your address. I have puifed you well If Cincius
should refer any business of yours to me, I will undertake it
But at present he is more intent on his own business, in
which I am rendering him some assistance. If you mean to
stay any length of 6me in one place you may expect frequent
letters from me : but pray send even more yourself* I wish
you would describe your Amaltheium to me, its decoration
and its plan ; and send me any poems or stories you may
have about Amaltheia,^ I should like to make a copy of
it at Arpinum. I will forward you something of what I have
written. At present there is nothing finished,

* Some epigrams or inscTiptions tmder a portrait bast of Cicero in
the gymnasium of Atticus's villa at Buthrotum. Atticus had a taste for
such compositions* See Nepos» Aft. l8j Pliny, JV. H. 35, § 1 1.

'^ Cicero had defended Archias, and Thyillfis seems also to have been
intimate with him: but he says Archias, after complimenting the
LucullI by a poemi is now doing the same to the CieciJii MetellL
The **CfficiUan drama'* is a reference to the old dramatist, CEecilita
Statins {i^, B.C. 168).

^ Of Amaltheia, nurse of Zeus in Crete, there were plenty of legends.
Atticus is making in Ms house something like what Cicero had made to
his, and called his academia or gymnasium. That of Atticus wai
probably also a summer house or study, with garden, fountains, etc*|
and a shrine or statue of Amaltheia,

ihtf

TO ATTICUS

45

XXII (A I, 17)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome, 5 December

Your letter, in which you inclose copies of his letters, has
made me realize that my brother Quintus's feelings have
undergone many alternations, and that his opinions and judg-
ments have varied widely from time to time/ This has not
only caused me all the pain which my extreme affection for
both of you was bound to bring, but it has also made me
wonder what can have happened to cause my brother
itus such deep offence, or such an extraordinary change
feeling. And yet I was already aware, as I saw that you
bIsOi when you took leave of me, were beginning to suspect,
that there was some lurking dissatisfaction, that his feelings
were wounded, and that certain unfriendly suspicions had
sunk deep into his heart. On trying on several previous
occasions, but more eagerly than ever after the allotment of
his province, to assuage these feelings, I failed to discover
the one hand that the extent of his offence was so
^eal as your letter indicates ; but on the other I did not
moke as much progress in allaying it as I wished. How-
ever, I consoled myself with thinking that there would be no
4iottbt of his seeing you at Dyrrachium, or somewhere in your
of the country : and, if that happened, I felt sure and
persuaded that everything would be made smooth
bet^'een you, not only by conversation and mutual explana-
tion, but by the very sight of each other in such an interview.
For I need not say in writing to you, who know it quite
weU, how kind and sweet-tempered my brother is, as ready
to forgive as he is sensitive in taking offence. But it most
unfortunately happened that you did not see him anywhere,
Fof the impression he had received from the artifices of

* Cicero is evidently very anxious as to the mlsunderstjuidiiig between

Qftbtus &Qd his brother-ic'law Atticus, caused, as be hints, or at any

Wjt not allayed, by Pomponia. The letter is very carefully written,

vnbout the familiar tone and mixture of jest and earnest common to

t BQii «C tlie Ifltteis to Atticus.

aOBKfS LETTERS

B.C. 61, yET. 45

cdieis had iiioie weiglil witii him than duly or reladon-
aiiip, cx^ tbe old aflectkn so kng escisdiig betweeD you,
wfaicfa ogg^t to bave been die s ti opg^t inflnence of all. And
jet, as to wbeze the bimme for dits Eiiisimdeistanding resides,
I can more easOy coocOTe dun write : sinoe I am tJrsdd that,
while dff^pnding my own relitian% I should not spare yours.
For I percem diat, diotieh DOictnal woond was inflicted by
membeis of die hiaBf^ diey yet could at least have cured it
But the loot of die mischief in this case, which perhaps
ejtffids £anher dian ^pp^^M^ I shall more conireniently ex-
plain to you when we meet. As to the letter be sent to you
from Tbeasadomca,^ and about the language which you sup-
pose him to have used both ai Rome among your friends
and on his jomney, I don't know how lar the matter went,
but my whole hope of remofing this unpleasantness rests oo
yoor landness. For if you wfl] only make up your mind to
belie^re that the best men are often those whose feelings are
most easily initated and appeased, and that this quickness, so
to speak, and sensitheness of disposition are generally signs
of a good heart ; and lastly-^and this is the main thing— that
we must mutually put up with each other's gaocheries (shall
I call them?X or faults, or injurious acts, then these mis-
understandings will, I hope, be easily smoothed away. I
beg you to take this view, for it is the dearest wish of my
heart (which b yours as no one else's can be) that there should
not be one of my family or friends who does not love you
and is not loved by you.

That pajt of your letter was entirely superfluous, in which
you meotion what opportunities of doing good business
in the provinces or the city you let pass at other times
as well as in the year of my consulship : for I am thoroughly
persuaded of your unselfishness and magnanimity, nor did
I ever think that there was any difference between you
and me except in our choice of a career. Ambition
led me to seek official advancement, while another and
perfectly laudable resolution led you to seek an honourable
privacy. In the true glory, which is founded on honesty,
industry, and piety, I place neither myself nor anyone else
above you. In aflection towards myself, next to my brother

* At the cod ofthtma Eimatia^ which ftu-ted from DyrrachiQm. 1

iuij

TO ATTICUS

47

and immediate family, I put you first For indeed, indeed
I have seen and thoroughly appreciated how your anxiety
joy have corresponded with the variations of my for-
nes* Often has your congratulation added a charm to
and your consolation a welcome antidote to alarm.
iuf^ at this moment of your absence, it is not only your
dvice — in which you excel — but the interchange of speech —
m which no one gives me so much delight as you do — that
1 miss most, shall I say in politics, in which circumspection is
ilways incumbent on me, or in my forensic labour, which I
[formerly sustained with a view to official promotion, and
nowadays to maintain my position by securing popularity,
r in the mere business of my family ? In all these I missed
you and our conversations before my brother left Rome, and
till more do I miss them since. Finally, neither my work
est, neither my business nor leisure, neither my affairs in
am or at home, public or private, can any longer do
at your most consolatory and affectionate counsel and
ation. The modest reserve which characterizes both
t has often prevented my mentioning these facts ; but on
si on it was rendered necessary by that part of your
in which you expressed a wish to have yourself and
character " put straight " and ** cleared " in my eyes.
fit, in the midst of all this unfortunate alienation and anger
his part, there is yet one fortunate circumstance — that
determination of not going to a province was known
\ me and your other friends, and had been at various times
by yourself; so that your not being with him may
\ attributed to your personal tastes and judgment, not to
el and rupture between you. So those ties which
Tbeen broken will be restored, and ours which have been
> religiously preserved will retain all their old inviolability.
M Rome I find pohtics in a shaky condition ; everything
mmatisfactory and foreboding change. For I have no doubt
" avc been told that our friends, the equites, are all but
from the senate. Their first grievance was the
iilgation of a bill on the authority of the senate for the
of such as had taken bribes for giving a verdict. I
oed not to be in the house when that decree was
but when I found that the equestrian order was in-
EiC at it, and yet refiuined from openly saying so, J

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C. 6l, JET, 45

remonstrated with the senate, as I thought, in very impres-
sive language, and was very weighty and eloquent considering
the unsatisfactory nature of my cause. But here is another
piece of almost intolerable coolness on the part of the equites>
which I have not only submitted to, but have even put in as
good a Eght as possible ! The companies which had contracted
with the censors for Asia complained that in the heat of the
competition they had taken the contract at an excessive
price ; they demanded that the contract should be annulled
I led in their support, or rather, I was second, for it waa
Crassus who induced them to venture on this demand. The
case is scandalous, the demand a disgraceful one, and a con-
fession of rash speculation. Yet there was a very great risk
that, if they got no concession, they would be completely alien*
ated from the senate. Here again 1 came to the rescue
more than anyone else, and secured them a full and very
friendly house, in which I, on the isl and 2nd of December,
dehvered long speeches on the dignity and harmony of the
two orders. The business is not yet settled, but the favour-
able feeling of the senate has been made manifest: for no one
had spoken against it except the consul-designate, Metellus ;
while our hero Cato had still to speak, the shortness of tht
day having prevented his turn being reached. Thus I, in thr
maintenance of my steady policy, preserve to the best of m)
ability that harmony of the orders which was originally mj
joiner's work j but since it all now seems in such a crazy con-
dition, I am constructing what I may call a road towards the
maintenance of our power, a safe one I hope, which I cannot
fully describe to you in a letteij but of which I will neverthe-
less give you a hint. / cultivate dose intima^ with Fompey.
I foresee what you will say, I will use all necessary pre-
cautions, and I will write another time at greater length
about my schemes for managing the Repubhc. You must
know that Lucceius has it in his mind to stand for the con-
sulship at once ; for there are said to be only two candidates
in prospect. Caesar is thinking of coming to terms with
him by the agency of Arrius, and Bibulus also thinks he
may effect a coahtion with him by means of C, Piso/ You

* The election in question is that to be bdd in B.C. 60 for the oon-
snlship of B.C. y^ Caesar and Bibulus were elected, and apparently

kun^iB

TO ATTICUS

49

smile? This is no laughing matter, believe me. What else

II write to you ? What ? I have plenty to say, but must

Qt it off to another time. If you mean to wait till you

r, let me know. For the moment I am satisfied widi a

modest request, though it is what I desire above every-

" Dg — that you should come to Rome as soon as possible.

5 December*

XXIII (A I»i8)

Tbk was the year in which Oesai, returning from his propraetorship
iSpMB, found Pompcy in difficulties with the senate (i}as to Lhe con-
firroation <f« d/ot of his acia in the East, (2) as to the
:6b. CoBs.^ assignation of lands to his veterans ; and being met with
5, CKthiu oppoaition himself as to the triumph that he claimed, and

his candidatureship for the consulship, he formed with

^AliwDjoft. Potnpey and Cmssus the o^eement laiown as the frrst
triumvirate* Cicero saw his favourite political object,
6 tmcardia crdtnum, threatened by any opposition to the triumvirate,
pi^Li^i, v,,^ yg^ distrusted as dangerous to the constitution. We shall find
fore, vajcillating between giving his support to its policy or
y the extreme Optimates. P» Clodius is taking measures to
ivkipied into a plebeian gens, in order to stand for the tribuneship,
'^*-*"- h still in Asia. Pompey's triumph had taken place in the
^September*

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIKUS)
Rome, 20 January

BuiCTE me there is nothing at this moment of which I
twmd so much in need as a man with whom to share all

thai causes me anxiety : a man to love me ; a man of sense
ilp whom 1 can speak without affectation, reserve, or conceal-

||he only two candidates declared as yet They were, of course,
ts, and Lucceius seems to reckon on getting in by forming a
_ J with either one or the other, and so getting the suptxjrt of one
» extreme parties, with the moderates, for himsjclf. Tne bargain
Tly made was between Lucceius and Caesar, the former Ending
^_aey. But the Optimates found mote, and carried Bibukis.
I Is Q. Airius the oratof (see Index). C Fiso is the consul of

ETTERS

mc 6c» yKT-

r or flsy brother is swa,^^ — tiisi most

of men. MeteQns is not a hmmm 1

WhSe fOQv ndso have 30 often lightlied my anxiety and
asguisb of soul by your conversation and advice, wbo
ever my ally in public a^aii^ my confidant in all priv
business, the sharer in all my couversadons and proy
where are you ? So entirely am I abandoned by all, that 1
only moments of repose left me are tiiose which are
with my wife, pet daughter, and sweet Htde Cicero. For as i
those friendships with the great, and their artificial atti
l^ons, they have indeed a certain glitter in the outside wo
bet they bring no private satisfaction* And so,
crowded morning UvSe^ as I go down to the forum
rounded by troops of firiends, I can find no one out of \
that crowd with whom to jest freely, or into whose ear 1 1
breathe a familiar sigh. Therefore I wait for you, I long \
you, I even uige on you to come ; for I have many amde "
many pressing cares, of which I think, tf I once had your i
to listen to me, I cotild unburden myself in the conver
of a single walk. And of my private azmeties, inde
shall conceal all the stings and vexations, and not trust 1
to this letter and an unknown letter-carrier. These, ho we
—for I don't want you to be made too anxious — are
very painful : yet they are persistent and worrying, and
not put to rest by the advice or conversation of any frie
But in regard to the Republic I have still the same con
and purpose, though it has again and again of its own 1
eluded treatment-^ For should I put briefly what has occur:
since you left^ you would certainly exclaim that the Ron
, empire cannot be maintained much longer. Well, after yo

* Reading (mainly with Schutz) animus prasens et vohmfas^ tatk
4Ham atqtu etiam ipta medicinam refugit. The verb re/ugtt is v
doufetfiil, but it gives nearly the sense required, Cicero is leady to 3
Hi brave and active as before, but the state will not do its part It has^i
initance, blundered in the matter of the law against judicial comip*^
The senate offended the equites by proposing it, and yet did not <
the law* I think animus and voluntas must refer to Cicero, noti
J femte, to which in his present humour he would not attribute them*

TO ATTICUS

51

ire oar first scene, I think, was the appearance of the
i scandal, in which having, as 1 thought, got an oppor-
>f pruning licentiousness and keeping our young men
bounds, I exerted myself to the utmost, and lavished
resources of my intellect and genius, not from dislike to
ridual, hut from the hope of not merely correcting, but
pletely curing the state. The Republic received a
g blow when this jury was won over by money and
;)ortunity of debauchery. See what has followed !
e had a consul inflicted upon us, whom none except
psophers can look at without a sigh. What a blow
! Though a decree of the senate has been passed
pribery and the corruption of juries, no law has been
; the senate has been harassed to death, the Roman
; alienated. So that one year has undermined two
Bes of the Republic, which owed their existence to me,
t alone ; for it has at once destroyed the prestige of
late and broken up the harmony of the orders. And
Iter this precious year 1 It was inaugurated by the
rion of the annual rites of luventas ; ' for Memmius
d M. Lucullus's wife in some rites of his own \ Our
lus, being annoyed at that, divorced his wife. Yet the
mn shepherd had only injured Menelaus ; our Roman
f r Agamemnon as proper an object of injury

^ .■, Next there is a certain tribune named

lius^ whom you, perhaps, do not even know— and
by know him, for he is of your tribe, and his father
to distribute money to your tribesmen — this
to transfer P. Clodius to the plebs, and is
proposing a law to authorize the whole people to
"" iius*s affair in the campus,^ I have given him

>le «f Tuvcntas was vowed by M. Livius after the bnttle of

(b*C. 207), and dedicated in R.c, 191 by C, Licinius

imes Tx-incr established on the anniversary of its dedication

r^ 36). It is suggested, therefore, that some of the

d at these garner, but on this occasion refused,

one by C. Memmius, who was cunile aedile.

nd Menelaus Cicero means Lucius and Marcus

jrjriiiitj Memmius had, as tribune in B,c. 66-65, opposed in

[ for • tfiumph, the latter he has now injured in the person

I who Wis mi iuris was properly adopted before the comitia

p

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 60, .

a characteristic reception in the senate, but he is tl
thickest-skinned fellow in the world Metellus is an exc<
lent consul, and much attached to me, but he has lowef(
his influence by promulgating (though only for formes sak
an identical bill about Clodius. But the son of Aulus,' Gc
in heaven ! What a cowardly and spiritless fellow for
soldier ! How well he deserves to be exposed, as he is, dl
after day to the abuse of Palicanus ! * Farther, an agraril
law has been promulgated by Flavius, a poor productic
enough, almost identical with that of Plotius. But meaj
while a genuine statesman is not to be found, even "in
dream." The man who could be one, my friend Pompey-
for such he is, as I would have you know — defends h
twopenny embroidered toga^ by saying nothing. Crassi
never risks his popularity by a word. The others you kno
without my telling you. They are such fools that they seei
to expect that, though the Republic is lost, their fish-ponc
will be safe. There is one man who does take some troubk
but rather, as it seems to me, with consistency and honesq
than with either prudence or ability— Cato. He has
for the last three months worrying those unhappy /w^/k
who were formerly devoted to him, and refuses to aJlow.
an answer being given them by the senate. And so we
forced to suspend all decrees on other subjects until
publicani have got their answer. For the same
suppose even the business of the foreign embassies will
postponed. You now understand in what stormy wata
are : and as from what I have written to you in such
terms you have a view also of what I have not written,
back to me, for it is time you did. And though the state
affairs to which I invite you is one to be avoided,

curicUa, now represented by thirty lictors. What Herennius pr<
was that it should take place by a regular iex^ passed by the i
tributa. The object apparently was to avoid the necessity 1
presence of a pontifex and augur, which was required at the i
curiata. The concurrent law by the consul would come \xk
comitia centuriata. The adopter was P, Fonteius, a very youngi
^ L. Afranius, the other consul.

' M. Lollius PalicanuB, *'a mere mob orator*' {Brutus^ § «»3|
' The io^a picta of a triumphator, which Pompey, by sp
was authorized to wear at the games. Cicero u^es the co&te
ditmnutivCi (aguia.

ikdSi

mm^

19

TO ATTICUS

S3

Mue for me so far prevail, as to induce you to come
pven in these vexatious circumstances. For the rest
take care that due warning is given, and a notice put
^ places, to prevent you being entered on the census
ent; and to get put on the census just before tlie
en is the mark of your true man of business.^ So let
you at the earliest possible moment. Farewell.
January in the Consulship of Q, Metellus and L.

XXIV (A I, 19)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)
Rome, 15 March

I^ T

Wnox onlv if I had as much leisure as you, but also if I

fe ' tters as short as yours usually are, that I should

y a and be much the more regular in writing.

feet, it is only one more item in an immense and

cdvable amount of business, that I allow no letter to

you from me without its containing some definite

of events and the reflexions arising from it. And in

J to you, as a lover of your country, my first subject will

llybe the state of the Republic; next, as I am the nearest

erf your affection, I will also write about myself, and

ft what I think you will not be indisposed to know.

ten, in public affairs for the moment the chief subject

is the disturbance in Gaul. For the ^^dui^ — " our

^* — have recently fought a losing battle, and the

Mie undoubtedly in anns and making raids uponiour

be absent from the census without excuse rendered a man liable
Cicero will therefore put up notices in At ticus's various
\tsi or residence of his intention to appear in due course.
at the end of the period was, it seems, in the case of
mess, advisable, that he might be rated at the actual
property, no more or less,

title given to the ^Edui on their application for allianoei
I 33.

54

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 60, y«T. 4

province,^ The senate has decreed that the two consul!
should draw lots for the Gauls, that a levy should be held, aJ
exemptions from service be suspended, and legates with fill
powers be sent to visit the states in Gaul, and see that the]
do not join the Helvetii. The legates are Quintus Metellii
Creticus,* L. Flaccus," and lastly— a case of " rich unguen
on lentils *'—Leotulus, son of Clodianus.* And while 01
this subject I cannot omit mentioning that when among tin
consulars my name was the first to come up in the
a full meeting of the senate declared with one voice
must be kept in the city. The same occurred to P(
after me ; so that we two appeared to be kept at hoi
pledges of the safety of the Republic Why should I li
for the ** bravos '^ of others when I get these compliraj
home ? Well, the state of affairs in the city is as fol
The agrarian law is being vehemently pushed by the
Flavius, with the support of Pompey, but it has
popular about it except its supporter. From this lai
with the full assent of a public meeting, proposed to
all clauses which adversely afifected private rights. I
posed to except from its operation such public land as
been so in the consulship of P. Mucius and L. Calpumiu^
I proposed to confirm the titles of holders of those Dr
whom SuUa had actually assigned lands. I proposed tt^
retain the men of Volaterrse and Arretium — whose \am*

' The migraiion of the Helvelii did not actually begin till Ttr. wl
CiEsar tells us in Lhe first book of his CommefUaries how he '

^ Consul B.C. 69, superseded in Crete by Pompey B.c. 65, 1 1
B.C. 63.

' Praetor B.C. 63, defended by Cicero in an extant oration.

* Cn. Cornelius Lentulus Clodianus, consul in B.C. 72. Cicero \
the name Lentulus from iens (pulse, ^ao/), and quotes a Greek prow
for things incongruous. See Athenseus, 160 (from the Nea *'
Sopater) ;

* B.C- 133, the yecLT before the agrarian law of Tiberius GraccW^
The law of Gracchus had not touched the public land in Canipania (U i
old territory of Capua). The object of this clause ^wliich appd^'J
repeatedly in those of B.C. 120 and iii, see Bruns, FonUs Juris ^ p. 7^1
is to confine the allotment of ager puhlkus to such land as had becoiBt||
to subsequently, i.e., to land made '* public" principally by the COrJ
fiscations of Sulla.

t9

TO ATTICUS

5S

bad declared forfeited but had not allotted — ^in their

3gs. There was only one section in the bill that I did

5t propose to omit, namely, that land should be purchased

|th this money from abroad, the proceeds of the new

3ues for the next five years/ But to this whole agrarian

Bme the senate was opposed, suspecting that some novel

for Pompey was aimed at* Pompey, indeed, had set

; on getting the law passed. I, however, with the full

fral of the applicants for land, maintained the holdings

^all private owners — for, as you know, the landed gentry

the bulk of our party's forces^ — while I nevertheless

ied the people and Pompey (for I wanted to do that

[>) by the purchase clause j for^ if that was put on a sound

[>tingt 1 thought that two advantages would accrue— the

gs might be drawn from the city, and the deserted

onions of Italy be repeopled. But this whole business

interrupted by the war, and has cooled off. Metellus

L an exceedingly good consul, and much attached to me»

pother one is such a ninny that he clearly doesn^t know

I do with bis purchase.^ This is all my public news,

I you regard as touching on public affairs the fact that

in Herennius, a tribune, and a fellow tribesman of

-a fellow as unprincipled as he is needy — has now

making frequent proposals for transferring P. Clodius

I the plebs ; he is vetoed by many of his colleagues. That

t really, I think, all the public news,
For mj part, ever since I won what I may call the splendid
d immortal glory of the famous fifth of December ^ (though
was accompanied by the jealousy and hostility of many), I
.ve never ceased to play my part in the Republic in the
mme lofty spirit, and to maintain the position I then in-
aogmated and took upon myself. But when, first, by the
Jcqiotial of Clodius I clearly perceived the insecurity and
fotten state of the law courts; and, secondly, when I saw that
jjL took so little to alienate my friends the publicani from the
ft£e--Hhough with me personally they had no quarrel;

■^ TiMt li* be [Proposed to hypotbecate the vectigalta from the new
S formed by Pompey in the East for five years.
coosnlship. The bxibery at Afranius's election is asserted tn
fcXXL

r dfty Oti the execution of the Catilinsuian conspirators.

$6

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX, 60, MT, 4»

and, thirdly, that the rich (I mean joar fneni& the f.fh-
breeders) did not disguise their jealousy of me ^ tho u^Vr I
moaif, ' ' jt for sooae greater sectmty and stronger support,
Bo^ I vith, I have brought the man who had been too

Bng silent on my achievements, Pompey himself, to such a
fraTne of mind as not once only in the senate, but many times
-^ny words, to ascribe to me the preservation of this
nd of the world. And this was not so important to
rnc — for those transactions are neither so obscure as to need
testimony, nor so dubious as to need commendation — as to
the Republic ; for there were certain persons base enough to
think that some misunderstanding would arise between me
and Pompey from a difference of opinion on these measures.
With him I have united myself in such close intimacy that both
of us can by this union be better fortified in his own views, and
'more secure in his pplitical position. However, the dislike
of the licentious dandies, which had been roused against
me, has been so far softened by a conciliatory manner on
my part, that they all combine to show me marked attention.
In fine, while avoiding churlishness to anyone, I do not
curry favour with the populace or relax any principle ; but
my whole course of conduct is so carefully regulated, that,
while exhibiting an estarople of firmness to the Republic, in
my own private concerns — In view of the instability of the
loyalists, the hostility of the disaffected, and the hatred of
the disloyal towards me — I employ a certain caution and
circumspection, and do not allow myselfj after all, to be in-
volved in these new friendships so far but that the famous
refrain of the cunning Sicilian frequently sounds in my ears^

" Ke«p sober and distrust ; these wisdom's sinews ! "

Of my course and way of life, therefore, you see, I th
what may be called a sketch or outline. Of your own bu
ness, however, you frequently write to me, but I cannot i
the moment supply the remedy you require. For
decree of the senate was passed with the greatest unanic
on the part of the rank and file,'' though without the supp
of any of us consulars. For as to your seeing my name j

^ EpichBJTOUs, twice quoted by Polybias, xviii. 40; xxxL 21.
foi ^if tva& awmruVf ilpBpa ravra rwv ^pfvmv*
' FtdfoHi were probably those senators who had not held

A 1,19

TO ATTICUS

57

^

the foot of the decree, you can ascertain from the decree
itself that the subject put to the vote at the time was a
difiereDt one, and that this clause about " free peoples " was
fidded without good reason. It was done by P. Servilius the
younger,^ who delivered his vote among the last, but it
cannot be altered after such an interval of time. Accord-
iDgly,(the meetings, which at first were crowded, have long
c^sed to be held. If you have been able, notwithstanding,
by your insinuating address to get a trifle of money out of
the Sicyonians, I wish you would let me know.* I h ave
sent jou an account of my consulship written in Greek. If
tEere is anj^hing in it which to a genuine Attic like yourself
seems to be un-Greek or imscholaily, I shall not say as
Lucullus said to you (at Panhormus, was it not ?) about his
own history, that he had interspersed certain barbarisms
and solecisms for the express purpose of proving that it was
the work of a Roman. No, if there is anything of that sort in
my book, it will be without my knowledge and against my
win. \Vhen I have finished the Latin version I wiil send it
to you f and thirdly, you may expect a poem on the subject,
for 1 would not have any method of celebrating my praise
omitted by myself. In this regard pray do not quote
**Who will praise his sire? " * For if there is anything in the
world to be preferred to this, let it receive its due meed of
praise, and I mine of blame for not selecting another theme
for my praise. However, what I write is not panegyric but
history. My brother Quintus clears himself to me in a letter,
and asserts that he has never said a disparaging word of you

office. They were not different from the other senators in point of
legal rights, but as the ex-magistrates were asked for their sententia
fi«t, they seldom had time to do anything hut signify by word their
ftssent to one or other motion, or to cross over to the person whom they
intended to support.

* P, Servilius Vatia Isauricus, son of the conqueror of the Isaurians.
As he had not yet been pnetor, he would be called on after the am^
iuiares and prmtorii. He then moved a new clause to the decree, and
auiied it*

■ The decree apparently prevented the recovery of debts from a
tsbtra ctvitas in the Roman courts. Atticus would therefore have to
tnist to the regard of the Sicyonians for their credit.

' A son must be hard up for something to say for himself if he is always
birpsng on his father ^s reputation ; and so must I, if t have nothing
but my consulship. That seems the otdy point in the quotation. I do

58

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C» 60, J£X.

to anyone. But this we must discuss face to face with th
greatest care and earnestness : only do come to see me again
at last ! This Cossinius, to whom I intrust my letter, seems
to me a very good fellow, steady, devoted to you, and
exactly the sort of man which your letter to me had de-
scribed.
15 March.

XXV (A I, 20)
TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

ROME, 13 MAY

On my return to Rome from my villa at Pompeii
1 2th of May, our friend Cincius handed me your letter dated
13th February. It is this letter of yours which I will now
proceed to answer. And first let me say how glad I am that
you have fully understood my appreciation of you;^ and
next how excessively rejoiced I am that you have been so
extremely reasonable in regard to those particulars in which
you thought* that I and mine had behaved unkindly ^ or
with insufficient consideration for your feelings : and this I
regard as a proof of no common affectionj and of the most
excellent judgment and wisdom. Wherefore, since you have
written to me in a tone so delightful, considerate, friendly
and kindj that I not only have no call to press you any
farther, but can never even hope to meet from you or any
other man with so much gentleness and good nature, I
think the very best course I can pursue is not to say another
word on the subject in my letters. When we meet, if the
occasion should arise, we will discuss it together.

As to what you say about politics, your suggestions indeed

not feel that there is any reference to praise of hh father in Cicero's own
poem. There are two versions of the proverb :

TiQ vaHp* aivrjffii tl pt^ ttutoiaiiAorEQ viol

and
TiQ TTdTtp* flttv^fff t ft fJtij iitdaijiove^ wio*.

* Contained in Letter XXII. pp. 46-47.

* Reading (M for mihi^ as Prof Tyrrell suggests.

TO ATTICUS 59

ire both affectionate and wise, and the course you suggest
does not differ substantially from my own policy — for I must
neither budge an inch from the position imposed upon me
by my rank, nor must I without forces of my own enter the
lilies of another, while that other, whom you mention in your
letter, has nothing large-minded about him, nothing lofty,
nothing which is not abject and time-serving. However, the
course I took was, after all, perhaps not ill-calculated for se-
curing the tranquillity of my own life ; but, by heaven, I did
greater service to the Republic than, by suppressing the
attacks of the disloyal, I did to myself, when I brought con-
viction home to the wavering mind of a man of the most
splendid fortune, influence and popularity, and induced him
to disappoint the disloyal and praise my acts. Now if I had
been forced to sacrifice consistency in this transaction, I
should not have thought anything worth that price ; but the
fact is that I have so worked the whole business, that I did not
seem to be less consistent from my complacency to him, but
that he appeared to gain in character by his approbation of
rae. In everything else I am so acting, and shall continue so
to act, as to prevent my seeming to have done what I did do
by mere chance. My friends the loyaUsts, the men at whom
you hint, and that " Sparta " which you say has fallen to my
lot,* I will not only never desert, but even if I am deserted
by her, I shall still stand by my ancient creed. However,
please consider this, that since the death of Catulus I am
holding this road for the loyalists without any garrison or
company. For as Rhinton, I think, says :

•*Some are stark naught, and some care not at all." ^

However, how our friends the fish-breeders ^ envy me I will
write you word another rime, or will reserve it till we meet
Bot from the senate-house nothing shall ever tear me : either
because that course is the right one, or because it is most to-
my interests, or because I am far from being dissatisfied with
the estimation in which I am held by the senate.

^ 'SwdffTffv ikaxtc Kiivriv KOfffiiX. " Sparta is your lot, do it credit," a.
IiDc of Euripides which had become proverbial-

* «l fiky Trap' ovdiv ii&i, roig B* ovSfv fitXiu Rhintotif a dramatist^
ikta II.C. 320* 2$o (of Tarentum or Syracuse).

• See pp, s^* S«, 65.

As to the Sicyonians, as I wrote to you before/ there is
not much to be hoped for in the senate. For there is no one
now to lay a complaint before it Therefore, if you are
waiting for that, you will find it a tedious business. Fight
some other way if you can. At the time the decree was passed
no one noticed who would be affected by it, and besides the
rank and file of the senators voted in a great hurry for that
clause. For cancelling the senatorial decree the time is not
yet ripe, because there are none to complain of it, and
because also many are glad to have it so, some from spite,
some from a notion of its equity. Your friend Metellus is
an admirable consul r I have only one fault to find with
him — he doesn't receive the news from Gaul of the restora-
tion of peace with much pleasure. He wants a triumph, I
suppose. I could have wished a little less of that sort of
thing : in other respects he is splendid. But the son of Aulus
behaves in such a way, that his consulship is not a consul-
ship but a stigma on our friend Magnus. Of my writings
I send you my consulship in Greek completed. I have
handed that book to L. Cossinius, My Latin works I think
you Eke,' but as a Greek you envy this Greek book. If others
write treatises on the subject I will send them to you, but I
assure you that, as soon as they have read mine, some how
or other they become slack. To return to my own afiairs,
L. Papirius Paetus, an excellent man and an admirer of mine,
has presented me with the books left him by Servius Claudius,
As your friend Cincius told me that I could take them without
breaking the /ex Cincia^ I told him that I should have great
pleasure in accepting them, if he brought them to Italy,
"VVTierefore, as you love me, as you know that I love you, do
try by means of friends, clients, guests, or even your freedmen
or slaves, to prevent the loss of a single leaf. For I am in
urgent need of the Greek books which I suspect, and of the
Latin books which I know, that he left : and more and more
every day I find repose in such studies every moment left to
me from my labours in the forum. You will, I say, do me a
very great favour, if you will be as zealous in this matter as
you ever are in matters in which you suppose me to fed

I See p. 57.

» The Ux Cincia (b.c. 204) forbade the taking of presents for acting^
ms advocate in law courts.

i

A]|3q; lU t

TO ATTICUS

6l

strongly ; and Psetus's own affairs I recommend to your kind-
ness, for which he thanks you extremely » A prompt visit firora
yoarself is a thing which I do not merely ask for I advise it

^

XXVI (A II, I)

TO ATTICUS (IN GREECE)

Rome, June

Ok the ist of June, as I was on my way to Antium, and
eagerly getting out of the way of M. MeteOus's gladiators^
your boy met me, and delivered to me a letter from you
and a history of my consulship written in Greek. ^ This
Tnadc me glad that I had some time before delivered to L.
Cossinius a book, also written in Greek, on the same subject,
to take to you. For if I had read yours first you might have
said that X had pilfered from you. Although your essay
(which I have read with pleasure) seemed to me just a trifle
rough and bald, yet its very neglect of ornament is an orna-
ment in itself, as women were once thought to have the best
perfume who used none. My book, on the other hand, has
exhausted the whole of Isocrates's unguent case, and all
the paint-boxes of his pupils, and even Aristotle's colours.
This, as you tell me in another letter, you glanced over at
ra, and afterwards I suppose received it from Cos-
I should not have ventured to send it to you until
I had slowly and fastidiously revised it. However, Posi-
donius, in his letter of acknowledgment from Rhodes, says
thai as he read my memoir, which I had sent him with a
new to his writing on the same subject with more eiabora-
tion^ he was not only not incited to write, but absolutely
made afraid to do so. In a word, I have routed the Greeks*
Accordingly, as a general rule, those who were pressing me
for material to work up, have now ceased to bother me.
Pray, if you like the book, see to there being copies at

• Aujcas seems to have seen a copy bdongiiig to some one eke at
CoffuL Cicero explams that be had kept back Atticus's copy for revision.

62

CICERO S LETTERS

B.C. 60, JET.

Athens and other Greek towns ; ' for it may possibly throw ^
some lustre on my actions. As for my poor speeches, I wi]
send you both those you ask for and some more also, since
what I write to satisfy the studious youth finds favour, id
seems, with you also, [For it suited my purpose* — both
because it was in his Philippics that your fellow citizen
Demosthenes gained his reputation, and because it wa
by withdrawing from the mere controversial and forensic
style of oratory that he acquired the character of a serious"
politician— to see that I too should have speeches that
may properly be called consular. Of these are, first, one "
delivered on the ist of January in the senate, a second
to the people on the agrarian law, a third on Otho,
fourth for Rabirius, a fifth on the Sons of the Proscribed
a sixth when I declined a province in public meeting,
seventh when I allowed CatiUne to escape, which I de
livered the day after Catiline fled, a ninth in public meet-
ing on the day that the Allobroges made their revelation,
a tenth in the senate on the 5th of December. There
are also two short ones, which may be called fragments,
on the agrarian law. This whole cycle I will see that
you have. And since you hke my writings as well as
my actions, from these same rolls you will learn both what I
have done and what I have said^or you should not have
asked for them, for I did not make you an offer of thera,]

You ask me why 1 urge you to come home, and at the
same time you intimate that yon are hampered by busines
affairs, and yet say that you will nevertheless hasten back, no
only if it is needful, but even if I desire it. Well, there!
is certainly no absolute necessity, yet I do think you might
plan the periods of your tour somewhat more conveniently.
Your absence is too prolonged, especially as you are in a
neighbouring country, while yet I cannot enjoy your society,!

* Cicero evidently inleods Atticus to act as a publisher. His lu
will make copies. See p. 32, note I,

" The passage in brackets is believed by some, not on very good'
grounds, to be spurious. Otho is L. Rosci^is Otho, the author of the law
as to the seats in the theatre for the equltes. The "proscribed" are
those proscribed by Sulla, their sons being forbidden to hold office, a dis-
ability which Cicero malutaiaed foi fear of civil distuibancea. See in
Fis. §§ 4'S-

Ml, 1

TO ATTICUS

63

Or you mine. For the present there is peace, but if my young
fiend Pulcher's ^ madness had found means to advance a little
iher, I should certainly have been summoning you from
r present sojourn. But Metellus is offering him a splendid
sition and will continue to do so. Need I say more ?
le is a truly patriotic consul and, as I have ever thought,
fttur^y an honest man. That person, however, makes no
but avowedly desires to be elected tribune. But
I the matter was mooted in the senate, I cut the fellow to
beces, and taunted him with his changeableness in seeking
fe tribuneship at Rome after having given out at Hera, in
(icily/ that he was a candidate for the sedileship ; and went
I to say that we needn^t much trouble ourselves, for that
he would not be permitted to ruin the Republic any more as
a plebeian, than patricians like him had been allowed to do
so in my consulship. Presently, on his saying that he had
completed the journey from the straits in seven days, and
that it was impossible for anyone to have gone out to meet
hizQ, and that he had entered the city by night,^ and making
|l great parade of this in a public meeting, I remarked that that
t nothing new for him : seven days from Sicily to Rome,
liree hours from Rome to Interamna 1 * Entered by night, did
t^ so he did before ! No one went to meet him ? neither did
on the other occasion, exactly when it should have
I doi>e I In short, I bring our young upstart to his bear-
kkgS| HOC only by a set and serious speech, but also by repartees
of this sort. Accordingly, I have come now to rally him and
fsSt with him in quite a familiar manner. For instance, when
»e were escorting a candidate, he asked me " whether I had
been accustomed to secure Sicilians places at the gladiatorial
shows?'* «No," said I. "Well, I intend to start the
said he, "as their new patron; but my sister,*

fUtis, t\£,, P. Clodius Pulcher, the diminutive of contempt.
Where he had been as quaestor. Hera is said to be another name
Brbl^ Some read ken, " only yesterday.**

kIios is shewing off his modesty. It was usual for persons re-
from a province to send messengers in front, and to travel
ely, that their friends mi^ht pay them the compliment of going
ma 10 mcei tbenu Entering the city after nightfall was another method
of atdifi^ m pnblic reception. See Suet. Aug, 55.
' See pt S7* "o^« 3-
' CMlm wife of the consul Metellu& See p» 22, note

64

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX. 60, iET. 46

who has the control of such a large part of the consi
space, wont give me more than a single foot." **r
grumble," said I, ** about one of your sister's feet; you 1
lift the other also." A jest, you will say, unbecoming
consular. I confess it, but I detest that woman — ^so
worthy of a consul. For

" A shrew she is and with ber husband Jars,

and not only with Metellus, but also with Fabius,* 1
she is annoyed at their interference in this business,*
ask about the agrarian law : it has completely lost all inten
I think » You rather chide me, though gently, about myl
timacy with Pompey, I would not have you think
I have made friends with him for my own protection ;
things had come to such a pass that, if by any chanc
had quarrelled, there would inevitably have been vio^
dissensions in the state. And in taking precautions
making provision against that, I by no means swer
from my well-known loyalist policyj but my object wa
make him more of a loyalist and induce him to
somewhat of his time-serving vacillation : and he, let
assure you, now speaks in much higher terms of my achid
ments (against which many had tried to incite him) tha
his own. He testifies that while he served the state '
I preserved it. What advantage to me his doing so is I do not
know, it certainly is good for the state. What if I even make*
better citizen of Caesar," who has now the wind full in his sails
— am I doing so poor a service to the Republic ? Farther-
more, if there was no one to envy me, if all, as they ought to I
were my supporters, nevertheless a preference should still 1
given to a treatment that would core the diseased parts of l'
state, rather than to the use of the knife. As it is, howe?
since the knighdiood, which I once stationed on the sloped

' We don't know who this is ; probably a lover of Clodia*s.

" /.e.i in the business of her brother Clodius's attempt to get the ^^
tribimeship. [^

' Though Caesar has been mentioned before in regard to his can- ^
didatare for the consulship, and in connexion with the Clodius case,
this is the first reference to him as a statesman. He is on the eve 01 <g
his return from Spain^ and already is giving indication of his coatitiaB *
with Fompey. His military success in Spain tiist clearly demonstrated ,
his importance*

lU 1

TO ATTICUS

65

^

the Capitoline,^ with you as their standard-bearer and leader »
luis deserted the senate, and since our leading men think
themselves in a seventh heaven ^ if there are bearded mullets
ID their fish-ponds that will come to hand for food, and
neglect everything else, do not you think that I am doing
DO mean service if I secure that those who have the power,
should not have the will, to do any harm ? As for our friend
Cato, you do not love him more than I do : but after all, with
the very best intentions and the most absolute honesty, he
sometimes does harm to the RepubUc. He speaks and votes
as though he were in the Republic of Plato, not in the scum
of Romulus. What could be fairer than that a man should
be brought to trial who has taken a bribe for his verdict ?
Cato voted for this : the senate agreed with him. The equites
dedared war on the senate, not on me, for I voted against it.
What could be a greater piece of impudence than the publican i
renouncing the obligations of their contract ? Yet for the
sake of keeping the friendship of the order it was necessary
to submit to the loss. Cato resisted and carried his point.
Accordingly, though we have now had the spectacle of a
consul thrown into prison,' of riots again and again stirred up,
Dot one of those moved a finger to help, with whose support
I and the consuls that immediately followed me were ac-
customed to defend the Republic. " Well, but,^^ say you,
"are we to pay them for their support ?" What are we to
do if we can't get it on any other terms ? Are we to be
slaves to freedmen or even slaves ? But, as you say, asses
4i seneux! Favonius' carried my tribe with better credit
than his own ; he lost that of Lucceius. His accusation of
Nasica * was not creditable, but was conducted with modera-
tion : he spoke so badly that he appeared when in Rhodes
to have ground at the mills more than at the lessons of

' Dunag the ineetixig of the senate at the time of the Catilinarian
pjospifacy (2 Fhii, § 10).

* The consul Caecilius Metellus was imprisoned by the tribune Flavius
(or le&Lsting his land law (Dio, xxxviL 50).

* M. Favonius, an extreme Optimate. Ilh Catonis ^multn (Suet.
^H* '3)' He had a bitter tongue, but a faithful heart (F*ltit. Potnp. 60,
73: Veil- ii. 73). Me did not get the pnetorshlp (which he was now
■^tog) till B,c. 49. He was executed aiter Phihppi {Dio, 47, 49^.

* P. Scipto Nasica Metellus Pius, the future father-in-law of Pompe/a
%ho{ot ibe praetQishipi was bdicted for ambiius hf F«voii-u&

1. F

m

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 60, /ET* i

Molon.* He was somewhat angry with me because I appeare
iur the defence : however, he is now a candidate aga'
on public grounds. I will write you word bow Lucceius ;
getting on when I have seen Cassar, who will be heie in
couple of days. The injury done you by the Sicyonians ya
attribute to Cato and his imitator Servilius.'' Why ? did nd
that blow reach many excellent citizens? But since
senate has so determined, let us commend it, and not be ia^
minority of one.^ My ** Amaltheia " * is waiting and long
for you. My Tusculan and Pompeian properties please ;
immensely, except that they have overwhelmed me — me, 1
scourge of debt I — not exactly in Corinthian bronze, but il
the bronze which is current in the market." In Gaul I hop
peace is restored. My " Prognostics,'* * along with my po
speeches, expect shortly. Yet write and tell me what yc
ideas are as to returning. For Pomponia sent a message 1
me that you would be at Rome some time in July. Th
does not agree with your letter which you wrote to me abo^
your name being put on the census roll P^tus, as I ha?
already told you, has presented me with all books left by 1
brother. This gift of his depends upon your seeing to 1
with care. Pray, if you love me, take measures for the'
preservation and transmission to me. You could do me 1
greater favour, and I want the Latin books preserved wil^
as much care as the Greek. I shall look upon them
virtually a present from yourself. I have written to
tavius : "^ I had not said anything to him about you by wo
of mouth ; for I did not suppose that you carried on yoii
business in that province, or look upon you in the liglj
of general money-lender i but I have written, as id du
bound, with all seriousness.

^ ' AifoW^vio^ MoX^v of Alabantla taught rhetoric at Rhodes. Cice
had himself attended his lectures* He puna on the name Molon and
m&la^ ** mill at which slaves worked.'*

^ See pp. 57, 60.

^ Reading ducesshnibus^ ** divisions in the senate," with Mantittus
and Tyirell, not dissintionibus ; and deinde m, but not si for si.

* His studyj which be playfully calls by this name^ in imitation of that
of Atticus, See p* 30.

» See Letter XV, p. 25,

• His translation of the Prajr/mstkr of Ath^^ms*
^ Gaius Octavius, father of Augustus, governor of Macedonia,

AHii

TO ATTICUS

67

XXVII (A II. 2)

TO ATTICUS (ON HIS WAY TO ROME)

TuscuLUM (December)

TaK£ care of my dear nephew Cicero, I beg of you. I seem
to share his illness. I am engaged on the ** Constitution of
Pellene," and, by heaven, have piled up a huge heap of
iDicaearchus at my feet/ What a great man ! You may
Tleam much more from him than from Procilius. His " Con-
"ttitotion of Corinth'' and "Constitution of Athens*' I have,
1 1 think, at Rome. Upon my word, you will say, if you read
[ these, ** What a remarkable man ! '* H erodes, if he had any
would have read him rather than write a single letter
Qself' He has attacked me by letter ; with you I see he
^come to close quarters, I would have joined a con-
rather than resisted one, if I had thought that I
iJd have to listen to him as my reward. As to Lollius,
pu must be mad. As to the wine, I think you are right'
LBiit look herel Don't you see that the Kalends are ap-
ling, and no Antonius?* That the jury is being
died ? For so they send me word. That Nigidius "
as in public meeting that he will personally cite any
who does not appear? However, I should be glad if
Fwouid write me word whether you have heard anything
P^bout the return of Antonius ; and since you don't mean to
\ come here, dine with me in any case on the 29th, Mind you
I do this, and take care of your health.

The roll being unwound as he read and piled on the ground.
^ — Saarchus of Meisene, a contemporary of Aristotle, wrote on ** Con-
bteiQQi'' amcmg other things, Procilius seems also to have written on

* Hefode% a teacher at Athens, afterwards tutor to young Cicero,
licetniB to have written on Cicero's consulship.

• T^ev^ remarks refer to something in Atticus^s letter.
' C rjias, about to he prosecuted for makstas on his return

Jius FlguliiSj a tribune (which dates the letter after the loth
[J. The tribunes had no right of summons (v<^a/r>), they
] f eriQnallj^ enlbice their commands.

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 60, vBT. i

XXVIII (A II, 3)

TO ATTICUS (ON HIS WAY TO ROME)

Rome (December)

' FmsT, I have good news for you, as I think. Valerius 1
been acquitted. Hortensius was his counsel. The verdic
is thought to have been a favour to Aulus's son; and
** Epicmtes," ^ I suspect, has been up to some mischief, I
didn't like his boots and his white leggings.* What it is I
shall know when you arrive. When you find fault with the
narrow windows, let me tell you that you are criticising the
Cyropsedeia.'' For when I made the same remark, Cyrus
used to answer that the views of the gardens through broad
lights were not so pleasant. For let a be the eye, fiy the
object seen, S and e the rays . . . you see the rest.* For if
sight resulted from the impact of images,^ the images would
be in great difficulties with a narrow entrance : but, as it is,
that " effusion " of rays gets on quite nicely. If you have
any other fault to find you won't get off without an answer,
unless it is something that can be put right without
expense.

I now come to January and my ** political attitude,** ^

* "The Conqueror," z.^., Pompey. Atilus's son is L. A&anius.
' Z^,, his military get-up.

* Cynxs was Cicero's architect j Ms argument or theory he
Cyropjedeia, after Xenophou's book.

*' He supposes himself to be making a mathematical Sgure in <

8

iS

* The theory of sight held by Democritus, deuouncetl as tinph
aophical by Plutftrch {Tifmfh&n^ Introd.).

*n,3

TO ATTICUS

69

which, after the manner of the Socratics, I shall put the two

sides ; at the end, however, as they were wont to do, the one

which I approve* It is, indeed, a matter for profound

reflexion. For I must either firmly oppose the agrarian

law—which will involve a certain struggle, but a struggle

foil of glory — or 1 must remain altogether passive, which is

about equivalent to retiring to Solonium ^ or Antium ; or,

lastly, I must actually assist the bill, which I am told Caesar

folly expects from me without any doubt. For Cornelius has

been with me (I mean Cornelius Balbus,^ Caesar's intimate),

and solemnly assured me that he meant to avail himself of

iDy advice and Pompey's in everything, and intended to

ejideavour to reconcile Crassus with Pompey.^ In this

last course there are the following advantages : a very close

union with Fompey, and, if I choose, with Cassar also ; a

^ itconctliation with ray political enemies, peace with the

Qon herd, ease for my old age. But the conclusion of

i third book of my own poem has a strong hold on me :

■* Meanwhile the tenor of thy youth's first spring,
Which still as consul thou with all thy soul
And all thy manhood heldest, see thou keep,
And swell the chorus of all good men's praise." *

These verses Calliope herself dictated to me in that book,
which contains much written in an ** aristocratic " spirit,
and I cannot, therefore, doubt that I shall always hold that

'* The best of omens is our country's cause." *

ISut let UB reserve all this for our walks during the Com-

* App&jrently a viUa in the Sol&nius ager, near Lanuvium.

• The Cornelius Balbus of Gades, whose citizenship Cicero defended
LC j6 (consul D.C. 40). He was Caesar's close friend and agent,

' Cicero was apparently not behind the scenes. The coalition with
tep<7 certainly, and with Crassus probably, had been already made
and tbe temis s^eed upon soon after the elections. If Cicero after-
mvds dcsoTvered this it must have shewn him how little he could trust
Ptampcy's show of friendship and Csesar*s candour, Caesar desired
Cicer>'$ private friendship and public acquiescence, but was prepared
1» do vtthout them.

* ¥wom Cicero's Latin poem on his consulship.

xii. 243).

fo

CICERO'S LETTERS

B<C. 60, .£T.

pitalia/ Remember the day before the Compitalia* I '
order the bath to be heated, and Terentia is going to inv
Ponoponia, We will add your mother to the party. Pies
bring me Theophrastus de AmbiHone from my brothe
library.

XXIX (Q FR I, I)

Quintus Ocero was praetor in B.C. 62, In B.C. 61 (March) he went out
to ** Asia *^ as propt^tor ; his first year of office would be up in March,
B.C. 60, but his governorship was, as was very comnion, extended tiU
March, B.C* 59. Towards the end of B.C. 60 the senate seems to have
arranged not to appoint his successor, that is^ he would be left in office
til! about March, B.C. 58. It is in view of this third year of office that
Cicero writes this essay-letter to him on the duties of a provincial
governor. Apparently Quintus had faults of temper which had caused
some scandals to reach Rome. We have seen how he was one of the
few who managed to quarrel with Atticus; and in B.C. 48 we shall fiod
how fiercely he resented the exercise of his brother's influence which
had led him to take the losing side, which hrom his attachment to
Caesar he may have been half inclined to think the wrong side. His
constant squabbles with his wife (though the fault was evidently in
great part hers) also go towards forming our conclusion about him that»
with some ability and honesty, he was un peu diffiHle.

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN ASIA)

Rome (December)

I. Though I have no doubt that many messengers,
even common nimour, with its usual speed, will anticipate t
letter, and that you will already have heard from others that!
third year has been added to my loss and your labour, yetj
thought you ought to receive from me also the news of th
tiresome circumstance. For not in one, but in several 1
my previous letters, in spite of others having given up
idea in despair, I gave you hope of being able at
early date to quit your province, not only that I might

^ A country festival and general holiday. It was ^ferux concepHu
and therefore the exact day varied. But it was about the end of l'
year or beginning of the new year {in Pis. § 4 ; Aul. GelL x.
Ma€iob. S^* i. 4 ; ad AiL vii. 5 ; viL 7^ § 2).

iQfll,!

TO QUINTUS

71

llong as possible cheer you with a pleasurable belief, but also
^because I and the praetors took such pains in the matter,
, I felt no misgiving as to the possibility of its being
ged. As it is, since matters have so turned out that
&er the praetors by the weight of their influence, nor I
by my earnest efforts, have been able to prevail, it is eer-
ily difficult not to be annoyed, yet our minds, practised
^they are in conducting and supporting business of the
Bt gravity, ought not to be crushed or weakened by
on. And since men ought to feel most vexed at what
brought upon them by their own fault, it is I who
flight in this matter to be more ve^ed than you. For it is
the result of a fault on my part, against which you had pro-
tested both in conversation at the moment of your de-
piTtuie, and in letters since, that your successor was not
Ded last year. In this, while consulting for the interests
oar allies, and resisting the shameless conduct of some
tiants, and while seeking the increase of our reputation
&ur virtues, I acted unwisely, especially as I made it
ble for that second year to entail a third. And as I
the mistake to have been mine, it lies with your
om and kindness to remedy it, and to see that my im-
udence is turned to advantage by your careful perform-
of your duties. And truly, if you exert yourself in
very direction to earn men's good word, not with a view to
I others^ but henceforth to surpass yourself, if you rouse
[whole mind and your every thought and care to the
don of gaining a superior reputation in all respects,
me, one year added to your labour will bring us,
iCKir posterity also, a joy of many years' duration.
Core I begin by entreating you not to let your soul
and be cast down, nor to allow yourself to be over-
by the magnitude of the business as though by a
but, on the contrary, to stand upright and keep your
_ , or even advance to meet the flood of affairs. For
aire not administering a department of the state, in
fortune reigns supreme, but one in which a well-con-
policy and an attention to business are the most
ant things. But if I had seen you receiving the pro-
ngition of a command in a great and dangerous war, I
have trembled in spirit, because I should have

CICERO'S LETTERS

l,C, 60, XT,i

known that the dominion of fortune over us had been at the
same time prolonged. As it is, however, a department of
the state has been intrusted to you in which fortune occu-
pies no part, or, at any rate, an insignificant one, and which
appears to me to depend entirely on your virtue and self-
control We have no reason to fear, as far as I know, any
designs of our enemies, any actual fighting in the field, any
revolts of allies, any default in the tribute or in the supply
of com, any mutiny in the army : things which have very
often befallen the wisest of men in such a way, that they
have been no more able to get the better of the assault oif
fortune, than the best of pilots a violent tempest. You have
been granted profound peace, a dead calm : yet if the pilot
falls asleep, it may even so overwhelm him, though if he
keeps awake it may give him positive pleasure. For yoiu
province consists, in the first place, of allies of a race
which, of all the world, is the most civilized ; and, in the
second place, of citizens, who, either as being publkanu
are very closely connected with me, or, as being traders who
have made money, think that they owe the security of their
property to my consulship.

IL But it may be said that among even such men as
these there occur serious disputes, many wrongful acts are
committed, and hotly contested litigation is the result. As
though I ever thought that you had no trouble to contend
with ! I know that the trouble is exceedingly great, and
such as demands the very greatest prudence ; but remember
that it is prudence much more than fortune on which, in my
opinion, the result of your trouble depends. For what trouble
is it to govern those over whom you are set, if you do hot
govern yourself? That may be a great and difficult task to
others, and indeed it is most difficult : to you it has always
been the easiest thing in the world, and indeed ought to be
so, for your natural disposition is such that, even without dis-
cipline, it appears capable of self-control ; whereas a discipline
has, in fact, been applied that might educate the most faulty
of characters, But while you resist, as you do, money, pleasure,
and every kind of desire yourself, there will, I am to be told,
be a risk of your not being able to suppress some fraudulent
banker or some rather over-extortionate tax-collector ! For as
to the Greeks, they will think, as they behold the innocence of

fri-> ii

QFEI, I

TO QUINTUS

73

yoar life, that one of the heroes of their history, or a demigod
from heaveOj has come down into the province* And this I
say, not to induce you to act thusj but to make you glad
1^ you are acting or have acted so. It is a splendid thing
to have been three years in supreme power in Asia without
illowtng statue, picture, plate, n apery, slave, anyone's good
looks, or any offer of money— all of which are plentiful in
jour province — to cause you to swerve from the most abso-
hite honesty and purity of life. What can be imagined so
striking or so desirable as that a virtue, a command over
the passions, a self-control such as yours, are not remaining
in darkness and obscurity, but have been set in the broad
daylight of Asia, before the eyes of a famous province, and
in the hearing of all nations and peoples ? That the in*
habitants are not being ruined by your progresses, drained
by your charges, agitated by your approach ? That there is
the liveliest joy, public and private, wheresoever you come,
the city regarding you as a protector and not a tyrant, the
piwate house as a guest and not a plunderer ?

III. But in these matters I am sure that mere experience
has by this time taught you that it is by no means sufficient
to have these virtues yourself, but that you must keep your
eyes open and vigilant, in order that in the guardianship of
yoor province you may be considered to vouch to the allies,
the citizens, and the state, not for yourself alone, but for all
(he subordinates of your government. However, you have
in the persons of your hgati men likely to have a regard for
Aeir own reputation. Of these in rank, position, and age
Tubero is first ; who, 1 think, particularly as he is a writer
of history, could select from his own Annals many whom he
would like and would be able to imitate. Alienus, again, is
ouis, as well in heart and affection, as in his conformity to
our principles. I need not speak of Gratidius : I am sure
that, while taking pains to preserve his own reputation, his
fraternal affection for us makes him take pains for ours also.^
Vouf quaestor is not of your own selection, but the one
ttsigned you by lot. He is bound both to act with pro-

' Of the persons mentioned, L. .4i]lius Tubero is elsewhere praised as
a fnan ot learning {pro Lig. § lo) ; A. Alienus (prsetor BX. 49) was a
friend and correspondent j M. Gratidius is mentioned inpro Flacco^ § 49,
■iadiiig in a jadiciai capacity, and was perhaps a cousin of Cicero's.

74

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 60, XT, i

priety of his own accord, and to confoim to the policy and
principles which you lay down. But should any one of these
adopt a lower standard of conduct, you should tolerate suq
behaviour, if it goes no farther than a breach, in his priv
capacity, of the rules by which he was bound, but
if it goes to the extent of employing for gain the authori
which you granted him as a promotion. For 1 am ;
from thinking, especially since the moral sentiments
the day are so much inclined to excessive laxity and
seeking, that you should investigate every case of petty ]
conduct, and thoroughly examine every one of these persons ^
but that you should regulate your confidence by the
worthiness of its recipient. And among such persons you will
have to vouch for those whom the Republic has itself given
you as companions and assistants in public affairs, at l^st
within the limits which I have before laid down.

IV. In the case, however, of those of your personal staff
or official attendants whom you have yourself selected to be
about you — ^who are usually spoken of as a kind of prsetor't
cohort — we must vouch, not only for their acts, but even
for their words. But those you have with you are the sort
of men of whom you may easily be fond when they are acting
rightly, and whom you may very easily check when they shew
insufficient regard for your reputation. By these, when you
were raw to the work, your frank disposition might possibly
have been deceived — for the better a man is the less easily
does he suspect others of being bad — now, however, let this
third year witness an integrity as perfect as the two former,
but still more wary and vigilant. Listen to that only which
you are supposed to listen to ; don^t let your ears be open to
whispered falsehoods and interested suggestions. Don't let
your signet ring be a mere implement, but, as it were, your
second self: not the minister of another's will, but a witness
of your own. Let your marshal hold the rank which our
ancestors wished him to hold, who, looking upon this place as
not one of profit, but of labour and duty, scarcely ever con-
ferred it upon any but their freedmen, whom they indeed
controlled almost as absolutely as their slaves. Let the
lictor be the dispenser of your clemency, not his own j and
let the fasces and axes which they carry before you con*
stitute ensij^is rather of rank than of power. Let it, in fact|

QflU I| 1

TO QUINTUS

75

? known to the whole province that the life, ch^dren, fame,

fortunes of all over whom you preside are exceedingly

to you. Finally, let it be believed that you will, if you

Itect it, be hostile not only to those who have accepted a

but to those also who have given it. And, indeed, no

: will give anything, if it is made quite clear that nothing is

ally obtained from you through those who pretend to be

influential with you. Not, however, that the object of

i discourse is to make you over-harsh or suspicious towards

Lir staff. For if any of them in the course of the last two

ars has never fallen under suspicion of rapacity, as I am

|4pld about Caesius and Chaerippus and Labeo — and think it

Hie, because 1 know them — there is no authority, I think,

pBiich may not be intrusted to them, and no confidence

which may not be placed in them with the utmost propriety,

and in anyone else like them. But if there is anyone of

whom you have already had reason to doubt, or concerning

whom you have made some discovery, in such a man place

no confidence, intrust him with no i>article of your reputa-

' *[>n.

. If, however, you have found in the province itself any-
hitherto unknown to us, who has made his way into
imacy with you, take care how much confidence you re-
in him ; not that there may not be many good provin-
but, though we may hope so, it is risky to be positive*
Dr everyone's real character is covered by many wrappings
f pretence and is concealed by a kind of veil : face, eyes,
1 Tery often lie, speech most often of all Where-
f how can you expect to find in that class ^ any who, while
Ibltgomg for the sake of money all from which we can
•carcely tear ourselves away,^ will yet love you sincerely and
not merely pretend to do so from interested motives ? I thinks
tudeed, it is a hard task to find such men, especially if we
oodce that the same persons care nothing for almost any
I out of office, yet always with one consent shew affection
r the praetors. But of this class, if by chance you have
ver ed any one to be fonder of you-^for it may so happen
of your office, such a man indeed gladly admit upon

* The class of Romans who have practically become provincials,

* Rome and its society and intercstA.

y6

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX, 60, JET.i

your list of friends : but if you fail to perceive that, there is
class of people you must be more on your guard agai
admitting to intimacy, just because they are acquainted
aQ the ways of making money, do everything for the sake of it^
^nd have no consideration for the reputation of a man widi
whom they are not destined to pass their lives. And even
among the Greeks themselves you must be on your guaid
-against admitting close intimacies, except in the case of the
very few, if such are to be found, who are worthy of ancient
Greece. As things now stand, indeed, too many of them
are untrustworthy, false, and schooled by long servitude in
the arts of extravagant adulation. My advice is that these men
should ail be entertained with courtesy, but that close ties of
hospitality or friendship should only be formed with the best
of them : excessive intimacies with them are not very trust-
worthy — for they do not venture to oppose our wishes — and
they are not only jealous of our countrymen, but of their own
as well

VI. And now, considering the caution and care that I
would shew in matters of this kind^— in which I fear I may
be somewhat over-severe — what do you suppose my senti-
ments are in regard to slaves? Upon these we ought to
keep a hold in all places, but especially in the provinces.
On this head many rules may be laid down, but this is at
once the shortest and most easily maintained — that they
should behave during your progresses in Asia as though you
were travelling on the Appian way, and not suppose that it
makes any difference whether they have arrived at Tralles or
Formise. But if, again, any one of your slaves is conspicu-
ously trustworthy, employ him in your domestic and private
affairs; but in affairs pertaining to your office as governor,
or in any department of the state, do not let him lay a finger.
For many things which may, with perfect propriety, be in-
trusted to slaves, must yet not be so intrusted, for the sake
of avoiding talk and hostile remark. But my discourse, I
]:now not how, has slipped into the didactic vein, though
that Ls not what I proposed to myself originally. For what
right have I to be laying down rules for one who, I am fully
aware, in this subject especially, is not my inferior in wisdom,
while in experience he is even my superior ? Yet, after all,
if your actions had the additional weight of my approval, I

TO QUINTUS

77

M that they would seem more satisfactory to yourself
fore, let these be the foundations on which your public
ter rests : first and foremost your own honesty and
ntxoly then the scrupulous conduct of ail your staff, the
lingly cautious and careful selection in regard to in-
es with provincials and Greeks, the strict and unbend-
remment of your slaves. These are creditable even
conduct of our private and everyday business : in such
lortant government^ where morals are so debased and
ovince has such a corrupting influence, they must
seem divine. Such principles and conduct on your
re sufficient to justify the strictness which you have
^ in some acts of administmtion, owing to which
\ encountered certain personal disputes with great
ction, unless, indeed, you suppose me to be annoyed
t complaints of a feUow like Paconius — who is not
a. Greek, but in reality a Mysian or Phrygian — or
^Uprds of Tuscenius, a madman and a knave, from
^Kminable jaws you snatched the fruits of a most
^w>iece of extortion with the most complete jus*

Pfhese and similar instances of your strict adminis-
I in your province we shall End difficulty in justifying,
I tiiey are accompanied by the most perfect integrity :
fore let there be the greatest strictness in your ad-
Ration of justice, provided only that it is never varied
a¥our, but is kept up with impartiality. But it is of
ivail that justice is administered by yourself with im-
iity and care, unless the same is done by those to

you have intrusted any portion of this duty. And,
I, in my view there is no very great variety of business
I government of Asia : the entire province mainly de-

on the administration of justice. In it we have the
theory of government, especially of provincial govern-
clearly displayed : all that a governor has to do is to
consistency and firmness enough^ not only to resist
jCtsm, but even the suspicion of it To this also
be added courtesy in listening to pleaders, consideration
Iiotincing a decision, and painstaking efforts to convince
I of its justice* and to answer their arguments. It
luch habits that C. Octavius has recently made himself

78

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 60, iBT,

very popolar ;^ in whose court, for the first time,* the lictor (
not interfere, and the marshal kept silence, while every smtor
spoke as often and as long as he chose. In which conduct
he would perhaps have been thought over-lax, had it not been
that this laxity enabled him to maintain the following in-
stance of severity. The partisans of Sulla were forced to
restore what they had taken by violence and terrorism.
Those who had made inequitable decrees, while in office,
were now as private citizens forced to submit to the principles
they had established. This strictness on his part would
have been thought harsh, had it not been rendered palatable
by many sweetening inBuences of courtesy. But if this gentle-
ness was sufficient to make him popular at Rome^ where
there is such haughtiness of spirit, such unrestrained liberty,
such unlimited licence of individuals, and, in fine, so many
magistrates, so many means of obtaining protection, such
vast power in the hands of the popular assembly, and such
influence exercised by the senate, how welcome must a
pr^tor's courtesy be in Asia, in which there is such a
numerous body of citizens and allies, so many cities, so
many communities, all hanging on one man's nod, and in
which there are no means of protection, no one to whom to
make a complaint, no senate, no popular assembly ! Where-
fore it requires an exalted character, a man who is not only
equitable from natural impulse, but who has also been trained
by study and the refinements of a liberal education, so to
conduct himself while in the possession of such immense
power, that those over whom he rules should not feel the
want of any other power.

VIII. Take the case of the famous Cyrus, portrayed by
Xenophon, not as an historical character, but as a model of
righteous government, the serious dignity of whose character
is represented by that philosopher as combined with a peculiar
courtesy. And, indeed, it is not without reason that oui
hero Afrlcanus used perpetually to have those books in his
hands, for there is no duty pertaining to a careful and equit-
able governor which is not to be found in them. Well, if Ju

^ Father of Augiistus, governor of Macedonia^ B.C. 60-59. Bat he
seems to refer to his praetorship (b.c. 61) at Rome; at any rate, as well
:as to his conduct in Macedonia.

2 Reading ;»mwttwj ; others /r«OT«j, ** his head lictor."

<| FJC J, M

TO QUINTUS

79

_altri^-ate<l those qualities, though never destined to be in a
jgiyatG stSLtion^ how carefully ought those to maintain them
lo whOfTk power is given with the understanding that it must
^e surf^'^<i^^6d, and given bylaws under whose authority they
lUSt onoe more come ? In my opinion all who govern others
re b^" o td to regard as the object of all their actions the great-
. u np^irkGss of the governed. That this is your highest ob-
i » d Kas been so since you first landed in Asia, has been
j^^^, ..lied a.broad by consistent rumour and the conversation
^\\. It is, let me add, not only the duty of one who
vc*^^ aJlJes and citizens, but even of one who governs

8- ^^ sxnd dumb animals, to serve tbe interests and advantage
X tt'*^^^^ ^^^^der him. In this point I notice that everyone
^ijt^^ ^^t you take the greatest pains : no new debt is being

*^ - •=#"«ljCtjeri Fiw tKfk ct-affic Twhil^pi manv Vinvp. Vi^p»ti r^alipiviafl htv

^^^B^cted by the states, while many have been relieved by
^ CfOm a heavy and long-standing one. Several cities that
^d ^3"^^^^^^ dilapidated and almost deserted — of which one
jg tb^ Giost famous state in Ionia, the other in Caria, Samus
id H*ltcamassus — have been given a new life by you : thert
po pJirty fighting, no civil strife in the towns : you take care
the government of the states is administered by the best
of citizens : brigandage is abolished in Mysia ; murder
^Oppressed in many districts; peace is established throughout
ijbe pfovmce ; and not only the robberies usual on highways
^ad io covin try places, but those more numerous and more
icnoo&oues in towns and temples, have been completely
stopped: the fame, fortunes, and repose of the rich have
))eeQ relieved of that most oppressive instrument of prsetorial
^ladty— Vexatious prosecution ; the expenses and tribute of
»; ^ *^' nre made to fall with equal weight on all who hve
lories of those states : access to you is as easy as
uie ; your ears are open to the complaints of all : oo
\*% ^mii of means or want of friends excludes him, I don*t
" DID access to you in public and on the tribunal, but
frf«o your house and chamber i in a word, through-
government there is no harshness or cruelty —
- clemency, mildness, and kindness reign su-

Wut an immense benefit, again, have you done in

liberated Asia from the tribute exacted by the sediles,

which cost me some violent controversies ! For

So

CICERO'S JLETTERS

if one of our nobles complains openly that by your edict,
** No moneys shall be voted for the games," you have robbed
him of 200 sestertia, what a vast sura of money would have
been paid, had a grant been made to the credit of ev<^
magistrate who held games, as had become the regular cus-
tom 1 However, I stopped these complaints by taking
this position — what they think of it in Asia I don't knowj
Rome it meets with no little approval and praise — ^I
to accept a sum of money which the states had decreed \
temple and monument in our honour, though they had <
so with the greatest enthusiasm in view both of my se
and of your most valuable benefactions ; and though the |
contained a special and distinct exception in these wg
** that it was lawful to receive for temple or monument " ;
though again the money was not going to be thrown m
but would be employed on decorating a temple, and '
thus appear to have been given to the Roman people j
the immortal Gods rather than to myself — yet, in spite (
having desert, law, and the wishes of those who offered i
gift in its favour J I determined that I must not accept it- '
this reason among others, namely, to prevent those, to wh
such an honour was neither due nor legal, from being f
Wherefore adhere with all your heart and soul to &i4_
which you have hitherto adopted — that of being de
to those whom the senate and people of Rome have 1
mitted and intrusted to your honour and authority, of dc
your best to protect them, and of desiring their greatest 1
ness. Even if the lot had made you governor of Afric
or Spaniards, or Gauis — uncivilized and barbarous nation
it would still have been your duty as a man of feeling to <
suit for their interests and advantage, and to have contrit
to their safety. But when we rule over a race of men in wb
civilization not only exists, but from which it is believe
have spread to others, we are bound to repay them, ab
all thingSj what we received from them. For I shall noti
ashamed to go so far^ — especially as my life and achieveme
have been such as to exclude any suspicion of sloth|
frivolity^ — as to confess that, whatever I have accomplis^
I have accomplished by means of those studies and
ciples which have been transmitted to us in Greek literati
and schools of thought Wherefore, over and above '•

Qrn. I

TO QUINTUS

8i

geoerai good faith which is due to all men, I think we are in
a special sense under an obligation to that nation, to put in
pnclice what it has taught us among the very men by whose
flf^T'm*' we have been brought out of barbarism.

X. And indeed Plato, the fountain-head of genius and
ktmin^ thought that states would only be happy when
icholars and philosophers began being their rulers, or when
litose who were their rulers had devoted all their attention to
'laming and philosophy* It was plainly this union of power

' philosophy that in his opinion might prove the salvation
of states. And this perhaps has at length fallen to the fortune
of the whole empire ; certainly it has in the present instance
U) your province, to have a man in supreme power in it, who
has from boyhood spent the chief part of his zeal and time in

bibing the principles of philosophy, virtue, and humanity.
Wherefore be careful that this third year, which has been
«Med to your labour, may be thought a prolongation of
prosperity to Asia. And since Asia was more fortunate in
fetaiaing you than I was io my endeavour to bring you back,
see that my regret is softened by the exultation of the pro-
vince. For if you have displayed the very greatest activity in
earning honours such as, I think, have never been paid to
anyone else, much greater ought your activity to be in pre-
ierving these honours. What I for my part think of honours of
that kind I have told you in previous letters. I have always
Bearded them, if given indiscriminately, as of little value,
if paid from interested motives, as worthless : if, however, as
in this case, they are tributes to solid services on your part,
I hold you bound to take much pains in preserving them.
Since, then, you are exercising supreme power and official
authority in cities, in which you have before your eyes the
consecration and apotheosis of your virtues, in all decisions,
and official acts consider what you owe to those
opinions entertained of you, to those verdicts on your
;er, to those honours which have been rendered you.
what you owe will be to consult for the interests of all,
Io remedy men's misfortunes, to provide for their safety, to
s«solve that you will be both called and believed to be the
lather of Asia."

XJ. However, to such a resolution and deliberate policy
On your part the great obstacle are the pubikani: for, if

L G

82

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX. 60, ^T. 46

we oppose them, we shall alienate from ourselves and from
the Republic an order which has done us most excellent
service^ and which has been brought into sympathy with
the Republic by our means ; if, on the other hand, we comply
with them in every case, we shall allow the complete ruin of
those whose interests, to say nothing of their preservation, we
are bound to consult This is the one difficulty, if we look
the thing fairly in the face, in your whole government. For
disinterested conduct on one's own part, the suppression of
all inordinate desires, the keeping a check upon one's staff,
courtesy in hearing causes, in Estening to and admitting
suitors — ^all this is rather a question of credit than of difficulty:
for it does not depend on any special exertion, but rather
on a mental resolve and inclination* But how much
bitterness of feeling is caused to allies by that question of
the puMicani we have had reason to know in the case of
citizens who, when recently urging the removal of the port-
dues in Italy, did not complain so much of the dues them-
selves, as of certain extortionate conduct on the part of the
collectors. Wherefore, after hearing the grievances of
citizens in Italy, I can comprehend what happens to allies
in distant lands. To conduct oneself in this matter in such
a way as to satisfy the puMicani^ especiaMy when contracts
have been undertaken at a loss, and yet to preserve the
allies from ruin, seems to demand a virtue with something
divine in it, I mean a virtue like yours. To begin with,
that they are subject to tax at all, which is their greatest
grievance, ought not to be thought so by the Greeks,
because they were so subject by their own laws without the
Roman government Again, they cannot despise the word
pubUcanus^ for they have been unable to pay the assessment
according to Sulla's poll-tax without the aid of the pub-
lican. But that Greek puMicani are not more considerate
in exacting the payment of taxes than our own may be
gathered from the fact that the Caunii, and all the islands
assigned to the Rhodians by Sulla, recently appealed to the
protection of the senate, and petitioned to be allowed to
pay their tax to us rather than to the Rhodians, Wherefore
neither ought those to revolt at the name of a puMcanus
who have always been subject to tax, nor those to despise it
who have been unable to make up the tribute by themselves^

TO QUINTCS

83

to refuse his services who have asked for them.
i same time let Asia reflect on this, that if she were
ider our government, there is no calamity of foreign
• internal strife from which she would be free. And
^t government cannot possibly be maintained with-
Kes, she should be content to purchase perpetual peace
^amquiUity at the price of a certain proportion of her
cts,

L But if they will fairly reconcile themselves to the
nee and name of publican, all the rest may be made to
r to them in a less offensive light by your skill and
Oce. They may, in making their bargains with the
2m\ not have regard so ranch to the exact conditions
own by the censors as to the convenience of settling
usiness and freeing themselves from farther trouble,
llso may do, what you have done splendidly and are
Ding> namely, dwell on the high position of the pu^
\ and on your obligations to that order, in such a way
utting out of the question all considerations of your
wm and the power of your official authority and dignity
CGoncile the Greeks with the publicani^ and to beg of
whom you have served eminently well, and who owe you
hing, to suffer you by their compliance to maintain and
te the bonds which unite us with the pubUcanu But
!o I address these exhortations to you, who are not
dpable of carrying them out of your own accord with-
kjone's instruction, but have already to a great extent
aghly done so ? For the most respectable and im-
it companies do not cease offering me thanks daily,
lis is all the more gratifying to me because the Greeks
g same. Now it is an achievement of great difficulty
ite in feeling things which are opposite in interests,
and, I had almost said, in their very nature* But I have
ritten all this to instruct you — ^for your wisdom requires
ftn's instruction — but it has been a pleasure to me
writing to set down your virtues, though I have run to
I len^ in this letter than I could have wished, or
[ thought I should,

[I. There is one thing on which I shall not cease from
; you advice, nor will I, as far as in me lies, allow your
\ to be spoken of with a reservation. For all who

84

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C* 60, XT. 4(S|

come from your province do make one reservation in the
extremely iiigh praise which they bestow on your virtue,
integrity, and kindness — it is that of sharpness of temper.
That is a fault which, even in our private and everyday life,
seems to indicate want of solidit^? and strength of mind;
but nothing, surely, can be more improper than to combine
harshness of temper with the exercise of supreme power*
Wherefore I will not undertake to lay before you now what
the greatest philosophers say about anger, for I should not
wish to be tedious, and you can easily ascertain it your-
self from the writings of many of them : but I don*t think I
ought to pass over what is the essence of a letter, namely,
that the recipient should be informed of what he does not
know. Well, what nearly everybody reports to me is this;
they usually say that, as long as you are not out of temper,
nothing can be pleasanter than you are, but that when some
instance of dishonesty or wrong-headedness has stirred you,
your temper rises to such a height that no one can discover
any trace of your usual kindness. Wherefore, since no mere
desire for glory, but circumstances and fortune have brought
us upon a path of life which makes it inevitable that men
will always talk about us, let us be on our guard, to the
utmost of our means and ability, that no glaring fault maf
be alleged to have ejdsted in us. And I am not now
urging, what is perhaps difficult in human nature generally,
and at our time of life especially, that you should change
your disposition and suddenly pluck out a deeply-rooted
habit, but 1 give you this hint : if you cannot completelj
avoid this failing, because your mind is surprised by angel
before cool calculation has been able to prevent it, d©^
liberately prepare yourself beforehand, and daily reflect on
the duty of resisting anger^ and that, when it moves youf
heart most violently, it is just the time for being most careful to
restrain your tongue. And that sometimes seems to me to be a
greater virtue than not being angry at all. For the latter h
not always a mark of superiority to weakness, it is some
times the result of dullness ] but to govern temper an(
speech, however angry you may be, or even to hold youl
tongue and keep your indignant feelings and resentmenl
under control, although it may not be a proof of perfecl
wisdom, yet requires no ordinary force of character. An4

TO QUINTUS

8S

I in this respect they tell me that you are now much
gentle and less irritable. No violent outbursts of
ition on your part, no abusive words, no insulting

re are reported to me : which, while quite alien to
and refinement, are specially unsuited to high power
ace. For if your anger is implacable, it amounts to
te harshness ; if easily appeased, to extreme weakness.
tter, however, as a choice of evils, is, after all, prefer-
\ harshness.

^ But since your first year gave rise to most talk in
to this particular complaint^ — I believe because the
doing, the covetousness, and the arrogance of men
upon you as a surprise, and seemed to you unbear-
while your second year was much milder, because
ind reflexion, and, as I think, my letters also, ren-
jTOU more tolerant and gentle, the third ought to be
bpletely reformed, as not to give even the smallest

I for anyone to find fault. And here I go on to urge
roti, not by way of exhortation or admonition, but by
rly entreaties, that you would set your whole heart,
nd thought on the gaining of praise from everybody and
very quarter. If, indeed, our achievements were only
jject of a moderate amount of talk and commenda-
[>thing eminent, nothing beyond the practice of others,

have been demanded of you. As it is, however,
to the brilliancy and magnitude of the affairs in which
re been engaged, if we do not obtain the very highest
don from your province, it seems scarcely possible for
ivoid the most violent abuse. Our position is such

II loyalists support us, but demand also and expect
s every kind of activity and virtue, while all the dis-
leetng that we have entered upon a lasting war with

appear contented with the very smallest excuse for
fig as^ Wherefore, since fortune has allotted to you
theatre as Asia, completely packed with an audience, of
rse sixe, of the most refined judgment, and, moreover,
lly so capable of conveying sound, that its expressions
Eliou and its remarks reach Rome, put out all your

I beseech you, exert all your energies to appear not
} have been worthy of the part we played here, but to
' everything done there by your high qualities.

86

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 60, XT,1

XV. And since chance has assigned to me among
magistracies the conduct of public business in the city^
you that in a province^ if my share is inferior to no om
take care that yours surpasses others. At the same time
think of this : we are not now working for a future and pro-
spective glory, but are fighting in defence of what has been
already gained ; which indeed it was not so much an object
to gain as it is now our duty to defend. And if anything in
me could be apart from you, I should desire nothing more
than the position which I have already gained. The actual
fact, however, is that unless all your acts and deeds in your
province correspond to my achievements, I shall think that I
have gained nothing by those great labours and dangers, ill
all of which you have shared. But if it was you who, above
all others, assisted me to gain a most splendid reputation,
you will certainly also labour more than others to enable me
to retain it. You must not be guided by the opinions and
judgments of the present generation only, but of those to come
also : and yet the latter will be a more candid judgment, for it
will not be influenced by detraction and malice. Finally,
you should think of this — ^that you are not seeking glory for
yourself alone (and even if that were the case, you still ought
not to be careless of it, especially as you had determined to
consecrate the memory of your name by the most splendid
monuments), but you have to share it with me, and to hand it
down to our children. In regard to which you must be oa
your guard lest by any excess of carelessness you should
seem not only to have neglected your own interests, but to
have begrudged those of your family also.

XVI. And these observations are not made with the ide*
of any speech of mine appearing to have roused you frouL
your sleep, but to have rather ** added speed to the runner.^'*
For you will continue to compel all in the future, as you hav©
compelled them in the past, to praise your equity, self-control,
strictness, and honesty. But from my extreme affection '
am possessed with a certain insatiable greed for glory for you*
However, I am convinced that, as Asia should now be as
well-known to you as each man^s own house is to himself,
and since to your supreme good sense such great experience
has now been added, there is nothing that affects reputation
which you do not know as well as possible yourself, and

I

QFRI, IS An, 4

TO QUINTUS

87

irhidi does not daily occur to your mind without anybody's

lexhortation. But I, who when I read your writing seem to

ih^u* your voice, and when I write to you seem to be talking

\o you, am therefore always best pleased with your longest

itter, and in writing am often somewhat prolix myself. My

it prayer and advice to you is that, as good poets and

instaking actors always do, so you should be most attentive

the last scenes and conclusion of your function and

siness, so that this third year of your government, like a

Jlhird act in a play» may appear to have been the most elabor-

■ated and most highly finished. You will do that with more

ase if you will think that I, whom you always wished to please

more than all the world besides, am always at your side, and

am taking part in everything you say and do. It remains

b^ you to take the greatest care of your health, if

rish me and all your friends to be well also.

Paiewell*

XXX (A II, 4)

This year was a crucial one in tlie history of the Republic, and also of

[Qc^o particularly. It witnessed the working of the agreement entered

into in the previous year between Pompey, Caesar, and

n- Cosft^f Ciassus, to secure their sercTal objects, commonly called

fct ^^ ^"^^ Triumvirate. The determined enmity of the

JJj^JJ;^ consuls lo each other, the h igh -hand ed conduct of Csesar in

SS/ rcgaid tothe senate, liis ultimate appointment tothe unusual

period of five years' government of the Gauls and Illyrlcum,

were so many blows at the old constitution ; and scarcely less offensive

to the Catonian Optimates were the agrarian laws passed in favour of

I P'jmpcy*s veterans, the forcing of his acta through the senate, and the

[in&ngement whereby he too was eventually to have the consulship

t nun, and an extended period of provincial government. Cicero was

tetocted by hesitation. He had pmncd his faith on Pompey's ultimate

opposition to Qesar, and yet did not wholly trust him, and was fully aware

of the onpiacticable nature of Calo and the weakness of the Optimates.

The triumvirs had an instrument for rendering bim helpless in Clodius,

[hoi Cicero could not bcUeve that they would use it, or that his services

ffo ihc ¥tate could be so far forcotten as to make danger possible. We

11, then^ wholly absorbed in the question as to how far he

or oppose the triumvirs. It is not till the end of the year

cjUiS to see the real danger ahead. We have one extant

CBCnO^ UtilEMS

■.a 5^ XT, 47

I u» Ids credit, for
B. He also de-

tiimi

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Toscm^iM (Ap&ii^

I AM I'll j> viKm^ly obliged to jaa for sending me Seraptd
book, of wiikii izideed, faetveeii joo and me, I scarcely und
stood a thnmandth part. I have oidered the money for it to
be paid joa at oDce, that yoo may Dot pat it down to the cost
cf piesentatioa co{»e& Bat as I have mentioned the sub-
ject of money, I will beg you to try to come to a settlement
with Titinius in any way you can. If he doesn't stand by his
OWD proposal, what I should like best is that what he bought at
too dear a rate should be returned, if that can be done with
Pomponia's consent : if that too is impossible, let the money
be paid rather than have any difficulty. I should be very
glad if you would settle this before you leave Rome, with
your usual kindness and exactness.

So Clodius, you say, is for Tigranes ? I only wish he would
go — on the same terms as the Skepsian ! ^ But I don't grudge
him the job ; for a more convenient time for my taking a
" free legation '' is when my brother Quintus shall have
settled down again, as I hope, into private life, and I shall
have made certain how that *' priest of the Bona Dea*'* in-
tends to behave. Meanwhile I shall find my pleasure in the
Muses with a mind undisturbed, or rather glad and cheerful ;
for it will never occur to me to envy Crassus or to regret that
I have not been false to myself. As to geography, I will try
to satisfy you, but I promise nothing for certain,' It is a dif-
ficult business, but nevertheless, as you bid me, I will take

* That is, if it ends in his death, for MeUodorus of Skepsis was sent
by Mithridates to Tigranes to urge him to go to war with Rome, but
nrivatety advised him not to do so, and, in consequence, was put to
death liy Mithridates (Plut. Luc. 22). The word Scepti (Scjii^iw) was
introduced by Gronovius for the unintelligible word Syrfie found m
the M5S., which so often blunder in Greek names.

• Clodius, alluding to his intrusion Into the mysteries.

* Atticus has asked Cicero for a Latin treatise on gee

gec^rapby— prob*

1U4,5

TO ATTICUS

89

I that this country excursion produces something for you.

Mmd you let me know any news you have ferreted out, and

especially who you think will be the next consuls. However,

I am not very curious ; for I have determined not to think

about politics. I have examined Terentia's woodlands.

Wlmt need I say ? If there was only a Dodonean oak in them,

I should imagine myself to be in possession of Epirus.

About the ist of the month I shall be either at Formise or

Pompeii* If I am not at Formic, pray, an you love me,

come to Pompeii. It will be a great pleasure to me and not

much out of the way for you. About the wall, I have given

Philotimus orders not to put any difficulty in the way of your

doing whatever you please. I think, however, you had better

_call in Vettius,* In these bad times, when the life of all

"^)ie best men hangs on a thread, I vdue one summer's en-

pyment of my VslSiXxne palaestra rather highly; but, of course,

: last thing I should wish would be that Fomponia and her

pf should live in fear of a falling wall.

XXXI (A n, 5)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME>

AiTTiuM (April)

^ I WISH very much, and have long wished, to visit Alexandria
Bind the rest of Egypt, and at the same time to get away from
Bere, where people are tired of me, and return when they
^tate begun to feel my loss — but at such a time and at the
Hadding of such statesmen 1 *

1^ » m pabJisher, Cicero being the prince of book -makers— and to that
M Iws sent him the Greek geography of Serapio.

* In his Formianum or Pompeianum, his villas at Formi® and

■ Aa vchitect, a freedman of Cyrus, of whom we have heard before.

• The ^umvirs. The mission to Egypt was in the affairs of
Mmy Aatetes (father of Cleopatra), who was this year declared a

so

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C, S9, jBT. 47

** I fear to face the men of Troy
And Tiojan raatrons with their tmiling robes/'*

For what would my friends the Optimates say — if there are
such persons left ? That I had accepted a bribe to change
my views ?

•'Polydamas the first would lay the charge.**

I mean my friend Cato, who is as good as a hundred thousand
in my eyes. What, too, will history say of me six hundred
years hence ? I am much more afraid of that than of the
petty gossip of the men of to-day. But, I think, I had better
lie low and wait. For if it is really offered to me, I shall be
to a certain extent in a position of advantage, and then will
be the time to weigh the matter. There is, upon my word,
a certain credit even in refusing. Wherefore, if Theophanes *
by chance has consulted you on the matter, do not absolutely
decline. What I am expecting to hear from you is, what
Arrius says, and how he endures being left in the lurch/ and
who are intended to be consuls— is it Pompey and Crassus, or,
as I am told in a letter, Servius Sulpicius with Gabinius ? — and
whether there are any new laws or anything new at all ; and,
since Nepos * is leaving Rome, who is to have the augur-
ship — the one bait by which those personages could catch
me ! You see what a high price I put on myself! Why do
I talk about such things, which I am eager to throw aside,
and to devote myself heart and soul to philosophy. That, I
tell you, is my intention. I could wish I had done so from
the first. Now, however, that I have found by experience
the hollowness of what 1 thought so splendid, I am thinking
of doing business exclusively ivith the Muses. In spite of
that, please give me in your next some more definite in-
formation about Curtius and who is intended to fill his place>
and what is doing about P. Clodius, and, in fact, take your

* //. vi. 442; xxii. 100, Cicero*s frequent expression for popular
opinion, or the opinion of those he respects — his Mrs. Grtmdy.

^ Theophfines, a philosopher of Mitylene, a clos« friend of Pompcy's,
in whose bouse he firequeody resided. He took charge of Porapey's
Wife and children in B.C. 48-47.

' Q. Arrius, an orator and friend of Caesar's, by whose help he had
hoped for the consulship. See p. 49.

^ Q. Csecilius Metellus Nepos (consul B.C. 57). His brother, the consjl
cf a.c. 60, had just died and made a vacancy in the coM^e of aaguj

U <i. 5f 6

TO ATTICUS

91

rime and tell me everything as you promise ; and pray write
me word what day you think of leaving Rome, in order that I
may tell you where I am likely to be : and send me a letter
at once on the subjects of which I have written to you. I
ok forward much to hearing from you*

XXXII (A II, 6)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

. Antium (April)

As to my promise to you in a former letter that there should
be some product of this country excursion, I cannot confirm
it to any great extent : for I have become so attached to
idleness that I cannot be torn from its arms. Accordingly,
I either enjoy myself with books, of which I have a delight-
ful stock at Antium, or I just count the waves^ — for the rough
weather prevents my shrimping ! From writing my mind posi-
tively recoils. For the geographical treatise, upon which I had
settled, is a serious undertaking : so severely is Eratosthenes,
whom I had proposed as my modelj criticised by Serapio
and Hipparchus : what think you will be the case if Tyrannic^
is added to the critics ? And, by Hercules, the subject is
difficxilt of explanation and monotonous, and does not seem
to admit of as much embellishment as I thought, and, in
Awt — which is the chief point — any excuse for being idle
seems to me a good one i for I am even hesitating as to
settling at Antium and spending the rest of my life there,
where, indeed, I would rather have been a duovir * than at
Roaae. You, indeed, have done more wisely in having made
I TOQtself a borne at Buthrotum. But, believe me, next to that
' &ee town of yours comes the borough of the Antiates. Could
]fOti have believed that there could be a town so near Rome,

* A captive brought by Lucallos, who became a friend of Cicero
■d tutat to his son and nephew.

• One of the two yearly oflScers of a colony^ they answer to the
ooQttils at Rome. Therefore Cicero raeans» ** I wish I hax\ been a consul
b t ADolI colony rather than a consul at Rome."

gz

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C, S9, MV, 47"

where there are many who have never seen Vatinius ? Where
there is no one besides myself who cares whether one of the
twenty commissioners ^ is alive and well ? Where no one in-
trudes ypon me, and yet all are fond of me ? This, this is
the place to play the statesman in I For yonder, not only
am I not allowed to do so, but I am sick of it besides.
Accordingly, I will compose a book of secret memoirs for
your ear alone in the st)*le of Theopompus, or a more acrid
one still.' Nor have I now any politics except to hate the
disloyal, and even that without any bitterness, but rather
with a certain enjoyment in writing. But to return to busi-
ness : I have written to the city quaestors about my brother's
affair. See what they say to it, whether there is any hope
of the cash in denarii^ or whether we are to be palmed off
with Pompeian cistophoriJ' Farthermore, settle what is to
be done about the wall. Is there an)thing else ? Yes I Let
me know when you are thinking of starting.

XXXIII (A II, 7)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Antium (April)

About the geography I will think again and again. But
ask for two of my speeches, one of which I did not care to
write out because I had ended it abruptly, the other because
I did not want to praise the man I did not like. But tha^
too, I will see about. At all events, something shall be forth-
coming to prevent your thinking that I have been absolutely
idle. I am quite delighted to hear what you tell me about

DOUt

^ For distribution of land under Caesar's law. P. Vatinius
tribune this year, and worked in Caesar's interests.

* TheopompQs of Chios, the historian {Att. vi, i» § 12), Bora a1
B.C 378, His bitterness censured by Polybius, viii, 11-13.

'The monejr due from the treasury to Q- Cicero in Asia, He wants
it to be paid in Roman currency {dmani\ not in Asiatic coins {ciito-
fhori), a vast amount of which Porapey had brought home and deposited
m the treasury. So an Indian oflBcial might like sovereigns instead of
rupe^ if he could get them.

A

111,7

TO ATTICUS

93

Publius : pray fenet out the whole story, and bring it to me
I when you come, and meanwhile write anything you may make
I out or suspect, and especially as to what he is going to do
about the legation. For my part, before reading your letter, I
W2S anxious that the fellow ^ould go, not, by heaven, in order
to avoid his impeachment — for I am wonderfully keen to try
issues with him — but it seemed to me that, if he had secured
any popularity by becoming a plebeian, he would thereby lose
it " Well, why did you transfer yourself to the Plebs ? Was
it to make a call on Tigranes ? Tell me : do the kings of
Armenia refuse to receive patricians ? " In a word, I had
polished up my weapons to tear this embassy of his to pieces.
But if he rejects it, and thus moves the anger of those pro-
posers and augurs of the lex curia fa,^ it will be a fine sight !
By Hercules, to speak the truth, our friend Publius is bemg
treated a little contemptuously ! In the first place, though he
was once the only man at Caesar's house» he is not now allowed
to be one in twenty : ' in the next place, one legation had
been promised him and another has been given. The former
fine fat one ' for the levying of money is reser\*ed, I presume,
for Drusus of Pisaurum or for the gourmand Vatinius : this
latter miserable business, which might be very well done by
a courier, is given to him, and his tribuneship deferred till
it suits them. Irritate the fellow, I beg you, as much as you
can. The one hope of safety is their mutual disagreement,
the beginning of which I have got scent of from Curio.
Moreover, Arrius is fuming at being cheated out of the
consulship. Megabocchus and our blood-thirsty young men
ire most violently hostile. May there be added to this, I
pray, may there be added, this quarrel about the augurate ! I
bope I shall often have some fine letters to send you on these
\ subjects. But I want to know the meaning of your dark

* At he was a man sui iurist C!odius*s adoption into a new gens
||Mt;S<*^) would have to take place before the comitia curiata {no'ff
r»ent<Dd by thirty lictors), which still retained this formal business.
; oeieinoiiy required the presence of an augur and a pontifex to hold it
ICteero supposes Pompey and Caesar as intending to act in that cap&city.
] Pompey, it seems, did eventually attend,

I * One of the twenty commissioners under Csesar's agrarian law*
IClcero was offered and declined a place among them. The ** only man,
f coorse, refers to the intrusion on the mysteries.
» To Egirpt.

94

CICERO'S LETTERS

!-c» 59» /ET. 4f

hint that some even of the quingueviri^ are speaking
out. What can it be? If there is anything in it, there is
more hope than I had thought And 1 would not have you
f beheve that I ask you these questions " with any view to
action," ' because my heart is yearning to take part in prac-
tical politics. I was long ago getting tired of being at the
helm, even when it was in my pK>wer, And now that I am
forced to quit the ship, and have not cast aside the tiller,
but have had it wrenched out of my hands, my only wish
is to watch their shipwreck from the shore : I desire, in th^
words of your favourite Sophocles, "^

" And safe ben^th the roof
To hear with drowsy ear the plash of rain,**

As to the wall, see to what is necessary. I will correct the
mistake of Castricius, and yet Quintus had made it in his
letter to me 15,000, while now to your sister he makes it
30,000,' Terentia sends you her regards : my boy Cicero
commissions you to give Aristodemus the same answer for
him as you gave for his cousin, your sister's son.* I will
not neglect your reminder about your Amaltheia,* Take_
care of your health,

' This seems also to fcfer to the twenty agrarian commissione

who, according to Mommsen, were divided into committees of fivi

and were, therefore, spoken of indifferently as fuinqucviri and vi^nti'
tnri. Bnt it is somewhat uncertain.

* Kara t6 irpaKTvcov,
^ Castricius seems to have l>een a negoHator or banker in ,

We don't know what mistake is referred to; probably as to son
money transmitted to Pomponia.

* It is suggested that Aristodemus is some teacher of the two \
Ciceros, to whom the yoang Marcus wishes to apologize for his ab
or to promise some study. _

* Perhaps some inscription or other ornament for At dcos^s gymnasiti
in hla villa at Buthrotum.

*Wi7*«

TO ATTICUS

95

XXXIV (A n, 8)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Antium, April

When I had been eagerly expecting a letter from you as
usual tin evening, lo and behold a message that slaves have
come &om Rome, I summon them : I ask if they have any
f letters, " No/' say they* " What do you say," said I,
I ** nothing from Pomponius?" Frightened to death by my
I voice and look, they confessed that they had received one,
that it had been lost on the journey. Need I say
; ? I was intensely annoyed. For no letter has come
fou for the last few days without something in it
important and entertaining. In these circumstances, if
tbm was anything in the letter, dated 15th April, worthy
QdUng, pray write at once, that I may not be left in
ignocance ; but if there was nothing but banter, repeatfeven
Sal for my benefit And let me inform you that young Curio
Lias been to call on me. What he said about Publius agreed
leiactly with your letter. He hims<-lf, moreover,! wonder-
fully ** holds our proud kings in hate," * He told me that
j liie young men generally were equally incensed, and could
I aot put up with the present state of things. If there is hope
Jin them, we are in a good way. My opinion is that we
[ sboold leave things to take their course. I am devoting
Bjself to my memoir, i^owever^though you may think
Be a Saufeius,*|^I am r^lly the laziest fellow in the world.
pet into your head my several journeys, that you may
s wfaeTe you intend to come and see me. I intend to
at my Fonnian house on the Parilia (21st April).

A rerx from LudHus. " Young Curio " is the future tribune of
LC 50^ who was bribed by Caesar, joined him at Ravenna at the end of
r year, was sent by him in B.C. 49 to Sicily and Africa, and fell in
" ! with the Pompeians and King luba*
* Sattfdos, the Epicurean friend of Atticus (see Letter II). He
to mean, "as indefatigable as Saufeius." But Prof. Tyrrell
out that it might mean, **at the risk of your thinking me a;
[ and self-indulgent as SaufeiuSi I say/* etc

8t'

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 59, JBT. 41

Next, since you think that at this time I ought to leave out
luxurious Crater,^ on the ist of May I leave Formias, intend-
ing to reach Antium on the 3rd of May. For there are games
at Antium from the 4th to the 6th of May, and Tullia wants
to see them. Thence I think of going to Tusculum, thence
to Arpinum, and be at Rome on the ist of June, Be sure
that we see you at Formiae or Antium, or at Tusculum. Re-
write your previous letter for me, and add something new.

XXXV (A II, 9)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)
Antium, April

Cbcilius * the quaestor having suddenly informed me
he was sending a slave to Rome, I write these hurried
in order to get out of you the wonderful conversations
Publius, both those of which you write, and that one wl
you keep dark, and assert that it would be too long
write your answer to him ; and, still farther, the one that
not yet been held, which that luno of a woman * is to
to you when she gets back from Soionium. 1 wish you
believe that there can be nothing I should like more,
however, the compact made about me is not kept, I am
a seventh heaven to think that our friend the Jeru^emii
plebeian-maker * will learn what a fine return he has made
my brilliant speeches, of which you may expect a splen^
recantation. For, as well as I can guess, if that profligatel
in favour with our tyrants, he wiO be able to crow not

* The bay of Misenum, near which was Cicero's Pompeianum.
^ Q. Csecilius Bassus, probably quECStor at Ostta. Antium would]

in his district.

* ^owwist sc. Clodia. She is to talk to her brotlaer about Cici
She is ** luno *' perhaps as an enemy—as Eacon called the Duchessl
Burgundy Henry VII/s luno — or perhaps for a less decent reason^ I
coniux sororqui of Foblius. J

* Pompey, who was proud of having taken Jerusalem. Traduitor\
piiSem^ said of the magistrate presiding at the comitia for adoption.

ji^

the " cynic consular/' * but over your Tritons of the
ands also.^ For I shall not possibly be an object of
idys jealousy when robbed of power and of my in-
se in the senate. If, on the other hand, he should
el with them, it will not suit his purpose to attack me*
;ver, let him attack. Charmingly, believe me, and with
loise than I had thought, has the wheel of the Republic
red : more rapidly, anyhow, than it should have done
5 to Cato's error, but still more owing to the uncon-
ional conduct of those who have neglected the auspices,
Elian law, the lunian, the Licinian, the Csecilian and
m,* who have squandered all the safeguards of the con-
ion, who have handed over kingdoms as though they
private estates to tetrachs,* and immense sums of
^ to a small coterie, I see plainly now the direction
iar jealousy is taking, and where it will finally settle.
ve ^t I have learnt nothing from experience, nothing
Tbeophrastus,* if you don't shortly see the time of our
rmnent an object of regret. For if the power of the
e was disllkaj^ what do you think will be the case

t himscU. Clodiu^ may have called him tiiis from \m biting
BB. Fmf. TyrreU, *'Tear 'em,"
be nobility, whom Cicero has before attacked as idle and caring
dling but their fish-ponds {piscinarii, cp. p. 59),
tie /^ ^ha (about B.C. 150) was a law regulating ihe powers of
\XBt& to dissolve cttmiHa on religious grounds, such as badomeiis,
« 4r «at/0t fU. Cicero (who coiidd have had v«ry little belief in
Igpiral science) regards them as safeguards of the state, because as
'~'*~il«tics geoeralTy secured the places in the augural college, it
J. B hold on elections and l^i^lation. Bihulus tried in vain to

powers to thwart Caesar this year. The Ux Cadna D^dia
0) efiforced the notice for at least seventeen days (on three market
if ^tictioosand laws, and forbade the proposal of a lex satura^ *.^.,
eoottining a number of miscellaneous enactments. Perhaps its
Ml tthr& to the tuta of Pompey in the East, which he wanted to have
■ed <w Moc, The senate had made difficulties : but one of the fruits
tounviiste was a memsure for doing it The lex lunia et Ucinia
6(l) comfinned the CaciUa Didia^ and secured that the people

■ftp proposed laws were.
^b did in Asia, t^g.^ to Detotartts of Ualaiia, and about ten
Ubious that Cicero speaks of the/ana just as his opponent
Augustus after him. Each side looks on the other as a
{Cx^Mt B» C i. 22 ; Monum. Anq^. L § i).
ieopiir«ftns. successor of Aristotle at the Lyceum, Athens (p. 7P).
H

98

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.c 59, Mr. 47

when it has passed^ not to the people, but to three un-
scrupulous men ? So let them then make whom they choose
consuls, tribunesi and even finally clothe Vatinius's weo
with the double-dyed purple * of the priesthood, you will see
before long that the great men will be not only those who
have made no false step,' but even he who did make a mis-
take, Cato. For, as to myself, if your comrade Publius will
let me, I think of playing the sophist : if he forces me,
I shall at least defend myself, and, as is the trick of mj
trade, I publicly promise to

** Strike back at him who first is wroth with me."*
May the country only be on my side : it has had from :
if not more than its due, at least more than it ever demand
I would rather Ijave a bad passage with another pilot th
be a successful pilot to such ungrateful passengers, ' _
this win do better when we meet For the present take an
answer to your questions, I think of returning to Antium
from Formiae on the 3rd of May. From Antium I intend
to start for Tusculum on the 7th of May. But as soon as I
have returned from Formise (I intend to be there till the
29th of April) I will at once inform you. Terentia sends
compliments, and " Cicero the little greets Titus the
Athenian- ** *

XXXVI (A n, 12)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Tres Tabern^, 19 April

Are they going to deny that Publius has been made!
I^ebeian ? This is indeed playing the king, and is utte '
intolerable. Let Publius send some men to witness
seal ray affidavit : I will take an oath that my friend Gnaea

' The purple -bordered toga of the augur. Vatinius did not get I
augurship. He had some disfiguring swelling or wen.
^ Himself,

• Avi^p (mafivvtirBai^ *6rf, nc wpSrtpoc x'^^'^^i^ (Horn. IL xxir*

* Written in Greek, perhaps by the boy himseLL

\, IV ts

TO ATTICUS

99

the colleague of Balbus, told tne at Antium that he had
been present as augur to take the auspices. Two delight*
ful letters from you delivered at the same time I For which
I do not know what I am to pay you by way of reward for
good news. That I owe you for them I candidly confess.
But observe the coincidence. I had just made my way
from Antium on to the via Ap^ia at Three Taverns/ on
the very day of the Cerealia (19th April), when my friend
Curio meets me on his way from Rome. At the same
place and the same moment comes a slave from you with
letters. The former asked me whether I hadn't heard the
news? I said, "No." ** Publius," says he, "is a candidate

Er the tribuneship." **Yoii don't mean it?" **Yes, I
\^ says he, "and at daggers drawn with Caesar. His
rject is to rescind his acts.'* '* What says Oesar? " said I,
He denies having proposed any lex for his adoption/*
den he poured forth about his own hatred, and that of
cmmtus and Metellus Nepos. I embraced the youth and
»id good-bye to him, hastening to your letters. A fig for
those who talk about a *' living voice'*! What a much
cksier view I got of what was going on from your letters
&in from his talk ! About the current rumours of the day,
tbout the designs of Publius, about " luno's ** trumpet calls,
al>out Athenio who leads his roughs, about his letter to
Gr.xus, about the conversation of Theophanes and Mem-
uius. Besides, how eager you have made me to hear about
be ** fast '* dinner party which you mention 1 I am greedy in
iriosity, yet I do not feel at all hurt at your not writing me
I description of the symposium : I would rather hear it by
►ord of mouth. As to your urging me to write something,
Dy materia indeed is growing, as you say, but the whole is
jtill in a state of fermentation- — " new wine in the autumn."
hen the liquor has settled down and become clarified,
shall know better what to write. And even if you
ciC get it from me at once, you shall be the first to have
Jy for some time you must keep it to yourself. You
right to like Dicaearchus j he is an excellent writer,
'a much better citizen than these rulers of ours who

* Where the road from Antium joins the Appia, Cicero seems to be
fn tis iray lo Fonnise, where he had intended to arrive on the 2isL
*■ r musl be going very leisurely.

MJC^S^MS^H

^I

ZXXYn (A n, to)

TO AXnCUS (AT ROMS)

Aim ToKom^^ AntiL

FiMASK adnme Hf cnmiumfy . I m ddeniuned not I
at tfe ^OBCS at AtfdoHi: fiar it s son he nla t of m
to vish tD amd d tua|Miou of frxvoGlj, md jet
to be siigvii up 15 tisfdGng for mene isuiseixient, and 1
of a foQ&li kiod. Wbeiefeve I shall wsit for jou tiH i
7tli of Msj 9X Fotmse. So now kl ine krow what daj
shall see joo. Ftom Appit FonuD» ten o^dock I
siother a ihott ttme ago from Three Tarecns.

XXXVIII (A H, It)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

FoRHUE, April

I TELL you what it is : I feel myself a downright exile sm
arriving at Formiae. For at Andum there was never a <
that I didn't know what was going on at Rome better 1

^ ^iKalapxoc ^tid aiucaiapx^h ^ p<2n on a nune not reproducible]
iSfigllsh : **jT2st'mlers*' and "unjust^rulers*" ■

^ On the via Appia. Cicero halts at Appii Forum and at
despatches a short note, probably by some one he finds there g< "
Rome, to announce a change of plan. He had meant to get !
Antium on 3rd May, because Tullia wanted to see the games.
Letter XXXIV, p. 96.

pii, ic^ 11,13

TO ATTICUS

lOT

ttiose who were there. For your letters used to shew me not
pnly what was doing at Rome, but the actual political situa-
tion also — and not only that, but also what was likely to
happen. Now, unless I snatch a bit of news from some pass-
ing traveller, I can learn nothing at alL Wherefore, though
I im expecting you in person, yet pray give this boy, whom
I have ordered to hurry back to me at once, a bulky
fetter, crammed not only with all occurrences, but with what
you think about them j and be careful to let me know the
diy you are going to leave Rome. I intend staying at
Fonnias till the 6th of May. If you don^t come there by
that day, I shall perhaps see you at Rome. For why should
I invite you to Arpinum ?

** A nigged soil, yet Durse of hardy sons :
No dearer land can e*er my eyes behold.** *

3o much for this. Take care of your health.

XXXIX (A n, 13)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Formic, April

What an abominable thing I No one gave you my letter
written on the spot at Three Taverns in answer to your
iJclightful letters t But the fact is that the packet into which
I had put it arrived at my town house on the same day as I
tnoit it, and has been brought back to me to Formise.
Iccordingly, I have directed the letter meant for you to be
iken back again, to shew you how pleased I was with yours,
Jo you say that the talk has died out at Rome I 1 thought
D : but, by Hercules, it hasn't died out in the country, and
I has come to this, that the very country can*t stand the
espotasm you have got at Rome. When you come to " Lks-
^fgoaia of the distant gates"' — I mean Formiae — what loud

* Homer, Oii/ss. ut. 27.

* riiKiwpXQV AcuffTpvjoviffy^ whose king Laraus {Odyss. x. 81) was
■-*^-^ to have founded Fonniie (Horace, Od. ilL 17).

I02

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C» S9t ^'BT. 1

murmurs I what angry souls! what unpopularity for our frie
Magnus 1 His surname is getting as much out of fashion ^
the " Dives " of Crass us. Believe me, I have met no one he
to take tjie present state of things as quietly as I do. Whe
fore, credit me, let us stick to philosophy. I am ready 1
take my oath that there is nothing to beat it If you ha^
a despatch to send to the Sicyonians/ make haste to For
whence I think of going on the 6th of May.

XL (A II, 14)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

FoRMije, April

How you rouse my curiosity as to what Bibulus says, as 1
your conversation with " luno," and even as to your '* fa
dinner party ! Therefore make haste to come, for my <
are thirsty for news* However, there is nothing which 1
think is now more to be dreaded by me than that our de
Sampsiceramus, finding himself belaboured by the tongu
of all, and seeing these proceedings easy to upset, should
begin striking out. For myself^ I have so completely lost
all nerve, that I prefer a despotism, with the existing peace,
to a state of war with the best hopes in the world. As to
literary composition, to which you frequently urge me, it is
impossible I My house is a basilica rather than a villa,
owing to the crowds of visitors from Formise. But (you^ll
say) do I really compare the ^milian tribe to the crowd i^J
a basilica ? ^ Well, I say nothing about the common ruck'^^|

^ A despatch from senate or consuls. See Letter XXIV, p, 60.

' Ai companm for a£ quant partem. At has its usua] force of intro-
ducing a supposed objection. 1 can't^ say you, compare the ^miliaii
tribe, the Fonniauij to a crowd in a court-house ! They are not
io bad as that, not so wasteful of time \ 1 take basilica to mean the
saunterefs in a basilica, as we might say *' the park " for the company
in itj ** the exchange " for the brokers in it. I feel certain that Proi,
Tyrrell is wrong in ascribing the words s§d — sunt to a quotation
from Atticus's letter. What is wanted is to remove the full stop aftei
sunt. The contrast Cicero is drawing is between the intemiption to

* II, 14. 15

TO ATTICUS

103

the rest of them don't bother me after ten o'clock: but
C Arrius is my next door neighbour, or rather, he ahnost
fifs in my house, and even declares that the reason for
his not going to Rome is that he may spend whole days
with me here philosophizing! And then^ lo and behold^
00 my other side is Sebosus, that friend of Catulus I Which
way am I to turn? By heaven, I would start at once
for Arpinmn, only that I see that the most convenient place
to await your visit is Formise : but only up to the 6 th of
May ! For you see with what bores my ears are pestered.
^Vhat a splendid opportunity, with such fellows in the
house, if anyone wanted to buy my Formian property!^
And in spite of all this am I to make good my words, ^* Let
tis attempt something great, and requiring much thought
and leisure " ? However, I miii do something for you, and
not spare my labour.

XLI (A 11, IS)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

FoRMiM^ April

As you say, things are as shifting (I see) in public affairs as
in your letter ; still, that very variety of talk and opinion has
i charm for me. For I seem to be at Rome when I am
JeadiDg your letter, and, as is the regular thing in questions of
Jtich importance, to hear something first on one side and
then on the other. But what I can^t make out is this — ^what
he can possibly hit upon to settle the land question without
eoooontering opposition. Again, as to Bibulus's firmness in
putting off the comitia^ it only conveys the expression of his
own views, without really offering any remedy for the state of
the Republic, Upon my word, my only hope is in FubUus 1

IterAry work of a crowd of visitors and of one or two individimU alwa^
g up» The second is the worse^^nd here I thiQk all workers wiM
with him : the crowd of visitors {'mdgus\ go at Oie regular botu^
idividuals come in at all hours.
Beanie be would be inclined to sell it cheap in \m disgust.

104

aCERO'S LETTERS

BX, 59» vFT, 47

Let him becoiDe, k( him beoooie a tribuoe by all means, if
for DO oiber leiaoo, fen Uiat foa may be brought back from
Epims I For I don't see horn yoa can possibly aflTord to miss
him, especially if he shaU elect to have a wrangle with me \
Bat, seriously, if anything of the sort occurs, you would^ I am
certain, hurry back. But even supposing this not to be the
case, yet whether he mns amuck or helps to raise the state,
I promise myself a fine spectacle, if only I may enjoy it with
you sitting by my side,* Just as I was writing these words,
enter Sdbosus ! I had scarcely got out a sigh when '* Good
day," says Arrius. This is what you call going out of town 1
Eiapea from society ! ^Vhen I f aU in with men like these!
I shall really be off to

•• My natiTe moontains and my childhood's haunts. ** •

In fine, if I can't be alone I would rather be with do^
countrjrfolk than with such ultra-cockneys. However, I sh
since you don't say anything for certain, wait for you up 1
the 5th of May. Terentia is much pleased with the atl
tion and care you have bestowed on her controversy ^
Mulvius. She is not aware that you are supporting
common cause of all holders of public land. Yet| after 1
yau do pay something to the pubiicani ; she declines to ]
even that,* and, accordingly, she and Cicero^most cons
tive of boys— send their kind regards.

* The spectacle Cicero hopes for is Clodius's contests with
tmmvirs

* To Arpinum (see last letter). The verse is not known, and
be a quotation from his own poem on Marius. He often quol^ 1
lelf.

■ This is not mentioned elsewhere. The explanation seems to 1
that for the ager puhlkus allotted under the Sempronian laws a small i
had been exacted, which was abolished by a ]aw of B.C. iii (the 1
of the law being uncertain). But some Ckger pubitcus still paid i
and the publicanus Mulvius seems to have claimed it from some L_
held by Terentia, perhaps on the ground that it was land (such as I
agrr Campanus) not affected by the law of Gracchus, and therefore I
by the subsequent law abolishing rent.

H.I6

TO ATTICUS

IO$

XLII (A u, i6)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

FoRMi^ 29 April

r the day before the Kalends of May, when I had dined

was just going to sleep, the letter was delivered to me

litaining your news about the Campanian land You

' a't ask : at first it gave me such a shock that there was

I more sleep for me, though that was the result of thought

rather than pain. On reflexion, however^ the following ideas

occorred to me. In the first place, from what you had said

in yoor previous letter — ** that you had heard from a friend

of his ' that a proposal was going to be made which would

^tisfy everybody"— I hadfeared some verysweeping measure,

' don't think this is anything of the sort In the next

by way of consolation, I persuaded myself that the

of a distribution of land is now all centred on the

opanian territory/ That land cannot support more than

'5,000, so as to give tea iug^era apiece : * the rest of the crowd of

Its must necessarily be alienated from them. Besides,

' there is anything that more than another could inflame

feeling of the aristocrats, who are, I notice, already

it is this; and all the more: hat with port-dues

I Italy abolished,* and the Campmnian land divided, what

ham& revenue is there except the five per cent, on manu-

' missions ? And even that, I think, it will only take a single

^rampery harangue, cheered by our lackeys, to throw away

^■j" The old terntory of Capua and the Stetktian Plain bad been
Hbdilly rsenred Einam distribution under the laws of the Gracchi, and
HBi rservadoo hud not been repealed in subsequent laws ; at/ snhsuHa
TmftdHem 9fCt^im r^ikium (Suet. Cm. 20 ; cp. Cic. 2 Phii. § roi).
' Afifiorviiiig to Suetonius 20,000 citizens had allotments on the
ifkr /mAA^mi in Campania, But Dio says (xxxviii, t) that the Cam-
I Und was exempted by the lex lulia also. Its settlement was
later, by colonies of Caesar *s veterans. A iuj^trrum is five*
>of «ii acre.
' See Letter XXIX, p. 82. They were abolished b.c, 60.

io6

*Fori

iir>»i

hithctla be bas fenced widi thoeqKtfiaK: ''he^pp
CflMtt^i liV9r bitl Qear ansr be inpanAie fer his [
bifi io caRfing tbem*; '^^HaaaeMw^ stisfied with |
i^puMQ Inr **; *' whether it owld be leioed bf a tiibui^
Wftiootbiogtodowiitblmsi*; '* be ^ooj^tbe time hade
for the boneai oftbe A fciMMMue hi^tpbe settled'
wail no btistiie» of ba to iaqme wbetber Kbate had 1
WMehing ehe skj<3n diai orra^rwi or no** ; "as to thej
tsm^, he had been willing to oblige tbat Ofder*; "^wbat ^
fOifig to hKppCD if l^bidiB GBme dofwn 10 the forum at I
BaiebecomdnothafegDesed.*^ Bixt aofw, oif Samp '
amui^whatwiUyoa saytotbb? Thai yoo ba^e secured i
rercnoe from the Antilibamis and lemcyved that torn !
Campanian land? Well, how do yoa mean to
that ? ** I shall coerce yon,** says h^ "by means of <
army/' You won't coerce me, by Hcfcules, by your s
io much as by the ingmtitude of the schcaEed Awi^
have never made me any retoiii» even in words, to
nothing of substantial rewards. But if I had put out ]
•trengc)} against that coterie, I shocdd certainly have f
iome way of holding my own against them. As
tae, in view of the controversy between your friend
archuM and my ^eod Theophrastus — the form^
mending the life of action, the latter the life of contK
plation — I think I have akeady obeyed both. For asl
Dicsearchus, I think I have satisfied his requirements ;j
prcicnt my eyes are fixed on the school which not
alkrwi of my abstaining fi-om business, but blames me j

* TWi and the mention of Caesar's " anny ** (a bodygoard) i» <
by Bnet. Cm, 20 : *' Having promolgated his agrarian law, <
pdled hii colleague, Bibulus, by force of arms from Uie Fomm '
tiyhig to ttop proceedings by annoanciDg bad omens . . . and fi
rcdQ^ hsm to m^ despair that for the rest of bb yc^r of oflBce he I
^ed himaelf to his house and only announced his bad omens by nM
f fldicti.'* Bibulus appears to have been hustled by the mob alio, i

i tl, 26

TO ATTICUS

107

having always done so. Wherefore let me throw myself,
dear Titus, into those noble studies, and let me at length
fetum to what I ought never to have left.

As to what you say about Quintus's letter, when he wrote

to me he was also " in front a lion and behind a .*' ^ I

don^ know what to say about it; for in the first Hnes of
his letter he makes such a lamentation over his continu-
ance in his province, that no one could help being affected :
presently he calms down sufficiently to ask me to correct
and edit his Annals. However, I would wish you to have
an eye to what you mention, I mean the duty on goods
transferred from port to port. He says that by the advice of
his council he has referred the question to the senate. He
evidently had not read my letter, in which after having con-
adered and investigated the matter, I had sent him a written
opinion that they were not payable.' If any Greeks have
already arrived at Rome from Asia on that business, please
look into it and, if you think it right, explain to them my
opinion on the subject. If, to save the good cause in the
senate, I can retract, I will gratify the puMcani: but if not,
to be plain with you, I prefer in this matter the interests
of all Asia and the merchants ; for it affects the latter also
Tcry seriously, I think it is a matter of great importance to
us. But you will setde it. Are the quaestors, pray, still
besitating on the ctsiopkorus question?* If nothing better
is to be had, after trying everything in oor power, I should
be for not refusing even the lowest offer. I shall see you at
Arpinum and offer you country entertainment, since you
have despised this at the seaside.

* rpocBi \i<0v ^'jnBtv it- . Cicero leaves Atticus, as he often does,

tsfiU Dp the rest of thelinCt Spdxtm^^ jtiiffffjj it ;(i^aipa(Honi. JL vi. 181),
Hcneans^ of course, that Quintus is inconsistent

* The question seems to be as to goods brought to a port and pa3'ing
4aty, and then, not finding a sale, being transferred to another port io
the same province. The publicani at the second port demanded the

I pmient of & duty again^ which Cicero decides against them.

' $chat2 takes this to meaui ** Are the quasslors now doubting as to

p^ing even cisiophori? " ue,^ are they, so far from paying in Roman

\dmawii^ even hesitating to pay in Asiatic ? But if so, what is the exiremum

I Cicero advises Quinlus to accept? Prof. Tyrrell, besides, points

Ihat the quaestors could hardly refuse to pay anything for provincial

[ttpeoss. It is a question between ciitopk&ri and dtnarii. See p* 92.

io8

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.c 59, .

XLIII (A n. 17)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

FoRMivE, May

I QUITE agree with your letter. Sampsiceramus is getti!
up a disturbance. We have everything to fear. He is
paring a despotism and no mistake about it. For what
is the meaning of that sudden marriage union,^ the
panian land affair, Ihe lavish expenditure of money ? If these
measures were final, even then the mischief had been verf
great ; but the nature of the case makes finality impossible*
For how could these m easures possibly give them any pleasure
in themselves ? They would never have gone so far as this
unless they had been paving the way for other fata! steps.
Immortal Gods 1 — But, as you say, at Arpinum about the
loth of May we will not weep over these questions, lest the
hard work and midnight oil I have spent over my studies
shall turn out to have been wasted, hot discuss them together
calmly. For I am not so much consoled by a sanguine dis-
position as by philosophic " indifference," ' which I call to
my aid in nothing so much as in our civil and political busi-
ness. Nay, more, whatever vanity or sneaking love of reputa-
tion there is lurking in me — for it is well to know one's faults
— is tickled by a certain pleasurable feeling- For it used to
sting me to the heart to think that centuries hence the
services of Sampsiceramus to the state would loom larger than
my own. That anxiet>^ at least, is now put to rest For he is
so utterly fallen that, in comparison with him, Curius might
seem to be standing erect after his fall" But all this when
we meet. Yet, as far as I can see, you will be at Rome
when I come. I shall not be at all sorry for that, if you can

^ The marriage of Pompey with Caesar's daughter luTia.

* aHiatpopiaf a word taken from the Stoies, /tuu [Z^rfcm] summum
icnum est in his rebus neutram in partem moveri^ guct adta^opia ah ipo
dicitur {A(ad, 11. § 130).

' C Curius, one of the Catiline set, who had been ignominiom^
expelled the senate.

An. I7»i1l

TO ATTICUS

Tcg

conveniently manage it. But if you come to see me, as you

say in your letter, I wish you would fish out of Theophanes
how " Arabarches " * is disposed to me. You will, of course,
inquire with your usual zeal, and bring me the result to
serve as a kind of suggestion for the line of conduct I am
to adopt From his conversation we shall be able to get an
mkling of the whole situation.

XLIV (A n, 1^)

TO ATTICUS (ON HIS WAY TO EPIRUS)

Rome

f HAVE received several letters from you, which shewed me

jrhat eagerness and anxiety you desired to know the

We are bound hard and fast on every side, and are

ST making any difficulty as to being slaves, but fear-

; death and exile as though greater evils, though they are

\ much smaller ones. Well, this is the position— one

3usiy groaned over, but not relieved by a word from

The object, I surmise, of the men in power is to

tve nothing for anyone to lavish. The only man who

i his mouth and openly disapproves is the young CuriOt

J is loudly cheered, and greeted in the forum in the most

BpUmentary manner, and many other tokens of goodwill

febestowed on him by the loyalists; while Fufius* is pursued

' DQls, jeers, and hisses. From such circumstances it

but indignation that is increased, for you see

[ allowed to express their sentiments, but debarred

Qg them out with any vigour, \ And to omit

the upshot is that there is now no hope, I don't say '

persons, but even of the magistrates bebg ever

i again. Nevertheless^ in spite of this policy of repression,

Dickname of Pompey, from the title of the head of the
tn Egypt- like Sampsiceramug and the others, it is meant ai
* aUtisioD to Pompey^s achlevetrtents in the Eost, and perhaps
I wish to have the diiectlon of afikirs in EgypL
Letlef XXX, p* 33.

no

CICERO'S LETTERS

».c. S9» ^* 47 1

conversation, at least in society and at dinner tables, is fre

than it was. Indignation is beginning to get the better '
fear, though that does not prevent a universal feeling <
despair. For this Campanian law^ contains a clause imp
an oath to be taken by candidates in public meeting,
they will not suggest any tenure of public land other th
that provided in the Julian laws. All the others take thd
oath without hesitation : Laterensis * is considered to havel
shewn extraordinary virtue in retiring from his canvass forJ
the tribuneship to avoid the oath. But I don't care to writt
any more about politics. I am dissatisfied with myself, j
cannot write without the greatest pain. I hold my ow
position with some dignity, considering the general repn
sion, but considering my achievements in the past, with le
courage than I should like. / I am invited by Caesar in a v©
gentlemanly manner to accept a legation, to act as k§
to himself, and even an " open votive legation " is offei
me. But the latter does not give sufficient security, sin
it depends too much on the scrupulousness of Pulchellu
/<^nd removes me just when my brother is returning ; *
former offers better security and does not prevent my retumifl
when I please. I am retaining the latter, but do not th^
I shall use it. However, nobody knows about iL I don't 1
running away ; I am itching to fight There is great wa
of feeling for me. But I don't say anything positive :
will please not to mention it. I am, in fact, very anxio

^ I.e.^ Ceesar's agrarian law^ by which some of the Campanian
publicus was to be divided.

^ M. luventius Laterensis. See Letter L, p. 123.

* Pulchellus, 1.*,, P. Clodius Palcher. The diminutive is tised 1
express contempt. Cicero, since his return to Rome, is beginning I
realize his danger.

^ A libera Ugatia was really a colourable method of a senator trair
with the right of exacting certain payments for his expenses &ofl
the Italian or provincial towns. Sometimes it was simply a VjwiW
libera^ a sinecure without any pretence of purpose, some times it ««
ftoii causa, enabling a man to mlfil some vow he was supposed to hafl
made. It was naturally open to much abuse, and Cicero as consul \
passed a law for limiting it in time. Clodius would become tribune e
10 December, and this li/fera Ugatio would protect Cicero as long as i
lasted, but it would not, he thinks, last long enough to outstay f
tribuneship : if he went as legatus to Qesar in Gaul^ he wouUi tie safe*
and might choose his own time for resigning and returning to Rome.

A II, tS« 19

TO ATTICUS

III

&boat the manumission of Statius ' and some other things,
but I have become hardened by this time. I could wish, or
ntb^ ardently desire, that you were here : then I should not
nant advice or consolation. But anyhow, be ready to fly
i Inlher directly I call for you.

XLV (A 11. 19)
TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)
Rome (July)

1 HAVE many causes for anxiety, both from the disturbed
ftate of politics and from the personal dangers with which I
threatened. They are very numerous; but nothing
me more annoyance than the manumission of Statius ;
To think that he should have no reverence for my autho-
I But of authority I say nothlng^that he should have
fear of a quarrel with me, to put it mildly 1 "'^ But what
^I am to do I don't know, nor indeed is there so much
is the affair as you would think from the talk about it.
for myself, I am positively incapable of being angry with
those I love deeply. I only feel vexed, and that to a
ing degree. Other vexations are on really important
The threats of Clodius and the conflicts before
me touch me only slightly. For I think I can either con-
front them with perfect dignity or decline them without
any embarrassment. You will say, perhaps, ** Enough of
(Sgpity, like the proverb^ * Enough of the oak ' : ' an you
tore me, take thought for safety I '* Ah, dear me, dear me,
are you not here? Nothing, certainly, could have
' lyou. I, perhaps, am somewhat blinded, and too
afitected by my high ideal I assure you there never

itii^ ft slave of Quintus, was ttn popular in the province. Seep. 125.

_ ^fnAi, tl#. , feeding on acorns h a thing of the past, it is out of
tlike the golden age when they fed on wild fruit et fua tUdderant
Imdi oftcre glamUs (Ovid, Met, L 106) ; and so is dignity, it
atioM of mftiy now«

in

CICERC/S LETTERS

B.C. 59» iCT. 4fi

ms ftis|thiQg so scaodakm^ so shameful, so o^ensive to ^
soct^ oonditiioiis and ages of men alike, as the pre
Sbifie of a&n. It is more vk bf Hercules^ than I couk
have wished, bat not more tlauk I had expected. Yo
fwfmimwft hsve now tu|g|it erea usually quiet men to hiss."
BitiiihB is praised to the skies : I don't know why, but he_
has the sune son of ipplajQse as his

** Who bf dd^js KAored alone oor Sute,** ■

Fompey — the man I loved — has, to my infinite sorro^
nnaed his own teputatioo. They hold no one by a6fectio
and I fear they will be foroed to use terror. I, howeve
tefirain frocD hostility to their cause owing to my fiiendsb
fiDT him, and yet I cannot approve, lest I shoald stultify i
own past I keep to the highroad. The feeling of the peop
was shewn as clearly as possible in the theatre and at f
shows. For at the gladiators both master and supporters \
overwhelmed with hisses. At the games of Apollo the i
Diphilus made a pert allusion to Pompey, in the words;

** By OUT midbrtimes thou art — Gremt.*'

He was encored countless times. When he delivered the tine|

*' The time will oome when thou wilt deeplj mooni
That s^-same valotir,"

the whole theatre broke out into applause, and so on ^
the rest. For the verses do seem exactly as though
were written by some enemy of Pompey*s to hit the tin
"If neither laws nor customs can control," etc., caused |^
I sensation and loud shouts. Caesar having entered as
applause died away, he was followed by the younger Curio
The latter received an ovation such as used to be given
Pompey when the constitution was still intact Caesar ^
much annoyed. A despatch is said to have been sent flying
off to Pompey at Capua.* They are offended with
equites, who rose to their feet and cheered Curio, and i

^ Enniiis on Q, Fabiiis Majdmus CunctatOT.
* Pompej was in Campania actixig a& one of the twenty land <
missioners.

A 11, 19

TO ATTrCUS

"3

at war with everybody. They are threatening the Roscian
law,* and even the corn kw.^ There has been a great hubbub
altogether. For my part, I should have preferred their
6cmg^ being silently ignored; but that, I fear, won't be
aDowed. Men are indignant at what nevertheless must, it
seems, be put up with. The whole people have indeed now
ooe voice, but its strength depends rather on exasperation
than anything to back it up. Farthermore, our Publius is
threatening me : he is hostile, and a storm is hanging over my
head which should bring you posfe haste to town, I believe
that I am stiU firmly supported by the same phalanx of all
loyal or even tolerably loyal men which supported me when
c/jQ5\il- Pompey displays no common afFection for me. He
also asserts that Clodius is not going to say a word about
me. In which he is not deceiving me, but is himself deceived.
Cosconius having died, I am invited to fill his place/ That
would indeed be a case of "invited to a dead man's place."
I should have been beneath contempt in the eyes of the
world, and nothing could be conceived less likely to secure
that very " persoiml safety " of which you speak. For those
commissioners are disliked by the loyalists, and so I should
have retained my own unpopularity with the disloyal, with

ddition of that attaching to others. Csesar wishes me to

t a legateship under him. This is a more honourable

1 of avoiding the danger. But I don*t wish to avoid

What do I want, then ? Why, I prefer fighting. How-
I have not made up my mind. Again I say, Oh
[that you were here ! However, if it is absolutely necessary
Jl will summon you. What else is there to say? \Vhat
Idse? This, I think ; I am certain that all is lost. For why
inUDce matters any longer ? But I write this in haste^ and,

* The /<ar Hascia thmtralii {b.c, 67}* which gave fourteen rows of seats
llodieequites.

I • Thtt is, the law for distribution of com among poorer citirens,
iTIiefe were many such. Perhaps the most recent was the lex Cassia
I Timtim (h.c. 73}. Csesar, whci» when in later years he became supreme,
mtiicted this privilege, may have threatened to do so now.
' /.r., as one ot the twenty land commissioners. The next daiise
i lo refer to some proverbial expression^ ** to be invited to a place
\§i FltdoV Cmble," or some such sentence. Cicero means that his accept-
! wottid be equivalent to pcjlitical extinction, either from the obscurity
afCoKootus ot the inconsistency of the proceeding.
1. I

114

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 59, MT. 47

by Hercules, in rather a nervous state. On some future
occasion I will either write to you at full length, if I find a
very trustworthy person to whom to give a letter, or if I write
darkly you will understand all the same. In these letters I
will be Laelius, you Furius; the rest shall be in riddles.
Here I cultivate Csecilius/ and pay him assiduous attention.
I hear Bibulus's edicts have been sent to you. Our friend
Pompey is hot with indignation and wrath at them.*

XLVI (A II, 20)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome (July)

I HAVE done everything I could for Anicatus, as I under-
stood was your wish. Numestius, in accordance with your
earnestly expressed letter, I have adopted as a friend.
Caecilius I look after diligently in all ways possible, Varro*
does all I could expect for me, Pompey loves me and re-
gards me as a dear friend, " Do you believe that ? " you
will say. I do : he quite convinces me. Bot seeing that
men of the world in all histories, precepts, and even verses,
are for ever bidding one be on one's guard and forbidding
beliefj I carry out the former^ — ^" to be on my guard '* —
the latter—** to disbelieve *' * — 1 cannot carry out. Clodius
is still threatening me with danger. Pompey asserts that
there is no danger. He swears it. He even adds that he
will himself be murdered by him sooner than I injured.

* The uncle of Atticus. See p, i5»

' After the scene of violence in which Bibolus^ on attempting to
prevent the agrarian law being passed, was driven from the rostra, with
nis lictors* fasces broken, he shut himself up in bis house and published
edicts declaring Caesar's acts invalid, and denouncing the conduct of
Pompey (Suet, des. 20 ; Ko, xxxviii. 6).

* M, Terentius Varro, **the most learned of the Romans," and
author of very large numbers of books. He was afterwards one of
Pompey's /f^o/i" in Spain. He survived most of the men of the
revolutionary era.

* See Letter XXIV» p. 56.

.11,

TO ATTICUS

115

The negotiation is going on. As soon as anything is settled
1 will write you word. If I have to fight, 1 will summon
you to share in the work. If I am let alone, I won't root
you out of your " Amaltheia." About politics I will write
briefiy: for I am now afraid lest the very paper should
betray me. Accordingly, in future, if I have anything more
to write to you, I shall clothe it in covert language. For the
present the state is dying of a novel disorder ; for although
everybody disapproves of what has been done, complains,
and is indignant about it, and though there is absolutely no
difference of opinion on the subject^ and people now speak
openly and groan aloud, yet no remedy is applied : for we
do not think resistance possible without a general slaughteri
nor see what the end of concession is to be except ruin.
Brbulus is exalted to the skies as far as admiration and affec-
tion go. His edicts and speeches are copied out and read.
He has reached the summit of glory in a novel way. There is
now nothing so popular as the dislike of the popular party.
I have my fears as to how this will end. But if I ever see
my way clearly in anything, I will write to you more explicitly.
For yourself, if you love me as much as I am sure you do,
t^ce care to be ready to come in all haste as soon as I call
far yott. But I do my best, and shall do so, to make it un-
[necessary. I said I would call you Furius in my letters j but
Fit is not necessary to change your name. I'll call myself
' Lfldius and you Atticus, but I will use neither my own hand-
writing nor seal, if the letter happens to be such as I should
not wish to fall into the hands of a stranger. Diodotus is
dead ; he has left me perhaps 1,000 sestertia. Bibulus has
postponed the elections to the iSth of October, in an edict
eipressed in the vein of Archilochus.^ I have received the
hooks from Vibius : he is a miserable poet,* but yet he is
not without some knowledge nor wholly useless. I am
going to copy the book out and send it back.

■ /.#., in biting language. Arckilechum propria rabies armavit
. mmb9 (Hor, A. P. 79)-
{ ' The Caspwpaphia of Alexander of Ephesus, See Letter XLVIII^

L

it6

CICERO^S LETTERS

B.C. 59i ^T. 47,

XLVII (A II, 21)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)
Rome (July)

Why should I write to you on the Republic in detail/ Itl

utterly mined ; and is, so far, in a worse state thaii wheo ya
left it, that then a despotism seemed to be opprsssbigL
which was popular with the multitude, and though offensive
to the loyalists^ yet short of actual mischief; but now ail on
a sudden they have become so universally hated, that I
tremble to think what wUl be the end of it. For we have had
experience of those men^s resentment and violence, who have
ruined everything in their anger against Cato ; yet they we
employing such slow poisons, that it seemed as though i
end might be painless. Now, however, I fear they have 1
exasperated by the hisses of the crowd, the talk of the respect-
able classes, and the murmurs of Italy. For my part, I
in hopes, as I often used actually to say to you, that the whe ^
of the state chariot had made its revolution with scarcely any
noise and leaving scarcely any visible rut ; and it would have
been so, if people could only have waited till the storm had
blown over. But after sighing in secret for a long tim^
they all began, first to groan, and at last to talk and she
Accordingly, that friend of ours, unaccustomed to being l
popular, always used to an atmosphere of praise, and rev
ling in glory, now disfigured in body and broken in spirit, do
not know which way to turn ; sees that to go on is dangeroti
to return a betrayal of vacillation; has the loyalists
enemies, the disloyal themselves not his friends. Yet
how soft-hearted I am, I could not refrain from te
when, on the 25th of July, I saw him making a speech
the edicts of Bibulus, The man who in old times had T
used to bear himself in that place with the utmost con6de
and dignity, surrounded by the warmest affection of
people, amidst universal favour — how humble, how
do?ni he was then ! How ill-content with himself, to

lii

Fa ti, 21

TO ATTICUS

117

^

nothing of how unpleasing to his audience! Oh^ what a
spectacle ! No one could have liked it but Crassus-^no one
else in the world! Not I, for considering his headlong
descent from the stars, he seemed to me have lost his footing
rather than to have been deliberately following a path ; and^
as Apelles, if he had seen his Venus, or Protogenes his
lalysus daubed with mud, would, I presume, have felt great
sorrow, so neither could 1 behold without great sorrow a
man, portrayed and embellished with all the colours of my
art, suddenly disfigured. Although no one thought, in view
of the Clodius business, that I was bound to be his friend,
yet so great was my affection for him, that no amount of
injury was capable of making it run d^}^ The result is that
those Archilochian edicts of Bibulus against him are so
popular, that one can't get past the place where they are put
up for the crowd of readers, and so deeply annoying to him-
self that he is pining with vexation. To me, by Hercules, they
are distressing, both because they give excessive pain to a man
whom I have always loved, and because I fear lest one so
impulsive and so quick to strike, and so unaccustomed to
personal abuse, may, in his passionate resentment, obey the
dictates of indignation and anger. I don't know what is to
be the end of Bibulus. As things stand at present he is
enjoying a wonderful reputation. For on his having post-
poned the comitia to October, as that is a measure which
is always against the popular feeling, Caesar had imagined
that the assembly could be induced by a speech of his to
go to Bibulus's house; but after a long harangue full of
seditious suggestions, he failed to extract a word from any-
orve. In short, they feel that they do not possess the cordial
j goodwill of any section : all the more must we fear some
act of violence. Clodius is hostile to us. Pompey persists
in asserting that he will do nothing against me. It is risky
I for me to believe that, and I am preparing myself to meet
1 Im attack. I hope to have the warmest feelings of all orders
I on my side. I have personally a longing for you, and cir-
comstances also demand your presence at that time. I shall
fed it a very great addition to my policy, to my courage,
and, in a word, to my safety, if I see you in time, Varro

en expect. Pompey talks like an angel I have
shall come ofif with flying colours, or at any

Ii8

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.c, 59, ^T, 47

rate without being molested Be sure and tell me how yo^
are^ how you are amusing yourself, and what settlement yo
have come to with the Sicyonians.

XLVIII (A II, 22)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome (July)

How I wished yoti had stayed at Rome ! I am sure yon
would have stayed if you had foreseen what was going
happen. For then we should have had no difficulty in ke
ing " Pulchellus '" in order, or at least should have knoij
what he was going to do. As things are, he darts at
talks like a madman, never sticks to anything : threatens nd
this one and now that : seems likely, in reahty, to do whate
turns up. When he sees how unpopular the present sb
of things is, he seems to intend an attack upon the authc
of it ; but when he again recalls their power and armies, f
transfers his hostility to the loyalists. Me personally
threatens at one time with violence, at another with impe
ment . With him Pompey has remonstrated, and, as he tells i
himself — for I have no other evidence — has urgently remo
stratedj pointing out that he would himself lie under the i
treme imputation of perfidy and unprincipled conduct, if i
danger to me were created by the man whom he had '
self armedby acquiescing in his becoming a plebeian :
both he and Appius ^ had pledged themselves in regard
me : if Clodius did not respect that, he should shew su
annoyance that everyone would understand that he valu^
my friendship above everything. Having said this and mt
else to the same effect, he told me that the fellow at
argued against it at great length and for a long time, but
eventually gave way and declared that he would do nothing
against his wishes. Nevertheless, he has not ceased sinc$
then speaking of me with the greatest bitterness. But <

' Appius Claudius Pakher, elder brother of P. Qodius

A 11* 2^

TO ATTICUls

119

if he had not done so, I should have felt no confidence in
him, but should have been making every preparation, as in
fact I ara doing. As it is, I am so conducting myself that
every day the affections of people towards me and the strength
of my position are enhanced* I don^t touch politics in any
shape or way ; I employ myself with the greatest assiduity
in pleading causes and in my regular forensic business.*
And this I feel is extremely gratifying, not only to those
who enjoy my servicesj but dso to the people generally.
My house is crowded ; I am met by processions ; the memory
of my consulship is renewed; men's feelings are clearly
shewn : my hopes are so raised, that the struggle hanging
over me seems at times one from which I need not shrink.
Now is the time that I need your advicCj your love and
fidelity. Wherefore come post haste ! Eyerj'thing will be
easy for me if I have you. I can carry on many negotiations
through our friend Varro, which will be on firmer ground with
you to back them up ; a great deal can be elicited from
Publius himself, and be brought to my knowledge, which
cannot possibly be kept concealed from you ; a great deal also
— but it is absurd to enumerate particulars, when I want you
for everything. I would like you to be convinced of this
above all, that everything will be simplified for me if I see
you : but it all turns on this coming to pass befart he enters
on his office. I think that if you are here while Crassus is
^ging on Pompey — as you can get out of Clodius himself,
by the agency of " luno,^^ ^ how far they are acting in good
(aith — we shall escape molestation, or at any rate not be
left under a delusion. You don't stand in need of entreaties
or urgency from me. You understand what my wish is, and
what the hour and the importance of the business demand.
As to politics, I can tell you nothing except that everybody

* The speeches known to us of thii year are those for his colleague^
C, Aatonius, A. Thermus, and L. Flaccns. The two former lire lost,
bat we know from his own account that he had not avoided touching on
politics in the speech for Antonius, but had so offended Pompey and
C««kr that they at once earned out the adoption of Clodius {de Domo^

* Boiwinc* f,#., Clodia* See Letters XXXV, XL* Cmmw urgtnte
li ififficolt. Cicero must mean that while Cra&sus (whom he always
inffds Iks hostile to himself) is influencing Pompeyi he cannot trust
wfiai Pompey «ays, and must look for real infonnadon elsewhere.

120

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX. 59, MT,

entertains the greatest detestation for those who are tnaste
of everything » There is, however, no hope of a chang
But, as you easily onderstand, Pompey himself is discontent!
and extremely dissatisfied with himself. I don't see cle
what issue to expect : but certainly such a state of affai
seems likely to lead to an outbreak of some sort Alexande
books '—a careless writer and a poor poet, and yet not witi
out some useful information — I have sent back to you,
have had pleasure in admitting Numerius Numestius to
friendship, and I find him a man of character and good sens
worthy of your recoramendation-

XLIX (A II, 23)

TO ATTICUS (IN EFIRUS)

Rome (July or August)

I doic't think you have ever before read a letter of mine not
written by my own hand. You will be able to gather from
that how I am distracted with business. For as I had not a
moment to spare and was obliged to take a walk in order to
refresh my poor voice, I have dictated this while walking.
The first thing, then, which I wish you to know is that our
friend " Sampsiceramus *' is exceedingly dissatisfied with his
position, and desires to be restored to the place from which
he has fallen ; that he confides his annoyance to me, and is
without disguise seeking for a remedy^ which I don't think
can be found* The second thing is that all on that side,
whether promoters or mere hangers-on, are falling out of
fashion, though no one opposes them : there never was a
greater unanimity of feeling or talk everywhere. For myself
(for I am sure you wish to know it) I take part in no
political deliberations, and have devoted myself entirely to
my forensic business and work. Thereby, as may easily be
understood, I have frequent occasion to refer to my past
achievements and to express my regret. But the broths of

^ Alexander of Ephesus. Set Letter XLVI| p. 115.

La II, 2j* 24

Boor '^Iaii(
■ threats, an
W makes an c

TO ATTICUS

121

" lano " is giving utterance to all kinds of alarming
threats, and, while disclaiming them to ** Sampsiceramus,"
makes an open avowal and parade of them to others. Where-
fore, loving me as much as I know you do, if yon are asleep,
wake tip ; if you are standing, start walking ; if you are walkings
set ofif running ; if you are running, take wings and fly. You
can scarcely believe how much I confide in your advice and
'^^isdoni, and above all in your affection and fidelity. The
nee of the interests involved perhaps demands a long
lion, but the close union of our hearts is contented
»rith brevity. It is of very great importance to me that, if
you can't be at Home at the elections, you should at least
be here after his election is declared*^ Take care of your
health.

k

L (a II, 24)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome (July or August)

Iji the letter which I delivered to Numestius I begged you
to come back, in the most urgent and vehement terms it was
possible to use. To the speed which I then enjoined even
add something if you possibly can. And yet do not be
agitated, for I know you well, and am not ignorant of " how
love is all compact of thought and fear/' Bot the matter, I
hope, is going to be less formidable in the end than it was
at its beginning. That fellow Vettios, our old informer,
promised Caesar, as far as I can make out, that be would
secure young Curio being brought under some suspicion of
guilt Accordingly, he wormed his way into intimacy with
the young man, and having, as is proved, often met him^ at
last went the length of telling him that he had resolved by
the help of his slaves to make an attack upon Pompey and

* /*i*t betwieen the time of his election and of his entering on bis
ofioe. The iribunes entered on their office on the loth of December ;
liie elections u«uaUy took place in July, but were postponed till October
[ Uiti your by Bibulus. See Letter XL VI, p. 115.

122

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 59, XT,

assassinate him. Curio reported this to his father, the 1
to Pompey. The matter was reported to the senate. Vettiii
on being brought in, at first denied that he had ever
any appointment with Curio. However, he did not lo^
stick to that, but immediately claimed the protection of 1
state as giving information. There was a shout of *'no " 1
this ; ^ but he went on to state that there had been a
federacy of young men under the leadership of Curio, to wh
Paullus had at first belonged, and Q. C^pio (I mean Brut
and Lentulus, son of the flam en, with the privity of
father : that afterwards C. Septimius^ secretary to Bibulu
had brought him a dagger from Bibulus, That made
whole thing ridiculous, as though Vettius would have
at a loss for a dagger unless the consul had given him on
and it was all the more scouted because on the 13th of 1
Bibulus had told Pompey to be on his guard against plotl
on which occasion Pompey had thanked him. Young Cu '
being brought into the senate, spoke in answer to the aUe_
tions of Vettius; and on this particular occasion thestronge
thing against Vettius was his having said that the plan oft'
young men was to attack Pompey in the forum, with the he
ofGabinius's gladiators/ and that in this the ring-leaderi
Paullus, who was ascertained to have been in Macedonia i
that time, A decree of the senate is passed that " Vettiu
having confessed to having * worn a dagger/ * should be <
into prison ; that anyone releasing him would be guilty
treason to the state." The opinion generally held is th
the whole affair had been arranged. Vettius was to
caught in the forum with a dagger, and his slaves also wi^
weapons, and he was then to offer to lay an information; 1

^ Rtdamatum est* The MSS. have haud redanmium est^ *Mtwas
not refused."

* Marcus lunius Bratus, the future assassin of Coesarj adopted by
his unclcj Q* Servilius Caepio, The fathef of Lentulus "wt^s Jiamen
Maritalis {L. Lentulus), in Vat. § 25. Paullua is L. jEmilius Paullus,
consul B»C. 50.

* Cum gladiatoribus. Others omit cum, in which case the meaning
will be "at the gladiatorial shows of Gabinius." As some dcttA is
wanted, this is probably right.

* Under the Irx dc sicariis of Sulla carrying a weapon with felonious
intent was a capital crime, for which a man was tried itUer sicarias* Sm
2 FhiL §§ 8, 74.

J

A»t24

TO ATTICUS

123

this would have been carried out, had not the Curios giveo
Pompey previous information. Presently the decree of the
senate was read in public assembly. Next day, however, Caesar
— the man who formerly as praetor had bidden Q. Catulus ^
speak on the ground below — now brought Vettius on to the
rostra, and placed him on an elevation to which Bibulus,
though consul, was prevented from aspiring. Here that
fellow said exactly what he chose about public affairs, and,
having come there primed and instructed, first struck Csepio^s
mme out of his speech, though he had named him most
emphatically in the senate, so that it was easy to see that a
night and a nocturnal intercession^ had intervened: next
he named certain men on whom he had not cast even the
slightest suspicion in the senate : L. Lucullus, by whom he
said that C. Fannius was usually sent to him — the man who
an a former occasion had backed a prosecution of Clodius ;
L Domitius, whose bouse had been agreed on as the head-
quarters of the conspirators. Me he did not name^ but be said
that " an eloquent consular, who lived neaj the consul, had
said to him that there was need of some Servilius Ahala or
Brutus being found." ^ He added at the very end, on being
recalled by Vatinias after the assembly had been dismissed*
ihat he had been told by Curio that my son4n-law Piso was
privy to these proceedings, as M. Laterensis also. At present
Vettius is on trial for " violence " before Crassus Dives,* and
irhen condemned he intends to claim the impunity of an
informer ; and if he obtains that, there seem likely to be some
I prosecutions. I don't despise the danger, for I never despise
my danger, but neither do I much fear it People indeed shew
I i«iy great affection for me, but I am quite tired of life : such

* Q. IjiUitius Catulus, who died in the previous year» B.c. 60, had
I been x keen opponent of Caesar, who tried to deprive him of the honour

of dedicating the restored CapitoHne temple, and beat bim in the election
l-of PoQtifoE Maximus.

* ServiUa, mother of Brutus, waji reported to be Caesar's mbtress. As
Cicero is insinuating that the whole affair was got up by Csesar to
knitate Pompey with the boni^ this allusion will be understood*

' If Vettius did say this, he at any rate successfully imitated Cicero *»
Bumcr. These names are always in his mouth. See 2 PkU* §§ 26,
87 ; prv MiL §§ 8» 83, etc. For a farther discussion of Vettius, see
Appendix B.

* Probably a pfsetor, not the triumvir.

124

C1CER0*S LETTERS

B.C. 59, tLi

a scene of misery is it all. It was only the other day that we
were fearing a massacre, which the speech of that gallant old
man Q. Considius prevented :^ now this one, which we mi{^"
have feared any day, has suddenly turned up. In shd
nothing can be more unfortunate than I, or more for
than CatuluSj both in the splendour of his life and in
time of his death. However, in the midst of these miseri^
I keep my spirit erect and undismayed, and maintain
position in a most dignified manner and with great cautid
Porapey bids me have no anxiety about Clodius, and she
the most cordial goodwill to me in everything he says,
desire to have you to suggest my policy, to be the partner j
my amdeties, and to share my every thought. Therefon
have commissioned Numestius to urge you, and I now (
treat you with the same or, if possible, greater earnestness, (
literally fly to us. I shall breathe again when I once see yd

LI (A II, 25)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

RoMB (July or August)

When I have praised any one of your friends to you I she
like you tell him that I have done so. For instance,
know I lately wrote to you about Varro^s kindness to
and that you wrote me back word that the circumsti
gave you the greatest delight. But I should have prefer]
your writing lo him and saying that he was doing all I coij
expect — not because he was, but in order that he might (
so. For he is a man of astonishing whims, as you know, ''t
tuous and no wise ." ^ But I stick to the rule "Follies J

^ Q. Considius Gallus, who, according to Plutarch {Cies. 13), saidl
the senate that the attendance of senators was small because theyfeftN
a massacre. " What made you come, then ? *' said Csesar. ** My 9gs?[
he repEed j ** I have little left to lose/'

^pamvvTi^. Eur. Andr9m. 448.

*' With tortuous thoughts, naught honesty wiDding all,^'

in* as; qfri,2

TO QUINTUS

125

Itliose in power," etcJ But, by Hercules, that other friend of

I yours, Hortalus — with what a Bberal hand, with what candour,

I tnd in what ornate language has he praised me to the skies,

wben speaking of the pnetorship of Flaccus and that incident

of the Allobroges.' I assure you nothing could have been

moreaffectionatej complimentary, or more lavishly expressed.

I Tery much wish that you would write and tell him that I

I sent you word of it Yet why write ? I think you are on your

ay and are all but here. For I have urged you so strongly

I to come in my previous letters. I am expecting yoo with

l^eat impatience, longing for you very much; nor do I call

J for you more than circumstances themselves and the state of

I the times. Nothing can be more desperate than the position

[of politics, nothing more unpopular than the authors of it.

] I — as I think, hope, and imagine^ — am safe behind a rampart

I of goodwill of the strongest kind. Wherefore fly to me : you

[will either relieve me from all annoyance or will share it.

jMy letter is all the shorter because, as I hope, I shall be able

I in a very short time to talk over what I want to say face to

I face. Take care of your health.

LII (q fr I, 2)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN ASIA)

Rome, 26 October

tATius arrived at my house on the 25th October. His
gave me uneasiness, because you said in your letter
you would be plundered by your household in his
libsence. However, I thought it a very happy circumstance
Ithat he anticipated the expectation of his arrival, and the
IcoTopany that would have assembled to meet him, if he had

Eur, FhasH, 393.
** FoUi^ of those in power we needs must bear."
• L. Valerius Flaccus, as prsetor in B.C. 63, had assisted Cicero in the
ICltiliiie conspiracy. He was nowbemg tried foremheulement in Asia,
land was defended by the famous Q. HartenMus (Hortalus) and Cicero
l*-die only extant speech of this year.

126

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. S9i ^T.l

left the province with you, and had not appeared befa
For people have exhausted their remarks, and many obs'
tions have been made and done with of the " Nay, buti
looked for a mighty man"* kind, which I am glad to havei
over before you come. But as for the motive for your se
ing him^that he might clear himself with me — that was i
at all necessary. For, to begin with, I had never suspe
himj nor in what I wrote to you about him was I expressi^
my own judgment ; but since the interest and safety of all j
us who take part in public business depends, not on
alone, but on report also, I wrote you word of what [
were saying, not what I thought myself. How prevale
and how formidable that talk was Statius ascertained hims
on his arrival. For he was present when certain persons]
my house gave vent to some complaints on that very i
ject, and had the opportunity of perceiving that the ob
tions of the malevolent were being directed at hin
especially. But it used to annoy me most when I was i
that he had greater influence with you, than your sober I
of life and the wisdom of a governor required. How i
people, do you suppose, have solicited me to give then
letter of introduction to Statius ? How often, do you \
pose, has he himself, while talking without reserve
me, made such observations as, " I never approved
that," "I told him so," '* I tried to persuade him," '
warned him not to " ? And even if these things shew 1
highest fidelity, as I believe they do, since that is your p
ment, yet the mere appearance of a freedman or sll
enjoying such influence cannot but lower your dignity :
the long and short of it is— for I am in duty bound not|
say anything without good grounds, nor to keep back anyth
from motives of policy — ^that Statius has supplied all
material for the gossip of those who wished to decry ;
that formerly all that could be made out was that ce
persons were angry at your strictness ; but that after
manumission the angry had something to talk about

^ JdCK* alii rtva fwra ftkyav nal xctkov iSiyutjVy " but I ever
some big and handsome man" (Horn. Oifyss, ix, 513). Statiiis !
been manumitted by Qiiinlus Cicero, and there had been much i
about It, as we have already heard. See XLIV, p. 109, ftad
p. III.

\fiit,2

TO QUINTUS

127

Now I will answer the letters delivered to me by L, Caesius,
khom, as 1 see you wish it, I will serve in every way I can.
ne of them is about Zeuxis of Blaundus, whom you say
warmly recommended to you by me though a most
Dtorious matricide. In this matter, and on this subject
nerally, please listen to a short statement, lest you should
f chance be surprised at my having become so conciliatory
«rards Greeks. Seeing, as I did, that the complaints of
s, because they have a genius for deceit, were aUowed an
fcive weight, whenever I was told of any of them making
Dpiaint of you, I appeased them by every means in my
First, I pacified the Dion ysopoli tans, who were
Ibitter: whose chief man, Heimippus, I secured not
r my conversation, but by treating him as a friend. I did
tie to Hephaestus of Apameia ; the same to that most
^rorthy fellow, Megaristus of Antandrus; the same
i of Smyrna ; I also embraced with all the courtesy
the most trumpery of men, even Nymphon of
bdn. And all this I did from no liking for these
people, or the nation as a whole r I was heartily
: of their fickleness and obsequiousness, of feelings that
f not affected by our kindness, but by our position.
But to return to Zeuxis. When he was telling me the
ne story as you mention in your letter about what
. Cascellius had said to him in conversation, I stopped him
farther talk, and admitted him to my society. I can-
however, understand your virulence when you say that,
sewn up in the parricide*s-sack two Mysians at
you desired to display a similar example of your
rity in the upper part of your province, and that, there-
DU had wished to inveigle Zeuxis into your hands by
' possible means. For if he had been brought into
be ought perhaps not to have been allowed to
ape : but there was no necessity for his being hunted out
rveigled by soft words to stand a trial, as you say
letter — especially as he is one whom I learn daily,
rfrom his fellow citizens and from many others, to be
1 of higher character than you would expect from such
lobacure town as his.^ But, you will say, it is only Greeks

; fuam pr9 emiaie sua for ^ropt quemt civUattm mam, I

128

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 59, MTmd

to whom I am indulgent What ! did not I do everythinj
appease L. Caecilius ? What a man I how irritable !
violent ! In fact, who is there except Tuscenius/ whose
admitted of no cure, have I not softened ? See again, I
now on my hands a shifty, mean fellow, though of eqi
trian rank, called Catienus : even he is going to be smool
down. I don*t blame you for having been somewhat
to his father, for I am quite sure you have acted with g(
reason : but what need was there of a letter of the sort wl
you sent to the man himself? "That the man was n
the cross for himself from which you had already pulled
off once ; that you would take care to have him smoked
death, and would be applauded by the whole province
it" Again, to a man named C. Fabius — for that letter
T. Catienus is handing round — "that you were told t
the kidnapper Licinius^ with his young kite of a son,
collecting taxes." And then you go on to ask Fabius
burn both father and son alive if he can ; if not, to
them to you, that they may be burnt to death by I _
sentence. That letter sent by you in jest to C. Fabius^^
it really is from you, exhibits to ordinary readers a violence
language very injurious to you* Now, if you will refer to
exhortations in all my letters, you will perceive that I haij
never found fault with you for anything except harshn^
and sharpness of temper, and occasionally, though
for want of caution in the letters you write. In which
ticulars, indeed, if my influence had had greater wdj
with you than a somewhat excessive quickness of disp<
tion, or a certain enjoyment in indulging temper, or
faculty for epigram and a sense of humour, we should
tainly have had no cause for dissatisfaction. And doi
you suppose that I feel no common vexation when
am told how Vergilius is esteemed, and your neigh

think priJpe and pro (p^r) miglit easily have been mistaken for each otKd
and if the order oiquam and/^ (roistaJcen for pr&pe) were once chang"
the case of timiate would follow. Prof. Tyrrell, who writes the to
BianduSf would read nwlliorem for nQbiliorem^ and imagines a pun <
file meaning of Slaftdus, Byt the name of the town seems certain
Blctundus^ BXa?v^oc, or MXaiJi^^oc (StephantiSj BXar/^oc) ; see He
ffist. Num. p. 559 : and Cicero, though generally punning on i
would hardly do so here, where he is making a grave excuse.
^ Whom he called (Letter XXDC) " a madman and a knave'*

f FR I| 2

TO QUINTUS

[29

C Octavius ? * For if you only excel your neighbours fariher
op country, in Cilicia and Syria, that is a pretty thing to
boast of ! And that is just the sting of the matter, that though
the men I have named are not more blameless than yourself,
they yet outdo you in the art of winning favour, though they
know nothing of Xenophon's Cyms or Agesilaus ; from which
ngs, in the exercise of their great office, no one ever heard
irritable word. But in giving you this advice, as I have
from the first, I am well aware how much good I have done,'^
Now, however, as you are about to quit your province,
ay do leave behind you — as I thixik you are now doing —
; pleasant a memory as possible. You have a successor of
mild manners; in other respects^ on his arrival, you
be much missed. In sending letters of requisition,
. I have often told you, you have allowed yourself to be
f too easily persuaded. Destroy, if you cauj all such as are
inequitable, or contrary to usage, or contradictory to others.
Statius told me that they were usually put before you ready
written, read by himself, and that, if they were inequitable, he
. infonned you of the fact • but that before he entered your
nee there had been no sifting of letters ; that the result
f that there were volumes containing a selection of letters,
bicb were usually adversely criticised.' On this subject I
I not going to give you any advice at this time of day, for

* C. Vei^lius Balbus, propraetor m Sicily ij^ro Pi(mc, g 95 ; Letter
[XXIX). C. Octavius {father of Augustus), in Macedonia (see p. 7S).
I L Ala^dus Pbilippus was propraetor of Syria B*c 61-59. The governor
i of Cilida in the same period is not known ; probably some one left in
I ehft^e by Pompey,

' * I have endeavoured to leave the English a.s ambiguous as the Latin.
Doero may mean that he has done some good^ for at the end of Letter
XXIX he says that Quintns has improved in these points, and had been
better to his second than in his first year. On the other hand, the con-
text here seems rather to point to the meaning " how liitle good I have
Irfoofe!** — impatiently dismissing the subject of temper.
■ 'These * * requisitionary letters'* were granted by a provincial
I to certain persons requiring supplies | payment of debts^ or legal
I in their favour in the provinces, or other privileges, and, if care-
Dted, were open to much abuse. Cicero, in his own government
, bpAsted that he had signed none such in six months. The

^ J of Quintus had apparently got hold of a number of these

I tigned by him (having been first written out by the suitors thera-
t aiid scarcely glanced at hy him), and a selection of them published
1^ {tonne his injustice or carelessness.

I30

CICERO^S LETTERS

B.C. 59, iKT.

it is too late ; and you cannot but be aware that I have ofl
warned you in various ways and with precision. But I have, i
a hint from Theopompus, intrusted him with this message i
you : do see by means of persons attached to you, which j
will find no difficulty in doings that the following classes \
letters are destroyed — ^first, those that are inequitable ; ne
those that are contradictory ; then those expressed in j
eccentric or unusual manner ; and lastly, those that cont
reflesdons on anyone. I don't believe all I hear about the
matters, and if, in the multiplicity of your engagements^ ■
have let certain things escape you, now is the time to lo
into them and weed them out. I have read a letter said to ha^
been written by your nomenclator Sulla himself, which I can-
not approve : I have read some written in an angry spirit Bat
the subject of letters comes in pat : for while this sheet of paper
was actually in my hands, L, Flavins, praetor-designate and a
very intimate friend, came to see me. He told me that you had
sent a letter to his agents, which seemed to me most inequit-
able, prohibiting them from taking anything from the estate
of the late L. Octavius Naso, whose heir L. Flavins is, until
they had paid a sum of money to C. Fundanius ; and that
you had sent a similar letter to the Apollonidenses* not to
allow any payment on account of the estate of the late
Octavius till the debt to Fundanius had been discharged.
It seems to me hardly likely that you have done this ; for it
is quite unlike your usual good sense. The heir not to take
anything ? What if he disowns the debt ? What if he doesn't
owe it at all ? Moreover, is the praetor wont to decide whether
a debt is due?* Don*t I, again, wish well to Fundanius?
Am I not bis friend ? Am I not touched with compassion ?
No one more so : but in certain matters the course of law is
so clear as to leave no place for personal feeling. And
Flavins told me that expressions were used in the letter,

* The governor of a province would stand in such a matter in the
place of the prsetor in Rome, i. e. , he would decide on questions of law»
not of fact, as, whether a debt was due or sot. However, Quintus
perhaps only erred ki the form of his injunction. He might forbid the
deceased's estate being touched till the question of Fundanius's debt
was decided ; but in his letter he assumed (as he had no right to do)
that the claim was good. Substantially it seems to me that Quintu£
was right, and certainly in his appeal to him Cicero does not follow his
own injunction to disregard personal feelings.

lnt,z

TO QUINTUS

131

which he said was yours, to the effect that you would " either
thank them as friends, or make yourself disagreeable to
them as enemies," In short, he was much annoyed, com-
plained of it to me in strong terms, and begged me to write
i you as seriously as I could. This I am doing, and I do
Ifongly urge you again and again to withdraw your injunc-
Dn to Flavius's agents about taking money from the estate,
1 not to lay any farther injunction on the ApoUonidenses
ntrary to the rights of Flavius* Pray do ever>'thing you
for the sake of Flavius and, indeed, of Pompey also.
Iwould not, upon my honour, have you think me liberal to
i at the expense of any inequitable decision on your part :
: I do entreat you to leave behind you some authority, and
Be meraorandum of a decree or of a letter under your hand,
I framed as to support the interests and cause of Flavins.
pT the man, who is at once very attentive to me, and tena-
1 of his own rights and dignity, is feeling extremely hurt
he has not prevailed with you either on the grounds of
Dnal friendship or of legal right ; and, to the best of my
both Pompey and Caesar have, at one time or another,
ided the interests of Fla%ius to you, and Flavius has
to you personally, and certainly I have. Wherefore,
J is anything which you think you ought to do at my
:, let it be this* If you love me, take every care,
^ erery trouble, and insure Flavius's cordial thanks both
yooiself and myself. I cannot use greater earnestness in
toaJdng any request than I use in this.

As to what you say about Hermias, it has been in truth a
t of much vexation to me. I wrote you a letter in a rather
Eierly spirit, which I dashed off in a fit of anger and
wish to recall, ha\dng been irritated by what Lucullus's
tJman told me, immediately after hearing of the bargain.
letter, which was not expressed in a brotherly way,
gbt to have brotherly feeling enough to make allow-
As to Censorinus, Antonius, the Cassii, Scaevola— I
I delighted to hear from you that you possess their friend-
The other contents of that same letter of yours were
more strongly than I could have wished, such as
'with my ship at least well trimmed " ^ and your " die

** ^ov roi* vavv, Quintus had written, it seems, defiantly about

132

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.C» 59, jTT.J

once for all." * You will find those expressions to beunneo
sarily strong. My scoldings have always been very full i
affection. They mention certain things for complaint,' 1
these are not important, or rather, are quite insignificant
my part, I should never have thought you deserving of I
least blame in any respect, considering the extreme purity J
your conduct, had it not been that our enemies are numerou^
Whatever I have written to you in a tone of remonstrance
or reproach I have written from a vigilant cautionj which I
maintain, and shall maintain ; and I shall not cease imploring
you to do the same. Attalus of Hypsepa has begged me to
intercede with you that you should not prevent his getting
the money paid which has been decreed for a statue of
Q. Publicius, In which matter I both ask as a favour and
urge as a duty, that you should not consent to allow the
honour of a man of his character, and so close a friend of
mine, to be lowered or hindered by your means. Farther-
more^ Licinius, who is known to you, a slave of my hit
^sopus, has run away. He has been at Athens, hving ;
the house of Patron the EpiciJrean as a free man. The
he has made his way to Asia. Afterwards a certain Piatt
Sardisj who is often at Athens, and happened to be at At!
at the time that Licinius arrived there, having subseque
learnt by a letter from j^sopus that he was an escaped sfa
arrested the fellow, and pot him into confinement
Ephesus ; but whether into the public prison, or into a i
mill, we could not clearly make out from his letter.
since he is at Ephesus, I should be obliged if you wq
trace him in any manner open to you, and with all i

the slanders a3oat against him, and had quoted two Greek provei
Eayinge. The first is found in Stoboeus, lo8 (extract from Teles) :
was a fine saying of the pilot, * At least, Poseidon, a ship
trimmed/'* *.*,, if you sink my ship, she shall at least go down i
honour. Qumtus means, ** Whatever my enemies may do afterwa
will keep my province in a sound state as long as I am here,"

* dwa^ Qaviiv^ perhaps ** Better to die once for all than give i
every unjust demand." The editors quote i^schylus, /V. K 769 :

rf rdf airacag tf^'^pag ira<Txe^i' KaicwCt

But I don't fee! sure that this is the passage aEuded tOi

* Reading ^uiruntur for qua sunt

TO QUINTUS

133

cemj

Kei-
th
er

jther [send him] or bring him home with you. Don't take
into consideration the fellow's value : such a good-for-nothing
is worth very little ; but ^Esopus is so much vexed at his
slave's bad conduct and audacity, that you can do him no^
greater favour than by being the means of his recovering
him.

Now for the news that you chiefly desire. We have so
(Completely lost the constitution that Cato/ a young man of
10 sense, but yet a Roman citizen and a Cato, scarcely got
iff with his life because, having determined to prosecute
^ binius for bribery, when the praetors could not be ap-
proached for several days, and refused to admit anyone to
presence, he mounted the rostra in public meeting
id (^led Pompey an "unofficial dictator." No one ever
a narrower escape of being killed. From this you
ly see the state of the whole Republic. People, however,
no inclination to desert my cause. They make wonder*
professions, oifers of service, and promises : and, indeed,
have the highest hopes and even greater spirit— so that
hope to get the better in the struggle, and feel confid-
I in my mind that, in the present state of the Republic, I
' not fear even an accident. However, the matter stands
ttms: if Clodius gives notice of an action against me, the
vbote of Italy will rush to my support, so that I shall come
off with many times greater glory than before ; but if he at-
tempts the use of violence, I hope, by the zeal not only of
lids but also of opponents, to be able to meet force
ith force. All promise me the aid of themselves, their
iends, clients, freedmen, slaves, and, finally, of their money.
Our old re^ment of loyalists is warm in its zeal and
hment to me. If there were any who had formerly
compamtively hostile or lukewarm, they are now
themselves with the loyalists from hatred to these
ts. Pompey makes every sort of promise, and so does
but my confidence in them is not enough to in-
me to drop any of my preparations. The tribunes-
tate are friendly to us. The consuls-designate make
ilent professions. Some of the new praetors are very
ly and very brave citizens — ^Domitius, Nigidius, Mem-

^ Gains Cato, tribune B.C. 56.

134

CICBRO'S LETTERS

B.C 59, ^ET.

mitis, Lentulus' — the others are loyalists also, but these
are eminently so. ^\llerefa^e keep a good heart and high
hopes. However, I will keep you constantly informed i
particular events as tbey occur from day to day.

LI 1 1 (F xin, 42)

TO L. CULLEOLUS (IN ILLYRICUM)

Rome'

My firiend L. Lucceius,* the most delightful fellow in
world, has expressed in my presence amazingly warm th
to you, saying that you have given most complete and lib
promises to his agents. Since your words have roused \
gratitude in him, you may imagine how grateful he will be i

* L. Domitius Ahenobsirbus, who as praetor threatened C^sar with
impeachment, and as consul (b.c. 54) tried to get him recalled. He
was, in 50-49, appointed Caesar's successor in Gaul, defended Marseilles
against him, and eventually fell in the battle of Pharsalia* P. Nigi-
dius Figulus supported Cicero during the Catiline conspiracy. Gaius
Memmius, aedile B.c, 60 (see p. 51). Lucretius dedicated his poem to
him. L. Cornelius Lentulus Cms, consul B.c, 49, accused Clodiiu in
B.C. 61, murdered in Africa after Pompeyj B,c. 48.

■* There is no direct means of datiug these letters, as we have no other
information as to the proconsulship of Culleolas. Illyricum was not
always a separate government, but was sometimes under the governor
of Macedonia, sometimes under the governor of GauL The indications
of date are (i) Pompey is at home and often seen by Cicero, therefore
it is not between the spring of B.C. 67 and the end of 62 ; (2) it is not
later than March, B.C. 58^ because from that time for ten years Caestf
was governor of Illyricum, and before he ceased to be so Pompey had
left Italy, never to return. Even if Culleolus was not governor of
Illyricum, but of Macedonia, the same argument holds good, for C
Antonius was in Macedonia B,c. 63-60, and Octavius from B.C, 60 lo
March, B.C. 59. That is, Culleolus could not have been in Macedoni*
white Pompey was in Italy till after March, bx, 59*

* L. Lucceius, whom we have heard of before as a candidate fof
the coDsuIship with Csesar, and whom we shall hear of again as the
author of a history of the social and civil wars (Sulla and Marius), and
IS being asked to write on Cicero's consulship. He was a close friend
of Pompey, and took his side in B.C. 49 (Caes. B. C iii. 18). The
people of Bullis owed Lucceius money, and Cicero asks for ** mandau
letters '* from Culleolus to get it

rxiTT, 43, 4t

TO L. CULLEOLUS

^35

the thing itself, when, as I hope, you will have performed your

promise. In any case the people of BuUis have shewn that

they intend to do Lucceius right according to the award of

Pompeyr But we have very great need of the additional sup-

^m port of your wishes, influence, and prsetorian authority- That

H you should give us these I heg you again and again. And

H this will be particularly gratifying to me, becausa Lucceius's

I agents know, and Lucceius himself gathered from your letter

W CO him, that no one's inflyence has greater weight with you

V dian mine* I ask you once more, and reiterate my request,

J that he may find that to be the case by practical experience.

LIV (F xni, 41)

TO L. CULLEOLUS (IN ILLYRICUM)

Rome

In what you have done for the sake of L, Lucceius, I wish
you to be fully aware that you have obhged a man who will
be exceedingly grateful ; and that^ while this is very much
the case with Lucceius himself, so also Pompey as often as
he sees me — and he sees me very often — ^thanks you in no
common terms, I add also, what I know will be exceed-
ingly gratifying to you, that I am myself immensely delighted
with your kindness to Lucceius. For the rest, though I
bave no doubt that as yoo acted before for my sake, so now,
for the sake of your own consistency, you will abide by your
liberal intentions, yet I reiterate my request to you with all
earnestness, that what yon first gave us reason to hope,
and then actually carried out, you would be so good as to
see extended and brought to a final completion by your
means. I assure you, and I pledge my credit to it, that
snob a course will be exceedingly gratifying to both Lucceius
and Pompey, and that you will be making a most excellent
investment with them. About politics, and about the busi-
ness going on here, and what we are all thinking about, I
wrote to you in full detail a few days ago, and delivered the
letter to your servants. Farewell.

136

CICERO'S LETTERS b.c. 58,^.4]

LETTERS IN EXILE

We have no record in Ckero's correspondence of the final
taken by Qodius against him. We find him when the correspCYDd<

for this year opens on his way to exile : all his hoasts
L^iilfi *-**■•' staying and fighting have been thrown to the
A. SSbuuiuiv Clodius, indeed^ had not simply done what Cicero e

at the worst — impeached him. He had gone more
tematicaJly to work. Among other measures calculated to win popula
he proposed a modification of the lex ^lia Fufia^ declaring it iU^
a magistrate to stc^ legislative comitia by " watching the sky." Tl _
freed from one hindrance, he next propose<l and carried a law fof
the prosecution of any magistrate who had put a citizen to death without
trial {qui iftdemnaUs eivis necavisset) Cicero at once recogniwd hi*
danger : if the people voted this law, a jury could scarcdy fail to
condemn. The triumvirs would do nothing* Pompey, after all his
promises, avoided seeing Cicero as much as possible : Csesar offered him ft
legatin again ; and though he spoke against giving the law a retrospective
effect, he could not consistently object to the law itself, and shewed no
sign of desiring to shelter Cicero, except on his consenting to leave
Rome. Cicero then adopted the course which was open to all citizens
thr^raitened with a prosecution — that of going away from Rome — ^<i
started apparently with the view of going to Malta* Whether it was
wise or not, Cicero afterwards lamented having taken this course, and
thought that he had better have braved the danger and stood his trial
It at any rate facilitated the next move of Clodius, who proposed and
carried a bill forbidding Cicero " fire and water ** within 500 (after-
wards reduced to 400) miles of Italy, and confiscating his property*
Accordingly, Cicero bad to go much farther than he had intended. He
crossed from Brundisium to Dyrrachium, and ]iroceeded along the via
Sgnatia to its terminus at Thessalonica, where he spent the autumn,
B.C. 58* In November, B.C. 58, he returned to Dyrrachium, ready for
the recall which he beard was imminent. Meanwhile bis town bouM
was destroyed, its site made a templum^ and a statue of Libet^^ det xm.
in it, and his villas at Tusculum and Antium dismantled. The da
of his position are not exaggerated in his letters, and may accoui
much of their melancholy tone. He had lost the protection of the
and any one of his many enemies meeting him might have killed
with practical impunity. He seems to have left Rome in April.

t^nh^j

TO ATTIC US

137

LV (A 111, 3)

TO ATnCUS (AT ROME)

ViBO, April

I HOPE I may see the <iay when I shall thank you for having
compelled me to remain alive i At present I thoroughly
repent it. But I beg you to come and see me at Vibo at
once^ to which town I have for several reasons directed my
journey/ But if you will only come there, I shall be able to
consult you about ray entire journey and exile. If you don't
do so, I shall be surprised, but I feel sure you will.

I

LVI (A III, 2)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Nares Lucanje,'^ April

The reason for having come this journey is that there was
00 [dace where I could be independent except on Sicca's
estate,' especially till the bill is emended/ and at the same
time because I find that from this spot I can reach Bnindi-
Slum, if you were only with me, but without you I caiinot
«toy in those parts owing to Autronius/ At present, as I
said in my previous letter, if you will come to me, we shall

^ Mod. Monie Leone, on the road to Rhegium, from which at this
time Cicero meant to cross to Sicily^ and thence to Malta.

* Narcs Lucanae {Mante Ntro)^ near the River Silams, and on the
m'd Popilia (south-western branch of the Appia), Cicero has therefore
come north again from V^ibOj having given ctp the idea of Rhegium
ind Sicily, and making for Beneventum, and so by the via Appia for
Brondisium,

* A friend of Cicero's, of whose death at Bmndlsium we afterwards
hear (/am. xiv. 4, § 6).

* The bill orig;inally named jco nailes as the distance from ttaJy.
Before pi'?siiig it had to be put up in public three market days {trinum
HMftdinum), and meanwhile might be amended, and was amended lo 400,

' P, Autronitis Paetus, oncof Catiiine's confederates, who would injuie
Oooo if he could. Cicero would not be able to reach Epinis without

138

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.C. 58, v£T. 4^

be able to fonn a plan for the whole business. I know tbt J
journey is troublesome, but the whole calamity is full rfl
troubles. I cannot write more, I am so heart-broken and^
dejected. Take care of your health.
From Naxes Lucanx, 8 April

LVII (A III, 4)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

N£AK ViBO, April

I HOPE you will attribute my sudden departure from Vih
whither I had asked you come, to my unhappiness rathi
than to fickleness. A copy of the bill for my ruin
brought to me, in which the correction of which I had I
told was to the effect that I might legally remain
where beyond 400 miles. Since I was not allowed to
yonder,* I set out towards Brundisium before the day I
carrying the bill had come, both to prevent Sicca, in who
house I was staying, from being ruined,* and because 1 1
prevented from residing at Malta. So now make haste 1
catch me up» if only I shall find any welcome there.*
present I receive kind invitations. But about the rest
my journey I am nervous. Truly, my dear Pomponius, I
am very sorry I consented to live: in which matter you
exercised the chief influence with me. But of these things
when we meet. Only be sure and come

coming within his reach ; for he had been condemned for omMhts^ and
was in exile there or in Achaia. H las paries =^^'\ras,

^ To Malta. The propraetor of Sicily, C* Vergil ius, opposed his goiag
to Malta, which was in the province of Sicily, though it had ^primus ol
its own {Piam. 40 ; Plut- Cic, 32),

^ Because of entertaiDing the condeoQiied man, a special proviso d
this law (Dio, xatxviii. 17). ^

* In Epinis, believing that Atticus will understand that his going lo
Brundisium means that he will go to Epirus : and as Atticus lives
there, he naturally asks him to come to meet him. Epinis was, fof
certain purposes at least, in the province of Macedonia, and it depended
on the governor, L. A[}puleius Satuminus, what reception he would
meet. His Mend Flancius was quaestor.

J

A ni, 4, 1, 5

TO ATTICUS

139

LVIII (A in, i)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

From the neighbouehood of Thurium, on the way
TO Brundisium, April

I ALWAYS thought that it was of great importance to me that
you should be with me r but when I read the bill, then,
indeed, I understood that there could be nothing more
desimble for me than that you should overtake me as soon
as possible, in order that, if after quitting Italy I should
have to travel through Epirus, I might avail myself of your
protectiOD and that of your friends ; or, if I had to adopt
[ my other plan, I might come to some definite resolution in
accordance with your opinion. Wherefore I beg you to do
your best to overtake me promptly, which wiH be easier for
you to do smce the law about the province of Macedonia
has now been passed^ I would urge you at greater length
were it not that with you facts speak for me.

LIX (A III, S)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thurjum, 10 April

Teremtia thanks you frequently and very warmly. That is
a great comfort to me. I am the most miserable man aUve,
and am being worn out with the most poignant sorrow. I
don't know what to write to you. For if you are at Rome,
it is now too late for you to reach me ; but if you are on the

* One of Clodius's concessions to the consuk^ ta keep them qniet, was
to get Macedonia assigned by a hx to L. Calpumius Piso» As Atticus
litnl in what was practically part of the prDvioce, and had much
bttttoess there, it was important Co him to be on the Epot, and try to
infliience the chdc€ of a governor. That being over, he would not
We so much to detain him in Rome.

140

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C- S8, JET. i

road, we shall discuss together all that needs to be disct
when you have overtaken me. All I ask you is to retain
same affection for me, since it was always myself you love
For I am the same man : my enemies have taken what
mine, they have not taken myself. Take care of your healti
From Thurium, lo April.

LX (A HI, 6)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

On the way to Tarentum, i8 April

I HAD felt certain of seeing you at Tarentum or Brundisiun
and that was of importance to me in many respects : amc
others, as to my being able to stay in Epirus and consii
you about the future. My disappointment in this is on
another item in the long list of my misfortunes,* I me«
to go to Asia> to Cyzicus for choice. I commend my family
to you, I am very wretched and can scarcely support my
life.

From near Tarentum, 1 7 April.

LXI (f XIV, 4)

TO TERENTIA, TULLIOLA, AND YOUNG ClCEnS^

(AT ROME)

BRUNDisiuMf 29 April

Yes, I do write to you less often than I might, becaus.,
though I am always wretched, yet when I write to you or
read a letter from you, I am in such floods of tears that I
carmot endure it. Oh, that I had clung less to life ! I should

' We suppose that Cicero has heard from Attlcus that he is not going
to be at Tarentum or Bnindisiumi for he writes before airiving at
either*

Imii, 6; PXiV, 4 TO TERENTIA, ETC,

HI

«t least never have known real sorrow, or not moch of it, in
my life. Yet if fortune has reserved for me any hope of re-
covering at any time any position again, I was not utterly
wrong to do so: if these miseries are to be permanent, I
only wish, my dear, to see you as soon as possible and to die
in your arms, since neither gods, whom you have worshipped
with such pure devotion, nor men, whom I have ever served,
have niade us any return. I have been thirteen days at
Brandisiom in the house of M* Lsenius Flaccus, a very
€XceQent man, who has despised the risk to his fortunes and
dvil existence in comparison to keeping me safe, nor has
been induced by the penalty of a most iniquitous law to
refuse me the rights and good offices of hospitality and friend-
ship. May I some time have the opportunity of repaying him I
Feel gratitude I always shall. I set out from Brundisium
on the 29th of ApriV sind intend going through Macedonia
to Cyzicus. What a fall ! What a disaster ! What can I say ?
Should I ask you to come — ^a woman of weak health and
broken spirit ? Should I refrain from asking you ? Am I to be
without you, then ? I think the best course is this : if there
is any hope of ray restoration, stay to promote it and push
the thing on i but if , as I fear, it proves hopeless, pray come
to me by any means in your power. Be sure of this, that if I
have you I sh all n ot think m y sel f wholly lost, B ut wh at is to be-
come of my darling Tullia ? You must see to that now; I can
think of nothing. But certainly, however things turn out, we
mtist do everything to promote that poor little girPs married
happiness and reputation. Again^ what is my boy Cicero to

* Seading pid. Kal, instead of a. d. IL Kdl., which Tyrrell calls
^adus in Schutz. But absolute nonsense is not to be kept even for a
MS.

(i) Cicero says that he has been thirteen days at Brundisium,
In the next letter he lells Atticus he arrived on the 17 th.
That, in the Roinaii way of counting, brings it to prid*
(agth),

(2) Either the date at the end of the letter ia wrong, or prid,

must be used here

(3) There \& no such date properly as a^ d, II* KaL The day

before /fTi/. is a. d. III.
la regard to dates we must remember that Cicero is using the prx-

iolian ^endar, in which all months, except Febraaiy, Marchj Miiyi
uly, and October, bad twenty- nine days. These last four !iad thirty-
ODe and February twenty -eight.

142

CICERO'S LETTERS

fi,C. 581 JET* i

do ? Let him, at any rate, be ever in my bosom and in 1

arms/ I can't write more. A fit of weeping hinders
I don't know how you have got on ; whether you are left i
possession of anything, or have been, as I fear, entirdg
plundered. Piso, as you say, I hope will always be our frie
As to the manumission of the slaves you need not be unea
To begin with, the promise made to yours was that you wou
treat them according as each severally deserved. So
Orpheus has behaved well, besides him no one very marke
so. With the rest of the slaves the arrangement is that, |
my property is forfeited, they should become my freedme
supposing them to be able to maintain at law that stati
But if my property remained in my ownership, they were I
continue slaves, with the exception of a very few. But the
are trifles. To return to your advice, that I should keep 1
my courage and not give up hope of recovering my positid
I only wish that there were any good grounds for enten
ing such a hope. As it is, when, alas ! shall I get a let(
from you ? Who will bring it me ? I would have waited 1
it at Brundisium, but the sailors would not allow it, '
unwilling to lose a favourable wind. For the rest, put I
dignified a face on the matter as you can, my dear Terend
Our life is over : we have had our day : it is not any fault}
ours that has ruined us, but our virtue. I have made
false step, except in not losing ray life when I lost my honou
But since our children preferred my living, let us bear eve
thing else, however intolerable. And yet I, who encou
yoUj cannot encourage myself, I have sent that fait
fellow Clodius Philhet^rus home, because he was hampen
with weakness of the eyes* Sallustius seems likely to out
everybody in his attentions, Fescennius is exceedingly kixj
to me ; and I have hopes that he will always be attentive I
you. Sicca had said that he would accompany me ; but 1

" Cicero does not mean that young Marcus is to come to him at on
but that, when Tullia^s marriage portion is settled, Terentia is to bd
him with her if she comes. Re&IIy he didn't mean any of them I
come, at any rate for a long while. Piso is Tullia's husband.

* If Cicero's property was confiscated, it might be held that the
slaves went with it, and would be sold with it, and that his monumissioD
of them was an evasion, which could not hold good at law. If his
property was not confiscated, they were to remain in their status 1
slaves. See Letter CXCIL ^

ftiv,4 , Ain, 7

TO ATTICUS

143

left Brundisium. Take the greatest possible care of
DOT health, and believe me that I am more affected by your
Istress than my own. My dear Terentia, most faithful and

St of wives, and my darling little daughter, and that last
ope of my race, Cicero, good-bye I

29 April, from Brundisium.

LXII (A III, 7)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Brundisium, 29 April

RivKD at Bnmdisium on the 1 7 th of April On that day
slaves delivered me your letter, and some other slaves,
next day but one, brought me another. As to your in*
and advice to stay at your house in Epims, your kind-
most gratifying, and far from being a novelty. It is
that would have exactly suited my wishes, if I might
re spent aU my time there : for I loathe a crowd of visitors,
scarcely bear the light, and that solitude, especially
ot so famihar, would have been the reverse of dis-
ble. But to put up there as a mere stage in my
ley 1 In the first place it is far out of my way, and in the
is only four days from Autronius and the rest, and
j the third place you are not there » Had I been going to
de permanently, a fortified castle would have been an
Ivantage, but to one only passing through it is unnecessary,
if I had not been afraid, I should have made for
* — there were circumstances that made me much
go — but as it is, I have enemies in the neighbourhood,
are not there, and I fear they ' might hold even that
not to be the legal distance from Italy, nor do you

He mesuis that had it not been for enemies in Greece and Epims,
E»houJd not only have gone as far south as Epirus^ but farther — to
Iteos. There is a good deal to be said for Schuti's reading,

uam for Atkenast but as the MS. reading can be explained, it is

r to keep it.
' The Qodiftn party at Rome. ** That town " is Athens.

144

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 58, /ET. 48

mention by what day I am to expect you. As to your urging
me to remain alive, you carry one point^ — that I should not
lay violent hands upon myself ; the other you cannot bring to
pass— that I should not regret my policy and my continuance
in life. For what is there to attach me to it, especially i|
the hope which accompanied me on my departure is no
existent? I will not attempt to enumerate all the mise '
into which I have fallen through the extreme injustice
unprincipled conduct, not so much of my enemies, as
those who were jealous of me, because I do not wish to i
up a fresh burst of grief in myself, or invite you to share 1
same sorrow. I say this deliberately — that no one was ev
afflicted with so heavy a calamity, that no one had ev
greater cause to wish for death ; while I have let slip \ '
time when I might have sought it most creditably, Heno
forth death can never heal, it can only end my sorrow*^
politics I perceive that you collect all circumstances
you think may inspire me with a hope of a change :
though they are insignificant, yet, since you will have it s
let us have patience. In spite of what you say, you
catch us up if you make haste. For 1 will either come i
Epirus to be near you, or I will travel slowly through Candav
My hesitation about Epirus is not caused by vacillation (
my part, but by the fact that I do not know where '
am likely to see my brother. As to him^ I neither kno
how I am to see him, nor how I shall let him go. That i
the greatest and most distressing of all my distresses,
would indeed have written to you oftener, and at great<
lengthy had it not been that sorrow, while it has affected t
parts of my intellect, has above all entirely destroyed
faculty for this kind of writing. I long to see you. Ta
care of your health.
Brundisium, 29 April

* ** I have lost my chance of dying with honour ; henceforth d*
may end my g^rief, but cannot heal my damaged reputation." I?£ii4
Umpora^ i.e.^ other opportunities of suicide.

* A mountain range in Illyria, over which the via EgncUia
(mod. Eibassdn)*

^ -*■

TO ATTICUS

145

LXIII (A in, 8)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 29 May

fou at Brundisium, when on the point of start-
ions for my not going to Epinis : namely, the
mity of Achaia, which was full of enemies of the most
upuious character, and secondly, the difficulty of leaving
len I wished to resume my journey. Added to this,
I was at Dyrrachium two messages reached me : the
that my brother was coming from Ephesus to Athens
ip j the second, that he was coming through Macedonia
Dd. Accordingly, I sent a message to meet him at
HSf telling him to come thence to Thessalonica, I my-
X>ntinued my joumeyj and arrived at Thessalonica on
jrd of May, but have no certain intelligence about his
ey except that he had left Ephesus some time ago. At
Qt I am feeling very nervous as to what steps are being
at Rome, Although you say in one of your letters,
the 15th of May, that you hear that he will be vigor-
prosecuted, in another you say that things are calming
. But then the latter is dated a day before the former ;
I makes me all the more anxious. So while my own
Dal sorrow is every day tearing my heart and wearing
ay strength, this additional anxiety indeed scarcely
I me any life at all. However, the voyage itself was
dsfficult, and he perhaps, being uncertain where I
has taken some other course. For my freedman
ho saw nothing of him. Phaetho was driven by the
Erom Hium * to Macedonia, and met me at Pella. How
iable other circumstances are 1 am fully aware, and I
know what to say to you. I fear everything, nor is
any misery which would not seem possible in my
It unfortunate position. Miserable as I still am in the
of my heavy trials and sorrows, now that this anxiety

' Reading ad IH9 with Madvig for ab ilU,
L

146

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 58, jET. 4S

is added to them, I remain at Thessalonica in a state of sus-
pense without venturing upon any step whatever.

Now to answer you, I have not seen Caecilius Trypho, I
comprehend from your letter what you and Pompey have
been saying. That any movement in politics is impending
I cannot see as clearly as you either see, or perhaps only
suggest for my consolation. For, as the case of Tigranes was
passed over, all hope of a rupture is at an end,^ You bid
me thank Varro : I will do so ; also Hypsaeus.* As to your
advice not to go farther off till the acfa ' of the month of
May reach me, I think I shall do as you suggest But where
to stay ? I have not yet come to any decision. And inde<
my mind is so uneasy about Quintus, that I can deterj
on nothing. However, I will let you know immedial
From the incoherent nature of my letters I think you
understand the agitation of my mind, caused not so mi
by my misery, though I have been overwhelmed by an i
credible and unparalleled calamity, as by the recollection
my blunder. For by whose unprincipled advice I was
on and betrayed you certainly now perceive,* and oh that'
you had perceived it before, and had not given your whole
mind to lamentation along with me 1 Wherefore, when you
are told that I am prostrate and unmanned with grief, con-
sider that I am more distressed at my own folly than at the
result of it, in having believed a man whom I did not think
to be treacherous. My writing is impeded both by the re-

* Tigranes, a son of the king of Armenia, was brought to Romeil
Pompey to adorn his triumph, and put under the care of Lucius Flavi
This prince was, for a bnbe, released by Clodius by a trick, and \
attempt to get him away led to a scuffle in which lives were lost. Po
r^araed this as a slight ttpon himself, and his partisan, the
Gftbinius, attempted to prevent it But both were hustled in the fon
and treated with insults. The hope of a breach in the triumvirate an
from the supposition that Clodius had the support of Caesar in 1
high-handed proceeding fEHo, xxxviii. 30 ; Plut, Potn^, 48 ; Ascon. 4,

^ P. Plautms Hypsaeus, who had been Pompey s qneestor and
intimate terms with him. He had been, it seems, interesting bin
on Cicero's behalf.

* The gazette of public transactions and measures passed in the sen
which was sent round to the provinces. We shall hear of it again.

* The next letter shews that be means Hortensius, The blunder wh
he complains of having committed, by the advice of Hortensius, is t
of having left Rome, rather than stay and brave the impeachment.

tm,8,$

TO ATTICUS

147

pllection of my own disasters, and by my alarm about my
other. Yes, pray look after and direct all the affairs you
ntion. Terentia expresses the warmest gratitude to you.

1 ha?e sent you a copy of the letter which I have written to

Pompey.
Thessalonica, 29 May.

LXIV (A in, 9)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

ThessauLOnica, 13 June

' brother Quintus having quitted Asia before the ist of
y, and arrived at Athens on the T5th, he would have to
ke great haste to prevent proceedings being commenced
him in his absence, supposing there to be some one
who was not content with the misfortunes we have already
ttstajned. Accordingly, I preferred that he should hurry on
f Rome rather than come to me ; and at the same time—
' I will tell you the truth, and it will give you a notion of
t extent of my wretchedness — I could not make up my
ad to see him, devotedly attached to me as he is, and a
of most tender feelings, or to obtrude upon him my
pies and ruin in all their wretchedness, or to endure
being seen by him. And I was besides afraid of what
ceHEinly would have happened — that he would not have had
die resolution to leave me. I had ever before my eyes the
i^jicie when he would either have to dismiss his lictors,* or be
itly torn from my arms. The prospect of this bitter
I have avoided by the other bitter pain of not seeing
r brother. It is all you, who advised me to continue living,
Rve forced me into this distressful position. Accord-
am paying the penalty of my error. However, I am
aed by your letter, from which I easily perceive how high
r own hopes are. This did give me some consolation, but
3y» after all, till you passed from the mention of Pompey

^ Beciitse* though a provincial governor retained his lictors till he
fadbed Rome, he was l«und to go straight home or dismiss them.

I

148

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. $"&, .

to the passage beginning ** Now try and win over Horter
and men of that sort." In heaven's name, my dear
pooiuSj don't yon yet perceive by whose means, by ^
treachery, by whose dishonest advice, I have been ruin^
But all this I will discuss with you when we meet I will ^
say this much, which I think you know : it is not my enet
but my jealous rivals^ that have ruined me. Now, howeveij
things are really as you hope, I will keep up my spirits,
will rely upon the hope on which you bid me rely. But i
I myself think, this proves illusory, what I was not allon
to do at the best time shall be done at a worse/ Teren
often expresses her gratitude to you. For myself one of 1
miseries also consists in fear — the business of my unhaf
brother* If I could only know how it stands, I she
know what I ought to do. Personally, the hope of the i
vantages and of the letters you mention keeps me still, as ]
advise, at Thessalonica. If I get any news, I shall
what I ought to do about the rest Yes, if, as you say|
your letter, you left Rome on the tst of June, you will
see us. I have sent you a letter which I wrote to Pompey.
Thessalonica, 15 June,

LXV (Q FR I, 3)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (ON HIS WAY
TO ROME)

Thessalonica, 15 June

Brother \ Brother ! Brother ! did you really fear that I had
been induced by some angry feeling to send slaves to you
without a letter ? Or even that 1 did not wish to see you ? I
to be angry mth you 1 Is it possible for me to be angry with
you ? Why, one would think that it was you that brought me
low I Your enemies, your unpopularity, that miserably ruined
me, and not I that unhappily ruined you I The fact is, the
much-praised consulate of mine has deprived me of you, of
children, country, fortune ; from you I should hope it will

* Le*t suicide*

Q rx I, 3

TO QUINTUS

149

have taken nothing but myself. Certainly on your side I
have experienced nothing but what was honourable and
gmtifyiog : on mine you have grief for my fall and fear for
your 01m, regret, mourning, desertion, /not wish to see you ?
I The truth is rather that I was unwilling to be seen by you.
1 For you would not have seen your brother — not the brother
you had left, not the brother you knew, not him to whom
you had with mutual tears bidden farewell as he followed
you on your departure for your province i not a trace even or
feint image of him, but rather what I may call the likeness of
t» living corpse. And oh that you had sooner seen me or
I heard of me as a corpse ! Oh that I could have left you to
I sun?ive, not my life merely, but my undiminished rank I
f But I call all the gods to witness that the one argument which
me from death was, that all declared that to some
^extent your life depended upon mine. In which matter
I made an error and acted culpably. For if I had died, that
death itself would have given clear evidence of my fidelity and
love to you. As it is, I have allowed you to be deprived of
my aid, though I am alive, and with me still living to need
the help of others ; and my voice, of all others, to fail when
dangers threatened my family, which had so often been
fuccessfully used in the defence of the merest strangers.
For as to the slaves coming to you without a letter, the real
reason (for you see that it was not anger) was a d^dness of
my faculties, and a seemingly endless deluge of tears and
sorrows. How many tears do you suppose these very words
have cost me? As many as I know they will cost you
to read them ! Can I ever refrain from thinking of you or
ever think of you without tears ? For when I miss you, is it
only a brother that I miss ? Rather it is a brother of almost
my own age in the charm of his companionship, a son in
his consideration for my wishes, a father in the wisdom of
his advice ! What pleasure did I ever have without you, or
you without me ? And what must my case be when at the
ame time I missa daughter : How affectionate ! how modest !
how clever ! The express image of my face, of my speech,
of my very soul ! Or again a son, the prettiest boy, the very
joy of my heart ? Cruel inhuman monster that I am, I dis-
missed him from my arms better schooled in the world than
I could have wished : for the poor child began to understand

I50

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. sS» i^. 48

what was going on. So, too, your own son, your own image,
whom my little Cicero loved as a brother, and was now
beginning to respect as an elder brother 1 Need I mention
also how I refused to allow my unhappy wife — the truest of
helpmates — to accompany me, that there might be some
one to protect the wrecks of the calamity which had fallen
on us both, and guard our common children ? Neverthe-
less, to the best of my ability, I did write a letter to you,
and gave it to your freedman Philogonus, which, I believe,
was delivered to you later on ; and in this I repeated the
advice and entreaty, which had been already transmitted to
you as a message from me by ray slaves, that you should go
on with your journey and hasten to Rome, For, in the first
place, I desired your protection, in case there were any
of my enemies whose cruelty was not yet satisfied by mjf
fall. In the next place^ I dreaded the renewed lamenta-
tion which our meeting would cause : while I could not
have borne your departure, and was afraid of the very thiog
you mention in your letter— that you would be unable
to tear yourself away. For these reasons the supreme
pain of not seeing you — and nothing more painful or mote
wretched could, I think, have happened to the most affee-
tionate and united of brothers — was a less misery than would
have been such a meeting followed by such a parting. Now,
if you can, though I, whom you always regarded as a brave
man, cannot do so, rouse yourself and collect your ener;giei
in view of any contest you may have to confront. I hope,
if my hope has anything to go upon, that your own spot-
less character and the love of your fellow citizens, and even
remorse for my treatment, may prove a certain protection
to you. But if it turns out that you are free from personal
danger, you will doubtless do whatever you think can be
done for me. In that matter, indeed, many write to me at
great length and declare that they have hopes ; but I person-
ally cannot see what hope there is, since my enemies have
the greatest influence, while my friends have in some cases
deserted, in others even betrayed me, fearing perhaps in
my restoration a censure on their own treacherous conduct
But how matters stand with you I would have you ascertain
and report to me. In any case I shall continue to live ai
long as you shall need me, in view of any danger you may

t pft It 3

TO QUINTUS

isi

aye to undergo: longer than that I cannot go on in this kind

' life. For there is neither wisdom nor philosophy with

nt strength to sustain such a weight of grief. I know

nere has been a time for dying, more honourable and

advantageous ; and this is not the only one of my

ny omissions, which, if I should choose to bewail, I

bould merely be increasing your sorrow and emphasising

ay own stupidity. But one thing I am not bound to do,

lit is in fact impossible — remain in a life so wretched and

lionoured any longer than your necessities, or some

funded hope-, shall demand. For I, who was lately

cmely blessed in brother^ children, wife, wealthy and in

very nature of that wealth, while in position, influence,

station, and popularity, I was inferior to none, howevei

lishcd — 1 cannot, I repeat, go on longer lamenting

^myself and those dear to me in a life of such humilia

Ion as this, and in a state of such utter ruin. Wherefore,

Vhat do you mean by writing to me about negotiating a

of exchange? As though I were not now wholly de-

endent on your means ! And that is just the very thing

which I see and feel, to my misery, of what a culpable

pi have been guilty in squandering to no purpose the

6y which I received from the treasury in your name,'

le you Imve to satisfy your creditors out of the very vitals

' yourself and your son. However, the sum mentioned in

Dur letter has been paid to M, Antonius, and the same

riount to Caepio. For me the sum at present in my

(ids is sufficient for what I contemplate doing. For in

ither case — whether I am restored or given up in de-

I — I shall not want any more money. For yourself, if

are molested, I think you should apply to Crassus and

Calidius. I don't know how far Hortensius is to be trusted.

elf, with the most elaborate pretence of affection and the

daily intimacy, he treated with the roost utter want

nciple and the most consummate treachery, and

_ riua helped him in it : acting under whose advice,

iiscs^ and injunctions, I was left helpless to fall into this

fesastcr. But this you will keep dark for fear they might

bjare you. Take care also — and it is on this account that I

' Sec pp. gi, 107*

IS3

CICERO'S LETTERS

B. C, ^%j JET* ^

think you should cultivate Hortensius himself by means (
Pomponius — that the epigram on the /ex Aurtlia ' attributed
to you when candidate for the aedileship is not proved I
false testimony to be yours. For there is nothing that 1 \
so afraid of as that, when people understand how much |
for me your prayers and your acquittal wiU rouse, they i
attack you with all the greater violence. Messalla I :
as really attached to you : Pompey I regard as stiU
tending only. But may you never have to put the
things to the test ! And that prayer I would have oflfered 1
the gods had they not ceased to listen to prayers of
However, I do pray that they may be content with
endless miseries of ours ; among which, after all, there i
no discredit for any wrong thing done — sorrow is the be
ning and end, sorrow that punishment is most severe wh
our conduct has been most unexceptionable. As to
daughter and yours and my young Cicero, why should I j
commend them to you, my dear brother ? Rather I grie
that their orphan state will cause you no less sorrow i
it does me. Yet as long as you are un condemned tti
will not be fatherless. The rest, by my hopes of restoiati
and the privilege of dying in my fatherland, my tears ^
not allow me to write ! Terentia also I would ask you
protect, and to write me word on every subject Be as bra?
as the nature of the case admits*
Thessalonica, 13 June,

LXVI (A HI, ro)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessaldnica, 17 JUNh:

The public transactions up to the 25th of May I have le
from your letter, I am waiting for the rest, as you adv
at Thessalonica j and when they arrive I shall be better ab
to decide where to be. For if there is any reason, if ;

* Quintiis was a candidate m B.C. 66 for the aedileship of \
following year. Tlie Itx AureHa^ which divided the juries between J

Am, 10

TO ATTICUS

153

action is being taken, if I shall s€e any hopes, I shall either
wait in the same place or go to your house ; but if, as you
ay» these hopes have vanished into air, I shall look out for
soinething else. At present you do not give me any indica-
tion except the disagreement of those friends of yours, which,
however, arises between them on every kind of subject rather
than myself. Therefore I don't see what good it is to me.
However, as long as you all will have me hope, I shall obey
rou. For as to your scoldings so frequent and so severe,
lad your saying that I am faint-hearted, I would ask you
that na.isery is there so heavy as not to be included in my
disfranchisement ? Did anyone ever fall from such a high
position, in so good a cause, with such endowments of
genius, wisdom and popularity, with such powerful sup-
f*orts from all loyalists? Can I forget what I was, and
not feel what I am ? Of what honour, of wliat glory, of
what children, of what means, of what a brother I am de-
' pfived ? This last, indeed, to draw your attention to a new
kind of disaster — though I valued him, and always had
I done so, more than myself — I have avoided seeing, lest I
ihould behold his grief and mourning, or lest I — whom he had
1 left in the highest prosperity — should obtrude myself upon
him in a state of ruin and humiliation. I pass over the
I other particulars that are past bearing : for I am prevented
by my tears. And here, let me ask, am I to be blamed
for my grief, or for the unfortunate mistake of not retaining
these advantages (and I could easily have done so, had not
a plot for my destruction been hatched within my own
wills), or at least of not losing them without losing my life
I it the same time ? My purpose in writing these words is
that Tou shotild rather console me, as you do, than think
ae Querying of correction or chiding ; and the reason of
I the comparative brevity of my letters is, in the first place, that
I am hindered by outbursts of sorrow, and, in the second
place, that I have news to expect from Rome rather than any
I b ooxnmunicate myself* But when that news arrives I will let
I kmm ray plans. Pray, as you have done hitherto, write

(, cquites, and tribum^arani^ was passed in Pompey's Brst
B,c. 70. As this was the compromise in the maUer of
J TavotLfed by Pompey, Hortenstus, and the like, an attack on
111 »Miid be likdy to g*'e offence.

IS4

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C S8, JET, 4S

to me on as many subjects as possible, that I may not 1
ignorant of any possible thing there is to know.
Thessalonica, 17 June.

LXVII (A III, II)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 27 June

I HAVE been kept at Thessalonica up to this tim
by your letter and some good news (which, however, did not
rest on the best authority^ and the expectation of hearing
from you all at Rome, as by the fact that you advised my
doing so» When I receive the letters which I expect, if
there turns out to be the hope which rumour brings me, I
shall go to your house ; * if otherwise, I will inform you of
what I have done. Pray go on, as you are doing, and he
me by your exertions, advice, and influence. Cease
consoling me, but yet don't chide me ; for when you do t
I fail to recognize your affection and regret I Yet I belie
you to be so distressed yourself at my wretchedness, \
IS not within anyone's power to console you. Give
support to Quintus, my best and kindest of brothers,
write to me fully on everything,
27 June.

LXVIII (A III, 12)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 17 July

Well, you argue earnestly as to what hope is to be entt
tained, and especially through the action of the senate, i
yet you mention that the clause of the bill is being [
up, in virtue of which the subject is forbidden to be men-

^ /.«., to the house of Atticos at ButhrotunL

AITJ, It, U

TO ATTICUS

1S5

boned in the senate. Accordingly, not a word is said about
it In these circumstances you find fault with me for dis-
tressing myself, when the fact is I am already more distressed
than anybody ever was, as you know very well. You hold
oat hope as a consequence of the elections. What hope can
there be with the same man tribune, and a consul-designate
who is my enemy ? ^ But you have dealt me a blow in what
fOQ say about my speech having got abroad,^ Pray do your
>est to heal that wound, as you express it. I did indeed
lite one some time ago, in a fit of anger at what he had
rst composed against me ; but I had taken such pains to
tppress it, that I thought it would never get into circulation.
!ow it has leaked out I cannot think. But since the occa-
[>n never arose for my having a word of dispute with him,
ad since it appeal^ to me to be more carelessly written
lan my other speeches, I think it might be maintained not
be by me. Pray look after this if you think I can do
ything to remedy the mischief; but if my ruin is inevit-
lie, I don't so much care about it, I am still lying idle in
e same place, without conversation, without being able to
[ink* Though, as you say, I have ** intimated *^ to you my

you should come to me, yet it is now clear to me *

u are doing me useful service where you are, but

not give me even a word of relief here. I cannot

any more, nor have I anything to say: I am rather

hear from you all.
lea, 17 July.

I *^ Ckxlius was not re-elected, and CJ. Caecilius Metellus Nepos, wha

► tribune (B.C. 63-62) been hostile to Cicero, now as consul sap-

[ Pompey in befriending Cicero.

' The speech in the senate in Curivmm ei doiHum, %.€,, against

elffer C. Curio, who had been Clodius^s advocate in B.C. 61 on

durg^ de ifuesto. Fragments only of it are preserved. They

"iciently violent. Cicero suggests repudiating the authorship,

the speech had never been deliveredj, and therefore was not

rily intended for publication. There is no special reason for

'Cicero*8 character on this account. If some enemy had got

' e MS. and published it without his consent, it was not really

sion of his deliberate sentiments,
ding nunc iamtn intdlego for si donaiam ut intellega, which ia
* a. There may be latent in si donatam some proper name,
n or Macedoniam^ but it is not possible to extract it qoWp
If, &5 }i^^^^ means '* where yoti arcj" t!.#., at Rome,

IS6

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 58, i

LXIX (A in, 14)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 21 July

From your letter I am full of anxiety to hear what Pomp
view is of my case, or what he professes to be his vie
The elections, I presume, are over; and when they we
over you say that he was of opinion that my case shouffl
be mooted. If I seem foolish to you for entertaining
hopes, it is at your bidding that I do so : yet I know
that you have in your letters been usually inclined rather to
check me and my hopes. Now pray write distinctly what
your view is, I know that I have fallen into this distress
from numerous errors of my own. If certain accidents have
in any degree corrected those errors, I shall be less sorry
that I preserved my life then and am still living. Owing to
the constant traffic along the road ^ and the daily expectation
of political change, I have as yet not removed from Thessa-
lonica. But now I am being forced away, not by Plancius
— for he, indeed, wishes to keep me here — but by the nature
of the place^ which is not at all calculated for the residence
of a disfranchised man in such a state of sorrow. I have not
gone to EpiruSj as I had said I would, because aU of a
sudden the messages and letters that arrived have all in-
dicated it to be unnecessary for me to be in the immediate
neighbourhood of Italy. From this place, as soon as I have
heard something about the elections, I shall set my face
towards Asia, but to what particular part I am not yet|
certain r however, you shall know.
Thessalonica, 21 July.

* The via Eptatta, the road across Macc<3omft, which was onej
the great chaonels of commanication between Rome and the East, r
which terminated at Thessalonica.

A m. 14, n

TO ATTICUS

157

LXX (A in, 13)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 5 August

As to my having writteo you word that I meant to go to
Epinis, I changed my plan when I saw that my hope was
vanishing and fading away, and did not remove from Tbessa-
lanica. I resolved to remain there until I heard from you
on the subject mentioned in your last letter, namely, that
there was going to be some motion made in the senate on
my case immediately after the elections, and that Pompey
had told you so. Wherefore, as the elections are over and
I have no letter from you, I shall consider it as though yoa
had written to say that nothing has come of it, and I shall
not feel annoyed at having been buoyed up by a hope which
did not keep me long in suspense. But the movement,
which you said in your letter that you foresaw as likely to
be to my advantage, people arriving here tell me will not
occur/ My sole remaining hope is in the tribunes-designate :
and if I wait to see how that turns out, you will have no
reason to think of me as having been wanting to my own
cause or the wishes of my friends. As to your constantly
finding fault with me for being so overwhelmed by my mis-
fortune, you ought to pardon me when you see that I have
softained a more crushing blow than anyone you have ever
seen or heard of. As to your saying that you are told that
I my intellect in even aifected by grief, that is not so ; my in-
I teUect is quite sound. Oh that it had been as much so in
the hour of danger 1 when I found those, to whom I thought
my safety was the dearest object of their life, most bitterly
land unfeelingly hostile: whOj when they saw that I had
I somewhat lost my balance from fear, left nothing undone
(which malice and treachery could suggest in giving me the
final push, to my utter ruin* Now, as I must go to Cyzicus,

^ The probable split tunong tbe triumvift, idludcd to in Letter

LxnL

158

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 58, i«T. 4S

where I shall get letters more mrely, I beg you to write me
word all the more carefully of everything you may think I
ought to know. Be sure you are affectionate to my brother
Quintus : if in all my misery I still leave him with rights
tindiminished, I shall not consider myself utterly ruined.
5 August.

LXXI (Q FR I, 4)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, August

I BEG you, my dear brother, if you and all my family have
been ruined by my single misfortune, not to attribute it to
dishonesty and bad conduct on my part, rather than to short-
sightedness and the wretched state I was in, I have com-
mitted no fault except in trusting those whom I believed to
be bound by the most sacred obligation not to deceive me,
or whom I thought to be even interested in not doing so.
All my most intimate, nearest and dearest friends were
either alarmed for themselves or jealous of me : the result
was that all I lacked was good faith on the part of my
friends and caution on my own.^ Bet if your own blameless
character and the compassion of the world prove sufficient to
preserve you at this juncture from molestation, you can,
of course, observe whether any hope of restoration is left for
me. For Pomponius, Sestius, and my son-in-law Piso have
caused me as yet to stay at Thessalonica, forbidding me, on
account of certain impending movements, to increase my
distance. But in truth I am awaiting the result more on
account of their letters than from any firm hoj>e of my own.
For what can I hope with an enemy possessed of the most for-
midable power, with my detractors masters of the state, with
friends unfaithful, with numbers of people jealous? How-
ever, of the new tribunes there is one, it is true, most warmly
attached to me — Sestius — and I hope Curias, Milo, Fadius,

^ Reading defuU ioifmi.

Q r* I, 4

TO QUINTUS

159

»

Fabridus; but still there is Clodius in violent opposition,
who even when out of office will be able to stir up the
passions of the mob by the help of that same gang, and then
there will be found some one also to veto the bill.
Such a state of things was not put before me when I was
ving Rome, but I often used to be told that I was certain
return in three days with the greatest klat " What made
fou go, then ? " you will say. What, indeed ! Many circum-
stances concurred to throw me off my balance — the defection
of Pompey, the hostility of the consuls, and of the praetors
'' lao, the timidity of the publicani^ the armed bands. The
of my friends prevented me seeking refuge in death,
hich would certainly have been the best thing for my honour,
e best escape from unbearable sorrows. But I have written
:o you on this subject in the letter I gave to Phaetho. Now
that you have been plunged into griefs and troubles, such as
no one ever was before, if the compassion of the world can
lighten our common misfortune, you will, it seems, score a
success beyond belief! But if we are both utterly ruined —
ah me I — I shall have been the absolute destruction of my
whole family, to whom I used to be at least no discredit !
But pray, as I said in a previous letter to you, look into the
business, test it thoroughly, and write to me with the candour
which our situation demands, and not as your affection for
me would dictate, I shall retain my life as long as I shall
think that it is in your interest for me to do so, or that it
OQ^t to be preserved with a view to future hope. You will
Itnd S^stius most friendly to us, and I believe that Lentulus,
the coming consul, will also be so for your sake. However,
deeds are not so easy as words. You will see what is wanted
md what the truth is. On the whole, supposing that no
CEie takes advantage of your unprotected position and our
imoD calamity, it is by your means, or not at all, that
...jclbing may be effected. But even if your enemies have
I begQn to annoy you, don*t flinch : for you will be attacked
by legBl process, not by swords. However, I hope that
tf^ may not occur, I beg you to write me back word on
•B subjects, and to believe that though I have less spirit
sid resource than in old times, I have quite as much
affection and loyalty.

i6o

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. s8» Mt*

LXXII (A m, 1$)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 17 August

On the 13th of August I received four letters from
one in which you urge me in a tone of reproof to be less
weak I a second, in which you say that Crassus*s freedman
has told you about my anxiety and leanness ; a third, in
which you describe the proceedings in the senate ; a fourth
on the subject of Varro's assurances to you as to the Mendly
feelings of Pompey.

To the first my answer is this ; though I do grieve, yet I
keep all my mental faculties, and it is precisely that which
vexes me^I have no opportunity and no one with whom
to employ so sound an intellect For if you cannot find
yourself separated from one individual like myself without
sorrow, what do you think must be my case, who am de-
prived both of you and of everyone else ? And if you, while
still in possession of all your rights, miss me, to what an ex-
tent do you think those rights are missed by me ? I will
not enumerate the things of which I have been despoiled, not
only because you are not ignorant of them, but also lest I
should reopen my own sorrow. I only assert this, that
never did anyone in an unofficial position possess such great
advantages, or fall into such great miseries. Moreover,
lapse of time not only does not soften this grief, it even en-
hances it. For other sorrows are softened by age, this one
cannot but be daily increased both by my sense of present
misery and the recollection of my past hfe. For it is not
only property or frieods thai I miss, but myself. For what
am I ? But I will not allow myself either to wring your soul
with my complaints, or to place my hands too often on my
wounds. For as to your defence of those whom I said had
been jealous of me, and among them Cato, I indeed think
that he was so far removed from that crime, that I am above
all things sorry that the pretended zeal of others had more
influence with me than his honesty. As for your excuses

J

in, IS

TO ATTICUS

l6l

the others, they ought to be excused in my eyes if they
so in yours. But all this is an old story now, Crassus's
eedman, I think, spoke without any real sincerity. In the
' senate you say that the debate was satisfactory. But what
about Curio ? Hasn't he read that speech ? I can't make
out how it got into circulation 1 But Axius, in describing
; proceedings of the same day, does not speak so highly
F Curio. ^ But he may be omitting something ; I know you
certainly not written anything except what actually
Varro's talk gives me some hope of Caesar, and
that Varro himself would throw himself into the
1 1 Which he certainly will do, both of his own accord
under pressure from you. For myself, if fortune ever
^lats me the enjoyment of you all and of my country, I
•ill at least take care that you shall, above all the rest of my
tendSy have cause to be glad : and I will so discharge all the
duties of affection and friendship, which (to confess the
Blh) have not heretofore been conspicuous, that you shall
xd me as restored to yourself as much as to my brother
I my children. If I have in any way sinned in my con-
to you, or rather since I have done so, pardon me.
or I have sinned more grievously against myself* And I
60 not write this to you because I know you not to feel
deeply for my misfortune: but certainly if it had been
1 nislter of abligation with you, and had always been so,
to liwe me as much as you do and have done, you would
Bever have allowed me to lack that judgment with which
wo are so well supplied,* nor would you have allowed me to
be pentiaded that the passing of the bill for the "colleges"
«»s to our advantage,* But you did nothing but weep over

* Or, «* Prof- Tyrrell tuggests, '* does not quote Curio to that effect,"
I tibtnk, however, tliat Cicero does not use laudo in this sense except in

l^ittedoii with mutortm^ auctores^ and even then generally with a sub-
^kMt ftt least, of commend&tion. The speech was composed to be
I^Wmred against the elder Curio and Clodius (see p. f55), but was
" irvcr delivered. Its personal tone made it dangerous now,

* Ckero n»ea]» that Atticus acted with the emotion spontaneously
his affecdon» but not with the caution which he would
in doing a thing which he was under some obligation

' The ttsdent •* colleges '* or "clubs" had been gradually increasing,
I decre e of the senate in B.c, 64 had declared certain of them
But Clodius had overridden Um decree by a Ux early* in
M

l62

CtCERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 58> JET,

my sorrow, as thoogh yon were my second self. This was
indeed a sign of your affection : but what might have been
done, if I had earned it at your hands — the spending by you
of days and nights in thinking out the course I ought to have
pursued— that was omitted, owing to my own culpable im-
prudence, not yours. Now ifj I don*t say you only, but if
there had been anyone to urge me, when alarmed at Pompey's
ungenerous answer,^ not to adopt that most degrading course
— and you are the person that, above all others, could have
done it — ^I should either have died honourably, or we should
have been living to-day triumphant. In this you must forgive
me. For I find much greater fault with myself, and only
call yon in question afterwards, as at once my second self
and the sharer in my error ; and, besides, if I am ever
restored, our mistake will seem still less in my eyes, and to
you at least I shall be endeared by your own Hndness, since
there is none on my side/^ There is something in the sug-
gestion you mentioned as having been made in your con-
versation with Culleo as to a primlegium^ but by far the
better course is to have the law repealed. For if no one
vetoes it, what course caii be safer ? But if anyone is found
to prohibit its passing, he will be equally able to veto a
decree of the senate. Nor is there need for the repeal of
anything else. For the previous law did not touch me : and
if, on its publication, I had chosen to speak in its favour,
or to ignore it, as it ought to have been ignored, it could
not have done me any harm at alL* It was at this point

3.C. 58, Jind many new ones were formed, which he yscd for his political
purposes {pr^ SisL § 55 ; Dio, xxxviii. 13).

* That he could do iiothing against the wishes of Caesar \Att, x. 4, § 3;
cp. m Pis. § 77). AccordiDg to Plutaich, Pompey avoided a personal
interview (CjV. 31).

^ The kindness has been all on the side of Atticus, who will there*
fore be attached to the object of it— for the benefactor loves more than
the benefited.

* Aprhiiegium was a law referring to a particular person, which was
forbidden by the twelve tables, and if it was shewn to beunconstitutioDal
a decree of tlie ^n^e could declare it void. But Cicero seems to think
that such a proceeding of the senate would give a possibility of raising
the question afresh.

* The ftrst biU named no oae^ but enacted that "anyone who had pat
a citizen to death uncondemned should be forbidden fire and water.**
The lecond, "that M. Tullitis be forbidden fire and water." Cicero

n

TO ATTICUS

163

t that my judgment failed to assist me, nay, even
me harm. Blind, blind, I say, was I in laying aside
senator's toga, and in entreating the people; it was a
1 step to take before some attack had been begun upon
by name.^ But I am harping on the past : it is, how-
r, for the purpose of advising you, if any action is to be
tetif not to touch that law, in which there are many pro-
Bions in the interests of the people. But it is foolish for
i to be laying down rules as to what you are to do and
I only wish that something may be done ! And it is
1 that point that your letter displays much reserve : I pre-
Sme, to prevent my being too much agitated by despair. For
It action do you see possible to be taken, or in what way ?
brough the senate ? But you yourself told me that Clodius
6jted upon the doorpost of the senate-house a certain
ause in the law, "that it might neither be put to the house
br mentioned." * How could Domitius/ therefore, say that
; would bring it before the house ? How came it about
that Clodius held his tongue, when those you mention
I your letter both spoke on the subject and demanded that a
tion should be brought in ? But if you go to the people-
It be carried except with the unanimous approval of the
Rmnes ? "What about my property? What about my
use ? Will it be possible to have it restored ? Or, if that
[lot, how can I be ? Unless you see these difficulties on
I way to be solved, what is the hope to which you invite
J ? But if, again, there is no hope, what sort of life is there
me ? So I await at Thessalonica the gazette of the pro
caedings of the 1st of August, in accordance with which I
shall decide whether to take refuge on your estate, in order
at ODce to avoid seeing people I don't want to see, to see
you, according to your letter, and to be nearer at hand in
^»se of any motion being made (and this I understand is in

I ihftt the former did not touch him, I suppose, because it could not

This is in accordance with the view of Caesar, who

I of ihe law, but said that old sores ought not to be ripped up —

xriii. 17).

it shewed that he considered hiniself as coining under the
pfaiw.

Ldtcr LXVin, p. 154.
L,, Domitios Ahenobarbus, who was a praetor this year.

164

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 58, j^rr. 4S

accordance with your view and that of my brother Quintus),
or to depart for Cyzicus. Now, my dear Pomponius, since
you imparted to me none of your wisdom in time to save
me, either because you had made up your mind that I had
judgment enough of my own, ox that you owed me nothing
beyond being by my side ; and since, betrayed, beguiled, and
hurried into a snare as I was, I neglected all my defences,
abandoned and left Italy, which was everywhere on the
qui vive to defend me, and surrendered myself and mine into
the hands of enemies while you looked on and said nothing,
though, even if you were not my superior in mental power,
you were at least in less of a fright : now, if you can, raise
the fallen, and in that way assist 'me! But if every
avenue is barred, take care that I know that also, and cease
at length either to scold me or to offer your kindly-meant
consolations. If I had meant to impeach your good faith,
I should not have chosen your roof, of all others, to which
to trust myself : it is my own folly that I blame for having
thought that your love for me was exactly what I could
have wished it to be : * for if that had been so, you would
have displayed the same good faith, but greater circumspec-
tion j at least, you would have held me back when plunging
headlong into ruin, and would not have had to encounter
the labours which you are now enduring in saving the
wrecks of my fortunes. Wherefore do be careful to look
into, examine thoroughly, and write fully everything that
occurs, and resolve (as I am sure you do) that I shall be
some one^ since I cannot now be the man I was and the man
I might have been \ and lastly, believe that in this letter it
is not you, but myself that I have accused. If there are
any people to whom you think that letters ought to be
delivered in my name, pray compose them and see tbem^
delivered,
17 August

^ Though Cicero uses ionium . . . quantum here, he does not 1

that Atticus failed to love him enough — that would have been too ua*
reasonable. In a certain way he means that he loved him too much. He
allowed his spontaneous feelings full vent^ without acting with the cool
wisdom which he would have shewn in fulfilling a duty or moral obligt*
tion. It is more fully expressed above. Stilly it was a diBcalt thing to
say I and he doesn't succeed in making it very clear.

H in, 15, 16, 17

TO ATTICUS

16s

LXXni (A m, 16)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 19 August

[My whole journey is in suspense till I receive letters from
Ipu all of the ist of August, For if there turns out to be
|ifi]r hope, I am for Epirus : if not, I shall make for Cyzicus
lor some other place. Your letter is cheerful ^ indeed, but at
[tiie same time, the oftener I read it, the more it weakens the
f suggested ground for hope, so that it is easy to see that you
are trying to minister at once to consolation and to truth,
■ Accordingly, I beg you to write to me exactly what you
[know and exactly what you think.
19 August.

LXXIV (A III, 17)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 4 September

rs of my brother Quintus of an invariably gloomy nature
lied me from the 3rd of June up to the 29th of August
*0n that day, however, Livineius, a freedman of Lucius
Kegulus, came to me by the direction of Regulus himself.^
He arnioimced that absolutely no notice whatever had been
given of a prosecution, but that there had, nevertheless,
hixn some talk about the son of C* Clodius.^ He also

' Redding /tsta for /i^f^.

* I* Livineius Regulus, whom Cicero [F, xiii. 60) calls a very inlimate
4, and says that Ms freedman Trypho stood his friend in the hour
«d. He seems to have been condemned (io B.C. 56?) for somethin^f
The afterwards served under lulius Ciesar {B, Afr, § 9). The freed-
iuq'« full nanie was L. Livineius Trypho.

' AUmiC Appius anLiDg as prosecutor of Quintus. He was a nephew of
K Qcxliu*. See Letter CCXXIL

i66

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX. 58, mvA

brought me a letter from my brother Quintus, But tiexl
day came the slaves of Sestius, who brought me a letter from
you not so positive in regard to this alarm as the conversa-
tion of Livineios had been. I am rendered very anxious in
the midst of my own endless distress, and the more so as
Appius ^ has the trial of the case. As to other circumstances
mentioned in the same letter by you in connexion with my
hopes, I understand that things are going less well than
other people represent them. I, however, since we are now
oot far from the time at which the matter will be decided,
will either go to your house or will still remain somewhere in
this neighbourhood. My brother writes me word that his
interests are being supported by you more than by anyone
else. Why should I urge you to do what you are already
doing ? or offer you thanks which you do not expect ? I only
pray that fortune may give us the opportunity of enjoying
our mutual affection in security. I am always very anxious to
get your letters, in which I beg you not to be afraid of your
minuteness boring me, or yoor plain speaking giving me
pain.

4 September.

LXXV (A m, 18)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica (September)

You raised no little flutter in my mind when you said in youf
letter that Varro had assured you as a friend that Pompey
would certainly take up my case, and that as soon as he had
received a letter from C^sar, which he was expecting, he
would even name some one to formally carry out the business.
Was that all mere talk, or was the letter from Caesar hostile ?
Is there some ground for hope? You mentioned, too, that

* Appius Claudius Pulcher, brother of P. Clodius, was praetor^desig-
nate for B.C. 57, and had allotted to him the quastio tie reSitt ntj^ghmm
(pro Sest. § 78). He was consul B.C. 54.

a

A ni, iS, 19

TO ATTICUS

167

Pompey had also used the expression " after the dections,**
Pray, as you can conceive the severity of the troubles by
which I am prostrated, and as you must think it natural to
our kuidness to do so, iDform me fiiliy as to the whole
state of my case. For my brother Quintus, dear good
fellow, who is so much attached to me, fills his letters with
hopeful expressions, fearing, I suppose, my entirely losing
heart Whereas your letters vary in tone; for you won^
have me either despair or cherish rash hopes. I beseech you
to let me know everything as far as you can detect the truth.

LXXVI (A in, 19)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Th£ssalonica, 15 September

[ As long as my letters from you all continued to be of such a

I oatufe as to keep expectation alive, I was bound to Thes-

ttlonica by hope and eager longing : afterwards, when all

political measures for this year appeared to me to be over, I yet

determined not to go to Asia, both because a crowd of people

is disagreeable to me, and because, in case any movement

was set on foot by the new magistrates, I was unwilling to be

I far off. Accordingly, I resolved to go to your house in Epirus,

not because the natural features of the country mattered to

I me, shunning as I do the Ught of day altogether, but because

I it will be most grateful to my feelings to set out from a

harbour of yours to my restoration ; and, if tliat restoration is

denied me, there is no place where I shall with greater ease

tdlher support this most wretched existence or (which is much

J better) rid myself of it. I shall be in a small society : I shall

l&hake off the crowd. Your letters have never raised me

I to such a pitch of hope as those of others ; and yet my

■hopes have always been less warm than your letters. Never-

jfheless, since a beginning has been made in the case, of

|whatever sort and from whatever motive, I will not dis-

ojiii the sad and touching entreaties of my best and only

tfib

f68

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX. S8, .^T, 4S

brother, nor the promises of Sestius and others, nor the
hopes of my most afflicted wife, nor the entreaties of my
most ynhappy Tulliola, as well as your own loyal letter,
Epirus will fumish me with a road to restoration or to that
other alternative mentioned above. I beg and entreat of
you, Titus Pomponius, as you see that I have been despoiled
by the treachery of men of all that most adds splendour to
life, of all that can most gratify and delight the soul, as you
see that I have been betrayed and cast away by my own
advisers, as you understand that I have been forced to ruin
myself and my family — help me by your compassion, and
support my brother Quintus, who is still capable of being
saved ; protect Terentia and my children. For myself, if you
think it possible that you may see me at Rome, wait for me; if
not, come to see me if you can, and make over to me just
so much of your land as may be covered by my corpse.
Finally, send slaves to me with letters as soon and as often as
possible.

15 September.

LXXVII (A m, 20)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 4 October

Cicero greets Q, Ccedlius Pomponianus Atticus, son of Quintut}

That this is now the case, and that your uncle has done
what he ought to have done, I approve in the strongest
manner possible: I will say I am "glad," when circum-
stances shall admit of my using such a word. Ah me ! how

^ Cicero gives AUicus his full name, rather playfully, as it wasanewac*
quisition. His uncle, Q. Caecilius, dying this year, left him heir to a large
ft)rtune, and adopted him in hia will (Nep. Att, 5). He therefore, ftC*
cording to custom, took his uncle's pranonten 2n^ noffun^ Q. OeciHuSj
retaining his own nomtn in an adjectival form (Pomponianus) as a ^^•
noment just as C Octavius became, by bis uncle^s will, C lulius Csmr
Octmnanus, His additional name of Atticus remained as before, and
jn ordinary life was his usual designation. See p. 15.

A lu, ao

TO ATTICUS

169

well everything would have been going if my own spirit, my

own judgment, and the good faith of those on whom I relied

had not failed me 1 But I won't review these circumstances

lest I increase my sorrow. Yet I feel sure that it occurs to

your mind what a life ours was, how delightful^ how dignified.

To recover this^ in the name of fortune, bestow all your

nergies, as I know you do, and take care that I keep the

ay of my return in your delightful house with you and

family. For this hope and expectation, though now put

^ore me as being very strong, I yet wished to wait in your

ome in Epirus ; but my letters are such as to make me think

: better not to be in the same neighbourhood. What you

ay in your letter about my town house and about Curio's

" I is exactly true. Under the general act of restoration,

I if only that is accorded me, everything will be included, of

I which I care for nothing more than for my house. But I don't

I give you any precise injunction, I trust myself wholly to your

liOTection and honour. I am very glad to hear that you have ex-

] tncated yourself from every embarrassment in view of so large

inheritance. As to your promise to employ your means

I securing my restoration, though I am in all points assisted

you above all others, yet I quite see what a support

Jttat is, and I fully understand that you are undertaking and

Ion carry on many departments of my cause, and do not

Jiieed to be asked to do so. You tell me not to suspect that

ipar feelings have been at all affected by acts of commission

r omission on my part towards you— well, I will obey you

nd will get rid of that anxiety ; yet I shall owe you all the

|inore from the fact that your kind consideration for me has

on a higher level than mine for you. Please tell me in

' letters whatever you see, whatever you make out, what-

ver is being done in my case, and exhort all your friends to

in promoting my recall. The bill of Sestius * does not

«U*rw sufficient regard for my dignity or sufficient caution.

' Sotius, tribune -elect for B.C. 57, would come into office loth De-
Bber, 9.C* 58. He means to bring a biU before the people for Cicero's
~1I, And a draft of it has been sent to Cicero, who criticises it as not
ng sufHciently into details, though he had before said that a general
fii'a MM inUerufn covered everything ; but perhaps this bill only
ded Uie Cloaiaji law as a priviUgium^ without mentioning anything

IJO

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 58, iirr. 4

For the proposed law ought to mention me by name, and to

contain a carefully expressed clause about my property.

Pray see to it.

Thessalonica, 4 October.

LXXVIII (F XIV, 2)

TO TERENTIA (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 5 October

GREETmos to Terentia, and Tulliola, and Cicero. Do
suppose that I write longer letters to anyone else,
some one has written at unusual length to me,
I think myself bound to answer. For I have nothing j
write about, and there is nothing at such a time as this 1 *
I find it more difficult to do. Moreover, to you and
dear TuUtola I cannot write without many tears. For I j
you reduced to the greatest misery — the very people wh
I desired to be ever enjoying the most complete happine
a happiness which it was my bounden duty to secure, J
which I should have secured if I had not been such a con
Our dear Piso 1 love exceedingly for his noble conduct,
have to the best of my ability encouraged him by letter j
proceed J and thanJced him, as I was bound to do, I
that you entertain hopes in the new tribunes. We shall 1
reason to depend on that, if we may depend on Pomp
goodwill, but yet I am nervous about Crassus. I g£
that you have behaved in every respect with the gre
courage and most loyal affection^ nor am I surprised
it ; but I grieve that the position should be such that i
miseries are relieved by such heavy ones on your
For a kind friend of ours, Publius Valerius, has told
in a letter which I could not read without violent we
ing, how you had been dragged from the temple of Vesta|
the Valerian bank.^ To think of it, my dear, my "

' Tercntiai whose half-sister was a Vestal, seems to have
sanctuary with ihe Vestals, as did the mother and sister of Augustoil

' iav» 2

TO TERENTIA

171

I

I

^ou from whom everybody used to look for help ! * That
m, my Terentia, should now be thus harassed, thus pro-
strate in tears and humiliating distress ! And that this
should be brought about by my fault, who have preserved
the rest of the citizens only to perish myself 1 As to what
you say about our town houses or rather its sltej I shall not
consider myself fully restored^ until it has dso been restored
for me. ^However, these things are not yet within our grasps
I am only sorry that you, impoverished and plundered as you
are, should be called upon to bear any part of the present ex-
penses. Of course, if the business is successfully accomplished
we shall get everything back : but if the same evil fortune
keeps us down, will you be so foolish as to throw away even
the poor remains of your fortune ? ^ I beseech you, my life,
as far as expense goes, allow others to bear it, who are well
able if they are only willing to do so ; and do not, as you
love me, try your delicate constitution. For I have you day
and night before my eyes : I see you eagerly undertaking
labours of every kind : I fear you cannot endure them. Yet
I see that everything depends on you ! Wherefore, to enable
us to attain what you hope and are striving for, attend care-
fully to your health. / don't know to whom to write except
to those who write to me, or to those about whom you say
something in your letters* I wil! not go farther off, since
that is your wish, but pray send me a letter as often as pos-
sible^ especially if there is anything on which we may safely
build our hope. Good-bye, my loves, good-bye !
Thessalonica, 5 October.

B.C 43. The special indignity of which Cicero complains is that she
bad been forced to leave the sanctuary and appear at the bank of
Valerius, but for what purpose we cannot now telL It is suggested
tbat it was to make some solemn declaration as to her husband's pro-
perty, some of which she may be supposed to have tried to conceal.
Tbe term ifiu^a esses is that applied to prisoners led through the streets,
bot we may regard it as used ad invidiam.

^ In securing her husband^s advocacy*

* Mention is made of Terentia^s separate estate in Letters XXX and
LXXXL

1^3

CICERO'S LETTERS

B*C 58, i

LXXIX (A III, 21)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica, 28 October

It is exactly thirty days to the writing of this letter since!
have heard from you. Well, my present intention is, as I
have told you, to go into Epirus and there by preference to
await whatever may turn up, I beg you to write to me with
the utmost openness whatever you perceive to be the state of
the case, and whether it is for good or evil, and also to send
a letter, as you say, in my name to whomsoever you think it
necessary,
28 October.

LXXX (A III, 22)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Thessalonica and Dyrrachium, 27 November

Though my brother Quintus and Piso have given me]
careful account of what has been done, yet I could
wished that your engagements had not hindered you fro
writing fully to me, as has been your custom, what
on foot and what you understood to be the facts, Upi
the present, Pkncius ^ keeps me here by his generous I
ment, though I have several times already made an effort I
go to Epirus. He has conceived a hope, which I do
share, that we may possibly quit the province together :
hopes that that may redound greatly to his credit* But as
soon as news shall come that soldiers are on their way
hither,^ I shall have to insist on quitting him. And as soon

^ Cn. Plancius, quaestor in Macedonia, whose kindness Cicero laud*
" "m in B.C. 54.
governor, L. Calpumius Piso, who was to have

highly when defending him in B.C. 54.
- The forces of the new £ove

V

m, ai, «; F xjv, 1

TO TERENTIA

175

i I do tbat I will at once send you word, that you may know
bere 1 am. Lentulus,* in his own peculiar zeal for my cause,
bich he manifests by action and promises and writings,
Ves me some hope of Pompey's friendly feelings. For you
^ve often told me in your letters that the latter was wholly
roted to him. As to Metellus,^ my brother has written
word that by your agency as much has been accom-
shed as he had hoped. My dear Pomponius, fight hard
I may be allowed to live with you and my own family,
write rae everything that occurs. I am heavy with
and regret for all my dear ones, who have always
rer to me than myself. Take care of your health.

Ipyrrachium, 27 November. As, if I went through Thes-
into Epirus, I should have been likely to be a very long
De without any intelligence, and as I have warm friends in
t people of Dyrrachium, I have come to them, after writing
! former part of this letter at Thessalonica. When I turn
J face from this town towards your house I will let you
towj and for your part I would have you write me every-
'ng with the utmost particularity, whatever its nature.
[>w eicpecting some definite step or the abandonment
ope.

LXXXI (F XIV, I)

TO TERENTIA

Partly written at Thessalonica, partly at
Dyrrachium, 28 November

INGS to his Terentia, Tulliola, and Cicero. I learn,
from the letters of many and the conversation of all
Dm I meet, that you are shewing a virtue and courage
sing belief; and that you give no sign of fatigue

cedonia after bis consalship, &nd wotild be sending his troops oa

bre him.

1 P. Cornelius Lentulus, conBut-designate for B.c. 57.

[ Q. Cicilius MeteUusNepoSj consul-designate for B.C. $'jk See ppb

174

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C. SS, /ET,

in mind or body from your labours. Ah me 1 To think
that a woman of your virtue, fidelity, uprightness, and kind-
ness should have fallen into such troubles on my account I
And that my little TuUk should reap such a harvest of sorrow
from the father, from whom she used to receive such
abundant joys I For why mention my boy Cicero, who from
the first moment of conscious feeling has been made aware
of the bitterest sorrows and miseries ? And if, as you say,
I had thought these things the work of destiny, I could
have borne them somewhat more easily, but they were really
all brought about by my own fault, in thinking myself be-
loved by those who were really jealous of me, and in not
joining those who really wanted me.^ But if I had followed
my own judgment, and had not allowed the observations of
friends, who were either foolish or treacherous, to have such
great influence with me, we should have been living at the
height of bliss. As it is, since friends bid us hope, I will do
my best to prevent my weakness of health from failing to
second your efforts. I fully understand the magnitude of the
difficulty, and how much easier it will turn out to have been to
stay at home than to get back. However, if we have all the
tribunes on our side, if we find Lentulus as zealous as he
appears to be, if, finally, we have Pompey aiid Caesar, there
is no reason to despair. About our slaves/ we will do what
you say is the opinion of our friends. As to this place, by
this time the epidemic has taken its departure ; but while it
lasted, it did not touch me. Plancius, the kindest of men,
desires me to stay with him and still keeps me from depart-
ing. I wanted to be in a less frequented district in Epinis,
to which neither Hispo ^ nor soldiers would come, but as yet
Plancius keeps me from going ; he hopes that he may pos-
sibly quit his province for Italy in my company. And if ever
I see that day^ and come once more into your arms, and if I
ever recover you all and myself, I shall consider that I have
reaped a sufficient harvest both of your piety and my own.
Piso's * kindness, virtue, and affection toward us all are so

■ The party of the triuinvirs. ' See Letter LXI, p. 142,

" A centurion or other officer in the army of Piso crossing to M
donia. But the name is otherwise unlcDown, and some have thoi
that it is an intentional disguise for the name of Piso himself.
* Cicero's son-in-law.

i: xjv, f

TO TERENTIA

^7S

^^ that nothing can stirpass them. I hope his conduct
may be a source of pleasure to him, a source of glory I see
clearly that it will be* I did not mean to find fault with you
about my brother Quintus, but I wished that you all, especially
^considering how few there are of you, should be as closely
lited as possible. Those whom you wished me to thank I
ai^ thanked, and told them that my information came from
As to what you say in your letter, my dear Terentia,
: your intention of selling the village, alas ! in heaven's
, what will become of you ? And if the same ill-fortune
nties to pursue us, what will become of our poor boy ? I
cannot write the rest — so violent is my outburst of weeping,
sod I will not reduce you to the same tearful condition. I
only add this : if my friends remain loyal to me^ there will be
lack of money ; if not, you will not be able to effect our
pbject out of your own purse. In the name of our unhappy
lines, beware bow we put the finishing stroke to the bo/s
If he has something to keep him from absolute want,
he will need only moderate character and moderate luck to
■ituin the rest. See to your health, and mind you send me
r-carriers, that I may know what is going on and what
I are all doing. I have in any case only a short time to

Give my love to Tulliola and Cicero, Good-bye.
Dyirachium,* 27 November.

KS. — I have come to Dyrrachium both because it is a
\ state, very kindly disposed to me, and the nearest point

• Italy.* But if the crowded condition of the place offends
, I shall take myself elsewhere and I will write you word,

^ The g^^ter part of this letter was evidently written at Thessalonica.

^appeals to have pot the date and place of departure to it after

I ftt Dyrrachium, and then added a postscript to explain why he

Be there.

' As a libera crnUas Dyirachium bad the ins exility and would not

t WBed with Roman officials. The crowded state of the town — by which

po mcaos crowded with Romaos^ — would arise from its being the

I place of disembarkation from Rome across the north of the Greek

to the East. There was doobtless always a large traffic

t and Brundisium, but at this time of year, when sailing would

"jle, avoided, he might hope to £nd it somewhat lesscrowdcd^

176

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C. SS, /EJ,'{

3 the

thoT

LXXXII (A III, 23)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

DvRRACHiUM, 29 November

On the 26th of November I received three letters
one dated 25th of October, in which you exhort me to await
the month of January with a good heart, and write at length
on such topics as you think tend to encourage my hopes—
as to the zeal of Lentulus^ the goodwill of Metellus, and the
general policy of Pompey. In the second letter, contrary^
your usual custom, you append no date, but give suffii '^
indication of the time of its writing. For the law hai
been pubHshed by the eight tribunesj you mention that
wrote this letter on the very same day, that is, the 29th
October,* and you say what good you think that pubhcation
has done* In regard to which, if my restoration is to be
despaired of along with this law, I would have you think in
your affection for me that my fruitless exertions are pitiable
rather than foolish : but if there is any ground for hope, try
and secure that my cause may be hereafter supported with
greater attention to details by the new magistrates. For
this bill of the old tribunes " had three clauses, of which the
one relating to my return was carelessly drafted. For nothing
is restored to me except my citizenship and senatorial rank :
which, in the circumstances of my position, sufiices me, but
it does not escape your observation what special provisions
will have to be made^ and in what manner. The second
clause is the usual one^ — " If anything be done in virtue
of this law against other laws.^* * But observe, my dear
Pomponius, what the object of the third clause is, and

* This bill for Cicero's recall would, of course, be vetoed by Clodios,
and could not therefore be passed, hut it would probably influence the
action of the new tribunes for B.C. 57.

' /.&, the tribunes of B.C. 58.

' /,«., securing indemnity to the proposers if there is a technical breach
of exisdng laws, something like the common clause — **all statutes tot*
contrary notwithstanding. -

A in, ^3

TO ATTICUS

177

by whom it has been put in. For you know that Clodius
provided that it should be scarcely possible, or rather alto-
gether impossible, for his law to be deprived of validity
cither by senate or people. But you must see that the
penal provisions of such laws as are repealed have never
been observed. For in that case hardly any law could be
[ repealed at all — for there is no law which does not hedge
I itself in by trying to make repeal difficult — but when a law
lis repealed, so is the clause meant to prevent its repeal,
iKow, though this is in truth the case, since it has been the
limiversal doctrine and practice, our eight tribunes introduced
I the following clause : If any prmitsion is contained in this
\HII wMch^ in vietv of existing laws or plebiscites (*>., Clodios's
law), // is not lawful without incurring penalty^ now or here-
^ofore^ whether to publish^ repeal^ amende or supersede^ or
\wkcreby he who has so published or amended would be liable
\k penalty or fine — such provision is not enacted by this law,
[And observe that this contingency did not touch the case
I of those eight tribunes, for they were not bound by a Jaw
lemanating from their own body.^ Which makes one the
liinore suspicious of some evil intention, since they have
[ftdded a clause which did not affect themselvesj but was
I against my interests: so that the new tribunes, if they
ilappened to be somewhat timid, would think it still more
necessary to employ the clause.^ And Clodius did not fail
to notice this. For he said in the public meeting of
November the third, that by this clause a limit to theh* legal
[powers was kid down for the tribunes-designate; and yet
it cannot escape your notice that in no law is there a clause
of the sort : whereas^ if it had been necessary, everybody
would have employed it in repealing a law. How this point
cime to escape Ninnius ' and the rest, pray find out, and
tito introduced the clause, and how it was that the eight
tribunes did not hesitate to bring my case before the senate
-Hfhich implies that they did not think that clause of

' The Clodinu law.

* Because they woiild not be protected as the previous trihunes were
I bf the fact of the Clodian law {\vhick alone was contravened) hz.ving
(mtnited irom their own colkgium*

' L. Quadratus Ninnius, tribune-elect. On the ist of June next he
btoughi forward the question of Cicero's restoration in the senate.

I. N

178

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX. 58, .«T. 48

the law binding — and were yet so cautious in their pro-
posal for its repeal, as to be afraid (though not personally
liable) of what need not be taken into consideration, even by
those who are bound by the law. This clause I would not
have the new tribunes propose; however, let them only
carry something, no matter what : I shall be content with
the single clause recalling me, so long only as the business is
done. I have for some time been feeling ashamed of writing
at such length; for I fear by the time you read this it will be
all up with any hopes, so that this minute criticism of mine
may seem pitiable to you and ridiculous to others. But if
there is any ground for hope, pray look at the law which
Visellius ^ drafted for T, Fadius* I like it very much : for
that of our friend Sestius, which you say has your approba-
tion, I don't like.

The third letter is dated 12th of November, in which you
explain with wisdom and care what the circumstances are
which seem to cause a postponement of my affair, and about
Crassus, Pompey, and the rest. Accordingly, I beg you, if
there is any hope that the matter can be settled by the zeal
of the loyalists, by the exertion of influence, and by getting
numbers on our side, to endeavour to break through all
difficulties at a rush, to throw your whole weight into the
attempt, and incite others to do the same. But if, as I per-
ceive from your conjectures as well as my own, there is no
hope left, { beg and implore you to cherish my brother
Quintus, whom I to our mutual misery have ruined, and
not allow him to do anything to himself which would be
to the detriment of your sister's son. My little Cicero, to
whom, poor boy I I leave nothing but prejudice and the
blot upon my name, pray protect to the best of your power*
Terentia, that most afflicted of women, sustain by your kind-
ness. I shall start for Epirus as soon as I have received news
of the first days of the new tribunate,* Pray describe fully,
to me in your next letter what sort of a beginning is ]

29 November.

loe luuf—
madiflfl

* Cicera*s cousin, C Viscllias Varro, a learned jurisconsult {Bmi.
§264; I yerr.%71)^

' The tribunes came into office on the loth of December, nearly
three weeks before the consuls, praetors, etc, who entered oflSce on
the 1st of January.

1

M: rxiv, 3

TO TERENTIA

179

LXXXIII (F XIV, 3)

TO TERENTIA (AT ROME)

DvRHACHtUM, 29 November

TINGS to his Terentia, Tulliola, and Cicero. I have
ed three letters from the hands of Aristocritus, which
lost obliterated with tears. For I am thoroughly
ined with sorrow, my dear Terentia, and it is not my
niseries that torture me more than yours — and yours,
lildren I Moreover, I am more miserable than you in
hat whereas the disaster is shared by us both, yet the
is all my own. It was my duty to have avoided the
ST by accepting a legation,^ or to resist it by careful
gement and the resources at my command, or to fall
brave man. Nothing was more pitiful, more base, or
unworthy of myself than the line I actually took,
rdingiy, it is with shame as well as grief that I am
owered. For I am ashamed of not having exhibited
ge and care to a most excellent wife and most darling
teO. I have, day and night, before my eyes the mourn-
resses, the tears of you all, and the weakness of your own
i, while the hope of recall presented to me is slender
d. Many are hostile, nearly all jealous. To expel me had
difficult, to keep me out is easy. However, as long as
ntertain any hope, I will not give way, lest all should seem
ly my fault. As to your anxiety for ray personal safety,
s now the easiest thing in the world for me, for even my
ic5 desire me to go on living in this utter wretchedness.
, however, do as you bid me. I have thanked the
is you desired me to thank, and I have delivered the
% to Dexippus, and have mentioned that you had in*
d me of their kindness. That our Piso has shewn
sing zeal and kindness to us I can see for myself, but
body also tells me of it. God grant that I may be

iber the Uiera legatio or the acting UgaiM in Gaul, both of which
ofiicTcd him.

i8q

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 5S» min 4^

allowed, along with you and our children, to enjoy the actual
society of such a son-in-law ! For the present our one re-
maining hope is in the new tribunes, and that, too, in the
first days of their office ; if the matter is allowed to get stalcj
it is all over with us. It is for that reason that I have sent
Aristocritus back to you at once, in order that you may be
able to write to me on the spot as to the first official steps
taken, and the progress of die whole business ; although I
have also given Dexippus orders to hurry back here at once,
and I have sent a message to my brother to despatch letter-
carriers frequently. For the professed object of my being at
Dyrrachium at the present juncture is that I may hear as
speedily as possible what is being done ; and I am in no
personal danger, for this town has always been defended by
me. When I am told that enemies are on their way here I
shall retire into Epinis. As to your coming to me, as yOO
say you will if I wish it — for my part, knowing that a large
part of this burden is supported by you, I should like you to
remain where you are. If you succeed in your attempt I
must come to you : but if, on the other hand — but I needn't
write the rest From your first, or at most, your second
letter, I shall be able to decide what I must do. Only be
sure you tell me everything with the greatest minuteness,
although I ought now to be looking out for some practical
step rather than a letter. Take care of your health, and
assure yourself that nothing is or has ever been dearer to_
me than you are. Good-bye, my dear Terentaa, whon
seem to see before ray eyes, and so am dissolved in i
Good-bye !
29 November,

r A III, 24

TO ATTICUS

I8l

LXXXIV (A III, 24)

TO ATTICUS <AT ROME)

Dyrrachium, 10 December

r^ Some time ago, 1 received letters from you all stating
itb your consent the vote for the expenses of the con-
fvinces had been taken, though I was nervous as to
suit of the measure, I yet hoped that you saw some good
1 for it beyond what I could see : but when I was in-
d by word of mouth and by letters that this policy
urs was strongly censured, I was much disturbed, be-

tbe bope wliich I had cherished, faint as it was,
td completely destroyed. For if the tribunes are

with us, what hope can there be? And, indeed,
seem to have reason to be angry, since they, who
undertaken my cause^ have not been consulted on
leasure ; while by your assenting to it they have been
\red of all the legitimate influence of their office : and
I though they profess that it was for my sake that
isnshed to have the vote for the outfit of the consuls
r tbeir controlt not in order to curtail their freedom
tion, but in order to attach them to my cause : ^

liie phmsc omare provinciaSf ornare cansiiles^ etc., means the vote
1 senate deciding the number of troops, amount of money, and
DOt^t ihat the magistrates going to their provinces were to have.
lovinces to be taken by outgoing consuls were decided before the
WA — in this case they were Cilicia and Spain. But the ornatio
f took place after the consuls bad entered on their office, i.e.^ after
\ of January. For this year, however — -we don''t know why — it
tken place before the ist of December, B,C. 58, The result of this
be ihat the new tribunes for bx. 57^ — entering on their office loth
iber, B,c» 58 — would have no voice in the matter, and would thus
great bold on the consuls. Most of these tribunes were supporters
ero, while he was doubtful as to one of the consuls — Q, Qecilius
las Ncpos. He thinks, therefore, that his cause has lost by this
re, for the tribunes will have less power of putting force on the
b to do anything for him, and yet the same power of stopping
^hoold they wish to do anything of their own accord. Besides, the
ibones may be alienated by what they may think a measure de-
fy to their position. These fears came to nothing ; the tribunes
d^bI to Cicero, and the consul Piso iorworded his recall.

1 82

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C, 58, vFT,

that as things stand now, supposing the consuls to cho
to take part against me, they can do so without let
hindrance, but if they wish to do anything in my favo
they are powerless if the tribunes object For as to wh
you say in your letter^ that, if your party had not consents
they would have obtained their object by a popular woU
that would have been impossible against the will of
tribunes/ So I fear, on the one hand, that I have lost 1
favour of the tribunes ; and on the other, even suppoi
that favour to remain, that the tie has been lost by wh
the consuls were to be attached. Added to this is anotl
disadvantage, the abandonment of the weighty resolution —
as, indeed, it was reported to me — that the senate should
pass no decree until my case had been decided, and that, too,
in the case of a measure which was not only not urgent, but
even contrary to custom and unprecedented. For I think
there is no precedent for voting the provincial outfit of
magistrates when still only designate : so that, since in a
matter like this the firm line^ on which my cause had
been taken up has been infringed, there is now no reason
why any decree should not be passed. It is not surprising
that those friends to whom the question was referred assented,
for it was difficult to find anyone to express an opinion
openly against proposals so advantageous to two consuls. It
would in any case have been diflScult not to be complaisant
to such a warm friend as Lentulus, or to Metellus after the
exceedingly kind way in which he put aside his quarrel with
me. But I fear that, while failing to keep a hold on them,
we have lost the tribunes. How this matter has occurred,
and in what position the whole business stands, I would
have you write to me, and in the same spirit as before : for
your outspoken candour, even if not altogether pleasant, is
yet what I prefer.
10 December,

* Because the tribunes could have vetoed any measure brought before
the people, and so could have forced the consuls to come to termi.

^ /.e,t that the senate would pass no decree prior to one recalling
Ci^io.

Utl»H^3S>^

TO ATTICUS

183

LXXXV (A III, 25)

TO ATTICUS (? IN EPIRUS ')

Dyrrachium (December)

^ArreR you left me I received a letter from Rome, from which
see clearly that I must rot away in this state of disfran-
[lent : for I can't believe (don't be offended at my
_; so) that you would have left town at this juncture, if
bad been the least hope left of my restoration. But
» over this, that I may not seem to be ungrateful and
I wish everything to share my own ruin. All I ask of you
Q what you have faithfully promised, that you will appear
before the ist of January wherever I may be.

LXXXVI (A in, 26)

The Dew year found Cicero still at Dyrrachimii, waiting for the law

to pass for his recall, wbicb (owing chiefly to the riotous

p*j^,,J^^* opposition of Clodius) did not pass till the 5th of August.

" »»i4lu» We have no letters in the interval between January and

nihej, August, but a few lively ones recounting the nature of

*■ his return (4th of September), and four speeches dealing

,^^^ with his position and that of his property. He seems

at once to have attached himself to Pompey, and to have

pniasoted his appointment as pmfectus annomt^

TO ATTICUS (FIN EPIRUS')

Dyrrachium, January

SAVE received a letter from my brother Quintus inclosing

the decree of the senate passed concerning me. My in ten-

I tion is to await the time for legislation, and, if the law is

Tbcre is no indication in the letter as to where Atdcus is. He left

[ Ute in B.C. 58, and apparently did not return till after Cicero's

The most natural explanation is that he was in Epinis, or some-

\ in Gttiece, and that he had visited Cicero at Dyrrachium on his

1 84 CICERO'S LETTERS B.C. 57, jev, 49

defeated, I shall avail myself of the resolution of the senate,*
and prefer to be deprived of my life rather than of my
country* Make haste, I beg, to come to me.

LXXXVII (A III, 27)

TO ATTICUS (? AT ROME)

Dyrrachium (after as January)

From your letter and from the bare facts I see that ^BT
utterly mined.'' I implore you, in view of my deplorable
position, to stand by my family in whatever respect they
shall need your help. I shall, as you say, see you soon»

LXXXVIII (F V, 4)

TO Q. METELLUS THE CONSUL (AT ROME)j

Dyrrachium (January)

A LETTER from my brother Quintus, and one from ray frieu
Titus Pomponius, had given me so much hope, that I de-
pended on your assistance no less than on that of your

way. I do not quite see how this should be thought impossible in view
of the last sentence of LXKXV or the next letter. Cicero asks Atticus to
join him, but he might do so whether Atticus were at Buthrotum, of
Komei or anywhere dse,

* On 1st January, B.C. 57» P- Lentulus brought the case of Cicero
before the senate. The prevailing opinion was that his interdictio hav-
ing been illegal, the senate could quash it. But Pompey, for the &ake of
security, recommended a Ux, One of the tribunes, without act^~**~
vetoing the senaitts consultum, demanded a night for consideration.

auestion was again debated in succeeding meetings of the senate, but _ .
le 25th was not decided. Technically an auctoritas was a decree that
had been ¥etoed by a tribune, and Cicero \pm Sest, % 74) implies that
such a veto had been put in, and at any rate the nocHs postulaH^ was
equivalent to a veto,

^ Perhaps he has just heard that the sitting of the senate on the

keot

utMH

AHT, 27; J' V»4

TO Q. METELLUS

185

»co]
mh
an
^on
tio
I ha

my b
Kmade
Hbenati

Brat]

^colleague. Accordingly, I at once sent you a letter in
ihich, as my present position required, I offered you thanks
^and asked for the continuance of your assistance. Later
jon, not so much the letters of my friends, as the conversa-
tion of travellers by this route, indicated that your feelings
had undergone a change ; and that circumstance prevented
'my venturing to trouble you with letters. Now, however,
my brother Quintus has sent me a copy which he had
Dade of your exceedingly kind speech delivered in the
Ette, Induced by this I have attempted to write to you,
" and I do ask and beg of you, as far as I may without giving
you offence, to preserve your own friends along with me,
ather than attack me to satisfy the unreasonable vindictive-
ftess of your connexions. You have, indeed, conquered your-
self so far as to lay aside your own enmity for the saie of
tthe Republic : will you be induced to support that of others
ngainst the interests of the Republic ? But if you will in
your clemency now give me assistance, I promise you that
1 will be at your service henceforth : but if neither magis*
trates, nor senate, nor people are permitted to aid me,
owing to the violence which has proved too strong for me,
I and for the state as well, take care lest — though you may

I wish the opportunity back again for retaining all and sundry
lb their rights— you find yourself unable to do so, because
there will be nobody to be retained.*
B^Slii of January Imd been interrupted by Clodius's roughs. But othei
timlkf events happened, and there is no certain means of dating this
hotCt The difficulty, as it stands, is that it impUes Atticus's temporaiy
returrr ♦-• P-"ie,

' "1 ionaUy enigmatical sentence is meant to contain a menace

ogiiii s who 15 hinted at in the word amnium^ just as he is earlier

in the letter in the word iuornm. Clodius was a connexion by marriage
of Mctelltts (through his late brother, the husband of Clodia), and Cicero
thut Meteuus Is restrained from helping him by regard for Clodius.
towSf however, by this time, that one of the new tribanes, Milo,
^leied to repel force by force, and he hints to Metellus that if he
OQUDtenftnces Clodius's violence he may some day find that there is no
~ " i to save — if that's his object. In Letter LXXXIX he shews
rly he had contemplated Clodius being killed by Milo (occisum iri
Milam viiiea).

kdlfes

1 86

CICERO'S LETTERS

I.e. 57, ,«T. ,

LXXXIX (A IV, I)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome (September)

Directly I arrived at Roroe, and there was anyone to
whom I coold safely intrust a letter for you, I thought the
very first thing I ought to do was to congratulate you io
your absence on my return. For I knew, to speak candidly,
that though in giving me advice you had not been mor*;
courageous or far-seeing than myself, nor— considering my
devotion to you in the past — too careful in protecting roe
from disaster, yet that you — though sharing in the first
instance in my mistake, or rather madbess, and in my ground*
less terror — had nevertheless been deeply grieved at our
separation, and had bestowed immense pains, zeal, care»
and labour in securing my return. Accordingly, I can
truly assure you of this, that in the midst of supreme joy and
the most gratifying congratulations, the one thing wanting to
fill my cup of happiness to the brim is the sight of you, or
rather your embrace ; and if I ever forfeit that again, when
I have once got possession of it, and if, too, I do not exact
the full delights of your charming society that have fallen
into arrear in the past, I shall certainly consider myself un-
worthy of this renewal of my good fortune.

In regard to my political position, I have resumed what
I thought there would be the utmost difficulty in recovering
— ^my brilliant standing at the bar, my influence in the
senate, and a popularity with the loyalists even greater than
I desired. In regard, however, to my private property — as
to which you are well aware to what an extent it has been
crippled, scattered, and plundered — I am in great difficulties,
and stand in need, not so much of your means (which I look
upon as my own), as of your advice for collecting and
restoring to a sound state the fragments that remain. For
the present, though I believe everything finds its way to you
in the letters of your friends, or even by messengers aiid

I mi

TO ATTICUS

187

niznour, yet I will write briefly what I think you would like
Ito learn from my letters above all others. On the 4th of
[August I started from Dyrrachium, the very day on which
he law about me was carried. I arrived at Bruiidisium on
I the 5 th of August There my dear Tuliiola met me on
f what was her own birthday, which happened also to be the
PBame-day of the colony of Brundisium and of the temple of
~ iety, near your house. This coincidence was noticed and
^celebrated with warm congratulations by the citizens of
Brundisium. On the 8th of August, while still at Brun-
disium, I learnt by a letter from Quintus that the law had
been passed at the comitia centuriata with a surprising
enthusiasm on the part of all ages and ranks, and with an
incredible influx of voters from Italy. I then commenced
^ my journey, amidst the compliments of the men of highest
I consideration at Brundisium, and was met at every point by
* legates bearing congratulations. My arrival in the neigh-
bourhood of the city was the signal for every soul of every
I order known to my nomenciator coming out to meet me,
except those enemies who could not either dissemble or
deny the feet of their being such. On my arrival at the
Pona Capena, the steps of the temples were already
ged from top to bottom ^ by the populace \ and while
congratulations were displayed by the loudest pos-
iibLe applause, a similar throng and similar applause accora-
panied me right up to the Capitol, and in the forum
tod on the Capitol itself there was again a wonderful
crowd. Next day, in the senate, that is, the 5th of Sep-
tember, I spoke my thanks to the senators. Two days after
I that — there having been a very heavy rise in the price of
I com, and great crowds having flocked first to the theatre
and then to the senate-house, shouting out, at the instiga*
tion of Clodius, that the scarcity of corn was my doing—
s of the senate being held on those days to discuss
J question^ and Pompey being called upon to under-
ukc the management of its supply in the common talk not
onlv of the plebs, but of the aristocrats also, and being him-
rous of the commission, when the people at large
-pon me by name to support a decree to that effect.

* Reading ah mfimo.

188

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.C. 57, .«T.49

I did so, and gave my vote in a carefully-worded speech.
The other consulars, except Messalla and Afranius, having
absented themselves on the ground that they could not vote
with safety to themselves, a decree of the senate was passed
in the sense of my motion, namely, that Pompey should be
appealed to to undertake the business, and that a law should
be proposed to that effect. This decree of tha senate having
been publicly read, and the people having, after the sense-
less and new-fangled custom that now prevails, applauded
the mention of my name/ I delivered a speech. All the
magistrates present, except one praetor and two tribunes,
called on me to speak/ Next day a full senate, including all
the consulars^ granted everything that Pompey asked for.
Having demanded fifteen legates, he named me first in the
list, and said that he should regard me in all things as a
second self. The consols drew up a law by which complete
control over the corn-sopply for five years throughout the
whole world was given to Pompey. A second law is drawn up
by Messius/ granting him power over all money, and adding
a fleet and army, and an imptrium in the provinces superior
to that of their governors. After that our consular law seems
moderateindeed : thatof Messiusisquitetntolerable. Pom;
professes to prefer the former ; his friends the latter,
consulars led by Favonius murmur : I hold my tongue,
more so that the pontifices have as yet given no answer
regard to my house.* If they annul the consecration I si
have a splendid site. The consuls, in accordance with a
decree of the senate, will value the cost of the building that
stood upon it; but if the pontifices decide otherwise, they
T!?ill pull down the Clodian building, give Out a contract in
their own name (for a temple), and value to me the cost erf"
site and house. So our affairs are

^ As backing the decree. The phrase was aderai scri&enda M* Tnllim '
Cicero, etc,

* Dederunt^ i,t,^ €(fntionem; liL gave me a meeting, i.e., the right of
uddressing the meeting, which only magistrates or those introduced by
magistrates could do.

® C. Messios, a tribune of the year.

* Clodius had consecrated the site of Cicero*s hotise for a temple]
Liberty, The pontifices had to decide whether that consecration heJ
good, or whether the site might be restored to Cicero. Hence his
speech de Domo sua ad Pontifices,

jems

UtV, 1,2

TO ATTIC as

1 89

" For happy though but ill, for ill not worst" *

I Iti regard to money matters I am, as you know, much

[embarrassed. Besides, there are certain domestic troubles,

, which I do not intrust to writing. My brother Quintus I

love as he deserves for his eminent qualities of loyalty,

I .virtue, and good faith. I am longing to see you, and beg

you to hasten your return, resolved not to allow me to be

without the benefit of your advice. I am on the threshold,

as it were, of a second life. Already certain persons who

defended me in my absence begin to nurse a secret grudge

at me now that I am here, and to make no secret of their

jealousy. I want you very much.

XC (A IV, 2)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome (October)

If by any chance you get letters less frequently from me
than from others, 1 beg you not to put it down to my
negligence, or even to my engagements ; for though they
«re very heavy, there can be none sufficient to stop the
course of our mutual affection and of the attention I owe to
yoiL The fact is that, since my return to Rome, this is only
the second time that I have been told of anyone to whom I
could deliver a letter, and accordingly this is my second
letter to you. In my former 1 described the reception I had
on my return, what my political position was, and how my
1^5 were

*' For happy though but ill, for ill not worst."

The despatch of that letter was followed by a great con-
troversy about my house. I delivered a speech before the
pontifices on the 29th of September. I pleaded my cause
^th care, and if I ever was worth anything as a speaker, or

' The origin of the Latin lin« Ie not known. The English is Milton%
^> Ln IL 224.

igo

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 57, MT.

even if I never was on any other occasion, on this one at
any rate my indignation at the business, and the importance
of it, did add a certain vigour to my style/ Accord-
ingly, the rising generation must not be left without the
benefit of this speech, which I shall send you all the same,
even if you don't want it.* The decree of the pontifices w as
as follows : " If neither by order of the people nor vote ^M
the plebs the party alleging that he had dedicated had be^^
appointed by name to that function, nor by order of the
people or vote of the plebs had been commanded to do so,
we are of opinion that the part of the site in question may be
restored to M. Tullius without violence to religion." Upon
this I was at once congratulated — for no one doubted that my
house was thereby adjudged to me — when all on a sudden
that fellow mounts the platform to address a meeting, invited
to speak by Appius,* and announces at once to the peop'
that the pontifices had decided in his favour,* but that I '
endeavouring to talce forcible possession ; he exhorts th
to follow himself and Appius to defend their own shrine i
Liberty/ Hereupon, when even those credulous hean
partly wondered and partly laughed at the fellow's mad fol^
I resolved not to go near the place until such time as i

* The speech de D&ma si4a ad Pontifices. The genuineness of the
ing speech has been doubted. But it may very well be said that no
but Cicero could have written it. It is not certainly one of his happi
efforts, in spite of what he says here ; but he is not unaccustomed I
estimate his speeches somewhat highly, and to mistake violence
vigour*

^ He will send it to Attic us to get copied by his librariiy
published.

* Appiu5 Claudius Pulcher, brother of P, Godius, was a praetor i
year.

* It ia not clear that Clodius was wrong ; the pontifices decided th
for a valid consecration an order of the people was requisite, and, (
course, Clodius could allege such an order, Cicero devoted the great!
part of his speech, therefore, to shewing (i) that Clodius's adoption Wl
mviMd, and that he was therefore no tribune, and inculpable of tak)l(
an order of the people \ {%) that the law was B,priviifgium, and thetl
fore invalid. Tlie pontifices did not consider either of these poinU
which were not properly before them, or within their competence ; th^
merely decided the rek^ous question — that unless there had been i
iussm pifpuli or ptebis scUus there was no valid consecration*

' Of perhaps only ** statue of Liberty," as the temple was not ;
completed.

ikvr,t

TO ATTICUS

igr

consuls by decree of the senate had given out the contract
for restoring the colonnade of Catulus.^ On the ist of
October there was a full meeting of the senate. All the
pontifices who were senators were invited to attend, and Mar-
cellinusj' who is a great admirer of mine, being called on
to speak first, asked them what was the purport of their
deczW. Then M. Lucullus, speaking for all his colleagues,
answered that the pontifices were judges of a question of
id^ioDf the senate of the validity of a law : that he and his
coQeagues had given a decision on a point of religion ; in the
senate they would with the other senators decide on the law.
lAccofdingly, each of them, when asked in their proper order
fcr their opinion, delivered long arguments in my favour.
HFhen it came to Clodius's turn, he wished to talk out
^he day, and he went on endlessly ; however, after he had
^ken for nearly three hours, he was forced by the loud
pression of the senate's disgust to finish his speech at last,
the decree in accordance with the proposal of Mar*
[Hnus passing the senate against a minority of one, Serranus
Dsed his veto,' At once both consuls referred the
Son of Serranus's veto to the senate. After some very
kime speeches had been delivered — "that it was the
<iecision of the senate that the house should be restored to
ifte**: ** that a contract should be given out for the colonnade
of Catulus": **that the resolution of the house should be
supported by all the magistrates " : ** that if any violence oc-
carred, the senate would consider it to be the fault of the
utagisoate who vetoed the decree of the senate " — Serranus
Mne thoroughly frightened, and Cornicinus repeated his
I farce : throwing off his toga, he flung himself at his son-in-
fs feet/ The former demanded a night for consideration*

' A portico or colonnade, built bjr Q. Catulus, the conqueror of the

', oa the site of the house of M. Flaccus, who was killed with
BBS in B.a lOO. It was dose to Cicero's house, and what

_ appears to have done was to pull down the portico, and build

f, ej< tending over part of Cicero's site, on which was to be a

; far his statue of Liberty.

. Cornelius Lentnlus Marcellinus was called on first as cqhsuI-*

iefcir B-C. 56.

a. Atiilius Serranus, a tribune. He had been a qusestor in

)*i oORsoIsKip, but had opposed his recall.
^ Ca. Oppiui Oamicinus, the father-in-law of Serranus, is said in

192

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 57, JKV, 49

They would not grant it : for they remembered the ist of
January. It was, however, at last granted with difficulty on my
interposition. Next day the decree of the senate was passed
which I send you. Thereupon the consuls gave out a con-
tract for the restoration of the colonnade of Catulus : the
contractors immediately cleared that portico of his away to
the satisfaction of alL^ The buildings of my house the con-
suls, by the advice of their assessors, valued at 2,000,000
sesterces (about ;^ 16,000)** The rest was valued very
stingily. My Tusculan villa at 500,000 sesterces (about
jQ^^ooo) : my villa at Formiae at 250,000 sesterces (about
;^2,ooo) — an estimate loudly exclaimed against not only by
all the best men, but even by the common people. Vou
will say, " What was the reason ? " They for their part say
it was my modesty — because I would neither say no, nor
make any violent expostulation. But that is not the real
cause : for that indeed in itself would have been in my
favour,* But, my dear Pomponius, those very same men, I
tell you, of whom you are no more ignorant than my self!
having clipped my wings, are unwilling that they should
grow again to their old size. But, as I hope, they are
already growing again. Only come to me I But this, I fear,
may be retarded by the visit of your and my frieod Varro.
Having now heard the actual course of public business j let me
inform you of what I have in my thoughts besides. I have
allowed myself to be made legatus to Pompey, but only on
condition that nothing should stand in the way of my being
entirely free either to stand, if I choose, for the censorship
— if the next consuls hold a censorial election— or to assume

p. red, ai Quir. § 13 to have done the same in the senate on the 1st of
Janusiy, when Sciratius also went through the same form of " demand^
ing a night" for consideration.

* Prof. Tyrrell brackets poriicum. But I do not tmderstand his dif-
ficulty, especially as he saw none in the last letter. Cicero {de Dame,
f 102) certainly implies that Clodras had, at any rate, partly pulled
down the poriictis Catuli, in order to build something on a larger scale,
which was to take in some of Cicero's site. This was now to come
down, and so leave Cicero his area^ and, Z presume, the old pertkiu
Catuii was to be restored.

* Cicero bad given Crassus 3,500,000 for it (about ^^'zS.oook See
Letter XVI.

■ /.*., my modest reserve. There does not seem any reason for
Tyrrell^s emendation of num for nam.

iV»«

TO ATTICUS

193

* votive commission " in connexion with nearly any fanes
sacred groves.' For this is what falls in best with our
neral policy and my particular occasions. But I wished
the power to remain in my hands of either standing for elec-
don, or at the beginning of the summer of going out of town :
and meanwhile I thought it not disadvantageous to keep myself
before the eyes of the citizens who had treated me generously.
Well, such are my plans in regard to public affairs ; my dom-
estic affairs are very intricate and difficult. My town house
lOS being built: you know how much expense and annoy-
^bce the repair of my Fornaian villa occasions me, which
PKan neither bear to relinquish nor to look at, I have adver-
ted my Tusculan property for sale ; I don't much care for
^ suburban residence.* The liberality of friends has been
Whausted in a business which brought me nothing but dis-
fwnour ; and this you perceived though absent, as did others
on the spot, by whose zeal and wealth 1 could easily have
obtained all I wanted, had only my supporters allowed it.^
In this respect I am now in serious difficulty. Other causes
\t£ anxiety are somewhat more of the tacmda kind.* My

W i have translated KloU's text. That given by Prof. Tyrrell is, to

^K St any itUe, quite unintelligible, Cicero's legatio tinder Fompey

HfieKn to have beeo, in fact, honorary^ or Ubtra^ for he do^sn^t seem to

^Ke dome aoything. He wishes to reserve the right of resigning It to

iOnd Cot the censorship (censors were elected in the following year), or

of tttRODg it into a voHva UgaHo^ to visit certain sacred places on

tile plea of performing a vow, thus getting the opportunity, if he

desired it, of retiring temporarily from Rome in a dignified nmnner.

The force ^Iprope seems to be "almost any, I care not what»" It was

that a man with his stormy past would do for the delicate

the censorship, and he would save appearances by going on a

fw. See Letter XLIV,

cartOy others read nonfaHU^ ** I don*t like being without a
ban residence."

thiDg which brought him ** nothing but dishonour ' was his
Rome, and the conseouent expenses connected with winning
ads, or paying for Milo 3 bravoes to face those of Clodius, In
part of the sentence he seems to mean that, had his supporters
nim properly, he wotdd have got everything necessary to make
losses from ^c hberality of the senate. Others explain that
*s really means Pompey only.

\ and the omission of his wife in the next clause, as the similar
. At the end of the last letter, seem to point to some misunderstand-
mvih Terentia, with whom, however, a final rupture was postponed
nearly twdve years (B.C. 46).
L O

»t

Wocile i

friends.

^aamm

194

CICERO'S LETTERS

I.C* 57, .flET,

brother and daughter treat me with affection. I am look
forward to seeing you.

XCI (A IV, 3)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome, 24 November

I AM very well aware that you long to know what is goiJ
on here, and also to know it from me, not because thin^
done before the eyes of the whole world are better realized
when narrated by my hand than when reported to you by
the pens or lips of othersj but because it is from ray letters
that you get what you want — ^a knowledge of my feelings in
regard to the occurrences, and what at such a juncture is
the state of my mind, or, in a word, the conditions in which
I am living. On the 3rd of November the workmen were
driven from the site of my house by armed ruffians : the
porticus Catuliy which was being rebuilt on a contract given
out by the consuls, in accordance with a decree of the senate,
and had nearly reached the roof, was battered down : the house
of ray brother Quinlus ^ was first smashed with volleys of
stones thrown from my site, and then set on fire by order of
Clodius, firebrands having been thrown into it in the sight
of the whole town^ amidst loud exclamations of indignation
and sorrow, I will not say of the loyalists — for I rather think
there are none — but of simply every human being* That
madman runs riot : thinks after this mad piank of nothing
short of murdering his opponents ; canvasses the city street
by street : makes open offers of freedom to slaves. For the
fact is that up to this time, while trying to avoid prosecution,^

* See last letter. The porticus CaiuH had been, at any rate, partly
demolished by Cloditis to make way for his laiger scheme of building,
which was to lake in part of Cicero's ** site.** S^tpra Col. § 79.

^ Next door to Cicero*s own house*

* He would avoid prosecution de vi by getting elected to the jedile-
ship for B.C» $6, for actual magistrates were rarely prosecuted ; but he,
in this case, actually avoided it by getting a consul and tribune to '-"^-'"
it by edict {prtf Siit. | S9).

TO ATTICUS

195

I had a case, difficult indeed to support, and obviously badj
: still a case : he might have denied the facts, he might
shifted the blame 00 others, he might even have
aded that some part of his proceedings had been legal.
Jut after such wrecking of buildings, incendiaries, and
wholesale robberies as these, being abandoned by his sup-
porters, he hardly retains on his side Decimus the marshal
I <ff GeBius J takes slaves into his confidence ; sees that, even
be openly assassinates everyone he wishes to, he will not
a worse case before a court of law than he has at
at. Accordingly, on the nth of November, as I was
ling down the Sacred Way, he followed me with his gang,
were shouts, stone- throwing, brandishing of clubs
Dd swords, and all this without a moment's warning. I
and my party stepped aside into Tettius Damio's vestibule ;
those accompanying me easily prevented his roughs from
getting in. He might have been killed himself^ But I am
now on a system of cure by regimen : I am tired of surgery.
The fellow, seeing that what everybody called for was not
his prosecution but his instant execution, has since made all
your Catilines seem models of respectability.^ For on the
1 2th of November he tried to storm and set fire to Milo's
house, I mean the one on Germalus : * and so openly was
thi8done,thatat eleven o'clock in the morning he brought men
there armed with shields and with their swords drawn, and
others with lighted torches. He had himself occupied the

* Disignat&rem, This may mean (i) an official who shewed P&opZe
I to their places in the theatre ; (2) an underlaker's man, who marsnolfed

ifaDCtaU* To the latter office a certain infamia wa^ attached. We know
Bothing^ more of Decimus (see pro Dottw^ § 50)* Gellius was an eqttes
lod ft stepsoD of L. Marcius Pbilippus. He afterwards gave evidence
•EtxBsC Sestius for vis <see pro SesL % 1 10). Cicero calls hira the
i&orer «f all seditions {in VoHn, § 4), and one of Clodius's gang {di
Hur, Rtsf. } 59), See next letter.

* Perhiips hf M. Antonius, See 2 PhiL | 21 ; pro MiL % 40.

* liL " made all Catilines Acidini." Acidinus was the cognomen
nf it-veral distinguished men. In Ug. Agr. \u § 64, Cicero classes the

I Among men "respectable not only for the public offices they
n\df and for their services to the state, but also for the noble way

Iin which they had endured poverty." There does not» however^ seem any
f^good reason known ibr their becoming proverbial as the an I j thesis to
inmat>on&rie&.
* A slope of the Palatine. Milo's other hou&e (p. 196).

196

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C, 57, JET. 49

house of P. Sulla ^ as his headquarters from which to conduct
the assault upon Milo's. Thereupon Q. Flaccus led out some
gallant fellows from Milo's other house (the Anniana) : killed
the most notorious bravoes of all Clodius's gang : wanted to
kill Clodius himself; but my gentleman took refuge in the
inner part of Sulla's house. The next thing was a meet-
ing of the senate on the 14th. Clodius stayed at home:
Marcellinus '" was splendid : all were keen. Metellus '
talked the business out by an obstructive speech, aided
by Appius, and also, by Hercules ! by your friend
whose firmness you wrote me such a wonderfully
letter I Sestius * was fuming. Afterwards the fellow
vengeance on the city if his election is stopped,
cellinus's resolution having been exposed for public pen
(he had read it from a written copy, and it embraced 1
entire case^ — the prosecution was to include his violent |
ceedings on the site of my house, his arson, his ass
me personally, and was to take place before the el^
he put up a notice that he intended to watch the sk
all comitial days,* Public speeches of Metellus dison

* P. Cornelius Sulla, nephew of the dictator. Cicero defended 1
in B.C. 62, but he had taken the part of Clodius in the time of Cio
exile.

* Cd. Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus, the consul-designate :
next year. In that capacity he would be called on for bis .
first.

* Q. Csecilius Metellus Nepos, the consul. Though he had :
opposed Cicero's recall, he stood by his cousin, P. Clodius, in regard tO'^
the ihreatetied prosecution, Appius is Appius Claudius, brother (*'
P. Clodius.

^ P. SestiuS} the tribune favourable to Cicero^ afterwards <
by him.

* Mr. Purser's reading of nisi anteftrret before prosctipdt s
me to darken the passage. What happened was this. Maro
senientia was never put to the vote, because MeteUus, Appius,
Hortensius (Cioero seems to mean him) talked out the sitting. AcC45fd»- '
ingly, Marcellinus published it, i.e., put it up outside the Curia to be
read : and under it he {or some other magistrate whose name hai
dropped out of the text) put a notice that he was going to " wafi b tli<?
sky all the dies camitiaies^ so as to prevent the election bei-

But this had been rendered inoperative by CIodias*s amendi
the lex MUa Fufia (see n Phil. | 81)— or at any rate of 1
validity— and> accordingly, the only thing left was the abm
by a magistrate, which Milo proceeded to make. The
ever was that such obnuntiati^ must be made before the cm

tv.3

TO ATTIC US

197

[ Appius hot-headed, of Publius stark mad. The upshot,

owever, was that, had not Milo served his notice of bad

nens in the campus^ the elections would have been held.

in the 19th of November Milo arrived on the campus before

liidnight with a large company, Clodius, though he had

iicked gangs of runaway slaves, did not venture into the

fmpus, Milo stopped there till midday/ to everybody's

at delight and his own infinite credit : the movement of

three brethren * ended in their own disgrace ; their

olence was crushed, their madness made ridiculous. How-

ter, Metellus demands that the obstructive notice should be

?ed on him next day in the forum : ** there was no need

come to the campus before daybreak : he would be in

jie comiiium at the first hour of the day." ' Accordingly, on

aoth Milo came to the forum before sunrise. Metellus

the first sign of dawn was stealthily hurrying to the

)tft I had aknost said by by-lanes : Milo catches our

nd up " between the groves " * and serves his notice. The

tter returned greeted with loud and insulting remarks by

~ cus. The 2 1 St was a market day/ For two days

pblic meeting. I am writing this letter on the 23rd at

! o'clock in the morning, Milo is already in possession of

iompus. The candidate Marcellus ^ is snoring so loud

I can hear him next door. I am told that Clodius's

bule is completely deserted : there are a few ragged

rs there and a canvas lantern.' His party complains

I (t FhiL ib\ which again could not begin till sunrise. Hence
/s ^i^t^s visit to the campus. For the meaning ol prop&sita see
Ktrr '*' '."" i

the comitia could not be begun.
\\ v. n iu^, his brother Appius, and his cousin Metellus Nepos.
• MeteUas means that he shall take the necessary auspices for the
4lia in the comitium, before going to the campus to take the

I* Gencrmllj caUed infer duos lucos^ the road down the Caprtolium

rards the Cajnpus Martins, originally so called as beine between the

» htmd% of the mountain. It was the spot traditionally assigned to

*«sy]iuii " of Romulus.

[ ' Oil the nundintE and the next day no comiHa and no meeting of the

* coald be held.

sdidate for the sedileship, 01 whom we know nothing.
^parently a poor lantenii whose sides were made of canvas instead

igS

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 57,

that I am the adviser of the whole business : they litt
know the courage and wisdom of that hero ! His gallan^
is astonishing. Some recent instances of his superhuc
excellence I pass over j but the upshot is this : I dolj
think the election will take place, I think Publius will 1
brought to trial by Milo — unless he is killed first. If
once puts hirnself in his way in a riot, I can see that he wiB
be killed by Milo himself. The latter has no scruple about
doing it ; he avows his intention ; he isn't at all afraid of
what happened to me, for he will never listen to the advice
of a jealous and faithless friend, nor trust a feeble aristocraL
In spirit, at any rate, I am as vigorous as in my zenith, or even
more so ; in regard to money I am crippled. However, the
liberality of my brother I have^ in spite of his protests,
repaid (as the state of my finances compelled) by the aid of
my friends, that I might not be drained quite dry myself. What
line of policy to adopt in regard to my position as a whole,
I cannot decide in your absence : wherefore make haste t
town.

XCII Cq fr II, I)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN SARDINU*!

Rome {io December)

The letter which you have already read I had sent off in
the morning. But licinius was pohte enough to call on me
in the evening afto^ the senate had risenj that, in case of
any business having been done there, I might, if I thought
good, write an account of it to you. The senate was fuller
thaji I had thought possible io the month of December just

* QnintUG Cicero was in Sardinia as Pompcy*s legatus as super-
intendeDt of the corn -sup ply, to wblch office he had been appointed ia
August The letter is written not earlier than the 1 0th of December^
for the new tribunes for BC. 56 have come intoofiRce, and not later thao
the i6tli, becanjse on the 17th the Satamatia began* Perhaps as the
senate is summoned and presided over by Lupus, it is on the 10th, the
day of his entrance upon ofHce.

IQ FH It, I

TO QUINTUS

199

before the holidays. Of us consulars there were P. Setvilius,
M. Lucullus, Lepidus, VolcatiiiSj Glabiio ; the two consuls*
designate ; the praetors. We were a really full house : two
hundred in alL^ Lupus had excited some interest - He
raised the question of the Campanian land in considerable
detaiL He was listened to in profound silence. You are
unaware what material that subject affords* He omitted
of the points which I had made in this business.*
e were some sharp thrusts at Csesar, some denuncia-
tions of Gellius, some appeals to the absent Pompey. After
cx)ncluding his speech at a late hour, he said that he would
not ask for our votes lest he might burden us with a personal
controversy; he quite tinderstood the sentiments of the
senate from the denunciations of past times and the silence
on the present occasion. Milo spoke. Lupus begins the
formula of dismissal,* when Marcellinus says : " Don't infer
from our silence, Lupus, what we approve or disapprove
of at this particular time. As far as I am concerned, and I
think it is the same with the rest, I am only silent because
I do not think it suitable that the case of the Campanian
land should be debated in Pompey^s absence.^* Then Lupus
said that he would not detain the senate.^ Racilius rose
and began bringing before the house the case of the pro-
posed prosecutions. He calls upon Marcellinus, of course,
first ; * who, after complaining in serious tones of the Clodian
incendiaries, massacres, and stonings, proposed a resolution
that " Clodius himself should, under the superintendence of
the praetor urbanus, have his jury allotted to himj that
the elections should be held only when the allotment of

* " Ftill," that is, for the time of year, A " full house " h elsewhere
mendoned as between three and four hundred.

* P. Rutilius Lupus^ one of the new tribunes.

' This refers to Cicero s attempts to exempt the ager pubHcus in
Campania from being divided (see Letter XXIV, p. 55) j and not only
to his speeches against Rullus. It was because Csesor dbregarded
the imdent exception of this land from such distribution that Cicero
opposed his bill, and refused to serve on the commission.

* Nihil vos moramur were the words used by the presiding magistrate,
indicating that be had 00 more business to bring before the senate. If
00 one said anything, the senate was dismissed ; but any magistrate,
or magistrate-designate, could speaks and so continue the sitting up
to ntf^htfall, when the house stood adjourned.

' Because consul-designate. L. Racilius, one of the new Iribunes.

200

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 57, xrr, 49

t he I
vapH

jurors* had been completed; that whoever stopped the
trials would be acting against the interests of the state*'
The proposal having been received with warm approve
Gaius Cato* — as did also Cassius — spoke against it, with
very emphatic murmurs of disapprobation on the part of
the senate, when he proposed to hold the elections before the
trials. Philippus supported Lentulus/ After that Racilius
called on me first of the unofficial senators for ray opinion/
I made a long speech upon the whole story of P. Clodius's
mad proceedings and murderous violence : I impeached him
as though he were on his trial, amidst frequent murmurs of
approbation from the whole senate. My speech was praised
at considerable lengthy and, by Hercules ! with no little
oratorical skill by Antistios Vet us, who also supported the
priority of the legal proceedings, and declared that he should
consider it of the first importance. The senators were cross-
ing the floor in support of this view," when Clodius, being
called on, began trying to talk out the sitting. He spoke in
furious terms of having been attacked by Racilius in an un-
reasonable and discourteous manner. Then his roughs o^J
the Graecostasis^ and the steps of the house suddenly raise^H

^ The S0Tiitio iuduum was performed by the pnetor drawing out the
required number of names from the urn, which contained the names of
all liable to serve. The accused could, however, challenge a certain
number, and the praetor had then to draw others,

' The formula whereby the senate declared its opinion that so and so
was guilty of treason. It had no legal force, but the magistrates might,
and sometimes did, act on it.

' C. Porcius Cato, distant relation of Cato Uticensis, one of the
tribunes.

* l.e,, Marcellinus (Co. Cornelius Lentnlus).

" The senators not in office only spoke when called on {fvgaii).
consuls -design ate (if there were any) were always called first, and
the consulars in order. To be called first was a subject of ambition,
and an opportunity for the presiding magistrate to pay a compliment or
the reverse*

" They went and sat or stood near the speaker they wished to
port. It was not, however, a formal division tiU the speeches end<
and the presiding magistrate counted. Still, it made the di^
easier.

^ A platform outside the sen ate ♦house, where representatives o\
ally of Greek and then of other states were placed. It was apparent
possible to hear, or partly hear, the debates from it. It was a/orJVT
structus { Varro, Z, Z. v. 155). There is no evidence that it was a buil<
to lodge ambassadors in, as Prof. Tyrrell says.

^H II, 1 1 F VII, 26 TO M. FADIUS CALLUS

201

pretty loud shout, in wrath, I suppose, against Q. Sextilius

the other friends of Milo. At this sudden alarm we broke

I with loud expressions of indignation on all sides. Here

t the transactions of one day for you : the rest, I think, will

! put off to January. Of all the tribunes I think Racilius

l-by fer the best : Antistius also seems likely to be friendly

I me : Plancius, of course, is wholly otirs. Pray, if you love

be careful and cautious about sailing in December.

XCIII (F VII, 26)

TO M. FADIUS GALLUS (AT ROME)

TuscuLUM ^ (? December)

ATtHG been suffering for nine days past from a severe

Tder of the bowels, and being unable to convince those

^bo desired my services that I was ill because I had no

fever, 1 fled to my Tusculan villa, after having, in fact,

observed for two days so strict a fast as not even to drink a

drop of water. Accordingly, being thoroughly reduced by

weakness and hunger, I was more in want of your services

than I thought mine could be required by you. For myself,

while shrinking from all illnesses, I especially shrink from

L^t in regard to which the Stoics attack your friend Epi-

HUUS for saying that " he suffered from strangury and pains

Rn the bowels "^ — the latter of which complaints they attribute

to gluttony, the former to a still graver indulgence, I had

en really much afraid of dysentery. But either the cbange

residence, or the mere relaxation of anxiety, or perhaps

natural abatement of the complaint from lapse of time,

as to me to have done me good. However, to prevent

[ ^ The year of this letter has been inferred from the irtention of
Btuliis*5 auguraJ banqtiet. For P, Cornelius Lentulus Spinther, son of
cqiisqI of B.C. 57, was in this year elected into the college of
JBETS. Yet as we know that Cicero^s Tusculan villa was dismantled
f Oodius, and was advertised for sale (though not sold), it seems rather
olraflvdtnaiy that Cicero should have gone there for his health. Tbe
fiodii GaUi were a family of CLcero's native place, Arpmum*

202

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 56, /ET. 50

your wondering how this came about, or in what manner I let
myself in for it, 1 must tell you that the sumptuary law, sup-
posed to have introduced plain living, was the origin of my
misfortune. For whilst your epicures wish to bring into
fashion the products of the earth, which are not forbidden
by the law, they flavour mushrooms, ^^'ts cJunix^ and every
kind of pot-herb so as to make them the most tempting
dishes possible.^ Having fallen a victim to these in the
augural banquet at the house of Lentulus, I was seized with
a violent diarrhoea, which, I think, has been checked to-day
for the first time. And so I, who abstain from oysters and
lampreys without any difficulty, have been beguiled by beet
and mallows- Henceforth, therefore, I shall be more cautious,
Yet, having heard of it from Anicius* — for he saw me turning
sick^ — you had every reason not only for sending to inquire,
but even for coming to see me, I am thinking of remaining
here till I am thoroughly restored, for I have lost both
strength and flesh. However, if I can once get completely
rid of my complaint, I shall, I hope, easily recover these.

XCIV (F I, I)

In the year BX. 56 the growing differences between the trlumvin
were temporarily composed at the meeting at Loca, and Cicero made
up his mind that the only course for him to pursue wa* to
C^ S'rnS' a*^^*^ himself to them, as the party of the boni had not»
LcTJtultis as he hoped, taken advantage of those differences to attach

Marcellinus, Pompey to themselves as a leader against Csesar. Hil
^.^*"^^ recantation is indicated in the speeches di Provinciis Cm*

ippus- sulariims and pro £aB&, in which he practically snpp

part| at least, of the arrangements oFLnca.

* There were several snmptuary laws. Those which may possibly be
referred to here are (l) the /ex Licinia (?B.c. 103), which defined ctt*
tain foods as illegal at banqaets, but excepted quod ex terra mtearberevi
sit «a/ttw (Macrobius, Sat. iii, 17, 9 ; GelL ii. 24, 7) j (2) the iexyEmiU$
(b,c. 68), which also defined both the quantity and quality of foo4
allowable at banquets (Gell. ii. 24, 12).

* C Anicius, a senator and intimate friend of Cicero'&

F 1.

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

203

I

TO K LENTULUS SPINTHER* {IN CILICIA)

Rome, 13 January

HATEVER attention or affection I may shew you, though it
may seem sufficient in the eyes of others, can never seem
sufficient in my own» For such has been the magnitude of
your services to me that, inasmuch as you never rested till
my affair was brought to a conclusion, while I cannot effect
the same in your cause,'* I regard my life as a burden. The
ditHculties are these. The king's agent, Hammonius, is
openly attacking us by bribery. The business is being
carried out by means of the same money-lenders as it was
when you were in town. Such people as wish it done
for the king's sake — and they are few — ^are all for intrusting
the business to Pompey. The senate supports the trumped-
up rehgious scruple, not from any respect to religion, but
from ill-feeling towards him, and disgust at the king's
outrageous bribery. I never cease advising and instigating
Pompey— even frankly finding fault with and admonishing
him — to avoid what would be a most discreditable imputa-
tion,* But he really leaves no room for either entreaties
or admonitions from me. For, whether in everyday con-
versation or in the senate, no one could support your cause
with greater eloquence, seriousness, zeal, and energy than
he has done, testifying in the highest terms to your services

* Consul of B.C. 57, who had gone at the end of hh consulship to be
gDvemor of Cilicia.

* When Ptolemy Auletes first appealed to the senate (b,C, 57) to
restore him to the throne of Egypt, it appears that a resolution was
pgosed authorizing the proconsul of Cilicia to do so ; but as Pompey
wnhed to have the business, the senate found itself in a difficulty, not
wiihlng to put him in military command, or daring to oflfend him by
tn open reiusal (Dio, xxxix. 12). The tribune C. Cato found up a
SibyUine oracle forbidding the employment of an army for the purpose,
which served the senate as a decent excuse. The commission to
Lentulus was eventually withdrawn by an auctoritas senatus^ and
Lciitulus did not venture to do it. Ptolemy, finding that he could
aot succeed in getting Pompey commissioned, retired to Ephesus, and

ards succeeded oy an enormous bribe in inducing Gabinius, the
rasuJ of Syria, to do it (B.C. 55).
Of having been induced by greed or ambition to undertake the
•i^oxmtion of Ptolemy ^

204

CICERO*S LETTERS

it.a 56, MT, 50

to himself and his aiTection for you. Marcellinus, you know,
is incensed with his flute-playing majesty.^ In everythingi
saving and excepting this case of the king, he professes
the intention of being your champion. We take what
he gives : nothing can move him from his motion as to
the religious difficulty, which he made up his mind to bring,
and has, in fact, brought several times before the senate.
The debate up to the Ides (for I am writing early in the morn-
ing of the Ides ') has been as follows : Hortensius and I and
LucuUus voted for yielding to the religious scruple as far as
concerned the army,' for otherwise there was no possibility of
getting the matter through, but, in accordance with the decree
already passed on your own motion, were for directing you to
restore the king,<* so far as you may do so without detriment
to the state " : so that while the religious difficulty prohibits
the employment of an army, the senate might still retain
you as the person authorized. Crassus votes for sending
three legates, not excluding Pompey : for he would aDow
them to be selected even from such as are at present in
possession of imptrium: Bibulus is for three legates
selected from men without imperium. The other consulars
agree with the latter, except Servilius, who says that he
ought not to be restored at all : and Volcatius, who on
the motion of Lupus votes for giving the business to Pompey :
and Afranius, who agrees with Volcatius. This last fact
increases the suspicion as to Pompey's wishes ; for it was
noticed that Pompey's intimates agreed with Volcatius.
We are in a very great difficulty : the day seems going
against us. The notorious colloguing and eagerness of
Libo and Hypsseus, and the earnestness displayed by
Pompey*s intimates, have produced an impression that
Pompey desires it ; and those who don't want him to have
it are at the same time annoyed with your having put power
into his hands." I have the less influence in the case

* Reading HMHm for the unmeaniog iilfi. It is not certain, but it
miLkes ^ood sense. Ptolemy was called AuUtes (fltite-player), of which
the Latin HHan is a translation, meant, no doubt, somewhat jocosely.

* /.f., before going to the senate on the Ides of January (13th). See
next letter.

' The Sibylline oracle forbade restoring the king *' with a multitude.''

* Pompey had at this time imperium as curat<?r anncfta.

* Because it was on Lentulus's motion that Pompey had been made

tim.

IV**'^

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

20S

I

use I am under an obligation to you* Moreover, what-
ever influence I might have had is extinguished by the idea
people entertain as to Pompey's wishes, for they think they
are gratifying him. We are in much the same position as
we were long before your departure : now, as then, the sore
has been fomented secretly by the king himself and by the
friends and intimates of Pompey, and then openly irritated
by the consulars, till the popular prejudice has been excited
to the highest pitch. AO the world shall recognize my

(loyalty, and your friends on the spot shall see my affection
for you though you are absent. If there were any good
faith in those most bound to shew it, we should be in no
difficulty at alL
»
No
bee

XCV (F I, 2)

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA)
Rome, 15 January

Nothing was done on the 13th of January in the senate,
because the day was to a great extent spent in an alterca-
tion between the consul Lentulus and the tribune Caninius-
On that day I also spoke at considerable length, and thought
that I made a very great impression on the senate by dwell-
ing on your affection for the house. Accordingly, next day
we resolved that we would deliver our opinions briefly : for
it appeared to us that the feelings of the senate had been
softened towards us — ^tbe result not only of my speech, but
of my personal appeal and application to individual senators.
Accordingly, the first proposition, that of Bibulus, having
been delivered, that three legates should restore the king :
the second, that of Hortensius, that you should restore
him without an army: the third, that of Volcatius, that
Pompey should do it, a demand was made that the proposal
of Bibulus should be taken in two parts.' As far as he

atrai^r anmma, and so in possession oiimperium with naval and military
forces.
' ITie pf op<i«al of Bibulus to send " three legates *' implied a concei- J

206

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.a 56, ,«T. 50

dealt with the religious difficulty — a point which was now
past being opposed — his motion was carried ; his proposition
as to three legates was defeated by a large majority. The
next was the proposition of Hortensius. Thereupon the
tribune Lupus, on the ground that he had hinaself made a
proposal about Pompey, starts the contention that he ought
to divide the house before the consuls. His speech was
received on all sides by loud cries of " No '* : for it was both
unfair and unprecedented. The consuls would not give in
and yet did not oppose with any vigour. Their object wa
to waste the day, and in that they succeeded : * for they sain
very well that many times the number would vote for the
proposal of Hortensius, although they openly professed
their agreement with Volcatius. Large numbers were called
upon for their opinion, and that, too, with the assent of the
consuls : for they wanted the proposal of Bibulus carried.
This dispute was protracted till nightfall, and the senate
was dismissed. I happened to be dining with Pompey on
that day, and I seized the opportunity — the best I have ever
had^ for since your departure I have never occupied a more
honourable position in the senate than I had on that day —
of talking to him in such a way, that I think I induced him
to give up every other idea and resolve to support your claims.
And, indeed, when I actually hear him talk, I acquit him
entirely of all suspicion of personal ambition : but when I
regard his intimates of every rank, I perceive, what is no
secret to anybody, that this whole business has been long
ago corruptly manipulated by a certain coterie, not without
the king^s own consent and that of his advise rs»

I write this on the 15th of January, before daybreak.
To-day there is to be a meeting of the senate. We sha"
maintain, as I hope, our position in the senate as far as it i^
possible to do so in such an age of perfidy and unfair deaF

sion to the Sibylline verse, in not sending ** an army." It was there-
fore to be voted on as two questions — (i) Shall the Sibylline verse be
obeyed, and an army not sent? (2) Sliall three legates be sent?

* That is» the debate went off on the side issue as to who had the prior
right of dividing the house. hnp\is said Ae had, because the proposal
ofVoIcatius was really made before the others, 3.1?., in the previous day's
debate (see last letter}. The consuls were only too glad thus to avoid
having the main question brought to a vote, and let this technical j
be spun out in a languid debate.

, 2, 3 TO p. LENTULUS SPINTHER 20?

As to an appeal to the people on the subject, we have,
secured that no proposition can be brought before

without neglect of the auspices or breach of the laws,
I, in fine, without downright violence.^ The day before my
ating these words a resolution of the senate on these
fttters of the most serious character was passed, and
ough Cato and Caninius vetoed it, it was nevertheless
atten out,^ I suppose it has been sent to you. On all
her matters I will write and tell you what has been done,
alever it is, and I will see that everything is carried out

the most scrupulous fairness as far as my caution,
hour, attention to details, and influence can secure it.

XCVI (F I, 3)

P, LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA)

Rome (? January)

■ Goto prtsents his compiifnents to P. Lentulus^ proconsuL

luLUS Trebqnius, who has important business in your pro-
both of wide extent and sound, is an intimate friend
mioe of many years' standing. As before this he has
ays, both from his brilliant position and the recommenda-
Sons of myself and his other friends, enjoyed the highest
popularity in the province, so at the present time, trusting
to your affection for me and our close ties, he feels sure
that this letter of mine will give him a high place in your
esteeoL That he may not be disappomtcd in that hope I
cflnieslly beg of you, and I commend to you all his business
concerns, his freedmen, agents, and servants ; and specially

* Btentse thq^ had magistrates ready to stop the comiHa by declaring
M omeosi and tribunes ready to veto any proposal.

* A tmmim eensuUum vetoed by a tribiine was written out, with the
amei iH its pioposeis and backers, and a statement at the end as to
Cibe tritmnea vetoing it. It was thus on record as an auci&ritas sunaiuSf
** rttoliition of the senate," not & sinaius consuitum. A perfect specimen

I in Letter CCXXIIL This auctoritas was to the effect tliai no
i to ondeitdce the restoration. See Letter CXIIL

208

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,CU 56, .-ET. 50

that you will confirm the decrees made by T. Ampins in
his regard, and treat him in all respects so as to convince him
that my recommendation is no mere ordinary one,*

XCVII (F I, 4)

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA)

Rome, Jakuartt

Though in the senate of the 15th of January we ma
most glorious standi seeing that on the previous day we I
defeated the proposal of Bibulus about the three legates, i
the only contest left was with the proposal of Volcatius^ ;
the business was spun out by our opponents by various (
structive tactics. For we were carrying our view in a :
senatej in spite of the multifarious devices and invete
jealousy of those who were for transferring the cause of I
king from you to some one else. That day we found Cu
very bitterly opposed, Bibulus much more fair, almost frien
even. Caninius and Cato declared that they would
propose any law before the elections. By the Ux Pupia^ \
you know, no senate could be held before the ist of Fri
ruary, nor in fact during the whole of February," unless 1
business of the legations were finished or adjourned. Ho

* This is a spedmeQ of the short letter of introduction to a proviL_
governor which were given almost as a matter of course by men
position at Rome. We shall have many of them in the coarse of t
correspondence i and Cicero elsewhere warns the recipient of sudi
letters not t® pay attention to them unle^is he expressly indicates his
wish by some less formal sentence (see Letter CXIV). T. Ampius wai
the predecessor of Lentultis in Cilicia.

'^ /,^., no meeting of the senate for ordinaiy business. During the
month of Febniary the senate usually devoted all its time to hearing and
answering deputations from the provinces or foreign states. The la
Pupia forbade the meeting of the senate on dies comUialts^ and after the
15th the days in Jfonuajy were all comiiiaJes : but another law {iix
Vahnia) ordered it to meet every day in February for the business
of the legations. If this business was concluded or deferred it re-
mained a moot point whether a magistrate was not stilJ bound or, 1
least, Allowed to summon it for other business (ad Q» Fr, ii 13).

.4.5

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

209

r» the Roman people are generally of opinion that the
text of a trumped-up religious scruple has been intro-
ced by your jealous detractors, not so much to hinder
as to prevent anyone from wishing to go to Alex-
with a view of getting the command of an army,
vever, everyone thinks that the senate has had a regard
your position. For there is no one that is ignorant of
fact that it was all the doing of your opponents that no
vision took place : and if they, under the pretext of a regard
' the people^ but really from the most unprincipled villainy,
Itempt to carry anything, I have taken very good care that
_ ey shall not be able to do so without violating the auspices
' m the laws, or, in fact, without absolute violence. I don't
j^ink I need write a word either about my own zeal or the
Bjunous proceedings of certain persons. For why should
■Kn^e any display myself — since, if I were even to shed
my blood in defence of your position, I should think that I
had not covered a tithe of your services to me ? Or why com-
plain of the injurious conduct of others, which I cannot do
[itbout the deepest pain ? I cannot at all pledge myself to you
\ to the effect of open violence, especially wilh such feeble
ales ; but, open violence out of the question, I can
yau that you will retain your high position, if the
nest affections both of the senate and the Roman people
ksecure it to you.

i

XCVIII (r I, s)

»

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA)
RoiiE, February

TsoiJGH the first wish of my heart is that my warmest grati-
tode to you should be recognized first of all by yourself and
then by everybody else, yet I am deeply grieved that such a
stale of things has followed your departure as to give you
oocasioa, in your absence, to test the loyalty and good dis-
position towards you both of myself and others. That you
: and feel that men are shewing the same loyalty in main-

210

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C. 56^ ^ST. I

taining your position as I experienced in the matter of 1
restoration, I have understood from your letter. Just when
I was, depending most securely on ray policy, zeal, activity,
and ini^uence in the matter of the king, there was suddenly
sprung on us the abominable bill of Cato's,^ to hamper aU
OUT zeal and withdraw our thoughts from a lesser anxiety to
a most serious alarm. However, in a political upset of that
kind, though there is nothing that is not a source of terror,
yet the thing to be chiefly feared is treachery : and Cato, at
any rate, whatever happens, we have no hesitation in op-
posing. As to the business of Alexandria and the cause of
the king, I can only promise you thus much, that I will to
the utmost of my power satisfy both you, who are absent,
and your friends who are here. But I fear the king's cause
may either be snatched from our hands or abandoned alto-
gether^ and I cannot easily make up my mind which of the
two alternatives 1 would least wish. But if the worst comes
to the worst, there is a third alternative, which is not wholly
displeasing either to Selicius^ or myself— namely, that we
should not let the matter drop, and yet should not allow the
appointment^ in spite of our protests, to be transferred to the
man to whom it is now regarded as practically transferred'
We will take the utmost care not to omit struggling for any
point that it seems possible to maintain, and not to present
the appearance of defeat if we have in any case failed to
maintain it. You must shew your wisdom and greatness of
mind by regarding your fame and high position as resting on
your virtue, your public services^ and the dignity of your
character, and by believing that| if the perfidy of certain
individuals has deprived you of any of those honours
which fortune has lavished on you^ it will be more in-
jurious to them than to you. I never let any opportunity
slip either of acting or thinking for your interests, I avail
myself of the aid of Q, Selicius in everything: nor do I
think that there is any one of all your friends either shrewder,
or more faithful, or more attached to you,

^ That of the trihuDC C Cato for the recall of Lentului,
* A money-lender, and friend of Lentulus Spinther,
■ Pompey-

fi.S; QFRii,a

TO QUINTUS

211

XCIX (Q FR 11, 2)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN SARDINIA)

Rome, i8 January

ix was not from the multiplicity of business, though 1 am
Ifery much engaged, but from a slight inflammation of the
Icyes that I was induced to dictate this letter, and not, as is
liny usual habit, write it with my own hand. And, to begin
[irith, I wish to excuse myself to you on the very point on
[irhich I accuse you. For no one up to now has asked me
'whether I have any commands for Sardinia "^ — I think you
' en have people who say, " Have you any commands for
ilome?" As to what yoo have said in your letters to me
libout the debt of Lentulus and Sestius, I have spoken with
ICincius.* However the matter stands, it is not the easiest
ItQ the world. But surely Sardinia must have some special
Iproperty for recalling one's memory of the past. For just as
Ithe famous Gracchus — as augur — after arriving in that pro-
Ivince remembered something that had happened to him,
I when holding the elections in the Campus Martius, in viola-
I tion of the auspices^ so you appear to me to have recalled at
I your ease in Sardinia the design of Numisius and the debts
jdiie to Pomponius. As yet I have made no purchase.
ICuIleo's auction has taken place : there was no purchaser for
iTusculan property. If very favourable terms were to be
I should perhaps not let it slip. About your building
tnot fail to press Cyrus.* I hope he will do his duty. But
fieverything goes on somewhat slowly, owing to the prospect
Itf tkat madman's aedileship.^ For it seems that the legislative
obly will take place without delay : it has been fixed for
idle aoth of January* However, I would not have you uneasy.
lE?ery precaution shall be taken by me. In regard to the
[Alexandrine king, a decree of the senate was passed declaring

^ Agent or steward of Atlkus.

• The architect. See Letter XXVIII, p. 6&

' Clodius, who was ^ile this year.

212

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 56, AT.-^

it dangerous to the Republic that he should be restored "with
a host.'* The point remaining to be decided in the senate
being whether Lentulus or Pompey should restore him,
Lentulus seemed on the point of carrying the day. In that
matter I did justice to my obligations to Lentulus marvellously
well, while at the same time splendidly gratifying Pompey's
wishes: bat the detractors of Lentulus contrived to talk
the matter out by obstructive speeches. Then followed the
comitial days, on which a meeting of the senate was im-
possible. What the villainy of the tribunes is going to ac-
complish I cannot guess ; I suspect, however, that Caninius
will carry his bill by violence.^ In this business I cannot
make out what Pompey really wishes. What his enfoura^
desire everybody sues. Those who are financing the king
are openly advancing sums of money against Lenttjlus.
There seems no doubt that the commission has been taken
out of Lentulus*s hands, to my very great regret, althougft
he has done many things for which I might, if it were not
for superior considerations, be justly angry with him. I
hope, if it is consistent with your interests, that you will
embark as soon as possible, when the weather is fair and
settled, and come to me. For there are countless things, in
regard to which I miss you daily in every possible m
Your family and my own are welL
18 January,

C (a IV, 4 a)

TO ATTICUS (RETURNING FROM EPIRU3

Rome, 28 January

I WAS charmed to see Cincius when he called on me <
28th of January before daybreak. For he told me that J
were in Italy and that he was sending slaves to you, I did
like them to go without a letter from me ; not that I had i
thing to say to you, especially as you are all but here, but]

* For commissioniog Pompey with two Jictors to restore Ptole

i TV, 4 » ; Q PR Ut 3 TO QUINTUS

213

might express merely this one thing — that your arrival is

Bost delightful and most ardently wished for by me. Where-

W fly to us with the full assurance that your affection for me

fully reciprocated The rest shall be reserved for our

I write in great haste. The day you arrive, mind,

id your party are to dine with me.

CI (Q FR II, 3)

Jto raS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN SARDINIA)

Rome, 12 Februaky

t HAVE already told you the earlier proceedings ; now let me
cribe what was done afterwards. The legations were post-
ned from the ist of February to the 13th. On the former
r our business was not brought to a settlement. On the
1 of February Milo appeared for trial. Pompey came to
uppon him. Marcellus spoke on being called upon by me.*
^'e came off with flying colours. The case was adjourned
fo the 7 th, Meanwhile (in the senate), the legations having
&*n postponed to the 13th, the business of allotring the
guastors and furnishing the outfit of the praetors was brought
the house. But nothing was done, because many
ties were interposed denouncing the state of the
iblic. Gaius Cato published his bill for the recall of
alus, whose son thereupon put on mourning. On the
Milo appeared. Pompey spoke, or rather wished to
For as soon as he got up Clodius's ruffians raised a
hotjt, and throughout his whole speech he was interrupted,
ot only by hostile cries, but by personal abuse and insult-
remarks. However, when he had finished his speech—
r he shewed great courage in these circumstances, he was

* Milo impeadied by Clodius before the comiiia trihuta for his wnploy-
■I oC ghaiators. Dio (xxxix. iS) says that Clodius thuB impeached
, not with any hope of securing his conviction against the powerful
[ of Cicero and Pompey, but to get the chance of insulting these
Marcellus was one of the candidates for th« aedileship with
See Letter XCI*

214

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C* 5^f ^^*'^

not cowed, he said all he had to say, and at times had by
his commanding presence even secured silence for his words
— well, when he had finished, up got Clodius. Our party
received him with such a shout — ^for they had determined lo
pay him out — that he lost all presence of mind, power of
speech, or control over his countenance. This went on up
to two o'clock^Pompey having finished his speech at noon
— and every kind of abuse, and finally epigrams of the most
outspoken indecency were uttered against Clodius and
Clodia. Mad and livid with rage Clodius, in the very midst
of the shouting, kept putting questions to his claque : " Who
was it who was starving the commons to death?" His
ruffians answered, " Pompey." " Who wanted to be sent to
Alexandria ? " They answered, " Pompey."' " Who did they
wish to go ? " They answered, ** Crassus," The latter was
present at the time with no friendly feelings to Mile, About
three o'clock, as though at a given signal, the Clodians began
spitting at our men. There was an outburst of rage. They
hegan a movement for forcing us from our ground Our
men charged i his ruffians turned tail. Clodius was pushed
off the rostra : and then we too made our escape for fear of
mischief in the riot. The senate was summoned into the
Curia : Pompey went home. However, I did not myself enter
the senate-house, lest I should be obliged either to refrain
from speaking on matters of such gravity, or in defend-
ing Pompey (for he was being attacked by Bibulus, Curio,
Favonius, and Servilius the younger) should give offence to
the loyalists. The business was adjourned to the next day.
Clodius fixed the Quirinalia (17th of February) for his pro-
secution. On the 8th the senate met in the temple of Apollo,
that Pompey might attend. Pompey made an impressive
speech* That day nothing was concluded. On the 9th in the
temple of Apollo a decree passed the senate " that what had
taken place on the 7th of February was treasonable." On this
day Cato warmly inveighed against Pompey, and throughout
his speech arraigned him as though he were at the ban He
said a great deal about me, to my disgust, though it was in
very laudatory terms. When he attacked Pompey's perfidy
to me, he was listened to in profound silence on the part of
my enemies. Pompey answered him boldly with a palpable
allusion to Crassus, and said outright that " he would take

! n, 3

TO QUINTUS

215

precautions to protect his life than Africanus had

le, whom C, Carbo had assassinated."^ Accordingly,

hportant events appear to me to be in the wind. For

pmpey understands what is going on, and imparts to me

It plots are being formed against his life, that Gaius Cato

"being supported by Crassus, that money is bemg supplied

I Clodius, that both are backed by Crassus and Curio, as

il as by Bibulus and his other detractors : that he must

te extraordinary precautions to prevent being overpowered

] that demagogue — with a people all but wholly alienated,

*^ty hostile, a senate ill-affected, and the younger men

So he is making his preparations and summoning

>m the country. On his part, Clodius is rallying his

a body of men is being got together for the Quiri-

For that occasion we are considerably in a majority,

ng to the forces brought up by Pompey himself: and

ge contingent is expected from Picenum and Gallia, to

ble us to throw out Cato's bills also about Milo and

atutus.

fOn the loth of February an indictment was lodged against

tius for bribery by the informer Cn. Nerius, of the Pupi-

tribe, and on the same day by a certain M. Tnllius for

bt* He was ill. I went at once, as I was bound to do,

[his house, and put myself wholly at his service : and that

more than people ejcpected, who thought that I had

1 cause for being angry with him. The result is that my

erne kindness and grateful disposition are made manifest

to Sestius himself and to all the world, and I shall

as good as my word. But this same informer Nerius

named Cn. Lentulus Vatia and C. Cornelius to the

aissioners.' On the same day a decree passed the

f Ia 1I.C. 129, iLfter making a speech in favour of the claims of the

na for exemption from the agrarian law of Gracchus, Scipio ^mi-

t the yotmger Africanus, was found dead in his bed. The common

s that he had been assassinated by Carbo, or with his privity,

i never proved (see de Orat. lu § 170). Cicero does not here

\ the truth of the story, be merely repeats Pompey's words.

M, Tallius Albinovanus. It was on this charge de zi that Cicero

coded Sestius in the extant speech. The charge of bribery does not

i«af to have been proceeded with.

[ AdUgatos^ probably commissioners named to receive and report on
■ * lof an informer before the senate acted.

2l6

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 56^ -ET. 50

senate "that political clubs and associations should be
broken up, and that a law in regard to them should be
brought in, enacting that those who did not break off from
them should be liable to the same penalty as those convicted
of riot."

On the nth of February I spoke in defence of Bestia*oii
a charge of bribery before the praetor Cn, Domitius,* in the
middle of the forum and in a very crowded court ; and in the
course of roy speech I came to the incident of Sestius, after
receiving many wounds in the temple of Castor, having been
preserved by the aid of Bestia- Here I took occasion to
pave the way beforehand for a refutation of the charges
which are being got up against Sestius, and I passed a well-
deserved encomium upon him with the cordial approval of
everybody. He was himself very much delighted with it
I tell you this because you have often advised me in your
letters to retain the friendship of Sestius. I am writing
this on the 1 2th of February before daybreak : the day on
which I am to dine with Pomponius on the occasion of his
wedding.

Our position in other respects is such as you used to cheer
my despondency by telling me it would be — one of great
dignity and popularity : this is a return to old times for
you and me effectedj my brother^ by your patience, high
character, loyalty, and, I may also add, your conciliatory
manners. The house of Licinius, near the grove of Piso^
has been taken for you. But, as I hope, in a few months'
time, after the ist of July, you will move into your own.
Some excellent tenants, the Lamiae, have taken your house
in Carinse.* I have received no letter from you since the
one dated Olbia. I am anxious to hear how you are and
what you find to amuse you, but above all to see you your-
self as soon as possible. Take care of your health, my dear

* L, Calpurmns Piso Bestia, a candidate in the last election of
aedlles.

* Cn. Domitius Calvinus, consul BX. 53. In the Civil War he sided
with Pompey, and perished at sea after Thapsus (s.c, 46).

* Ad iu^um Pisonis, The place is not known, but there is not snf'
ficient reason for the change to ad tacum Ptsoms, a place eqttsUy
unknown.

* A part of Rome on the slope of the Mons Oppiiis. \

Q FE n» 3 1 P ii 5 b TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER 2 1 J

other, and though it is wintertime, yet reflect that after all
; is Sardinia that you are in,*
15 February*

CII (F I, s b)

"to p. LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA)

Rome (February)

is being done and has been done here I imagine you

DOW from letters of numerous correspondents and from

messengers : but what are still matters for conjecture, and

[Seem likely to take place, I think I ought to write and tell

I you. After Pompey had been roughly treated with shouts

[and insulting remarks, while speaking before the people on

[the 7th of February in defence of Milo, and had been

[accused in the senate by Cato in exceedingly harsh and

I bitter terms amidst profound silence^ he appeared to me to

be very much upset in his mind. Accordingly, he seems to

me to have quite given up any idea of the Alexandrine

business — which, as far as we are concerned, remains exactly

I where it was, for the senate has taken nothing from you

tuccept what, owing to the same religious diflficulty, cannot be

granted to anyone else. My hope and my earnest endeavour

now is that the king, when he understands that he cannot

1 what he had in his mind — restoration by Pompey—

1 that, unless restored by you» he will be abandoned, and

" ctcd, should pay you a visit,' This he will do without

my hesitation, if Pompey gives the least hint of his approval.

Bat you know that man's deliberate ways and obstinate

preserve. However, I will omit nothing that may contribute

to that result. The other injurious proceedings instituted

by Cato I shall, I hope, have no difficulty in resisting, I

perceive that none of the consulars are friendly to yoti

except Hortensius and Lucullus ; the rest are either hostile^

^ 1.4. i get out of it as soon as yoa can.
* Ftolemy was at Ephestia*

ziS

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 56, MT,

without openly shewing it, or undisgiiisedly incensed. Keep
a brave and high spirit, and feel confident that the resu
will be to utterly repulse the attack of a most contemptible
fellow, and to retain your high position and fame-

cm (F I, 6)

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA)

Rome (February)

What is going on you will learn from Pollio,* who not ool;
was engaged in all the transactions, but was the leader in
them. In my own deep distress, occasioned by the course
your business has taken,* I am chiefly consoled by the hope
which makes me strongly suspect that the dishonest practices
of men will be defeated both by the measures of your friends
and by mere lapse of time, which must have a tendency to
weaken the plans of your enemies and of traitors. In the
second place, I derive a ready consolation from the memory
of my own dangers, of which I see a reflexion In your fortunes.
For though your position is attacked in a less important par-
ticular than that which brought mine to the ground, yet the
analogy is so strong, that I trust you will pardon me if I am
not frightened at what you did not yourself consider ought
to cause alarm. But shew yourself the man I have known
you to be, to use a Greek expression, "since your nails were
soft."' The injurious conduct of men will, believe me,
only make your greatness more conspicuous. Expect from
me the greatest zeal and devotion in everything : I will not
falsify your expectation.

^ The famous C Asinius Poliio,

' The postponement of the Egyptian commissioii.

" II (iiraXw (ii^w^j t.^., "from your earliest youth." Others ejcplain
it to mean '* from the bottom of your hearty" or ** thoroughly/' from the
idea that the nerves ended in the nails. I? aitrQv rtUv Avv^wv,
** thoroughly," occurs in late Greek, and similur usages in the Anthology.

4

*i4. 6

TO QUINTUS

219

CIV (Q FR II, 4 AND PART OF 6)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN SARDINIA)

Rome, March

OtJR friend Sestius was acquitted on the i ith of March, and,
what was of great importance to the Republic— that there
should be no appearance of difference of opinion in a case
of that sort — was acquitted unanimously. As to what I
had often gathered from your letters, that you were anxious
about — that I should not leave any loophole for abuse to an
imMendly critic on the score of my being ungrateful, if I
did not treat with the utmost indulgence his occasional
nrrong-headedness — let me tell you that in this trial I estab-
lished my character for being the most grateful of men. For
tn conducting the defence I satisfied in the fullest manner
possible a man of difficult temper, and, what he above all
things desired, I cut up Vatinius (by whom he was being
openly attacked) just as I pleased, with the applause of gods
and men. And, farther, when our friend Paullus ^ was
brought forward as a witness against Sestius, he affirmed
that he would lay an information against Vatinius* if
Licinius Macer hesitated to do so, and Macer, rising from
Sestius's benches, declared that he would not fail. Need I
say more ? That impudent swaggering fellow Vatinius was
overwhelmed with confusion and thoroughly discredited.

That most excellent boy, your son Quintus, is getting on
splendidly with his education. I notice this the more
because Tjrrannio' gives his lessons in my house. The
building of both your house and mine is being pushed on

* Ia j^railiiis PauUus, prretor B.C, 53, consul B.C 50, a strong Opti-
nute and friend of Cicero's.

* P. Vatinius, the tribune of B*c 59, who liad supported Gfisar and
proposed the law for his five years* command in GauL Cicero spoke
against him for peijury ; but afterw'ards we shall find them ostensibly
reconciled.

I * A Greek grammarian and geographer, of whom we have heard

sso

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C. 56, MT. 50

energetically. I have caused half the money to be paid to
your contractor. I hope before winter we may be under the
same roof. As to our Tullia, who, by Hercules, is very
warmly attached to you, I hope I have settled her engage-
ment with Crassipes/ There are two days after the Latin
festival which are barred by religion.* Otherwise the festival
of luppiter Latiaris has come to an end.

The afRtience which you often mention I feel the want
of to a certain extent ; but while I welcome it if it comes
to me, I am not exactly beating the covert for it" I am
building in three places, and am patching up my other
bouses. I live somewhat more lavishly than I used to do*
1 am obliged to do so. If I had you with me I should give
the builders full swing for a while.* But this too (as I hope)
we shall shortly talk over together.

The state of affairs at Rome is this : Lentulus MarceUinus
is splendid as consul, and his colleague does not put any
difficulty in his way : he is so good, I repeat, that I have never
seen a better. He deprived them of all the comitial days ;
for even the I^tin festival is being repeated," nor were thanks-
giving days wanting." In this way the passing of most mis-
chievous laws is prevented, especially that of Cato,' on
whom, however, our friend Milo played a very pretty trick.
For that defender of the employment of gladiators and
beast-fighters had bought some beast-fighters from Cosconius
and Pomponius, and had never appeared in public without
them in their full armour. He could not afford to maintain

^ P. Furius Crassipes. TulJia^s first liusband, C. Caljiuraiiis Piso Fmgi,
died, it seems, before Cicero returned from exile in B.C. 57. This
second marriage (or, perhaps, only betrotliaj} was shortly ended by a
divorce,

^ Le.f on which the spcnsalia could not take place.

' Not going the right way to work to get It.

* At the end of tbe next letter he says that, pending Quintus's arrival,
lie has stopped some of his building,

■ On some alleged informality the ferim Latina were held a second
time {instaurat^), really, Cicero implies, in order to bar some additional
days for public business, and prevent legislation, as later on tie ejection
of Pompey and Crassus was prevented (Dio, xxxix. 30).

• At the end of B.c, 57, or the beginning of 56, fifteen days of suppiu
tatio were decreed in consequence of Caesar*s success in Gaul (OeS|
B. G. ii, 35).

^ Gftius Cato the tribune, who proposed to recall Lentulus*

ul. I

FtJFR II, 4,6

TO QUINTUS

221

them, and accordingly had great difficulty in keeping them
together, Milo found this out. He comniissioned an in-
dividual, with whom he was not intimate, to buy this troop
from Cato without exciting his suspicion. As soon as it
had been removed, Racilius — at this time quite the only
real tribune — revealed the truth, acknowledged that the
men had been purchased for himself— for this is what they
had agreed — and put up a notice that he intended to sell
" Cato's troop." This notice caused much laughter. Accord-
ingly, Lentulus has prevented Cato from going on with his
lawsj and also those who published bills of a monstrous
description about Csesar, with no tribune to veto them*
C^inius's proposal, indeed, about Pompey has died a
natural death. For it is not approved of in itself, and our
friend Pompey is also spoken of with great severity for the
breach of his friendship with Publius Lentulus. He is not
the man he was. The fact is that to the lowest dregs of the
populace his support of Milo gives some ofi'ence, while the
aristocrats are dissatisfied with much that he omits to do, and
find fault with much that he does. This is the only point,
however, in which I am not pleased with Marcellinus — that he
handles him too roughly. Yet in this he is not going counter
to the wishes of the senate : consequently I am the more glad
to withdraw from the senate-house and from politics altogether.
In the courts I have the same position as I ever liad : never
was my house more crowded. One untoward circumstance
has occiured owing to Milo's rashness — the acquittal of
SexL Clodius^ — -whose prosecution at this particular time,
and by a weak set of accusers, was against my advice. In
a most corrupt panel his conviction failed by only three
votes. Consequently the people clamour for a fresh trials
and he must surely be brought back into court For people
will not put up with it, and seeing that, though pleading
before a panel of his own kidney, he was all but con-
demnedt they look upon him as practically condemned.
Even in this matter the unpopularity of Pompey was an
obstacle in our path. For the votes of the senators were
largely in his favour, those of the knights were equally
divided, while the tribuni asrarii voted for his condemna-

A scfiba or public clerk, and a client of the patrician Clodil

222

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C; 56, j€T. so

tion. But for this contretemps I am consoled by the daily

condemnations of niy enemies, among whom, to my great

delight, Servius^ got upon the rocks: the rest are utterly

done for, Gaius Cato declared in public meeting that he

would not allow the elections to be held, if he were deprived

of the days for doing business with the people, Appius has

not yet returned from his visit to Caesar. I am looking

[ forward with extraordinary eagerness to a letter from you,

1 Although I know the sea is still closed, yet they tell me that

(certain persons have, nevertheless, arrived from Olbia full

of your praises, and declaring you to be very highly thought

of in the province. They said also that these persons reported

that you intended to cross as soon as navigation became

' possible. That is what I desire : but although it is yourself,

of course, that I most look forward to, yet meanwhile I

long for a letter. Farewell, my dear brother.

CV (Q FR ir, 5 AND PARTS OF 6 AND f)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN SARDINIA)

Rome, 8 April

I HAVE already sent you a letter containing the informatio
of my daughter Tallia having been betrothed to Crassipes
on the 4th of April, and other intelligence public and private.
The following are the events since then. On the 5th of
Aprils by a decree of the senate, a sum of money amounting
to 40,000 sestertia (about ;£'320jOoo) was voted to Pompey
for the business of the com-supply. But on the same day
there was a vehement debate on the Campanian land, the
■senators making almost as much noise as a public meeting.
The shortness of money and the high price of corn increased
the exasperation. Nor will I omit the following : the mem-
bers of the colleges of the Capitolini and the Mercuriales*

^ Unknown, Cicero's words seem to imply that he nearly got con-
^cted, but not quite.

* In B.C. 357 a " college " was established for celcbmting the lu&
CapitQlini^ in celebration of the failure of the Gauls to take it.

rfiMib

Q FR n, 5, 6, 7

TO QUINTUS

223

expelled from their society a Roman knight named M. Furius
Flaccus, a man of bad character : the expulsion took place
when he was at the meeting, and though he threw himself
at the feet of each member.

On the 6th of April, the eve of my departure from town,
I gave a betrothal party to Crassipes. That excellent boy,
jour and my Quintus, was not at the banquet owing to
a very slight indisposition. On the 7th of April I visited
Quintus and found him quite restored. He talked a good
deal and with great feeling about the quarrels between our
wives. What need I say more ? Nothing could have been
pleasanter. Pomponia, however, had some complaints to
nialte of you also : but of this when we meet. After leaving
your boy I went to the site of your house : the building was
going on with a large number of workmen. I urged the
contractor Longilius to push on. He assured me that he
had every wish to satisfy us. The house will be splendid,
for it can be better seen now than we could judge from the
plan : my own house is also being built with despatch* On
this day I dined with Crassipes, After dinner I went in my
sedan to visit Pompey at his suburban villa. I had not been
I able to call on him in the daytime as he was away from
home. However, I wished to see him^ because I am leaving
Rome to-morrow, and he is on the point of starting for
Sardinia. I found him at home and begged him to restore
you to us as soon as possible. "Immediately," he said.
He is going to start, according to what he said, on the nth
of April, with the intention of embarking at Livorno or
Pisa.^ Mind, my dear brother, that, as soon as he arrives,
you seize the first opportunity of setting sail, provided only
that the weather is favourable. I write this on the 8th of
April before daybreak, and am on the point of starting on
my journey, with the intention of stopping to-day with Titus
Titius at Anagnia. To-morrow I think of being at Laterium,*

i»ted of men living on the Capitoline (Uvy, v. 50). The Afercuriaies
wcfen "college" or company of merchants who cejebrated ihtfite of
the consecration of the tetnp]e of Mercury (b,c. 495) on the Ides of
Mi| (livy, iL 27 ; Ov, F. v. 669 ; C /. £. I p, ao6).

* It WIS on this journey that Pompey visited Luca to meet Ckssj- and
Crassos.

' The name of a property of Qiiintus at Arpinum.

224

CICEKO S LETTERS

BX. 56, .«T. 50

thence, after five days in Arpinum, going to my Pompeian
house, just looking in upon my villa at Cuitise on my return
journey, with the view — since Milo's trial has been fixed for
the 7th of May^ — of being at Rome on the 6th, and of seeing
you on that day, I hope, dearest and pleasantest of brothers.
I thought it best that the building at Arcanum ^ should be
suspended till your return. Take good care, my dear brother,
of your health, and come as soon as possible*

CVI (A IV, 4 b)

TO ATTICUS (RETURNING FROM EPIRUS)

Antium (April)

It will be delightful if you come to see us here. You
find that Tyrannio has made a wonderfully good arrang
ment of my books, the remains of which are better than I had
expected. Still, I wish you would send me a couple of your
library slaves for Tyrannio to employ as gluers, and in other
subordinate work, and tell them to get some fine parch-
ment to make title-pieces, which you Greeks, I think, call
** sillybi." But all tins is only if not inconvenient to you. In
any case, be sure you come yourself, if you can halt for a
while in such a place, and can persuade Pilia ^ to accompany
you. For that is only fair, and Tullia is anxious that she
should come. My word! You have purchased a fine
troop i Your gladiators, I am told, fight superbly. If you
had chosen to let them out you would have cleared your
expenses by the last two spectacles. But we will talk about
this later on. Be sure to come, and, as you love me, see
about the library slaves.

* Anotber property of Quinttis near Mintuma?.

' The receaily married wife of AtLicus. See p, 21&

A IT, 4 In s TO ATTICUS 22$

CVII (A IV, 5)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Antium (April)

Do you really mean it ? Do you think that there is anyone
by whom 1 prefer to have what I write read and approved of
before yourself? " Why, theoj did I send it to anyone before
you ? ** I was pressed by the man to whom I sent itj and
had no copy. And—well ! I am nibbling at what I must,
ifter all, swallow — my " recantation " ^ did seem to me a
trifle discreditable I But good-bye to straightforward, honest,
and high-minded policy! One could scarcely believe the
axDOunt of treachery there is in those leaders of the state, as
they wish to be, and might be, if they had any principle of
honour in them. I had felt it, known it-^ taken in, abandoned,
and cast aside by thera, as I had been I and yet my purpose
still was to stick by them in politics. They were the same
men as they ever had been. At last, on your advice, my
eyes have been opened. You will say that your advice only
extended to action, not to writing also. The truth is that I
wanted to bind myself to this new combination, that I might
have DO excuse for slipping back to those who, even at a
time when I could claim their compassion, never cease being
jealous of me. However, I kept within due limits in my
subject, when I did put pen to paper, I shall launch out
more copiously if hs shews that he is glad to receive it, and
those make wry faces who are angry at my possessing the
?illa which once belonged to Catulus, without reflecting that
I bought it from Vettius : who say that I ought not to have
built a town house, and declare that I ought to have soldp

' -nakwt^'^a — something he had apparently written and sent to
Pompey or Csesar, giving in his adhesion to the policy of the triumvirs-
It can hardly have been the speech dt Pramndis Consu/ari/tus or the
iTAiie pr6 BalbQ, which had probably not yet been delivered, for the
urangement recommended in the former speech was not that of the
tonfieieDce of Luca, while in the tatter, though he speaks respectfiilly of
Czsar, there is nothing in the shape of a palinodt in general politics.

226

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 56, MT. 50

But what is all this to the feet that, when I have delivered
senatorial speeches in agreement with their own views, their
chief pleasure has yet been that I spoke contrary to Pompe/s
wishes ? Let us have an end of it Since those who have
no power refuse me their affection, let us take care to secure
the affection of those who have power. You will say, -* I
could have wished that you had done so before.** I know
you did wish it, and that I have made a real ass of myself.
But now the time has come to shew a little affection for
myself, since I can get none from them on any terms.

I am much obliged to you for frequently going to see my
house. Crassipes^ swallows up my money for travelLng.
Tullia will go straight to your suburban villa.* That seems
the more convenient plan. Consequently she will be at your
town house the next day : for what can it matter to you ?
But we shall see. Your men have beautified my library by
making up the books and appending title-slips. Please thank
them.

CVIII (F V, 12)

TO L. LUCCEIUS*

Arpinum (April)

I HAVE often tried to say to you personally what I am about
to write, but was prevented by a kind of almost clownish
bashfulness. Now that I am not in your presence I shall
speak out more boldly : a letter does not blush. I am in-
flamed with an inconceivably ardent desire, and one, as I

^ That is, the dowry and expenses of Tullia's betrothn) to Cmssipes.

' Tullia dt via recta in horSos^ for tu^ etc., and ad te postridie. This
tuny not be right, but no other suggestions as to the meaning of these
abrupt clauses have been made which are in the least convincing. We
must suppose that Atticus has asked TulHa to stay with him and his
wife Piba, and Cicero is describing her journey from Antium.

* L. LucceiuSj of whom we have heard before, as having some
quarrel with Atticus. His work has not survived. No letter of the
correspondence has brought more adi mad version on Cicero, and yet
log-rolling and the appealing to friends on the press to review one*s
book are not wholly unknown even in our time.

W V, 11

TO L. LUCCEIUS

227

think, of which I have no reason to be ashamed, that in
a history written by you my name should be conspicuous
and frequently mentioned with praise. And though you
bare often shewn me that you meant to do so, yet I hope
you will pardon my impatience. For the style of your com-
position, though I had always entertained the highest ex-
pectations of it^ has yet surpassed my hopes, and has taken
sach a hold upon me, or rather has so fired my imagina-
Ltion, that I was eager to have my achievements as quickly
las possible put on record in your history. For it is not
'only the thought of being spoken of by future ages that
i makes me snatch at what seems a hope of immortality, but
lit is also the desire of fully enjoying in my lifetime an
■ authoritative expression of your judgment, or a token of
lyour kindness for me, or the charm of your genius. Not,
Ibowever, that while thus writing I am unaware under what
Ibeavy burdens you are labouring in the portion of history
IfOU have undertaken, and by this time have begun to write.
I Bm because I saw that your history of the Italian and Civil
Wars was now all but finished, and because also you told me
that you were already embarking upon the remaining por-
tions of your work, I determined not to lose my chance for
the want of suggesting to you to consider whether you pre-
ferred to weave your account of me into the main context
of your history, or whether, as many Greek writers have
done — Callisthenes, the Phocian War j Tima^us, the war of
I Fyrrhus ; Poly bins, that of Numantia ; all of whom separated
llhe wars I have named from their main narratives — you
|tou]d, like them, separate the civil conspiracy from pubMc
1 external wars. For my part, I do not see that it matters
to my reputation, but it does somewhat concern my
Itience, that you should not wait till you come to the
place, but should at once anticipate the discussion of
' ^t question as a whole and the history of that epoch.
Aiid at the same time, if your whole thoughts are engaged
m one incident and one person, I can see in imagination
bow much fuller your material will be, and how much more
^jj^bg rately worked out. I am quite aware, however, what
^modesty I display, first, in imposing on you so heavy
den (for your engagements may well prevent your com-
Bcc with my request), and in the second place, in asking

228

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 56, /CT.

you to shew me oflf to advantage. What if those transac-
tions are not in your judgment so very deserving of com-
mendation ? Yet, after all, a man who has once passed the
border-line of modesty had better put a bold face on it and
be frankly impudent. And so I again and again ask you
outright, bodi to praise those actions of mine in warmer
terms than you perhaps feel, and in that respect to neglect
the laws of history. I ask you, too, in regard to the personal
predilection, on which you wrote in a certain introductory
chapter in the most gratifying and explicit terms — and by
which you shew that you were as incapable of being diverted
as Xenophon's Hercules by Pleasure — not to go against it,
but to yield to your affection for me a little more than truth
shall justify. But if I can induce you to undertake this, you
will have, I am persuaded, matter worthy of your genius and
your wealth of language. For from the beginning of the
conspiracy to my return from exile it appears to me that a
moderate-sized monograph might be composed, in which you
will, on the one hand, be able to utilize your special know-
ledge of civil disturbances, either in unravelling the causes
of the revolution or in proposing remedies for evils, blaming
meanwhile what you think deserves denunciation, and estab-
lishing the righteousness of what you approve by explaining
the principles on which they rest : and on the other hand,
if you think it right to be more outspoken (as you generally
do), you will bring out the perfidy, intrigues, and treachery
of many people towards me. For my vicissitudes will supply
you in your composition with much variety, which has in
itself a kind of charm, capable of taking a strong hold on
the imagination of readers, when you are the writer. For
nothing is better fitted to interest a reader than variety of
circumstance and vicissitudes of fortune, which, thought he
reverse of welcome to us in actual experience, ml\ make very
pleasant reading : for the untroubled recollection of a past
sorrow has a charm of its own. To the rest of the world,
indeedj who have had no trouble themselves, and who
look upon the misfortunes of others without any suffering
of their own, the feeling of pity is itself a source of
pleasure. For what man of us is not delighted, though
feeling a certain compassion too, with the death-scene of
Epaminondas at Mantinea? He, you know, did not allow

r V, 12

TO L. LUCCEIUS

229

the dart to be drawn from his body until he had been
told, 135 answer to his question, that his shield was safe, so
tlut in spite of the agony of his wound he died calmly
tnd with glory. Whose interest is not roused and sus-
tained by the banishment and return of Themistocles ? ^
. 1 riily the mere chronological record of the annals has very
^Uttle charm for us — little more than the entries in the
^^fusfi: but the doubtful and varied fortunes of a man, fre-
■ queotly of eminent character, involve feelings of wonder,
W suspense, joy, sorrow, hope, fear : if these fortunes are
^ crowned with a glorious death, the imagination is satisfied
with the most fascinating delight which reading can give.
Therefore it will be more in accordance with my wishes if
you come to the resolution to separate from the main body of
your narrative, in which you embrace a continuous history of
events, what I may call the drama of my actions and fortunes ;
for it includes varied acts, and shifting scenes both of policy
and circumstance. Nor am I afraid of appearing to lay snares
for your favour by flattering suggestions, when I declare that
I dasire to be complimented and mentioned with praise by
you above all other writers. For you are not the man to be
ignorant of your own powers, or not to be sure that those
who withhold their admiration of you are more to be
accounted jealous, than those who praise you flatterers.
Nor, again, am I so senseless as to wish to be consecrated to
an eternity of fame by one who, in so consecrating me, does
not also gain for himself the glory which rightfully belongs
to genius. For the famous Alexander himself did not wish
to be painted by Apelles, and to have his statue made by
Lysippus above all others, merely from personal favour to
them, but because he thought that their art would be a glory
4t once to them and to himself. And, indeed, those artists
used to make images of the person known to strangers :
but if such had never existed, illustrious men would yet be
less illustrious. The Spartan Agesilaus, who would not
low a portrait of himself to be painted or a statue made,
deserves to be quoted as an example quite as much as those

rra appears by a slip to have written Themistocles instead of
s- The dramatic return of the latter just before the battle of
is narrated in Herodotus : whereas the former never returned,
;h his dead body was said to have been brought to Athens.

230

dCEEO'S LETTERS

B,C 56, JET,

who have taken trouble about such representations : for a
single pamphlet of Xenophon*s in praise of that king has
proved much more effective than all the portraits and statues
of them all. And, moreover, it will more redound to my
present exultation and the honour of my memory to have
found my way into your history, than if I had done so into
that of others, in this, that I shall profit not only by the
genius of the writer — ^as Timoleon did by that of Timseus,
Themistocles by that of Herodotus — but also by the autho-
rity of a man of a most illustrious and well-established
character, and one well known and of the first repute for
his conduct in the most important and weighty matters of
state ; so that I shall seem to have gained not only the fame
which Alexander on his visit to Sigeum said had been be-
stowed on Achilles by Homer, but also the weighty testi-
mony of a great and illustrious man. For I like that saying
of Hector in Nsevius, who not only rejoices that he is
"praised,'^ but adds, **and by one who has himself been
praised." But if I fail to obtain my request from you, which
is equivalent to saying, if you are by some means prevented
— for I hold it to be out of the question that you would refi^se
a request of mine — I shall perhaps be forced to do what
certain persons have often found fault with, write my own
panegyricj a thing, after all, which has a precedent of many
illustrious men. But it will not escape your notice that there
are the following drawbacks in a composition of that sort :
men are bound, when writing of themselves, both to speak
with greater reserve of what is praiseworthy, and to omit
what calls for blame. Added to which such writing carries
less conviction, less weight ; many people, in fine, carp at it,
and say that the heralds at the public games are more
modest, for after having placed garlands on the other re-
cipients and proclaimed their names in a loud voice, when
their own turn comes to be presented with a garland before
the games break up, they call in the services of another
herald, that they may not declare themselves victors with
their own voice. I wish to avoid all this, and, if you imder-
take my cause^ I shall avoid it ; and, accordingly, I ask you
this favour. But why, you may well ask, when you have
already often assured me that you intended to record in your
book with the utmost minuteness the policy and events of

' V, 13 ; A IV, 6

TO ATTICUS

231

^

my consulship, do I now raake this request to you with
such earnestness and in so many words ? The reason is to
be found in that burning desire, of which I spoke at the
beginning of my letter, for something prompt: because I
am in a flutter of impatience, both that men should learn
what I am from your books, while I am still alive, and that
I may myself in my lifetime have the full enjoyment of my
little bit of glory. What you intend doing on this subject I
should like you to write me word, if not troublesome to you.
For if you do undertake the subject, I will put together
some notes of all occurrences: but if you put me off to
some future time, I will talk the matter over with you.
Meanwhile, do not relax your efforts, and thoroughly polish
what you have already on the stocks, and — continue to love
mo.

CIX (A IV, 6)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

From the Country (April- May)

Of course 1 am as sorry about Lentulus as I am bound to
be : we have lost a good patriot and a great man, one who
to great strength of character united a culture equally
piTofound My consolation is a miserable one, but still it
Xh a consolation — that I do not grieve on his account : I
don't mean in the sense of Saufeius and your Epicurean
friends, but, by Hercules, because he loved his country so
deeply, that he seems to me to have been snatched away
hy a special favour of providence from its conflagration*
For what could be more humiliating than the life we are
living, especially mine? For as to yourself, though by
nature a poUtician, you have yet avoided having any servi-
tude peculiar to yourself : you merely come under an appella-
tion common to us all* But /, who, if I say what I ought
sbotit the Republic, am looked on as mad, if what expediency

^ Reading c&mmuni fmris nt^mine. After kU, the meaning is very
4?oU.fuL

232

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 56,f

dictates, as a slave, and if I say nothing, as utterly crus
and helpless — what must I be sufTering? Suffer, inde
do, and all the more keenly that I cannot even shew
pain without appearing ungratefuL Again i what if I sho
choose a life of inactivity and take refuge in the harbou
retired leisure? Impossible! Rather war and the can
Am I to serve in the ranks after refusing to be a genen
I suppose I must For I perceive you, too, think so, ;
whom I wish that I had always obeyed. All that is leftl
me now is, *' You have drawn Sparta : make the best of itj
But, by heavensi I can't : and I feel for Philoxenus/ 1
preferred a return to gaol. However, in my present tttM
ment I am thinking over how to express my rejection of t*
old policy, and when we meet you will strengthen me inl
I notice that you have written to me at frequent intervall
but I received all the letters at once. This circumstance m
creased my grief. For I had read three to begin with, in whig
the report of Lentulus was that he was a little better, ~"
came the thunderbolt of the fourth. But it is not he, as I s
who is to be pitied, bat we who are so callous as to live (
You remind me to write that essay on Hortensius : 1 1
digressed into other subjects, but have not forgotten
charge. But, by heaven, at the first line I shrank from I
task, lest I, who seem to have acted foolishly in resen^
his intemperate conduct as a friend, should once mcref
foolishly rendering his injurious treatment of me conspicuo
if I wrote an)rthing ; and at the same time lest my ' \
irwTdie^ manifested in my actions, should be somewS
obscured in my writing, and this mode of taking satisfactiol

^ PhiloxenuB, who, having been sent to the quarries by Dionysiti5 of
Syracuse, for criticising the tyrant's poetry, was given another chiince.
After reading a few lines he turned away silently. " Where are ya«
going?" said Dionysitts, **Back to the quarries," said Philoxeni*
For £iraprav tKaxi^f T£WTtjv jcoff/iti, see p. 59-

* Ffrrn. The true meaning of the word here seems to me to be
shewn hj de Am. § 87, quis tarn iss€t ferrms, qui eafn vitam ftrrt
/jj«/, cuique non auferrU fructum voluptatum omnium j&litttJ&f
There is an intentional play on the words ferreus and /erre, Othei*
have altered it to sen.'t\ and others have explained it as an allusion to the
iron age, in both cases spoiling the aniithesis— he died, wc remaiti—
and in the latter using the wok! in a sense not elsewhere found, IjVp
tulus is L. Cornelius Lentulus, See Letter L.

Vt^it 7

TO ATTICUS

233

M seem to imply a certain instability. But we shall

Only be sure to write me something as often as

ssible, I sent a letter to Lucceius asking him to write

le history of my consulship : be sure you get it from him,

* is a very pretty bit of writing, and urge him to use

:h, and thank him for having written me an answer

that he would do so. Go and see my house as often

you can. Say something to Vestorius ; ^ for he is acting

liberally in regard to me.

CX (A IV, 7)
TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Arpinum (April-May)

rcTTHiNG could be better timed than your letter, which
mch relieved the anxiety I was feeling about that excellent
oy, our Quintus. Two hours earlier Chaerippus had
mved : his news was simply awfuL As to what you say
bout ApoUonius, why, heaven confound him ! a Greek
" torn bankrupt 1 Thinks he may do what Roman knights
! For, of course, Terentius is within his rights 1 As to
leiellus — de martuis, etc^ — yet there has been no citizen

ie these many years past who » Well, I am willing to

lairant your getting the money : for what have you to fear,
homsoever he made his heir, unless it were Publius ? But
has, in fact, made a respectable man his heir, though

was himself I Wherefore in this business you will

lOt have to open your money- chest : another time you will

more cautious. Please see to my instructions about my

ouse : hire some guards : give Milo a hint/ The Arpinates

' A. rooncy^lcnder.

* oifx iffifi ^Btftlvoimvt leaving Alticus, as often, to fill in the words
'* ii^pci<rii' fi>x^Tda<r9m (Horn. Od, xxiL 412, where the word is
ntny)^ Terentius is some etjues who has stopped payment,
^use Clodius was attempting to pull down Cicero's new-built
the ground that the site was still consecrated. He was pre-
[ed by Milo (Dio, xxxix. 20).

234

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. S6» /ET,

grumble amazingly about Laterium/ Well, what caul
say ? I was much annoyed myself, but " to words of mine
he gave no heed," ^ For the rest, take care of young Cio
and love him as always.

CXI (A IV, 8 a)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Antium (April-May)

There were many things in your letter which please
but nothing more than your **dish of cheese and salt fish'^l
For as to what you say about the sale,

•* Boast not yourself before you see the end," *

I can find nothing in the way of a building for you in \
neighbourhood. In the town there is something of
sort, though it is doubtful whether it is for sale, and, in fa<
close to my own house. Let me teE yoo that Antium is the
Buthrotum of Rome, just what your Buthrotum is to Corey;
Nothing can be quieter, cooler, or prettier — ** be this i
own dear home,^* - Moreover, since Tyrannio has arrangei
my books for me, my house seems to have had a soul added
to it ; in which matter your Dionysius and Menophilus we

* Something that Quintus had done, perhaps about water, on 1
estate which annoyed his fellow townsmeu*

^6 5' oifK IfiTra^ero fiv9t,iit (Horn. Od. I, 271)*

* We must suppose Atticus lo have meutioned some money loss (
last letter), and to have added that, though a ruinous one, his tastes w
simple, and he could live on simple fare, Cicero laughs at the aifec
tion of the rich Atticus. Raudmcuium^ "a piece of bronze," was the
ancient term for the piece of bronze money used in sales, per as tt
libram (Varro> Z. Z. v. 163).

* /ij/irw ^W etTTjg tt/ocv riAti^cTflj/r IByq, ** Do not boast till yOQ see
a man dead ^ — a well-known line from a lost play of Sophocles, contabi^
ing a sentiment elsewhere often repeated, especially in Herodotus'^
account of the interview of Solon and Croesus.

^ ilij lim <}i>rog 0iXof oT«of, according to a probable restoration of the
Greek words (instead of etij ftttrijroc ^iXocoIkoc, " I might even h&tci""
tow a house in comparison ") j cp* Hor- Od, ii. 6, 7«

Aiv,8a;FV,3;i,7 FROM Q. METELLUS NEPOS 235

of wonderful service. Nothing can be more charming than
those bookcases of yours, since the title-slips have shewn
off the books. Good-bye. I should like you to write me
word about the gladiators, but only if they fight well, I don't
want to know about them if they were failures.

CXII (F V, 3)

FROM Q. METELLUS NEPOS (IN SPAIN)

The insults of a most outrageous person, with which he
loads me in frequent public speeches, are alleviated by
jour kind services to me ; and as they are of little weight as
coming from a man of that character, they are regarded by
me with contempt, and I am quite pleased by an interchange
of persons to regard you in the light of a cousin.^ Him I
dcm't wish even to remember, though I have twice saved his
life in his own despite. Not to be too troublesome to
JOQ about my affiurs, I have written to Lollius as to what I
want done about my provincial accounts, with a view to
his informing and reminding you. If you can, I hope you
win preserve your old goodwill to me.

CXIII (F I, 7)

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA)

Rome (October)

I HAVs read your letter in which you say that you are
obliged for the frequent information I give you about all
current events, and for the clear proof you have of my
kindness to yourself. The latter — the regarding you with

^ Fratris. The mother of Clodius, Csecilia, was a daughter of Q.
Caedtios Metelltis Balearicas (consul b.c. 123), father of the writer of
Jiis letter.

236

CICERO'S LETTERS

B*C 56, ^T. SO

fnic

warm aifection — it is my duty to do, if I wish to maintain
the character which yon desired for me ; the former it is a
pleasure to do, namely, separated as we are by length of space
and time, to converse with you as frequently as possible by ^
means of letters. But if this shall occur less frequentl^J
than you expect, the reason will be that my letters are ^H
such a kind that I dare not trust them to everybody
promiscuously. As often as I get hold of trustworthy
persons to whom I may safely deliver them, I will not omit
to do so. As to your question about each particular person's
loyalty and friendly feelings towards you, it is difficult to
speak in regard to individuals. I can venture on this one
assertion, which I often hinted to you before, and now write
from close observation and knowledge^that certain perso]
and those, above all others, who were most bound and m^
able to help you, have been exceedingly jealous of yoi
claims ; and that, though the point in question is different,
your present position is exceedingly like what mine was
some time ago in this, that those whom you had attacked
on public grounds now openly assail you, while those whose
authority, rank, and policy you had defended, are not so
much mindful of your kindness as enemies to your reputa-
tion. In these circumstances, as I wrote you word before, I
perceive that Hortensius is very warmly your fnend, Luculli
anxious to serve you : while of the magistrates L. Racii"
shews special loyalty and affection. For my taking up
cudgels for you, and advocating your claims, would seem S
the eyes of most people to be the measure of my obligation
to you rather than of my deliberate opinion. Besides thi
I am, in fact, not able to bear witness to any one of
consulars shewing zeal or kindness or friendly feeling to^
you. For you are aware that Pompey, who is very frequeni
accustomed, not on my instigation but of his own accoi
to confide in me about you, did not often attend the sen;
during these discussions. It is true your last letter, as
could easily conceive, was very gratifying to him. To mi
indeed, your reasonableness, or rather your extreme wisdom^
seemed not only charming, but simply admirable. For
that letter you retained your hold on a man of lofty chi
acter, who was bound to you by the signal generosity
your conduct towards him, but who was entertaining soi

^1,7

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

23;

Wsp icioDS that, owmg to the impression prevailing among
persons as to his own ambitious desires, you were
ted from him. I always thought that he wished to
support your reputation, even in that very dubious episode
' Caninius's proposal * * but when he had read your letter, I
uld plainly see that he was thinking with his whole soul
of you, your honours, and your interests. Wherefore look
upon what I am going to write as written after frequent
^■discussions with him, in accordance with his opinion, and
^Virith the weight of his authority. It is this : ** That, since no
^■senatorial decree exists taking the restorarion of the Alex-
^P^iidrine king out of your hands, and since the resolution
F written out upon that restoration (which, as you are aware,
itas vetoed) to the effect that no one was to restore the
king at all,* has rather the weight of a measure adopted
men in anger than of a deliberate decision of the
:e — you can yourself see, since you are in possession
ilicia and Cyprus,^ what it is within your power to
effect and secure ; and that, if circumstances seem to make
it possible for you to occupy Alexandria and Egypt, it is for
your own dignity and that of the empire that, after having
first placed the king at Ptolemais or some neighbouring
place, you should proceed with fleet and army to Alexandria,
^^^Tder that, when you have secured it by restoring peace
placing a garrison in it, Ptolemy may go back to his
lorn : thus it will be brought about that he is restored
at once by your agency, as the senate originally voted, and
without a * host,' as those who are scrupulous about religion
flud was the order of the Sibyl"

But though both he and I agreed in this decision, we yet
tfaoQght that men would judge of your policy by its result :
tf it turns out as we wish and desire, everybody will say that
jfOll acted wisely and courageously; if any hitch occurs,
Cbose same men will say that you acted ambitiously and
nsbly. Wherefore what you really can do it is not so easy for
05 10 judge as for you, who have Egypt almost within sight.
F«f UBf our view is this : if you are certain that you can get

» See Letter XCV. ^ See Letter CIL

• Joined to the province of Cilfda by Cato in B.C. 58-57. What
Ckeio u recommending is a clear evasion, Lentulus is not to (oka
Ptolemy back, but to go to £gypt and make it ready for him.

238

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C, 56, ^T. 1

possession of that kingdom, you should not delay : if it is
doubtful, you should not make the attempt I can guarantee
you this, that, if you succeed, you will be applauded by many
while abroad, by all when you return. I see great danger
in any failure, on account of the senatorial resolution and
the religious scruple that have been introduced into the
question. But for me, as I exhort you to snatch at what is
certain to bring you credit, so I warn you against running
any risks, and I return to what I said at the beginning o(
my letter — that men will judge all you do, not so much
from the policy which prompted it as from its result. But
if this method of procedure appears to you to be dangerous,
our opinion is that, if the king fulfils his obligations to those of
your friends, who throughout your province and sphere of
government have lent him money, you should assist him
both with troops and supplies : such is the nature and con-
venient situation of your province, that you either secure
his restoration by giving him aid, or hinder it by neglect-
ing to do so. In carrying out this pohcy you will perceive
better and more easily than anyone else what the actu '
state of affairs, the nature of the case, and the circumstano
of the hour admit: what our opinion was I thought th
I was the person, above all others, to tell you.

As to your congratulations to myself on my present _
tion, on my intimacy with Milo, on the frivolity and in
potency of Clodius— 1 am not at all surprised that, like]
iirst-rate artist, you take pleasure in the brilliant works
youf own hands. However, people's wrong-headedne
don't like to use a harsher word — surpasses belief; th
might have secured me by their sympathy in a cause in wb
they were all equally interested, yet they have alienatd
me by their jealousy : for by their carping and most malicio
criticisms I must tell you that I have been all but driv
Irom that old political standpoint of mine, so long
tained, not, it is true, so far as to forget my position, but i
enough to admit at length some consideration for my per-
sonal safety also. Both might have been amply secured f '
there had been any good faith, any solidity in our consuh
but such is the frivolity of most of them, that they do
so much take pleasure in my political consistency, as ofTei
at my brilliant position. I am the more outspoken in writi

H.7

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

239

■foi

this to 70U, because you lent your support, not only to my
present position, which I obtained through you, but also
loQg ago to my reputation and political eminence, when they
were, so to speak, but just coming into existence ; and at
the same time because I see that it was not, as I used
formerly to think, my want of curule pedigree that excited
prejudice : for I have noticed in your case, one of the
noblest of the land, a similar exhibition of base jealousy,
and though they did not object to class you among the
nobiessey they were unwilling that you should take any higher
flight I rejoice that your fortune has been unlike mine : for
there is a great difference between having one's reputation
lowered and one*s personal safety abandoned to the enemy.
In my case it was your noble conduct that prevented me
from being too much disgusted with my own j for you secured
that men should consider more to have been added to my
future glory than had been taken from my present fortune.
As for you^nstigated both by your kindness to myself and
my affection for you, I urge you to use all your care and
industry to obtain the full glory, for which you have burned
with such generous ardour from boyhood^ and never, under

I anyone's injurious conduct, to bend that high spirit of yours,
which I have always admired and always loved. Men have
i high opinion of you ; they loudly praise your liberality ;
they vividly remember your consulship. You must surely
perceive how much more marked, and how much more
prominent these sentiments will be, if backed up by some
considerable repute from your province and your govern-
ment However, in every administrative act which you
have to perform by means of your army and in virtue of
your imperium^ I would have you reflect on these objects
long before you act, prepare yourself with a view to them,
torn them over in your mind, train yourself to obtain them,
and convince yourself that you can with the greatest ease
maintain the highest and most exalted position in the state.
This you have always looked for, and 1 am sure you under-
stand that you have attained it And that you may
not think this exhortation of mine meaningless or adopted
without reason, I should explain that the consideration
which has moved me to make it was the conviction that you
required to be warned by the incidents, which our careers

240

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.C. 56. jGT, P

have had in common, to be careful for the rest of your
life as to whom to trust and against whom to be on your
guard

As to your question about the state of public affairs-
there is the most profound difference of opinion, but the
energ)' is all on one side. For those who are strong id
wealth, arms, and material power, appear to me to have
scored so great a success from the stupidity and fickleness
of their opponents, that they are now the stronger in moral
weight as well Accordingly, with very few to oppose them,
they have got everything through the senate, which they
never expected to get even by the popular vote without a
riot : for a grant for military pay and ten legates have been
given to Caesar by decree,' and no difficulty has been made
of deferring the nomination of his successor, as required
by the Sempronian law.* I say the less to you on this point
because this position of public affairs is no pleasure to me:
1 mention it, however, in order to urge you to learn, while
you can do so without suffering for it, the lesson which I
myself, though devoted from boyhood to every kind of
reading, yet learnt rather from bitter experience than from
study, that we must neither consider our personal safety lo
the exclusion of our dignity, nor our dignity to the exclusion
of our safety.

In your congratulations as to my daughter and Crassipes
I am obliged to you for your kindness, and do indeed expect
and hope that this connexion may be a source of pleasure
to us. Our dear Lentulus, a young man who gives such
splendid promise of the highest qualities, be sure you
instruct both in those accomplishments which you have
yourself ever been forward in pursuing, and also, above ail,
in the imitation of yourself: he can study in no better
school than that. He holds a very high place in my regard
and affection, as well because he is yours, as because he is
worthy of such a father, and because he is devoted to
and has always been so.

' Cicero says elsewhere that he sapported this {pro Balbc^ \
de Prov. Cons. § 28 j cp, Dio, xxxix. 25}.

' The law of Gaius Gracchus (B.C. 125) enacting that the s
should name before the elections the provinces lo be lield by the i
consuls.

n.7l rxm,6a TO Q. VALERIUS ORCA

241

CXIV (F XIII, 6 a)

VALERIUS ORCA (PROCONSUL IN AFRICA)

Rome (Mav)

ou are well I shall be glad. I am quite well. I pre-
ame that you will remember that, when escorting you on
he commencement of your official journey/ I mentioned to
in the presence of Publius Cuspius, and also afterwards
irged you privately at some length, that whomsoever I
night recommend to you as connexions of his, you should
gard as among connexions of my own. You, as was to
expected from your extreme regard and uninterrupted
[attentions to me, undertook to do this for me with the
utmost liberality and kindness, Cuspius, who is most care-
" in his duties towards all connected with him, takes a
prising interest in the well-being of certain persons of
ur province, because he has been twice in Africa when
' "ing over the very large concerns of his revenue-corn-
ay. Accordingly, this patronage of his, which be exercises
1 their behalf, I am accustomed as far as I can to back up
such means and influence as I possess. Wherefore I
mght it necessary to explain to you in this letter why I
j^ve letters of introduction to all the fHends of Cuspius. In
; letters I will merely append the mark ^ agreed upon

you and me, and at the same time indicate that he

I one of Cuspius's friends. But the recommendation which

I have resolved to subscribe to in this present letter, let me tell

Fjou, is more serious than any of them. For P, Cuspius has

" me with particular earnestness to recommend Lucius

ilius to you as warmly as possible. I appear to be barely

to satisfy his eagerness by using the words which I

nerally use when most in earnest He asks for something

* P^htdatum^ Ut. dressed in \h& paludamtnlum, the military dress in
\ provincial governors left Rome with impetium,
Yoiattiy some cipher, which he had agreed upon with Valerius to
(te that the commendatw was not to be looked upon as a mere
r cf course.

242

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. s6, iET. 50

out of the common way from me, and thinks I have a special
knack in that style of writing. I have promised him to
produce a masterpiece of commendation — a specimen of my
choicest work. Since I cannot reach that standard, however,
I would beg you to make him think that some astonishing
effect has been produced by the style of my letter. You will
secure that, if you treat him with all the liberality which your
kindness can suggest and your official power make feasible—
I don't mean merely in the way of material assistance, but
also in words and even in looks : and what influence such
things have in a province I could have wished that you had
already learnt by experience, though I have an idea that you
soon will do so. This man himself, whom I am recommend-
ing to you, I believe to be thoroughly worthy of your friend-
ship, not only because Cuspius says so (though that should be
enough), but because I know the keenness of his judgment
of men and in the selection of his friends. I shall soon be .
able to judge what has been the effect of this letter,
shall, I feel certain, have reason to thank you* For mys<
I shall with zeal and care see to all that I think to be yd
wish or to concern your interests. Take care of ya
health.

CXV (F XIII, 6 b)

TO Q. VALERIUS ORCA (PROCONSUL IN AFRIC

Rome (May)

P. Cornelius, who delivers you this letter, has been
commended to me by P. Cuspius, for whose sake you aieS
thoroughly informed from me how much I desire and
bound to do. I earnestly beg you that Cuspius may ]
as great, early, and frequent occasion as possible to thank i
for this introduction.

r nil, 6b ; Q FR II, 6 TO QUINTUS 243

CXVI (Q FR II, 6)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (RETURNING
FROM SARDINIA)

Rome, May

How delighted I was to get your letter! It had been expected
b7 me at fiist, it is true, only with longing, but recently with
ihnn also. And, in fact, let me tell you that this is the
only letter which has reached me since the one brought me
by your sailor and dated Olbia. But let everything else, as
ytm say, be reserved till we can talk it over together. One
thing, however, I cannot put off: on the 15th of May the
senate covered itself with glory by refusing Gabinius a sup-
fKcaiio. Procilius^ vows that such a slight was never in-
flicted on anyone. Out of doors there is much applause.
To me, gratifying as it is on its own account, it is even more
10 beoiuse it was done when I was not in the house. For it
was an unbiassed ' judgment of the senate, without any attack
or exercise of influence on my part. The debate previously
ananged for the 15th and i6thi namely, the question of the
Campanian land, did not come on. In this matter I don't
quite see my way.* But I have said more than I meant to
■ay: for it is best reserved till we meet Good-bye, best
and most longed-for of brothers! Fly to me. Our boys
both share my prayer : of course, you will dine with me the
day (^your arrival

' One of the tribunes. He was convicted of vis in B.C. ^4. Gabinius
%M governor of Sjrria B.C. 57-54. He had been engaged in some war-
Ike affiius in Indstt, for which, or for some successes over the Arabs, he
claimed die Mr>M/M»/^

* tAicp€s4c, ^pore," " clear."

' MiAi aqua Jutnt^ " there 'i a stoppage in my water course."

244

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX* 55. MT. 51

CXVII (A IV, 8 b)

In iliis year Cicero devoted tnuch of his time and enei^ to tbe 1
position of the d£ Oratore, He was gliid to be away from Rome, i
though he had resolved to give up his opposition to f
triumvirs, he was never really happy in supporting or el
witnessing their policy, and the first letter betrays I
sentiments as to the way in which the consuls had sc'^^
their election. His fear of an autocracy, however, \
now to be directed rather to Pompey than Caesar; 1
was he at all charmed by the splendour of the games given at the c
ing of Pompey's new theatre. The only extant speech is that aj
L. Calpurnius Fiso (consul B.c. 58) who had been recalled from \
donia.

Cft. Pompcius

M< Licinius
Crassus,

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

TuscuLUM* (January)

Apenas had scarcely left me, when your letter
Really ? Do you suppose he won*t propose his law ? '
speak a little louder : I seem scarcely to have caught '
you said. But let me know it at once, if it is all the samej
you, that is ! Well, since an additional day has been assi^
to the games, I am all the more content to spend that >
with Dionysius. About Trebonius I cordially agree
you. About Domitius/

^ The letter appears to be frona Tusculum, because Ciceio asks]
a letter every day, which he could hardly expect if he were futherf
This year Cicero was much away from Rome, and yet his col
spondence is meagre compared with other years, So far as this b I
due to accident in the preservation of his letters, it may be accoui
for by the fact that he was working at his de Oratore — so hard, 1
even his brother Quintus had scruples in breaking in upon him.

^ This may refer to the laws of Trebonius, giving Pompey and <
Spain and Syria respectively, and Caesar an additional five yeanl
Gaul, or to some of Pompey s own legislation.

' L* Domitius Ahenobarbus, a candidate for the consulship of B,C. '
but whose election had never come off. By various contrivances \
cQtmiia were prevented, so that the new year opened with an in
regnum ; and Pompey and Crassus were elected under the ]
of an iniefy^ex (Dio, xxjux. 31),

<f,8b

TO ATTICUS

245

** I swear by Ceres that no single fig
Was e'er so like another,'*

ase to mine, either in the sameness of persons, the
unexpectedness of it> or the futility of the loyalists. There
is one difference — he has brought it upon himself. For as to
the misfortune itself, I rather think mine is the less grievous.
For what could be more mortifying than that a man, who has
been consul-designate, so to speak, ever since he was bom,
should fail in securing his election ? Especially when he is
the only (plebeian) candidate, or at most had but one op-
aent If it is also the fact, which I rather think it is, that he ^
5 in the register of his pocket-book some equally long pages
ffelure, no less than of past consuls, what more humiliating
adon than our friend's, except that of the Republic ? My
St inform ati on about Natta' was from your letter : I couldn*t
the man. As to your question about my poem \ what
[it is all agog to escape from my hands ? Well? Would you
tmit it ? About Fabius Luscus^I was just going to speak
f him : the man was always very cordial £0 me, and I never
fid any cause to dislike him; for he is intelligent, very
ell-behaved, and serviceable enough. As I was seeing
othing of him> I supposed him to be out of town : but was
>ld by this fellow Gavius of Firmum, that he was at Rome,
Dd had never been away. It made a disagreeable impression
I roe. " Such a trifle as that? " you will say. Well, he had
bid me a good deal of which there could be no doubt as to
|cse brothers of Firmum, Wliat it is that has made him
old aloof from me, if he has done so, I have no idea.
As to your advice to me to act " diplomatically " and keep
I the ** outside course " — I will obey you. But I want still
ore worldly wisdom, for which, as usual, I shall come to
Pray smell things out from Fabius/ if you can get
I him, and pick the brains of your guest, and write me word
these points and all others every day. When there is
Mng for you to write, write and say so. Take care of
health*

* Pompey.

* L, Natta, a brother-iD-kw of Clodius, a pontifex who had

resided

i pre
If the (on^icroHo of Cicero's house. He seems to have just died.
• A friend of Pompey*s. I think **your guest** must be Pompey

—

246

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 55, MtA

CXVIII (F I. 8)

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIi*

KoM£ (January)

What debates have taken place in the senate, what de-
termination has been come to in your business, and what
Pompey has undertaken to do, all this you will best learn
from Marcus Plaetorius, who has not only been engaged
in these matters, but has even taken the lead in them,
and left nothing undone which the greatest affection for
you, the greatest good sense, and the greatest care could do,
From the same man you will ascertain the general position
of public affairs, which are of such a nature as is not easy
to put in writing. They are, it is true, all in the power of
our friends, and to such an extent that it does not seeta
probable that the present generation mil witness a change
For my part, as in duty bound, as you advised, and as pe^
sonal affection and expediency compel, I am attaching my-
self to the fortunes of the man whose alliance you thou '
you must court when my fortunes were in question,
you must feel how difficult it is to put away a political
viction, especially when it happens to be right and pro
up to the hilt. However, I conform myself to the wishe
him from whom I cannot dissent with any dignity : and 1
I do not do, as perhaps some may think, from insinc
for deliberate purpose and, by heaven 1 affection for Pon
are so powerful with me,' that whatever is to his interest, i
whatever he wishes, appears to me at once to be altoged
right and reasonable. Nor, as I think, would even
opponents be wrong if, seeing that they cannot possibly I
his equals, they were to cease to struggle against him,
myself I have another consolation — my character is
that all the world thinks me justified beyond all othd
whether I support Pompey's views, or hold my tongue,J
even, what is above everything else to my taste, returm
my literary pursuits. And this last I certainly shall d<v
my friendship for this same man p^ermils it For those (
jects which I had at one time in view, after having held the

»a

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

247

ghest offices and endured the greatest fatigues— the power

intervening with dignity in the debates of the senate,

id a free hand in dealing with public affairs — these have

entirely abolished, and not more for me than for all.

we all have either to assent to a small clique, to the utter
of our dignity, or to dissent to no purpose. My chief
►ject in writing to you thus is that you may consider care-
fiy what line you will also take yourself. The whole
)sition of senate, law courts, and indeed of the entire con-
itution has undergone a complete change* The most we

hope for is tranquil Uty : and this the men now in supreme
wer seem likely to give us, if certain persons ^ shew some-
lat more tolerance of their despotism. The old consular
festige, indeed, of a courageous and consistent senator

must no longer think of: that has been lost by the
olt of those who have alienated from the senate both

order once very closely allied to it, and an individual of
e most illustrious character. But to return to what more
mediately affects your interests — I have ascertained that
►mpey is warmly your friend, and with him as consul, to
t best of my knowledge and belief, you will get whatever

wish. In this he will have me always at his elbow, and
Ithing which affects you shall be passed over by me. Nor,
fact, shall I be afraid of boring him, for he will be very glad

his own sake to find me grateful to him. I would have you

y persuaded that there is nothing, however small, affecting
welfare that is not dearer to me than every interest of

own. And entertaining these sentiments, I can satisfy
rself indeed, as far as assiduity is concerned, but in actual
hievement I cannot do so, just because I cannot reach any

portion of your services to me, I do not say by actual
turn in kind, but by any return even of feeling. There is
I report that you have won a great victory.* Your despatch
anxiously awaited, and I have already talked to Pompey
lOUt it. When it arrives, I wiO shew my zeal by calling on
trates and members of the senate i and in every-

^ ..J which may concern you, though I shall strive for
•re than I can achieve, I shall yet do less than I ought.

' The extieme Optimates, such as Cato.

* Agminst the predatory and piratic inhabitants of Cilicift.

248

CICERO'S LETTERS

CXIX (Q FR II, 7)

B.C* 55, .«T, 51

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN THE COUNTRY)

Rome (February)

I THOUGHT you would like my book : ' that you like it as
much as you say I am greatly delighted. As to your hint
about my Urania and your advice to remember the speech
of lupiter,^ which comes at the end of that book, I do
indeed remember it, and that whole passage was aimed at
myself rather than at the rest of the world. Nevertheless,
the day after yoo started I went long before daybreak with
Vibullius to call on Pompey ; and upon addressing him on
the subject of the works and inscriptions in your honour,'
he answered me very kindly, gave me great hopes, said he
would like to talk to Crassus about it, and advised me to do
so too. I joined in escorting Crassus to his house on his
assuming the consulate : he undertook the affair, and said
that Clodius would at this juncture have something that he
wanted to get by means of himself and Pompey . he thought
that, if I did not baulk Clodius's views, I might get what I
wanted without any opposition. I left the matter entirely in
his hands and told him that I would do exactly as he wished
Publius Crassus the younger was present at this conversatioOi
who, as you know, is very warmly attached to me* What
Clodius wants is an honorary mission (if not by decree of
the senate, then by popular vote) to Byzantium or to Bro-
gitarus, or to both/ There is a good deal of money in it. It
is a thing I don't trouble myself about much, even if I don*l
get what I am trying to get, Pompey, however, has spoken

* His poem ** On his own Times.**

* In his poem d^ Conmlatu suo, the second book of which (Uraaia)
ends with a speech of lupiter, who recommends his leaving politics for
literature.

' A statue in the temple of Tellus.

* Brogitartis was a Galatian and connexion of Dciotams. Dodks
as tribune, had done some services lo Byzantium, and hud also got Brogi-
Unta the office of high priest of Cybele. He wants now to go and get
his money for these favours.

Q nt lu 7 t A tv, to

TO ATTICUS

249

to Ciassus. They seem to have taken the business in hand.
If they carry it through, well and good : if not, let us return
to my ** lupiter."

On the nth of February a decree passed the senate as to
bribery on the motion of AfraBius, against which I had
spoken when you were in the housa To the loudly ex-
pressed disapprobation of the senate the consuls did not go
on with the proposals of those who, while agreeing with
Afranius's motion, added a rider that after their election the
pnetors were to remain private citizens for sixty days/ On
that day they unmistakably threw over Cato. In short,
they manage everything their own way, and wish all the
world to understand it to be so.

CXX (A IV, lo)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

CuM>E, 20 April

IAt Puteoli there is a great report that Ptolemy has been

Vcstored* If you have any more certain news, I should like

> know it I am here devouring the library of Faustus.'

Perhaps you thought I was feasting on the beauties of

iPuteoli and the Lucrine lake. Well, I have them too*

^at I declare to heaven that the more I am debarred from

he enjoyment of ordinary pleasures, owing to the political

lituation, the more do I find support and refreshment in

[literature ; and I would rather be sitting in that charming seat

" yours, under your bust of Aristotle, than in iMr^ curule

* The praetorian elections, like the consular, had been put off till
February. Those elected would therefore enter on their office at once,

nd so escape prosecution, to which they would have been liable if, as
ofdinaiy years, they had been ** praetors-designate" from July to
ianuaiy. Afranius's motion seems to have been for suspending the
tirfbery l^ws pro hoc vice. Cato had been beaten : if there had been an
Opportunity of impeaching his rivals he might ha%'e got in.

* Son of the dictator Sulla, who is known to have brought back from
Athens a famous Aristotelian library.

' Pompey and Crassus, the consuls*

250

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 55, i€T* 51

chair, and be taking a stroll with you rather than with the great
man *■ with whom I see I shall have to walk. But as to that
walk, let fortune look to it, or god, if there is any god who
cares for such things, I wish, when possible, you would
come and see my walk and Spartan bath, and the buildings
planned by Cyrus, and would urge Philotimus to make haste,
that I may have something to match with yours in that depart-
ment' Pompey came to his Cuman property on the Panlia
(19th April). He at once sent a man to me with his compli-
ments. I am going to call on him on the morning of the 20th,
as soon as I have written this letter.

CXXI (A IV, 9)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

CuMiB, 28 April

I SHOULD much like to know whether the tribunes are
hindering the census by stopping business with their bad
omens ^ (for there is a rumour to that effect)^ and what they
are doing and contriving as to the censorship altogether. I
have had an interview with Pompey here. He talked a good
deal to me about pohtics. He is not at all satisfied mth
himself, to judge from what he says^ — one is obliged to put
in that proviso in his case. He thinks very little of Syria as
a province; talks a good deal about Spain — here, too, I
must add, " to judge from what he says," and, I think, his
whole conversation requires that reservation, and to be
ticketed as Phocylides did his verses — jcai rdh ^utKvXl^ov*

^ Pompey, as the context shews. In the next clause ambuiaiio hus
a double meaning of physical walking and of a political course of
conduct.

' Philotimus, a fireedman of Terentia*s, seems to have been engaged
at Rome in the reconstruction of Cicero's house. The Spartan bilh
{Lacunicum) was a hot-air bath, like a Tmrkish bath.

^ The tribunes had no t>//£» against the censors, they could only hinder
them by the indirect method of cbnuftiiatiOf declaring that the omeni
weie bad| and so preventing business.

* This also is Paocylides*s,

Unr, 9; Q FR II, 8

TO QUINTUS

251

He expressed gratitude to you for undertaking to arrange the
statues : * towards myself he was, by Hercules, most effusively
cordial. He even came to my Cuman house to call on me.
However, the last thing he seemed to wish was that Messalla
should stand for the consulship : that is the very point on
which I should like to hear what you know. I am much
obliged by your saying that you will recommend my fame to
Lucceius, and for your frequent inspection of my house.
My brother Quintus has written to tell me that, as you have
that dear boy, his son Quintus, staying with you, he intends
coming to your house on the 7 th of May, I left my Cuman
villa on the 26th of April That night I spent at Naples
with Paetus, I write this very early on the 2 7th, on my road
to my Pompeian house.

»

CXXII (Q FR II, 8)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (AT ROME)

CuM^ (April)

Ajraid that you will interrupt me— you? In the first
place, if I were as busy as you think, do you know what in-
terruption means ? Have you taken a lesson from Ateius ? '
So help me heaven, in my eyes you give me a lesson in a
kind of learning which I never enjoy imless you are with me.
Why, that you should talk to me, interrupt me, argue against
me, or converse with me, is just what I should like. Nothing
cotiJd be more delightful ! Never, by Hercules, did any
crazy poet read with greater zest his last composition than
~ listen to you, no matter what business is in hand, public
nrivate, rural or urban. But it was all owing to my foolish
ipulousness that I did not carry you off with me when I
leaving town. You confronted me the first time with an
unanswerable excuse — the health of my son : I was silenced.
The second time it was both boys, yours and mine: I

* Some bore, unknown to us.

* III Poirapcy's new theatre*

2S4

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 55, JET.

** No bliss so great as knowing al] that is.**

Wherefore indulge my thirst for knowledge by telling wh
happened on the first and on the second day of the showsj
what about the censors/ what about Appius,* what about th
she-Appuleius of the people?* Finally, pray write me wop
what you are doing yourself For, to tell the truth, revolt
tions don't give me so much pleasure as a letter from yo
I took no one out of town with me except Dionysius : yet !
am in no fear of wanting conversation — so delightful do I
find that youth. Pray give my book to Lucceius.* I send
you the book of Demetrius of Magnesia,* that there may be
a messenger on the spot to bring me back a letter fi*om you.

CXXIV (A IV, 12)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

Cumje, April

Egnatius * is at Rome, But I spoke strongly to him
Antium about Halimetus's business. He assured me th
he would speak seriously to Aquilius.'' You will see the i
therefore, if you please, I think I can scarcely be ready fd
Macro:' for I see that the auction at Larinum is on th
Ides and the two days following. Pray forgive me for tha
since you think so much of Macro, Bu^ as you love me, din

^ See p, 250. Censors were elected this year, but the powers of t
censorship had been much curtailed by a law of Clodius in B,c, 58,

' Appius Claudius (brother of Clodius) was a candidate for the
consulship of B.C. 54.

* Clodius, a revolutionary, like Appuleius Satuminus* The feminiiie
gender is ao insult.

* Either his poem **On his own Times," or the notes of events
which he had promised in Letter CVIII, p. 231.

* A treatise on union (wipl AfiovoitiQ), The rhetorician DionysJus
of Magnesia had been with Cicero during his tour in Asia*

* L. Egnalius, who owed Q. Cicero money.

' C* Aquilius Gallus, Cicero*5 colleague in the praetorship^ and a busy
advocate. See p. 13.

* Apparently a money-lender.

^mu

i2;FVti, 23 TO M* FADIUS GALLUS

255

me on the 2nd, and bring Pilia, You must absolutely

i so. On the ist I think of dining at Crassipes' suburban

L as a kind of inn. I thus elude the decree of the senate.

noe to my town house after dinner, so as to be ready to

fat Milo's in the morning.^ There, then, I shall see you,

shall inarch you on with me. My whole household

^ds you greeting.

CXXV (F VII, 23)

TO M. FADIUS GAULUS

Rome (May)

it arrived from Arpinum when your letter was

red to me; and from the same bearer I received a

from Avianius,' in which there was this most liberal

', that when he came to Rome he would enter my debt

on whatever day I chose. Pray put yourself in my

is it consistent with your modesty or mine, first to

a request as to the day, and then to ask more thaa a

's credit ? But, my dear Callus, everything would have

/, if you had bought the things I wanted, and only

price that I wished. However, the purchases whicli^

ing to your letter, you have made shall not only be

ed by me, but with gratitude besides : for I fully under-

d that you have displayed zeal and affection in purchas*

use you thought them worthy of me) things which

yourself — a man, as I have ever thought, of the

fastidious judgment in all matters of taste. Still, I

like Damasippus * to abide by his decision : for there

; (becat

P^ediAps at bis j^ansaiia, as he was married towards the end of the

Avianius Evamler, a dealer in statues, it seems, from whom
i Ittd bought some for Cicero. He offers to let the debt for them
1 90 tlie interest) nn from any day Cicero pleases.
' A weU*k&owD connoisseur* mentioned by Horace, Sai. 11. 5, 64,

He seeou to have offered to take the bargain off Cicero's

256

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,G. 55, -«T.

is absolutely none of those purchases that I care to hav
But you, being unacquainted with my habits, have bou
four or five of your selection at a price at which I do ni
value any statues in the world. You compare your Bacch
with Metellus's Muses. Where is the likeness ? To be^
with, I should never have considered the Muses worth all tE _
money, and I think all the Muses would have approved my
judgment : still, it would have been appropriate to a library,
and in harmony with my pursuits. But Bacchx ! What place
is there in my house for them ? But, you will say, they are
pretty. I know them very well and have often seen them.
I would have commissioned you definitely in the case of
statues known to me, if I had decided on them. The sort
of statues that I am accustomed to buy are such as may
adorn a place in a paim^ira after the fashion of gymnasia.'
What, again, have I, the promoter of peace, to do with a
statue of Mars ? I am glad there was not a statue of Saturn
also i for I should have thought these two statues had
brought me debt \ I should have preferred some representa-
tioo of Mercury r I might then, I suppose, have made a
more favourable bargain with Arriaous, You say you meant
the table-stand"* for yourself; well, if you like it, keep it
But if you have changed your mind I will, of course, have it*
For the money you have laid out, indeed, I would rather
have purchased a place of call at Tarracina,* to prevent my
being always a burden on my host. Altogether I perceive
that the fault is with ray freedman, whom I had distinctly
commissioned to purchase certain definite things, and also
with Junius, whom I think you know, an intimate friend of
Avian ius. I have constructed some new sitting-rooms in a
miniature colonnade on my Tusculan property. I want to
ornament them with pictures : for if I take pleasure in any-
thing of that sort it is in painting* However, if I am to
have what you have bought, I should like you to inform me
where they are, when they are to be fetched, and by what

^ That is, for his paltestra or gymnasium, as he csLlk it, in hi*
Tusculanum. See Letters I, II, VII.

* An ornamenlaJ leg or stand for table or sideboard {ataoisY See
picture in Rich's DUhonary of Antiquities,

^ On the via Appta, where the canaJ across the marshes began. C\cxx^
Slops there a night between Formlse aod Pomptina Sum ma {Att* ViL $)«

^^^^^^^^^

J

I t Vll, 23

TO M, FADIUS GALLUS

257

kind of conveyance. For if Damasippus doesn't abide by
decision, 1 shall look for some would-be Daniasippus/
veo at a loss.
As to what you say about the house, as I was going out
1 of town I intrusted the matter to my daughter Tullia : * for
it was at the very hour of my departure that I got your
^ letter. I also discussed the matter with your friend Nicias,
because he is, as you know, intimate with Cassius. On
my return, however, before I got your last letter, 1 asked
TulUa what she had done. She said that she had approached
Lidnia ^ (though I think Cassius is not very intimate with
I bis sister), and that she at once said that she could not
^ venture, in the absence of her husband (Dexius is gone to
^ Spain), to change houses without his being there and know-
ing about it I am much gratified that you should value
jttsoc iation with me and my domestic life so highly, as, in
St place, to take a house which would enable you to
I not only near me, but absolutely with me, and, in the
second place, to be in such a hurry to make this change
residence. But, upon my life, I do not yield to you in
agemess for that arrangement. So I will try every means
my power. For I see the advantage to myself, and,
adeed, the advantages to us both. If I succeed in doing
aything, I will let you know. Mind you also write me
^ord tmck on everything, and let me know, if you please,
phen I am to expect you.

' One who professes to be an amateur of art like Damasippus.
• As in Letter CVI, Tullia, not Terentia^ seems to be in Cicero's
con&denoe and presiding in his house. Terentia must already have
on bod terms with him, and perhaps was residing on her own

property.
' HsLlf-sister of Gains Cassius.

258

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C $Si ^T.j

f your
h vou T

CXXVI (F VII, I)

TO M, MARIUS (AT CUM^)

Rome (October?)

If some bodily pain or weakness of health has preveni
your coming to the games, I put it down to fortune rather
than your own wisdom : but if you have made up your mind
that these things which the rest of the world admires are
only worthy of contempt, and, though your health would
have allowed of it, you yet were unwilling to come, then I
rejoice at both facts — that you were free from bodily pain,
and that you had the sound sense to disdain what others
causelessly admire. Only I hope that some fruit of your
leisure may be forthcoming, a leisure, indeed, which
had a splendid opportunity of enjoying to the full,
that you were left almost alone in your lovely country.
I doubt not that in that study of yours, from which you
have opened a window into the Stabian waters of the
and obtained a view of Miseoum, you have spent the m*
ing hours of those days in light reading, while those vrl
left you there were watching the ordinary farces * half asl(
The remaining parts of the day, too, you spent in the pi
which you had yourself arranged to suit your own
while we had to endure whatever had met with the approi
of Spurius Maecius*^ On the whole, if you care to koc
the games were most splendid, but not to your taste,
judge from my own. For, to begin with, as a special honour
to the occasion, those actors had come back to the stage
who, I thought, had left it for their own. Indeed^ vol
favourite, my friend ^sop, was in such a state that no
could say a word against his retiring from the professi^
On beginning to recite the oath his voice failed him at

^ Communis, which is not satisfactory. But neither is the emcndAtiflJ
proposed, cominus. For communis^ "common," ** vulgar," see di i
ii. 8 45.

^ Whom Pompey employed to select the plays to be exhibiiedial
new theatre.

V

vii» 1

TO M. MARIUS

259

Words ** If I knowingly deceive." Why should I go on with
he story ? You know all about the rest of the games, which
hadn't even that amount of charm which games on a moderate
scale generally have : for the spectacle was so elaborate as to
ve no room for cheerful enjoyment^ and I think you need
eel no regret at having missed it. For what is the pleasure
if a train of six hundred mules in the ** Clytemnestra," or
hree thousand bowls in the *' Trojan Horse," or gay-coloured
irraour of infantry and cavalry in some battle ? These things
■oused the admiration of the vulgar ; to you they would have
ought no delight. But if during those days you listened
your reader Protogenes, so long at least as he read any-
hing rather than my speeches, surely you had far greater
Measure than any one of us. For I don't suppose you
ranted to see Greek or Oscan plays, especially as you can
see Oscan farces in your senate-house over there, while you
e so far from liking Greeks, that you generally won't
?**en go along the Greek road to your villa. Why, again,
hould I suppose you to care about missing the athletes,
ince you disdained the gladiators ? in which even Pompey
If confesses that he lost his trouble and his pains,
remain the two wild-beast hunts, lasting five days,
ficent — nobody denies it — and yet, what pleasure can
to a man of refinement^ when either a weak man is
im by an extremely powerful animal, or a splendid animal
transfixed by a hunting spear ? Things which, after all, if
orth seeing, you have often seen before ; nor did I, who
present at the games, see anything the least new. The
day was that of the elephants, on which there was a
t deal of astonishment on the part of the vulgar crowd,
t no pleasure whatever. Nay^ there was even a certain
~ 9g of compassion aroused by it, and a kind of belief
that that animal has something in common with
indJ However, for my part, during this day, while the
_ ical exhibitions were on, lest by chance you should
ink me too blessed, I almost split my lungs in defending
friend Caninius Gallus.' But if the people were as in-

^ Pliny (A^, //^ viii, § 21) says that the people were so moved that
[they loudly cursed Pompey,

' L, Camnius Gallus (see p. 210). What he was accused of does not

26o

CICERO'S LETrERS

i.a 55, JET, 51I

dulgent to me as they were to iiEsopi, I would, by heaven,
have been gkd to abandon my profession and live with you
and others like us. The ^ict is X was tired of it before, even
when botb age and ambition stirred me on, and when I could
ako dedine any defence that I didn't like j but now, with
things in the stale that they are, there is no life worth having.
For, on the one hand, I ^x^^cX no profit of my labour ; and,
on the other, I am sometimes forced to defend men who have
^been no friends to me, at the request of those to whom I am
imder obligations. Accordingly, I am on the look-out for
every excuse for at last managing my life according to my
own taste, and I loudly applaud and vehemendy approve
both you and your retired plan of life : and as to your in*
frequent appearances among us, I am the more resigned to
that because, were you in Rome, I should be prevented
from enjoying the charm of your society, and so would you
of mine, if I have any, by the overpowering nature of my en-
gagements ; from which, if I get any relief — for entire rel
I don't expect — I will give even you, who have been stui
ing nothing else for many years, some hints as to what it S
to live a life of cultivated enjoyment. Only be careful to
nurse your weak health and to continue your present care of
it, so iat you may be able to visit my country houses and
make excursions with me in my litter. I have written you
a longer letter than usual, from superabundance, not of
leisure, but of affection, because, if you remember, you
asked me in one of your letters to write you something to
prevent you feeling sorry at having missed the games. And
if I have succeeded in that, I am glad : if not, I yet console
myself with this reflexion, that in future you will both come
to the games and come to see me, and will not leave your
hope of enjoyment dependent on my letters.*

^ I do not like to think xMs letter a mere rhetorical exerd&Cf as has
been suggested, rather than a true account of Cicero's feelings as to the
theatre and amphitheatre. He often expresses his want of interest to
the latter. The vulg^ar display in the theatre, unlike the severe sid^
plicity of Greek ait| was an old evil (&ee Folyb. x%x. 1 4). '

r en-
eaa^J
u^H
it^l

Fvit, i: xiii,74»40 TO Q. ANCHARIUS 261

CXXVII (F XIII, 74)

TO Q. PHILIPPUS (PROCONSUL IN ASIA)

Rome

Though, considering your attention to me and our close
ties, I have no doubt of your remembering my recommenda-
ticMi, yet I again and again recommend to you the same
L O^ius, my intimate friend who is now in Rome, and the
bu^ess d[ L. Egnatius, my very intimate friend who is now
ifaioad. With &e latter my connexion and intimacy are
ao strong, that I could not be more anxious if the business
vere my own. Wherefore I shall be highly gratified if you
tiipe the trouble to make him feel that I have as high a
place in your affections as I think I have. You cannot
obl^e me more than by doing so : and I beg you warmly
to do it

CXXVIII (F XIII, 40)

TO Q. ANCHARIUS (PROCONSUL IN
MACEDONIA)

Rome

Lucius and Gains, sons of Lucius Aurelius, with whom, as
with dieir excellent father, I am most intimately acquainted,
I recommend to you with more than usual earnestness, as
yoong men endowed with the best qualities, as being very
dos^ allied to m3rself, and as being in the highest' degree
worthy of your friendship. If any recommendations of
mine have ever had influence with you, as I know that many
have had much, I beg you to let this one have it If you
treat them with honour and kindness, you will not only have
attached to yourself two very gratefil and excellent young
ineo, but you will also have done me the very greatest favour.

2(52

CTCERO'S LETTERS

B.C 55. ^ET. SI

CXXIX (A IV, 13)

TO ATTICUS (AT ROME)

TuscuLUM, 15 November

I SEE that you know of my arrival at Tusculum on the 14th
of November. I found Dionysius there, I wish to be at
Rome on the 17th, Why do I say ** wish ** ? Rather I am
forced to be so. Milo's wedding. There is some idea of
an eiection. Even supposing that to be confirmed,^ I am
glad to have been absent from the wrangling debates which
I am told have taken place in the senate. For I should
either have defended him, which would have been against
my opinion^ or have deserted him whom I was bound to
defend. But, by Hercules, describe to me to the utmost of
your power those events, and the present state of pohtics,
and how the consuls stand this bother. I am very ravenous
for news, and, to tell you the truth, I feel no confidence
in anything. Our friend Crassus indeed, people say, started
in his official robes with less dignity than in the old times
did L. Paullus,'' at the same time of life as he is, and, like
him, in his second consulship. What a sorry fellow ! About
my oratorical books, I have been working hard. They
have been long in hand and much revised : you can get
them copied." I again beg of you an outline sketch of the
present situation, that I may not arrive in Rome quite a
stranger.

^ £j[[Ot ut Ht ratat Schutx's reading, which seems the best for the
unintelligible ergo et si irata of the MSS. It would mean, "though I
re^et not having been back for Doraitius's elecdon (if it has Lakctt
place), I ara glad to have been away from the previous wrangling in the
senate.^'

^ Crassus starts for Syria ; he compares him to L. u^miHus Paallos
starting for the war with Perses (b.c. 168). Paullus was, like Crassos,
sixty years old, and in his second consulship. Paullus set out with
good omens, Crassus with a curse, denounced by the tribune C Ateiaft
Capito {dc Div. i. § 29 \ Plutarch, Crair. 16),

• By his lihrarii. Atticus was again acting as his publisher.

U; F V, Jt TO M. LICINIUS CRASSUS

263

■^ 94. C0SS.T

Abenobairfaiiis,
^AfL Q&udittS

CXXX (F V, 8)

Dttiiog this year politics were comparatively uneventftil. Crassiis was
(one to byria. Ponipey should have gone to Spain, bat at the request
of the senate he stayed near Rome» and in the autumn
his wife lulia died, thus breaJcing one strong tie between
him and Caesar. Quintus Cicero went as legatus to
Caesar and accompanied him to Britain. Cicero himself
kept op a correspondence with Caesar, and seems to nurse
his friendship with him with an almost feverish eagerness,
whichj however, lacks spontaneity. He was engaged this year in com-
posing his treatise on the Kepubhc.

[to M. LICINIUS CRASSUS (ON HIS WAY TO

SYRIA)

Rome (January)

I HAVE no doubt all your friends have written to tell you

what zeal I displayed on the ^ in the defence, or you

might call it the promotion, of your official position. For
h was neither half-hearted nor inconspicuous, nor of a
sort that could be passed over in silence. In fact, I main-
lined a controversy against both the consuls and many
onsulars with a vehemence such as I have never shewn in
ay cause before^ and I took upon myself the standing
defence of all your honours, and paid the duty I owed to
Dixr friendship — long in arrear, but interrupted by the great
tomplexity of events — to the very utmost. Not, believe
ne, that the will to shew you attention and honour was
"ever wanting to me; but certain pestilent persons — vexed
at another's fame— did at times alienate you from me,
and sometimes changed my feelings towards you. But I
have got the opportunity, for which I had rather wished than
hoped, of shewing you in the very height of your prosperity
that I remember our mutual kindness and am faithful to
our friendship. For I have secured not only that your
whole family, but that the entire city should know that you
have no warmer friend than myself* Accordingly, that most

^ The d&te has been lost.

264

iCERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, JET, $S

noble of women, your wife, as wel! as your two most affec-
tionate, virtuous, and popular sons, place full confidence in
my counsel, advice, zeal, and public actions ; and the senate
and Roman people understand that in your absence there is
nothing upon which yoo can so absolutely count and depend
as upon my exertions, care, attention^ and influence in all
matters which affect your interests* What has been done
and is being done in the senate I imagine that you are
informed in the letters from members of your family* For
myself, I am very anxious that you should think and believe
that I did not stumble upon the task of supporting your
dignity from some sudden whim or by chance, but that from
the first moment of my entering on public life I have always
looked out to see how I might be most closely united to you-
And, indeed, from that hour I never remember either my re-
spect for you, or your very great kindness and liberality to
me, to have failed. If certain interruptions of friendship
have occurred, based rather on suspicion than fact, let them,
as groundless and imaginary, be uprooted from our entire
memory and life. For such is your character, and such I
desire mine to be* that, fate having brought us face to face
with the same condition of public affairs, I would fain hope
that our union and friendship will turn out to be for the
credit of us both. Wherefore how much consideration
should in your judgment be shewn to me, you will yourself
decide, and that decision, I hope, will be in accordance
with my position in the state. I, for my part, promise and
guarantee a special and unequalled zeal in every service
which may tend to your honour and reputation. And even
if in this I shall have many rivals, I shall yet easily surpass
them all in the judgment of the rest of the world as well as
that of your sons, for both of whom I have a particular
affection ; but while equally well-disposed to Marcus, I am
more entirely devoted to Publius for this reason, that, though
he always did so from boyhood, he is at this particular time
treating me with the respect and affection of a second
father.

I would have you believe that this letter will have
the force of a treaty, not of a mere epistle ; and that I will
most sacredly observe and most carefully perform what
I hereby promise and undertake. The defence of your

^^A

1

iTRU,9

TO QUINTUS

265

_ olidoL] position which I have taken up in your absence
[i will abide by, not only for the sake of our friendship, but

llso for the sake of my own character for consistency.

Therefore I thought it sufficient at this time to tell you this —
"that if there was anything which I understood to be your

wish or for your advantage or for your honour, I should do
[it without waiting to be asked ; but that if I received a hint
[from yourself or your family on any point, I should take
f care to convince you that no letter of your own or any
I request from any of your family has been in vain. Where-
fore I would wish you to write to me on all matters, great,
Ismail, or indifferent, as to a most cordial friend; and to

bid your family so to make use of my activity, advice,
laolborityi and influence in all business matters— public or

pdvate, forensic or domestic, whether your own or those of
r four friends, guests, or clients — that, as far as such a thing is
stble, the loss of your presence may be lessened by my
Dur.

CXXXI (Q FR II, 9)

[ TO HIS KROTHER QUINTUS (IN THE COUNTRY)

Roio; (February)

trit ootc by its strong language has drawn out this letter,
r aj» to what actually occurred on the day of your start, it
' supplied me with absolutely no subject for writing. But as
[ when we are together we are never at a loss for something

to say, so ought our letters at times to digress into loose
LdiaL Well then, to begin, the liberty of the Tenedians has
I necdved short shrift,^ no one speaking for them except myself,

Btbulus, Calidius, and Favonius. A complimentary refer-
I eoce to you was made by the legates from Magnesia ad
' Sipylttm, they saying that you were the man who alone

* LiL ••has been beheaded with the axe of Tcnes," mythical founder
1 ieiC^''^^' ^'f Tcnedos, whose laws were of Draconian severity, A
fUff troai Tenedos, heard as usual in February, bad asked thai
^cdos might be made a ii^a dviiai.

266 CICERO'S LETTERS B.C. 54, ^^. 52

had resisted the demand of L. Sestius Pansa,^ On the
remaining days of this business in the senate, if anything
occurs which you ought to know, or even if there is nothing,
I will write you something every day. On the 12th I will
not fail you or Pomponius. The poems of Lucretius are
as you say — with many flashes of genius, yet very technical.*
But when you return, . , * if you succeed in reading the
Empedocka of Sallustius, I shall regard you as a hero,
scarcely human.

CXXXII (Q FR II, 10)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN THE COUNTI

Rome (February)

I AM glad you like my letter : however, I should not ev
now have had any tiling to write about, if I had not received
yours. For on the 12th, when Appius had got together a
thinly-attended meeting of the senate, the cold was so great
that he was compelled by the general clamour ^ to dismiss
Uf>, As to the Commagenian, because I have blown that
proposition to the winds^ Appius makes wonderful advances
to me both personally and through Pomponius ; for he sees
that if I adopt a similar style of discussion in the other
business, February will not bring him anything in. And

^ Some puhlicanus who had made a charge on the Magoesians whkh
they considered excessive.

^ Lucretius seems to have been now dead, according to DonAtw
15 October (B.C. 55), though the date is uncertain. I have transiatcd
the reading mulU^ iamen artis, which has been changed by some ta
multiE etiam artis. But the contrast in the criticism seems to be between
the fine poetical passages in the de Rerum Natura and the mass of
technical exposition of philosophy which must have repelled the **geneml
reader '' at all times. It suggests at once to Cicero to men b on another
poem on a similar subject, the EmpedocUa of Sallustius, of which and
Its writer we know nothing. It was not the historian,

^ Retaining popuit iQmvicio^ and explaining pupulus to have the
general meaning of the crowd, inclnding senators and speciiLtors.
Cicero uses/tfj^w/wj in this vague way elsewhere.

^ rR ti, lo

TO QUINTUS

267

certainly I did chaff him pretty well, and not only wrenched
from his grasp that petty township of his — situated in the
territory of Zeugma on the Euphrates ^- — but also raised a
loud laugh by my satire on the man's purple-edged toga, which
be had been granted when CiEsar was consul,^ ** His wish/'
sadd I, " for a renewal of the same honour, to save the yearly
lying of his purple-edged toga, I do not think calls for
' decree of the house ; but you, my lords, who could not
[endure that the Bostrian * should wear the toga prmtexta^
I will you allow the Commagenian to do so?" You see the
[style of chaff, and the line I took. I spoke at length against
[the petty princeling, with the result that he was utterly
I laughed out of court. Alarmed by this exhibition, as I
[laid, Appius is making up to me. For nothing could be
[easier than to explode the rest of his proposals. But I will
[not go so far as to trip him up, lest he appeal to the god of
I hospitality, and summon all his Greeks^it is they who make
I us friends again. I mil do what Theopompus wants. I
[had forgotten to write to you about Caesar : for I perceive
[vbat sort of letter you have been expecting. But the fact
[is, be has written word to Balbus that the little packet of

ters, in which mine and Balbus's were packed, had been

I drenched with rain that he was not even aware that there
a letter from me. He had, however, made out a few

ords of Balbus^s letter, to which he answered as follows :
perceive that you have written something about Cicero,

liich I have not fully made out : but, as far I could guess,
St was of a kind that I thought was more to be wished than
Ihoped foT.'^ Accordingly, I afterwards sent Caesar a dupli-

le copy of the letter. Don't be put off by that passage

*^_2cugina I take to mean the " territory of Zeii^a,** a town on the
"^ ales, part of the Roman province of Syria, and close to the
f of Comtnagene. Antiochus had asked that some stronghold
I be reckoned as his rather than as belonging to the province.
Appius, he insinuates, hoped to make money by granting the
fiuest of Antiochus, left king of Commagene by Pompey, for some
3(l1 privil^es, among which was the right of wearing the toga,
itAxt^ which symbolized some position with a shadow of Roman
fim/enum, while at the same time convening a compliment to the
Roman suzerainty. See Polyb, lib. xxvi. ; xjcx, 26 ; Suet. ^uj^. 60*

* Some petty prince of Bostra {Basra), in Arabiai of whom we
know nothing.

268

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, JET.

about his want of means* In answer to it I wrote bad
saying that he must not stop payment from any reliance <
my money chest, and descanted playfully on that subjec
in familiar terms and yet withoot derogating from my dignit
His good feeling towards us, however, according to all
counts, is marked- The letter, indeed^ on the point
which you expect to hear, will almost coincide with you
return ; * the other business of each day I will write on coii
dition of your furnishing me with letter-carriers. Howeve
such cold weather is threatening,* that there is very gre
danger that Appius may find his house frost-bitten and <"
serted ! *

CXXXIII (F VII, S)

TO C^SAR (IN GAUL)

Rome (February)

Cicero greets Csesarj imperator. Observe how far I ha?
convinced myself that you are my second self, not only i
matters which concern me personally, but even in the
which concern my friends. It had been my intention to t
Gaius Trebatius with me for whatever destination I shou
be leaving town, in order to bring him home again honoure
as much as my zeal and favour could make him. But when
Pompey remained at home longer than I expected, and a
certain hesitation on my part (with which you are not unac*
qaainted) appeared to hinder, or at any rate to retard, my

* Qaintus was expecting, what he got, the offer of serving under Oes&i
as Ugatus* Csesar was preparing for his second invasion of Britain*

* Which will prevent meetings of the senate, and so give me no news
to send you.

* There is a double mtmdre. Cold weather will prevent the meetingt
of the senate actually, but me taphori dally politics will be also cold anj'
dull, and that dullness will probably be nowhere so evident as in tj
deserted state of the consul Appius*s houije, which in all probabili^
will miss its usua^l bevy of callers. This explanation — put forward by
Prof. Tyrrell— is not wholly satisfactory, yet it is the best th$^^J^
been given » ^^::a^^m

fill 5

TO CiESAR

269

ure,* I presumed upon what I will now explain to you.

egin to wish that Trebatius should look to you for what

[had hoped from me, and, in fact, I have been no more

" Qg of my promises of goodwill on your part than I had

I wont to be of my own. Moreover, an extraordinary coin-

fice has occurred which seems to support my opinion and

uarantee your kindness. For just as I was speaking to

friend Balbus ^ about this very Trebatius at my house,

more than usual earnestness, a letter from you was

Dded to me, at the end of which you say : ** Miscinius

ifus,* whom you recommend to me, I will make king of

ul, or, if you choose, put him under the care of I^pta.

Dd me some one else to promote,'* I and Balbus both

1 our hands in surprise : it came so exactly in the nick

Jtime, that it appeared to be less the result of mere chance

something providential I therefore send you Treba*

>and on two grounds, first that it was my spontaneous

to send him, and secondly because you have invited

i to do so, I would beg you, dear C^sar, to receive him

such a display of kindness as to concentrate on his

gle person all that you can be possibly induced to bestow

r my sake upon my friends. As for him I guarantee — not

Ithe sense of that hackneyed expression of mine, at which,

I used it in writing to you about Milo, you very

rly jested, but in good Roman language such as sober

use^ — that no honester, better, or more modest man

Added to this, he is at the top of his profession as

>nsult, possesses an unequalled memory, and the

ofound learning. For such a man I ask neither a

ship, prefecture, nor any definite office, I ask only

f had two functions at this time ; he was governor of Spain
fscfus annome. The latter office, as being extraordinary,
, perhimsY held with the other without an actual breach of law,
I oeitamly against the spirit of the constitution, Cicero knows
y** staying in Italy and governing his province by /^att will
eptable to Csesar, and he alludes to it in carefully guarded
[He luid been named his iegaius when Pompey first undertook
t of the corD'SuppIy^ but it does not seem as if he ever seriously
ftlated going on actual service.
f I* GotoeUus Balbusj whom Cicero defended, and who acted a<
tigtent.
_* The name of the person jocosely referred to by Caesar is unccrtaitii

270

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54,

your goodwill and liberality; and yet I do not wish to prev€
your complimenting him, if it so please you, with even th^
marks of distinction. In fact, I transfer him entirely from i
hand, so to speak, to yours, which is as sure a pledge of go
faith as of victory. Excuse my being somewhat impoituna
though with a man like you there can hardly be any pret«
for it^however, I feel that it wiU be allowed to pass, I
careful of your health and continiie to love me as e\"er.

CXXXIV (Q FR II, II [13])

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN THE COX

Rome (15 February)

Your " black snow " * made me laugh, and I am ver
that you are in a cheerful frame of mind and ready
joke. As to Pompey, I agree with you, or rather you i
with me. For, as you know, I have long been singing tl
praises of your Caesar. Believe me, he is very close to n
heart, and I am not going to let him slip from his plac
Now for the history of the Ides (13th). It was Cseliu
tenth day.^ Domitius had not obtained a full paneJ, I a
afraid that foul ruffian, Servius Pola, will appear for the pi
secution. For our friend Cselius has a dead set made at hi
by the Clodian gens. There is nothing certain as yet, b
I am afraid. On the same day there was a full house I
the case of the Tyrians : the publicani of Syria appeared

^ We cannot tell the allusion, not having the letter of Quintus, I
he seems to have used the expression for something incongruous eitl
in politics, or in regard to his contemplated services with Caesar.

^ Le,^ the day he had to appear for trial, usually fixed by the pnel
on the tenth day from the notice of prosecution, Caelius had be
acquitted in B.C. 56* when Cicero defended hinci ; this second tr
appears to have in some way fallen through. The prretor Domitius
siud to be Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, son of Lucius, but he was intr
too young to have been prietor this year. The formej* trial of Caeii
(B.C. 56) had been before Cn. Domitius Calvinus, hence a difficul
about this passage. For the prsetor Domitius of this year is n
known. Domitius Calvinus was prcetor B.C. 56,

QFRIl, tl[l3]

TO QUINTUS

271

large numbers against them. Gabinius was abused roundly : *
tie publicani were also denounced by (the consul) Domitius
or having escorted him on his start on horseback. Our
riend Lucius Lamia was somewhat insolent : for on
)omitiQs saying, '* It is your fault, equites of Rome, that
such things have happened : for you give verdicts iaxly," he
said, " Yes, we give verdicts, but you senators give evidence
f character/* * Nothing was done that day : the house stood
djoumed at nightfall On the comitial days which follow
he Quirinalia (lyth February), Appius holds the view that
he is not prevented by the itx Pupia from holding a meeting
f the senate, and that by the kx Gabinia he is even com-
elled to have a meeting for the legations from the ist of
February to the ist of March.^ And so the elections are sup*
1 to be put off till March. Nevertheless, on these comitial
ays the tribunes say that they will bring fonvard the case
" Gabinius.'' I collect every item of intelligence, that I
Day have some news to tell you : but, as you see, I am short
material. Accordingly, I return to Callisthenes and
Pbilistus, in whom I see that you have been wallowing. CalUs-
enes is a commonplace and hackneyed piece of business,
8ke a good many Greeks. The Sicilian is a first-rate writer,
terse, sagacious, concise, almost a minor Thucydides ; ^ but
which of his two books you have— for there are two works —
I don't know. That about Dionysius is my favourite. For
Dionysius himself is a magnificent intriguer, and was familiarly

* The pubtuani of Syria were enraged with Gabinius for neglecting
his province while going to Egypt, thus allowing the pirates so to
plunder that they could not collect enough dues to recoup thetn for
^h<.i^ Ivarpadn to the state (Dio, xxxix. 59).

^ L- .^liu5 Lamia, an eques, appears to have bceii one of the depula-
tioa (j^ publieani who attended the senate to accuse GabiniuG.

* The prsetorian elections were again postponed from the previous
yeajto the early months of B.C, 54. Appius Claudius found means to
put them off till March by holding meetings of the senate each day —
the electoral cmnitia not being able to meet on the same day as the
MQHe.

* The tribune C. Memmius was proseculing Gabinius (Letter
CXLVII). The judicial comitia could meet, though not the electoral.

* Callisthenes of Olynthus wrote (i] a hbtory of the Trojan war j
(2| an account of Alexander the Great* Philistus of Syracuse (i)
1 history of Sicily ; (2) a life of Dionysius the elder ; (3) a life of
Dionysiiis the younger. He imitated Thucydides {dc Orat, § 17).

272

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.c, 54, ^T, 59 1

known to Philistus. But as to your postscript — ^are you
really going in for writing history ? You have my blessing^
on your project : and since you furnish me with letter-carriers^
you shall hear to-day's transactions on the Lupercalia (iStJa.
February). Enjoy yourself with our dear boy to your h
content

CXXXV (F VII, 6)

TO C TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

CvuM (April)

In all my letters to Caesar or Balbus there is a sort of
statutory appendix containing a recommendation of you, and
not one of the ordinary kind, but accompanied by some
signal mark of my warm feeling towards you. See only that
you get rid of that feeble regret of yours for the dty and city
ways, and carry out with persistence and courage what you
had in your mind when you set out We, your friends, shall
pardon your going away for that purpose as much as
"The wealthy noble dames who held the Corinthian peak**

pardoned Medea, whom, with hands whitened to the utmost
with chalk, she persuaded not to think ill of her for being
absent from her fatherland : for

** Many have served themselves abroad and served the state tis wdlj
Many have spent their lives at home to be bat counted foolsi"

In which latter category you would have certainly been, had
I not forced you abroad. But I will write more another
rime. You who learnt to look out for others, look out, while
in Britain, that you are not yourself taken in by the charioteers!
and, since I have begun quoting the Medea^ remember
line:

*'Tbe sage who cannot serve himself is vainly wise I weeiu'

Take care of your health.^

^ Trebatius is going to join Caesar, who is about to sail to Briti

F VII, 6, 7 J A IV, 14

TO ATTICUS

273

CXXXVI (F VII, 7)

TO a TREBATIUS TESTA (ON HIS WAY TO
GAUL)

CvMM (April or May)

For my part, I never cease recommending you, but I am
eager to know from you how far my recommendation is of
service. My chief hope is in Balbus, to whom I write about
you with the greatest earnestness and frequency. It often
excites my wonder that I don*t hear from you as often as
from my brother Qtiintus. In Britain I am told there is no
gold or silver. If that turns out to be the case, I advise you
to capture a war-chariot and hasten back to us at the earliest
opportunity. But if — letting Britain alone — we can still
obtain what we want, take care to get on intimate terms with
C^ar. In that respect my brother will be of much use to
you, so will Balbus, but most of all, believe me, your own
modesty and industry. You have an imptrator of the most
liberal character, your age is exactly the best one for employ-
ment, and your recommendation at any rate is quite unique,
so that all you have to fear is not doing yourself full justice.

CXXXVII (A IV, 14)

TO ATTICUS (ON A JOURNEY)
Cumje (May)

W Our friend Vestoriiis ^ has informed me by letter that you
are believed to have left Rome on the loth of May — later

lience the jest about the esudmrii^^ driveis of Gallic and British wilt-

chariots. Letter CXXXIII recommended him to Caesar. The lines

are froro the Medea of Enmus, adapted or translated from

uripides, I date these two letters from Cumjep because he speaks of

dtiug to Balbus, who was at Rome (p. 367).

> A bftnker at Puteoli.

274

CICERO^S LETTERS

B,C. 54, ^T.

<

than you said that you intended — because you had not been
very well. If you are now better I rejoice indeed. I wish
you would write to your town house, ordering your books to
be at my service just as if you were at homcj especially those
of Varro, For I have occasion to use some passages of those
books in reference to those which I have in hand, and which,
I hope, will meet with your strong approval.^ I'i'ay, if by
chance you have any news, principally from my brother
Quintus, next from CjEsar, and, finally, anything about the
elections or about poUtics — for you have an excellent nose for
such things — write and tell me about them ; if you have no
news, nevertheless write something. For a letter from you
never yet seemed to me either ill-timed or too long-w^inded.
But above all I beg that, when your business and your whole
tour has been concluded to your mind, you will come back
to us as soon as possible. Give my compliments to Dionysiu
Take care of your health.

CXXXVIII (Q FR 11, 12 [14])

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

CvMM (May)

I HAVE up to now received two letters from youj one just j
I was leaving town, the other dated Ariminum : others
which you say in your letter that you have sent I have not
received. I am having a fairly pleasant time (except that you
are not here) at Cumae and Pompeii, and intend staying in
these parts till the ist of June, I am writing the treatise
of which I spoke to you, " On the Republic," a very bulky
and laborious work. But if it turns out as I wish, it will be
labour well bestowed, and if not I shall toss it into the very
sea which I have before my eyes as I write, and set to work
on something else ; since to do nothing is beyond my power.
1 will carefully observe your instruction both as to attaching
certain persons to myself and not alienating certain others.

* The six books on the Republic*

lFRli,i2[i4];Fvn,8 TO C, TREBATIUS TESTA 275

|ut my chief care will be to see your son, or rather our son,
^ possible, every day at any rate, and to watch the progress
of his education as often as possible ; and, unless he declines
my help, I will even offer to be his instructor, a practice to
which I have become habituated in the leisure of these days
while bringing my own boy, the younger Cicero, on. Yes,
do as you say in your letter, what, even if you had not said
so, I know you do with the greatest care — <iigest, follow up,
and carry out my instructions. For my part, when I get to
Rome, I will let no letter-carrier of Cajsar go without a
letter for you. During these days you must excuse me :
there has been no one to whom I could deliver a letter
until the present bearer M. Orfius, a Roman knight, a man
that is my friend as well from personal consideration as
because he comes from the munkipium of Atella,^ which
you know is under my patronage. Accordingly, I recommend
him to you with more than common warmth, as a man in a
brilliant position in his own town and looked up to even
bvyond it Pray attach him to yourself by your liberal
tieatment of him: he is a military tribune in your army.
You will find him grateful and attentive. I earnestly beg
you to be very friendly to Trebatius.

CXXXIX (F VII, 8)

TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome (June)

SAR has written me a very courteous letter saying that he

not yet seen as much of you as he could wish, owing to

\ press of business, but that he certainly will do so, I have

Bxed his letter and told him how much obliged I shall

[he bestows on you as much attention, kindness, and

lity as he can. But I gathered from your letters that

I are in somewhat too great a hurry : and at the same time

wondered why you despised the pro&ts of a military

^ A municipium of Campania nine mites from Naples,

276

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C* 54, ^T. 53

tribuneship^ especially as you are exempted from the labour
of military duty. I shall express my discontent to Vacerra
and Manilius : for I dare not say a word to Cornelius/ who
is responsible for your unwise conduct, since you profess to
have learnt legal wisdom from him. Rather press on your
opportunity and the means put into your hands, than which
none better will ever be found. As to what you say of the
jurist Precianus, I never cease recommending you to him ;
for he writes me word that you owe him thanks. Be sure
to let me know to what that refers. I am waiting for a letter
from you dated ** Britain.***

CXL (q fr II, 13)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

Rome (3 June)

On the 2nd of June, the day of my return to Rome/
received your letter dated Placentia : then next day another
dated BlandenOj along with a letter from Csesar filled full of
courteous, earnest, and pleasant expressions. These expres-
sions are indeed valuable, or rather »w?j/ valuable, as tending
very powerfully to secure our reputation and exalted position
in the state. But believe me — for you know my heart-
that what I value most in all this I already possess, that is,
first of all, your active contribution to our common position;
and, secondly, all that warm affection of Caesar for me, which
I prefer to all the honours which he desires me to expect
at his hands. His letter too, despatched at the same time as
your own — which begins by saying what pleasure your arrival
and the renewed memory of our old affection had given him,
and goes on to say that he will take care that, in the midst of
my sorrow and regret at losing you, I shall have reason to be

da^

f

Vaeerra, Manilius, Cornelius, well-known lawyers or jurists of (
We shall afterwards see that Tiebatius did not go to Britain.

Q FR U, 13

TO QUINTUS

277

^kd that you are with him of all people — ^gave me extra-
Brdin^y delight. Wherefore you, of course, are acting in a truly
Hrotherly spirit when you exhort me, though, by heaven, I
^hn now indeed forward enough to do so, to concentrate all
V«y attentions upon him alone. Yes, I will do so, indeed, ""
inth a bumijig zeal : and perhaps I shall manage to accomplish
fhat is frequently the fortune of travellers when they make
at haste, who, if they have got up later than they intended,
ave, by increasing their speed, arrived at their destination
oner than if they had waked up before daylight. Thus I,
since I have long overslept myself in cultivating that great ~y
^man, though you, by heaven, often tried to wake me up, will
ke up for my slowness with horses and (as you say he likes
ny poem) a poet*s chariots. Only let me have Britain to paint
colours supplied by yourself, but with my own brush,
fhat am I saying ? What prospect of leisure have I, espe-
tas I remain at Rome in accordance with his request?
" will see. For perhaps, as usual, my love for you will
ome all difficulties. For my having sent Trebatius to
Dm he even thanks me in very witty and polite terms, remark-
; that there was no one in the whole number of his staff
tio knew how to draw up a recognizance. I have asked
him for a tribuneship for M, Curtius — since Domitius (the
consul) would have thought that he was being laughed at, if
my petition had been addressed to him, for his daily asser-
tion is that he hasn't the appointment of so much as a
military tribune : he even jested in the senate at his colleague
Appius as having gone to visit Caesar,^ that he might get
^om him at least one tribuneship. But my request was for
; year, for that was what Curtius wished. Whatever line
think I ought to take in politics and in treating my
nents, be sure I shall take, and shall be " gentler than
r-lap.** Affairs at Rome stand thus: there is some
[ of the elections taking place, but it is an uncertain
There is some latent idea of a dictatorship,* but
is that confirmed. There is profound calm in the

* At L^ca in the year B.C. 56.

• C&mitia habmdi causa. No such had been appointed since BX.
ind the irregular dictatorship of Sulk in B.C. Sz made the idea
i^tdul Pompey was understood to wish for the appointment, now

kter on. See pp. 326, 335*

2/8

CICERO'S LETTERS

Bx. 54j ^^. 5«

forum, but it is rather the calm of decrepitude than content.
The opinions I express in the senate are of a kind to win
the assent of others rather than ray own :

"Such the effects of nu&crable war*" *

CXLI (Q FR II, I4[i5 b])

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

Rome (July)

Well ! this time Fll use a good pen, well-mixed ink,
superfine paper. For you say you could hardly read
previous letter, for which, my dear brother, the reason i
none of those which you suppose. For I was not busy, :
agitated, nor out of temper with some one : but it is al^
my way to take the first pen that turns up and use it I
if it were a good one. But now attend, best and dearest^
brothers, to my answer to what you wrote in this same sh
letter in such a very business-like way. On this subject ;
beg that I should write back to you with brotherly cando
without concealment, or reserve, or consideration for yo
feelings — I mean whether you are to hasten home, as we I
talked of, or to stay where you are, if there is any excuse I
doing so, in order to extricate yourself from your emt
ments. If, my dear Qmintus, it were some small matter (
which you were asking my opinion, though I should
left it to you to do what you chose, I should yet have she
you what mine was. But on this subject your que
amounts to this — what sort of year I expect the next to 1
Either quite undisturbed as far as we are concerned, or I
any rate one that will find us in the highest state of prep
tion for defence. This is shewn by the daily throng at i
house, my reception in the forum, the cheers which
me in the theatre. My friends feel no anxiety, because i
know the strength of my position in my hold upon thefav<

^ TouLvG^ 6 T\:lffimp fl-^Xfl/AOf ilipydZirm (Eur. Su/^p, 119),

QFRU, 14 [15 b]

TO QUINTUS

2;9

both of Caesar and Pompey. These things give me entire
confidence. But if some furious outbreak of that madman
occurs, everything is ready for crushing him. This is my
feeling, my deliberate opinion : I write to you with entire
confidence. I bid you have no doubts, and I do so with no
intention of pleasing you, but with brotherly frankness*
Therefore, while I should wish you to come at the time you
ananged, for the sake of the pleasure we should have in each
other's society, yet I prefer the course you yourself think the
better one. I, too, think these objects of great importance —
ample means for yourself and extrication from your load of
debt. Make up your mind to this, that, free from embarrass-
ments, we should be the happiest people alive if we keep well
For men of our habits the deficiency is small, and such as can
be supplied with the greatest ease, granted only that we keep
our health.

There is an enormous recrudescence of bribery. Never

Has there anything equal to it. On the 15th of July the

rate of interest rose from four to eight per cent», owing to the

:Compact made by Memmius with the consul Domitius : ^

" wish Scaurus could get the better of it, Messalla is very

y. I am not exaggerating — they arrange to oiTer as much

as 10,000 sesterda (about ;^8o>ooo) for the vote of the first

intury. The matter is a burning scandal. The candidates

the tribuneship have made a mutual compact — having

ited 500 sestertia (about ;^4,ooo) apiece with Cato,

agree to conduct their canvass according to his direc-

lioo, with the understanding that anyone offending against it

is to be condemned by him. If this election then turns out

ECato will have been of more avail than all laws
put together.

For the nature of this compact, see p. 3001.

380

CICERO'S LETTERS

8»C. 54, j€T. j

CXLII (a IV, l6 AND PART OF 17)

TO ATllCUS (IN EPIRUS OR ON HIS
JOURNEY TO ASIA)

Rome (? 24 June)

The bare fact of my letter being by the hand of an

amanuensis will be a sign of the amount of my engagements.
I have no fault to find with you as to the number of your
letters, but most of them told me nothing except where you
were, or at most shewed by the fact that they came from you
that no harm had happened to you. Of this class of letters
there were two which gave me very great pleasure, dated by
yoQ from Bothrotum almost at the same time : for I was
anxious to know that you had had a favourable crossing.
But this constant supply of your letters did not give me so
much pleasure by the richness of their contents as by their
frequency. The one which your guest, M. Paccius, delivered
to me was important and full of matter, I will therefore
answer it And this is the first thing I have to say : I have
shewn Paccius, both by word and deed, what weight a recom-
mendation from you has : accordingly, he is among my
intimate friends, though unknown to me before. Now for the
rest. Varro, of whom you write, shall be got in somewhere,
if I can but find a place for him/ But you know the st\^le
of my Dialogues : just as in those " On the Orator," which
you praise to the skies, a mention of anyone by the inter-
locutors was impossible, unless he had been known to or
heard of by them, so in the " Dialogue on the Repubhc,'*
which I have begun, I have put the discussion in the mouths
of AfricanuSi Philus, Lselius, and Manilius. I have added
two young men, Q. Tubero and P. Rutilius, and the two sons-
in-law of LjeliuSj Scaevola and Fannius. So I am thinking
how (since I employ introductions to each book, as Aristotle

^ Thit is, as an interlocutor in the dialogue "On the Rcpubi
which Cicero was engaged in writing.

A iv^ 16. 17

TO ATTICUS

281

does in what he calls his "Exoterics") to contrive some

" j>retext for naming your friend in a natural way, as I under-

Btand is your wish. May I only be enabled to carry out my

[ attempt ! For, as you cannot but observe, I have under-

k taken a subject wide, difficult, and requiring the utmost

I leisure — the very thing that, above all others, I lack. In

•those books which you commend you complain of the

absence of Scsevola among the speakers. Well, I did not

withdraw him without a set purpose, but I did exactly what

that god of our idolatry, Plato, did in his Republic, When

SoCTates had come to the Piraeus on a visit to Cephalus, a

wedthy and cheerful old man, during all the introductory

[conversation the old man takes part in the discussion j

■then, after having himself made a speech very much to the

■point, he says that he wants to go away to attend on the

eligious rites, and does not return again. I believe Plato

^ hardly thought that it would be quite natural, if he kept a

r man of that age any longer in a conversation so protracted* I

thought that I was bound to be still more careful in the case

Df Scsevola, who was at the age and with the broken health

that you remember he then was, and who had enjoyed such

Thigh offices, that it was scarcely in accordance with etiquette

for him to be staying several days in the Tusculan villa of

I Crassus. Besides, the conversation in the first book was not

I unconnected with Scsevola's special pursuits : the other

hooks, as you know, contain a technical discussion. In

such I was unwilling that that facetious veteran, as you know

ihe was, should take part.

As to Pilia's business, which you mention, I will see to it

For the matter is quite clear, as you say, from the information

Uupplied by Aurelianus, and in managing it I shall have also

I an opportunity of glorifying myself in my Tullia's eyes. I am

jtupporting Vestorius : for I know that it gratifies you, and I

[am careful that he should understand that to be the case.

I But do you know the sort of man he is ? Though he has two

«udi gciod-natured people to deal with, nothing can exceed his

I impracticability. Now as to what you ask about Gains Cato.

You know that he was acquitted under the lex lunia Licinia:^

* A taw re-enacting the lex Didia^ and enacting under penalties that
»ltw was to be brought forward without due publication beforehand*

282

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, ^T. 52

I have to tell you that he will be acquitted under the hx Fufia^
and not so much to the sarisfaction of his defenders as of
his accusers. However, he has become reconciled to myself
and Milo. Dmsus has had notice of prosecution by Lucretius^
The 3rd of July is the day fixed for challenging his jurors.
About Procilius ** there are sinister rumours — but you know
what the courts are. Hirrus is on good terms with Domitius.*
The senatorial decree which the present consuls have carried
about the provinces^ — ** whoever henceforth, eta*' — does not
seem to me likely to have any eflfect.

As to your question about Messalla, I don't know what to
say: I have never seen candidates so closely matched.
Messalla's means of support you know, Scaurus has had
notice of prosecution from Triarius. If you ask me, no
great feeling of sympathy for him has been roused. Still,
his aedileship is remembered with some gratitude, and he
f has a certain hold on the country voters from the memory of
his father. The two remaining plebeian candidates have
compensating advantages which make them about equal:
DomitiusCalvious is strong in friends, and is farther supported
by his very popular exhibition of gladiators ; Memmius finds
favour with Cesar's veterans and relies on Pompey's chent
towns in Gaul If this does not avail him, people think
that some tribune will be found to push off the elections till
Caesar comes back, especially since Cato has been acquitted.
I have answered your letter brought by Paccius : now for
the rest. From my brother's letter I gather surprising in-
dications of Caesar's affection for me, and they have been
confirmed by a very cordial letter from Caesar himself. The
result of the British war is a source of anxiety. For it is as-
certained that the approaches to the island are protected by
astonishing masses of cliff. Moreover, it is now known that
there isn't a pennyweight of silver in that island, nor any
hope of booty except from slaves, among whom I don*t

* A kw whicli enabled the magistrates and tribunes to stop legislation
by ebnuntiaiia.

* Procilius had been condemned ds vi (p. 280). The rumouts, I
suppose, were as to the jiiry having been corrupted*

^ The consul L. Domitius Ahenobarbus and C, Lucceius Hirrtis, the
latter a warm partisan of Pompcy, who was supposed to be agitating for
a dictatorship.

rv, 16, 17

TO ATTICUS

28J

mi

suppose you can expect any instructed in literature or
music

PauUus has almost brought his basilica in the foram ta

iC roofi using the same columns as were in the ancient
building : the part for which he gave out a contract he is
building on the most magnificent scale, ^ Need I say more?

othing could be more gratifying or more to his glory than
Buch a monument Accordingly, the friends of Cassar — I
mean myself and Oppius, though you burst with anger —
have thought nothing of 60,000 sestertia (about ;;^48o,oooy
W that monument, which you used to speak of in such high
'tenns, in order to enlarge the forum and extend it right up
10 the Hall of Liberty. The claims of private owners could

It be satis lied for less. We will make it a most glorious
For in the Campus Marti us we are about to erect
ig places for the comitia tributa^ of marble and covered^
and to surround them with a lofty colonnade a mile in cir-
comference : at the same time the Villa Publica will also be
ccmtiected with these erections/'* You will say: **What
good will this monument do me?" But why should I
toouble myself about that ? I have told you all the news at
me : for I don't suppose you want to know about the
lustrum, of which there is now no hope," or about the trials
which are being held under the (Cincian) law/

Now allow yourself to be scolded, if you deserve it. For
you say in the letter from Buthrotum, delivered to me by
C Decimus, that you think you will have to go to Asia. There
"id not, by Hercules, seem to me to be anything that made
it matter in the least whether you did the business by agents
in person ; or anything to make you go so often and so
br from your friends. But I could have wished that I had

* L* ^milius Paullus (consul B.C. 50) restored the basilica btiilt by
Ilit uicestor M. ^'Emilius Lepidus in B.C. 179, and appears Co have
added largely to it, or even built a new one,

I ' These works seem lo have been contemplated by the censors and
«Date, and Cicero speaks of himself and Oppius as doing them because
iJiey supported rhe measure. They were partly carried out by Csesar,
twt not completed till the time of Augustus.

' Because the tribunes stopped it— the formal act at the end of the
ceosor's office — by obnuntiaiiottts,

* The name of the law mentioned here is uncertain. The Ux CimciA
di muiurihts forbade advocates taking fees for pleading.

d84

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, nTT. $1

urged this on you before you had taken any step. For I
certainly should have had some influence on you. As things
ar^ I will suppress the rest of my scolding. May it only
have some effect in hastening your return 1 The reason of
my not writing oftener to you is the uncertainty I am in as
to where you are or are going to be* However, I thought I
ought to give this letter to a chance messenger, because he
seemed to be likely to see you. Since you think you really
will go to Asia, pray tell me by what time we may expect
you back, and what you have done about Eutychides,

CXLIII (A IV, IS)

TO ATTICUS (IN EPIRUS)

Rome, 27 July

I AM glad about Eutychides, who, using your old prmnomen
and your new nomen^ will be called Titus Csecilius, just as
Dionysius, from a combination of your names and mine, is
Marcus Pomponius. I am, by Hercules, exceedingly grati-
fied that Eutychides has had cause to know your kindness to
me, and that the sympathy he shewed me in the time of my
sorrow was neither unnoticed at the time nor afterwards for-
, gotten by me. I suppose you were obliged to undertake your
i journey to Asia, For you never would have been willing,
without the most urgent cause, to be so far from so many
persons and things which you love so much, and which give
you so much delight. But the speed of your return will shew
your kindness and love for your friends. Yet I fear lest the
rhetorician Clodius, by his charms, and Pituanius, that ex-
cellent scholar, as he is said to be, and now, indeed, so
wholly devoted to Greek letters, may detain you. But if
you would shew the feelings of a man, come back to us at the
time you promised. You will, after all, be able to enjoy their
society at Rome^ when they get there safe. You say you
desire something in the way of a letter from me : I have
written, and, indeed, on many subjects — everything detailed

A IV, 15

TO ATTIC US

28S

like a journal — but, as I conjecture from your not having,
as it seems, remained long in Epirus, I suppose it has not
reached you. Moreover, my letters to you are generally of
such a kind, that I don't like to put them in anyone*s hands,
unless I can feel certain that he will deliver them to you.

Now for affairs at Rome. On the 4th of July Sufenas and
Cato were acquitted, Procilius condemned. From which we
have learnt that our treble-distilled Areopagites care not a
nish for bribery, elections, interregnum^ Ihe majesik^ or, in
fact, for the state generally ; but that they would rather that a
father of a family were not murdered on his own hearth-
stone — and even that preference not very decided. There
were twenty-two votes for acquittal, twenty-nine for con-
demnation ! ^ Publius, no doubt by an eloquent peroration
in his speech for the prosecution, had quickened the feelings
of the jurors ! Herbalus " was in the case, and behaved as
usual. I said never a word. For my little girl, who is un-
well, was afraid of offending PubHus^s feelings. After this
was over the people of Reate conducted me to their Tempe,
to plead their cause against the people of Interamna before
the consul and ten commissioners, because the Veline Lake,
which had been drained by Manius Curius by cutting away
the mountain, flowed into the Nar, by which means the
[taimous Rosia has been reclaimed from the swamp, though

ill fairly moist.^ I lived with Axius, who took me also to
visit Seven Waters. I returned to Rome on the gth of July
for the sake of Fonteius. I entered the theatre At first I
was greeted with loud and general applause— but don*t take
any notice of that, I was a fool to mention it— then I turned

ly attention to Antiphon. He had been manumitted before
being brought on to the stage. Not to keep you in sus-
pense, he bore away the palm. But there never was any-
thing so dwarfish, so destitute of voice, so— ^ But keep

^ M. Nonios Sufenas and C. Cato were charged with bribery and other
^ ' pfooeedings during tbeii tribimeshjp : Frocilias for rk^t (<& zv)
I some cidiea was killed.

llortenttiiSy the great orator.

'fbis re^TS to the famous waterfall of Temi An artificial catting

i the River Velinos (whidi otherwise covered ihe high valley ai a

) inlo the Nar, which is in the valley below. What was good for the

\ people of Reate was, of course, dangeioas for the people of Intenunoa

bvtng below. M' Cmina Dentatns wia consul B.c* 290.

■ Til

fo

Wl

■ an
pb€

386

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 54, /ET. sa

this to yourself. However, in the Andromache he was just
taller than Astyanax : among the rest he had not one of his
own height. You next ask about Arbuscula : she had
great success. The games were splendid and much liki
The wild-beast hunt was put off to a future occasion. Ni
follow me into the campus. Bribery is raging : ** and I a
sign to you will telL" * The rate of interest from being four
per cent on the 15th of July has gone up to eight per cenL
You will say, " Well, / don't mind that.'' ' What a man !
What a citizen \ Memmius is supported by all Csesar's
influence. The consuls have formed a coahtion between him
and Domitius (Calvinus) on terms which I dare not commit
to paper. Pompey rages, remonstrates, backs Scaurus, but
whether only ostensibly or from the heart people don't
feel sure* No one takes the lead ; money reduces all to the
same level. Messalla^s chance is at a low ebb : not because
he is wanting in spirit or friends, but because this coalition
of the consuls, as well as Porapey's opposition, stands in
his way. I think the result will be a postponement of the
elections. The tribunician candidates have taken an oath
to conduct their canvass according to the direction of Cato,
They have deposited with him 500 sestertia apiece, on
dition that whoever Cato condemns should forfeit it,
that it should be paid over to his competitors. I write
the day before the elections are to take place. But on
the sSth of July, if they have taken place, and if the letter-
carrier has not started, I will write you an account of the
whole comitia: and, if they are conducted without corruption,
Cato by himself will have been more efficacious than all laws
-and jurors put together. I have undertaken to def<
Messius, who has been recalled from his legation ; for A[
had named him legatus to Caesar. Servilius ordered
attendance in an edict. His jurors are to be from the tril
Pomptina, Velina, and Maecia. It is a sharp fight : howei
it is going fairly well. After that I have to prepare myi
for Dnisus, then for Scaurus. Very high-sounding title-sl
are being prepared for my speeches ! Perhaps even
consuls-designate will be added to the hst of my clients : and

* ctjfAa U Tot ipev (Horn, //, kxUL 326).
■ Bccau^ Attictts lent money.

n

.ato,

A IV, IS; F vtl, 9 TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA

28;

f if Scaunis is not one of them, he will find himself in serioifi*
difficulties in this trial Judging from my brother Quintus's
letter, I suspect that by this time he is in Britain. I await
news of him with anxiety. We have certainly gained one
advantage — many unmistakable indications enable us to feel
sure that we are in the highest degree liked and valued
by Caesar, Please give my compliments to Dionysius, and "
beg and exhort him to come as soon as possible, that he may
continue the instruction of my son and of myself as weO.

CXLIV (F VTI, 9)

TO C TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome (September)

It is a long time since I heard how you were getting on :
for you don't write, nor have I written to you for the last two
months. As you were not with my brother Quintus I did
not know where to send a letter, or to whom to give it I
am anxious to know how you are and where you mean to
winter. For my part, my opinion is that you should do so
with Caesar ; but I have not ventured to write to him owing
to his mourning.^ I would rather yoo put off your return to
us, so long as you come with fuller pockets. There is
nothing to make you hurry home, especially since "Battara '* '
is dead. But you are quite capable of thinking for your*
self. I desire to know what you have settled. There is a
certain Cn. Octavius or Cn. Cornelius, a friend of yours,

** Of highest race begot, a son of Earth,"

He has frequently asked me to dinner, because he knows
that you are an intimate friend of mine. At present he has
not succeeded in getting me : however, 1 am much obliged
to him.

^ For the death {in September) of his daughter lulia, wife of Fompey.
^ A nickname, it is said, of Vacerra (perhaps becau^ be stuttered )^
who had been a teacher of Trebatius*

^88

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, jBT,

CXLV (F VII, 17)

TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome (September)

From what I gather from your letter I have thanked
brother Quintus, and can besides at last heartily commend
you, because you at length seem to have come to some fixed
resolution. For I was much put out by your letters in tJ
first months of your absence^ because at times you seemi
to me — ^pardon the expression—to be light-minded in y<
longing for the city and city life, at others timid in under-
taking military work, and often even a little inclined to pre-
sumption — a thing as unlike your usual self as can be. For,
as though you had brought a bill of exchange, and not a
letter of recommendation to your commander-in-chief, you
were all in a hurry to get your money and return home;
and it never occurred to you that those who went to
Alexandria^ with real bills of exchange have as yet not
been able to get a farthing. If I looked only to my own
interests, I should wish, above all things, to have you with
me : for I used to find not only pleasure of no ordinary kind in
your society, but also much advantage from your advice and
active assistance. But since from your earliest manhood
you had devoted yourself to my friendship and protection,
I thought it my duty not only to see that you came to no
harm, but to advance your fortunes and secure your promo-
tion. Accordingly, as long as I thought I should be going
abroad to a province, I am sure you remember the voluntary
offers I made you. After that plan had been changed, per-
ceiving that I was being treated by Csesar with the highest
consideration, and was regarded by him with unusual affec-
tion^ and knowing as I did his incredible liberality and
unsurpassed loyalty to his word, I recommended you to
him in the weightiest and most earnest words at my con^

^ To Ftokmy Auletes, who bad agreed to pay laige sums to otrU
persons for »upporting bis interests in the senate.

ciiu .1

xed I

M

o^V
ler- 1
pre- h

.WYJUtJiQ FR n, IS TO QUINTUS

289

md. And he accepted this recommendation in a gratify-
png manner, and repeatedly indicated to me in writing, and
ihewed you by word and deed, that he had been powerfully
afected by my recommendation. Having got such a man
your patron, if you believe me to have any insight, or to
be your well-wisher, do not let him go ; and if by chance
Dmething at times has annoyed you, when from being busy
Di in difficulties he has seemed to you somewhat slow to
ve you, hold on and wait for the end, which I guarantee
be gratifying and honourable to you. I need not exhort
fovt at any greater length : I only give you this warning, that
Du will never find a better opportunity, if you let this slip,
cither of securing the friendship of a most illustrious and
liberal man, or of enjoying a wealthier province or a more
able time of life. "Quintus Cornelius concurred," as
say in your law books. I am glad you didn't go to
lin, because you have been saved some hard work, aud
! necessity of listening to your stories about that expedi-
Pray write to me at full length as to where you
going to winter, and what your hopes and present
I are.

CXLVI (Q FR n, IS)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN BRITAIN)

Rome (September)

ITiiEM you receive a letter from me by the hand of an
nanuensis, you may be sure that I have not even a httle
I leisure ; when by my own— a little. For let me tell you that
regard to causes and trials in court, I have never been
ioser tied, and that, too, at the most unhealthy season of
(the year» and in the most oppressively hot weather. But
I these things, since you so direct me, I must put up with,
land must not seem to have come short of the ideas and ex-
Ipectacions which you and Csesar entertain of me, especially
I since, even if it were somewhat difficult not to do that, I am
Ukely from this labour to reap great popularity and
t U

290

CICERO*S LETTERS

B,c. 54, XT, 51

prestige. Accordingly, as you wish me to do, I take great
^ pains not to hurt anyone's feelings, and to secure being liked
even by those very men who are vexed at my close friend-
ship with Caesar, while by those who are impartial, or
even inclined to this side, I may be warmly courted and
loved. When some very violent debates took place in the
senate on the subject of bribery for several days, because the
candidates for the consulship had gone to such lengths as to
be past all bearing, I was not in the house. I have made up
my mind not to attempt any cure of the political situation
<r without powerful protection. The day I write this Drusus has
been acquitted on a charge of collusion by the triimni ararii^
in the grand total by four votes, for the majority of senators
and equites were for condemnation. On the same day I
am to defend Vatinius. That is an easy matter. The
coffuHa have been put off to September. Scaurus's trial will
take place immediately, and I shall not fail to appear for
him. I don*t like your "Sophoclean Banqueters" at aU,
though I see that you played your part with a good grace.^
1 come now to a subject which, perhaps, ought to have been
my first. How glad I was to get your letter from Britain!
I was afraid of the ocean, afraid of the coast of the island.
The other parts of the enterprise I do not underrate ; but
yet they inspire more hope than fear, and it is the suspense
rather than any positive alarm that renders me uneasy. You,
however, I can see, have a splendid subject for description,
topography, natural featiires of things and places, manners,
races, battles, your commander himself — what themes for
your pen ! I will gladly, as you request, assist you in the
points you mention, and will send you the verses you ask
for, that is, '* An owl to Athens." " But^ look you ! I think
you are keeping me in the dark. Tell me, my dear brother,
< what C^sar thinks of my verses. For he wrote before to tell
me he had read my first book. Of the first part, he said
that he had never read anything better even in Greek : the
rest, up to a particular passage, somewhat " careless " ' — that
is his word. TeU me the truth^is it the subject-matter or

* In the " Banqueters " (cruv^itiraot) of Sophocles, Achilles is excluded
from a banquet in Tenedos. Some social mishap seems to hav€ occurred
to Quint us in camp.

* Sending coak to Newcastle* * p^Bvfior^Ku

J

QFfttt, 15 i Ittpt

TO QUINTUS

291

the "style " that he does not like? You needn't be afraid :
I shall not admire myself one whit the less. On this subject
speak like a lover of truth, and with your usual brotherly
frankness*

CXLVII (Q FR m, I)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN BRITAIN)

Arpinum and Rome, 28 September

fAfTKR extraordinarily hot weather — I never remember greater

It — 1 have refreshed myself at Arpinum^ and enjoyed the

xtreme loveliness of the river during the days of the games,

aving left my tribesmen under the charge of Philotimus,^ I

I at Arcanum on the loth of September. There I found

(escidius and Philoxenus, and saw the water, for which they

making a course not far from your villa, running quite

kioely, especially considering the extreme drought, and

said that they were going to collect it in much

^r abundance. Everything is right with Herus, In your

ilian property I came across Diphilus outdoing himself in

t)riness. Still, he had nothing left to construct, except

and a promenade, and an aviary. I liked that villa

■ much, because its paved colonnade ^ gives it an air of

threat dignity. I never appreciated this till now that

nnade itself has been all laid open, and the columns

; M^en polished. It all depends — and this 1 will look

llo — upon the stuccoing being prettily done. The pave-

Ifiients seemed to be being well laid. Certain of the ceilings

|1 did not like, and ordered them to be changed. As

the place in which they say that you write word that a

I entrance hall is to be built — namely, in the colonnade —

it better as it is. For I did not think there was space

jnt for an entrance hall ; nor is it usual to have one,

[>t in those buildings which have a larger court ; nor

it have bedrooms and apartments of that kind attached

I is, to get them seats at the games. See Letter XXVI, p. 63,

' Thcpffrttcus is a kind of cloister round the periiiyiium or atrium.

292

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, JET. 12

to it. As it is, from the very beauty of its arched roofi it
will serve as an admirable summer room. However, if you
think differently, write back word as soon as possible. In
the bath I have moved the hot chamber to the other corner
of the dressing-room, because it was so placed that its steam-
pipe was immediately under the bedrooms. A fair-sized bed-
room and a lofty winter one I admired very much, for they were
both spacious and weD-situated — on the side of the promenade
^ Dearest to the bath. Diphilus had placed the columns out of
the perpendicular, and not opposite each other. These, of
course, he shall take down ; he will learn some day to use
the plumb-line and measure. On the whole, I hope Diphilus's
work will be completed in a few months: for Caesius, who was
with me at the time, keeps a very sharp look-out upon him.
Thence I started straight along the vta Vitularia to your
Fufidianum, the estate which we bought for you a few weeks
ago at Arpinum for 100,000 sesterces (about ;£'8oo), I never
saw a shadier spot in summer — water springs in many parts
of it, and abundant into the bargain. In short, Caesius
thought that you would easily irrigate fifty iugera of the
meadow land. For my part, I can assure you of this, which
is more in my line, that you will have a villa marvellously
pleasant, with the addition of a fish-pond, spouting fountains,
a paimsifa, and a shrubbery. I am told that you wish to
keep this Bovillse estate. You will determine as you think
good. Calvus said that, even if the control of the water wen?
taken from you, and the right of drawing it off were estab-
Ushed by the vendor, and thus an easement were im-
posed on that property, we could yet maintain the price ia
case we wished to sell He said that he had agreed with
you to do the work at three sesterces a foot, and that he had
stepped it, and made it three miles. It seemed to me more.
But 1 will guarantee that the money could nowhere be better
laid out. I had sent for Cillo from Venafrum, but on that
very day four of his fellow servants and apprentices had
been crushed by the falling in of a tunnel at Venafrum, On
the 13th of September I was at Laterium. I examined the
road, which appeared to me to be so good as to seem almost
like a high road, except a hundred and fifty paces — for I
measured it myself from the little bridge at the temple of
Furina, in the direction of Satricum. There they had put

^yi

t m iiip I

TO QUIKTUS

293

own dustf not gravel (this shall be changed), and that part

^cf the road is a very steep incline. But I understood that it

lid not be taken in any other diiecdon* ptrticukrlyas joo

iid not wish it to go through the property of Locusta or Varrow

The latter alone had made the road very well where it skirted

i own property. Locusta hadn't touched rt f but I will call

on him at Rome^ and think I shall be able to stir him up, and

at the same time I shall ask M, Taurus, who is now at Rome,

and whom I am told promised to allow you to do so, about

making a watercourse through his property. I much approved

' your steward Nicephorius, and I asked him what orders

I'you had given about that small building at Laterium, about

which you spoke to me» He told me in answer that he had

ijhiQiself contracted to do the work for sixteen sesteitia (about

^128)« but that you had afterwards made many additions to

! work^ but nothing to the price^ and that he had there-

^fore given it up. I quite approve, by Hercules, of your

making the additions you had determined upon ; although

the villa as it stands seems to have the air of a philosopher,

It to rebuke the extravagance of other villas. Yet, after

that addition will be pleasing. I praised your landscape

""ener : he has so covered everything with ivy, both the

iation-wall of the villa and the spaces between the

ns of the walk, that, upon my word, those Greek

ues seemed to be engaged in fancy gardening, and to be

hewing off the ivy. Finally, nothing can be cooler or more

Do^y than the dressing-room of the bath* That is about

"I I have to say about country matters. The gardener, indeed,

\ well as Philotimus and Cincius are pressing on the oma-

itation of your town house ; but I also often look in

>n it myself, as I can do without difficulty. Wherefore

on't be at all anxious about that.

As to your always asking me about your son, of course I
"accuse you ** ; but I must ask you to " excuse " me also, for
[I don't allow that you love him more than I do, And oh
I that he had been with me these last few days at Arpinum, as he
I haiij set his heart on being, and as I had no less done 1

I A$ 1 ' i]>onia, please write and say that, when I go out
l^toiWD anywhere, she is to come with me and bring the boy»
Irn do wonders with him, if I get him to myself when I am
|ll Idstixe ; for at Rome there is no time to breathe. You

M'"mr

294

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, ^T, 5 J

know I formerly promised to do so for nothing. What do
you expect with such a reward as you promise me ? I now
come to your tetters which 1 received in several packets
when 1 was at Arpinum* For I received three from you in
one day, and, indeed, as it seemed, despatched by you
at the same time — one of considerable length, in which your
first point was that my letter to you was dated earlier than
that to Caesar. Oppius at times cannot help this : the reason
is that, having settled to send letter-carriers, and having
received a letter from me, he is hindered by something turn-
ing up, and obliged to despatch them later than he had
intended; and I don't take the trouble to have the day
altered on a letter which 1 have once handed to him. You
write about Caesar's extreme affection for us. This affection
/ you must on your part keep warm, and I for mine will
endeavour to increase it by every means in my p>ower. About
I Pompey, 1 am carefully acting, and shall continue to act, as
j you advise. That my permission to you to stay longer is a
welcome one, though I grieve at your absence and miss you
exceedingly, I am yet partly glad. What you can be think-
ing of in sending for such people as Hippodamus and some
others, I do not understand. There is not one of those
fellows that won*t expect a present from you equal to a
suburban estate. However, there is no reason for your
classing my friend Trebatius with them, I sent him to
Caesar, and Caesar has done all I expected. If he has not
done quite what he expected himself, I am not bound to make
it up to him, and I in like manner free and absolve you
from all claims on his part. Your remark, that you are
a greater favourite with Csesar every day, is a source of
undying satisfaction to me. As to Balbus, who, as you say,
promotes that state of things, he is the apple of my eye.
I am indeed glad that you and my friend Trebonius like
each other. As to what you say about the military tribune-
ship, I, indeed, asked for it definitely for Curtius, and Cfesar
wrote back definitely to say that there was one at Curtius's
service, and chided me for my modesty in making the request
If I have asked one for anyone else — as I told Oppius to write
and tell Caesar — I shall not be at all annoyed by a refusal,
since those who pester me for letters are annoyed at a refusal
from me, I like Curtius, as 1 liave told him, not oaly^

tuU I

TO QUINTUS

295

kSrst

Hnati

because you asked me to do so, but from the character you
gave of him ; for from your letter I have gathered the zeal
he shewed for my restoration* As for the British expedition,
1 conclude from your letter that we have no occasion either
for fear or exultation. As to pubUc affairs, about which you
wish Tiro to write to you, I have written to you hitherto
somewhat more carelessly than usual, because I knew that
all events, small or great, were reported to Caesar. I have
now answered your longest letter.

Now hear what I have to say to your small one. The
Brst point is about Clodius's letter to Caesar. In that

atter I approve of Ca&sar's policy, in not having given way
to your request so far as to write a single word to that Fury.

»Tbe next thing is about the speech of Calventius ** Marius.** *
I ana surprised at your saying that you think I ought to
answer it, particularly as, while no one is likely to read that
fcpeech, unless I write an answer to it, every schoolboy
learns mine against him as an exercise. My books, all of
which you are expecting, I have begun^ but I cannot finish
them for some days yet The speeches for Scaurus and
Plandas which you clamour for I have finished. The poem
i Caesar, which I had begun, I have cut short. I will write
you ask me for, since your poetic springs are running
llSry, as soon as 1 have time.

Now for the third letter. It is very pleasant and welcome

I news to hear from you that Balbus is soon coming to Rome, and

|iQ well accompanied I ' and will stay with me continuously till

1 5th of May. As to your exhorting me in the same letter,

; in many previous ones, to ambition and labour, I shall, of

e, do as you say: but when am I to enjoy any real life?

Your fourth letter reached me on the 13 th of Sq>tember^

Cftlrciitiiis is atid to stand for L. Calpomitti Piso CmaotAaaB^ the

I consul of B.C. 58, agaiost whom Gcoo's sp««cfa wai spoken in a.c. 55

I in the senate. He calls him Calveatitis from his roatema] gi»nd&rher»

I tod Maritts becatise — as be bad said, in the speech, 1 20 — he had bioiself

i>e into exile rather than eome toopen fight with him ; just as Q. Metdii

I dooe in B.c. 100, when, dediiuiie to take tbe oath to the m^vmn

' of SatttnttDos, rather than fig|ht jfafius^ who bid takai tbe oilb«

sitinioeule. This lecms ra5ief aromndabont c^JMBmihrn ; bal fta

r baa been proposed, and^ of coviae, Qoiiitiis, who bad ktaly raad

hi speecb, w^oM be able better to uidcntaod tbe 1 "

* Za, wiib money.

2Q6

CICERO'S LETTERS

B»c, 54, ^T.

dated on the loth of August from Britain. In it there was
nothing new except about your Erigona^ and if I get that
from Oppius I will write and tell you what I think of it I
have no doubt I shall Like it.^ Oh yes ! 1 had almost for-
gotten to remark as to the man who, you say in your letter,
had written to Caesar about the applause given to Milo—
I am not unwilling that Caesar should think that it was as
warm as possible. And in point of fact it was so, and yet
that applause, which is given to him, seems in a certain
sense to be given to me,"*

I have also received a very old letter, but which was late
in coming into my hands, in which you remind me about the
temple of Tellus and the colonnade of Catulus. Both of these
matters are being actively carried out At the temple of
Tellus I have even got your statue placed. So, again, as to
your reminder about a suburban villa and gardens, I was
never very keen for one, and now my town house has all the
charm of such a pleasure-ground. On my arrival in Rome on
the 1 8th of September I found the roof on your house finished:
the part over the sitting-rooms, which you did not wish to
have many gables, now slopes gracefully towards the roof of
the lower colonnade. Our boy, in my absence, did not
cease working with his rhetoric master. You have no reason
for being anxious about his education, for you know his
ability, and I see his application. Everything else I take it
upon myself to guarantee, with full consciousness that I am
bound to make it good.

As yet there are three parties prosecuting Gabinius : first,
Lh Lentulus, son of the ^arn^n, who has entered a prosecution
for ihe majestt ; ' secondly, Tib. Nero, with good names at the
back of his indictment j thirdly, C. Memmius the tribune in
conjunction with L. Capito. He came to the walls of the city
on the rgth of September, undignified and neglected to the
last degree. But in the present state of the law courts I do not
venture to be confident of anything. As Cato is unwell, he
has not yet been formally indicted for extortion* Pompey

* This tragedy of Quintus's never reached Cicero. It was lost in tiansft
Perhaps no great loss.

' Milo was aedile and had just given some splendid games,

* Afaiestas. He would be liable to this charge, under a law of Sulla's,
for having left his province to interfere in Egypt

I

hn, I

TO QUINTUS

297

0(

trying hard to persuade me to be reconciled to him, but
yet hie has not succeeded at all, nor, if I retain a shred of
liberty, will he succeed* I am very anxious for a letter
from you, Vou say that you have been told that I was a
party to the coalition of the consular candidates — it is a lie.
The compacts made in that coalition, afterwards made public
by Memmius, were of such a nature that no loyal man ought
to have been a party to them ; ^ nor at the same time was it
passible for me to be a party to a coalition from which
Messalia was excluded, who is thoroughly satisfied with my
conduct in every particular, as also, I think, is Memmius, To
Domitius himself I have rendered many services, which he
desired and asked of me. I have put Scaurus under a
icavy obligation by my defence of him. It is as yet very
ncertain both when the el^tions will be and who will be
lonsuls.

Just as I was folding up this epistle letter-carriers arrived
from you and Caesar (20th September) after a journey of
twenty days. How anxious I was I How painfully I was affected
Caesar's most kind letter ! * But the kinder it was, the
ore sorrow did his loss occasion me. But to turn to your
:er. To begin with, I reiterate my approval of your stay-
on, especially as, according to your account, you have
nsulted C^sar on the subject I wonder that Oppius
ias anything to do with Publius, for I advised against it
^arther on in your letter you say that I am going to be
Ugatus to Pompey on the 13th of September; I have
nothing about it, and I wrote to Oesar to tell hira
neither Vibullius nor Oppius had delivered his message
to Pompey about ray remaining at home. Why, I know
HOC However, it was I who restrained Oppius from doing
so, because it >vas Vibullius who should take the leading
part in that matter : for with him Caesar had communicated
^lersonally, with Oppius only by letter. I indeed can have
"second thoughts'** in matters connected with Caesar.
e comes next after you and our children in my regard,
not much after. I think I act in this with deliberate

* See p. 500.

* Apparently referring to the death of his daughter lulia,

* ^tvripac ^oi^foo^ from Eurip. Hipp. 4361 ai ItW^pai tw" t^povridtc

>

298

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, i€T.

judgment, for I have by this time good cause for it, yet
warm personal feeling no doubt does influence me also.

Just as I had written these last words — ^which are by my
own hand — ^your boy came in to dine with me, as Pomponia
was dining out. He gave me your letter to read, which he
had received shortly before — a truly Aristophanic mixture
of jest and earnest, with which I was greatly charmed.* He
gave me also your second letter, in which you bid hini
cling to my side as a mentor. How delighted he was with
those letters I And so was I. Nothing could be more at-
tractive than that boy, nothing more affectionate to me ! —
This, to explain its being in another handwriting, I dictated
to Tiro while at dinner.

Your letter gratified Annalis very much, as shewing that
you took an active interest in his concerns, and yet assisted
him with exceedingly candid advice. Publius Servilius the
elder, from a letter which he said he had received from
Caesar, declares himself highly obliged to you for having
spoken with the greatest kindness and earnestness of his
devotion to Caesar. After my return to Rome from Arpinum
I was told that Hippodamus had started to join you. I
cannot say that I was surprised at his having acted so dis-
courteously as to start to join you without a letter from me :
I only say this, that I was annoyed. For I had long resolved,
from an expression in your letter, that if I had anything I
wished conveyed to you with more than usual care, I should
give it to him : for, in truth, into a letter like this, which I
send you in an ordinary way, I usually put nothing that, if it
fell into certain hands, might be a source of annoyance. I
reserve myself for Minucius and Salvius and Labeo. Labeo
will either be starting late or will stay here altogether.
Hippodamus did not even ask me whether he could do
anything for me. T, Penarius sends me a kind letter about
you : says that he is exceedingly charmed with your literary
pursuits, conversation, and above all by your dinners. He
was always a favourite of mine, and I see a good deal of his
brother. Wherefore continue, as you have begun, to admit
the young man to your intimacy.

* Or, *' as kindly and critical at once as Aristophanes (of 6yzantiuiii}|''
as though Qumtos had written a Caxtonian criticism of bis son's style.

L lit, I

TO QUINTUS

299

From the fact of this letter having been in hand during
lany days, owing to the delay of the letter-carriers » I have
itted down in it many various things at odd times, as, for
istance, the following, Titus Anicius has mentioned to me
lore than once that he would not hesitate to buy a suburban
roperty for you, if he found one. In these remarks of his I
ad two things surprising : first, that when you write to him
bout buying a suburban propert)^ you not only don't write
me to that effect, but write even in a contrary sense ; and,
;ondly, that in writing to him you totally forget his letters
iiich you shewed me at Tusculum, and as totally the rule
f Epicharmus, " Notice how he has treated another " : * in
iCt, that you have quite forgotten, as I think, the lesson
)nveyed by the expression of his face, his conversation,
id his spirit- But this is your concern. As to a suburban
roperty, be sure to let me know your wishes, and at the

Be time take care that that fellow doesn't get you into
1^. What else have I to say ? Anything ? Yes, there
ps : Gabinius entered the city by night on the 27 th of
tptember, and to-day, at two o^clock, when he ought to
Lve appeared on his trial for Ihe majest*e^ in accordance
ith the edict of C, Alfius, he was all but crushed to the
;h by a great and unanimous demonstration of the popular
UrecL Nothing could exceed his humiliating position.
towever, Piso comes next to him. So I think of introduc-
a marvellous episode into my second book " — Apollo
fcclaring in the council of the gods what sort of return that
the two commanders was to be, one of whom had lost,
id the other sold his anny. From Britain I have a letter
Caesar's dated the ist of September, which reached me
I the 27th, satisfactory* enough as far as the British ex-
^ition is concerned, in which, to prevent my wondering
not getting one from you, he tells me that you were not
ith him when he reached the coast. To that letter I made
reply, not even a formal congratulation, on account of
mourning. Many, many wishes, dear brother, for your
ealth.

' Of his po€m ** On his own Times.'* Piso in Macedonia, where he
d been unsuccessful with border tribes : Gabinius in going to Eg}*pt
support Ptolemy. He left many of his soldiers there.

7

3»

aCERO'S LETTERS

B.C 54, .«T.

CXLVIII (a IV, 17 AND PARTS OF 16)

TO ATTICUS (ABROAD)

RoHB, I October

You think I imagine that I write more rarely to you than I
used to do from having forgotten my regular habit and purpose^
but the fact is that, perceiving your locality and journeys to
be equaUy uncertain, I have never intrusted a letter to any-
one — either for Epinis, or Athens, or Asia, or anywhere else
— ^unless he was going expressly to you. For my letters are
not of the sort to make their non-delivery a matter of
indifference ; they contain so many confidential secrets that
I do not as a rule trust them even to an amanuensis, for fear
of som« jest leaking out in some direction or another.

The consuls are in a blaze of infamy because Gains.
Memmius, one of the candidates, read out in the senat
compact which he and his fellow candidate, Domitii
Calvinus^ had made with the consuls^-that both were to
forfeit to the consuls 40 sestertia apiece (in case they were
themselves elected consuls), if they did not produce three
augurs to depose that they had been present at the passing
of a iex curia fa, which, in fact, had not been passed ; and two
consulars to depose to having helped to draft a decree fof
furnishing the consular provinces, though there had not even
been a meeting of the senate at all.' As this compact was
alleged not to have been a mere verbal one, but to have

^ The object of the existing consuls in making such a bargain was to
to their provinces without difificnity, with imperium, which had to be
stowed by a formal meeting of the old ccmitia curiata. But that formality
could be stopped by tribunes or other magistrates "watching the sky, *
or declaring evil omens : and just as these means were being resorted to
to put off the elections, so they were also likely to be used in this matter*
If It was thus put off into the next year, Domitiusand Appius, not being
any longer consuls, would have still greater difficulty. Corrupt as the
anangement was, it seems not to have come under any existing law, and
both escaped punishment, Appius went as proconsul to CiliciA, in
spite of the lex curiaia not being passed, but Domitius Ahenobarf
seems not to have had a province* The object of Domitius Cat' '

I IV, 17, 16

TO ATTICUS

301

1^

been drawn up with the sums to be paid duly entered,
formal orders for payment, and written attestations of many
persotis, it was, on the suggestion of Pompey, produced by
Memmius, but with the names obliterated. It has made no
difference to Appius — he had no character to lose I To the
^ ither consul it was a real knock-down blow, and he is, I
'assure you, a ruined man. Memmius, however, having thus
dissolved the coahtion, has lost all chance of election, and
is by this time in a worse position than ever, because we are
now informed that his revelation is strongly disapproved of
by Caesar. Our friend Messalla and his fellow candidate,
Domitius Calvinus, have been very liberal to the people.
Nothing can exceed their popularity. They are certain to be
consuls. But the senate has passed a decree that a " trial
with closed doors " should be held before the elections in
respect to each of the candidates severally by the panels
already allotted to them alL The candidates are in a great
frighL But certain jurors — among them Opimius, Veiento,
and Kan tins — appealed to the tribunes to prevent their
being called upon to act as jurors without an order of the
people,^ The business goes on. The comitia are post-

Mcmmlus in making Uie conn pad was to secure their own election,
"1 the existing consuls had many means of assisting, but it is not
what Memmius's object in disclosing it was. Perhaps anger on
bis hopes gone, and an idea that anything that humiliated
arbos would be pleasing to Caesar. He also seems to have
oacrrelled with Calvinus. Gaius Memmius Gemellus is not to be con-
rounded with Gaius Memmius the tribune mentioned in the next letter,
* There is considerable uncertainty as to the exact nature odudicium
tUfHt here rendered **a trial with closed doors,*' on the analogy of
senaius ammlium taciturn described by CapitoHnus, in Gordian. ch.
jdi. It is not, I think, mentioned elsewhere {iudiciis tacitis of 2 Off^
I 24, is a general expression for ** anonymous expressions of opinion ),
and the passage in Plutarch {Cato min. 44) introduces a new difficulty,
for it indicates a court in which candidates a/ttr election are to purge
thcntsclves. Again, qua crant omnibus sortiia is very difficult. Cicero
Dovhere elsCj I believe, uses the passive sortitus. But, passing that,
whAi are the c&nnlia meant ? The tense and mood shew, I think, that
the woidft are explanatory by the writer, not part of the decree. I
Tentuie^ contrary to all editors, to take omnibus as dative, and to sup-
pcBe that the consilia meant are those of the album iudicum who had
veoi selected to try cases of anthitus^ of which many were expected.
There is no proof that the induces in a iudicium taciturn had to be
senators, and the names in the next sentence point the other way. The
pf opceed that the law should allow this selection from the album to

ic round*

to ' T

302

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C. 54, MT, S2

poned by a decree of the senate till such time as the law for
the ** trial with closed doors ** is carried. The day for pass-
ing the law arrived. Terentius vetoed it. The consuls,
having all along conducted this business in a half-hearted kind
of way, referred the matter back to the senate. Hereupon
^ — Bedlam! my voice being heard with the rest ** Aren't
you wise enough to keep quiet ^ after all ? " you will say.
Forgive me : I can hardly restrain myself. But, nevertheless,
was there ever such a farce ? The senate had voted that
the elections should not be held till the law was passed :
that, in case of a tribunician veto, the whole question
should be referred to them afresh. The law is introduced
in a perfunctory manner : is vetoed, to the great relief of the
proposers : the matter is referred to the senate. Upon that
the senate voted that it was for the interest of the state that
the elections should be held at the earliest possible time !

Scaurus, who had been acquitted a few days before/ after
a most elaborate speech from me on his behalf— when all
the days up to the 29th of September (on which I write this)
had one after the other been rendered impossible for the
comida by notices of ill omens put in by Scsevola — paid
the people what they expected at his own house, tribe by
tribe. But all the same, though his liberality was more
generous, it was not so acceptable as that of the two
mentioned above, who had got the start of him, I could
have wished to see your face when you read this ; * for I am
certain you entertain some hope that these transactions will
occupy a great many weeks ! But there is to be a meeting
of the senate to-day, that is, the ist of October — for day is
already breaking. There no one will speak his mind except
Antius and Favonius," for Cato is ill Don't be afraid

form the itidicium tadium^ which would give no public verdict, but on
whose report they could afterwards act.

^ M, ^milius Scaurus was acquitted on the and of September on a
charge of extortion in Sardinia, The tdal had been hurried on lest he
should use the Sardinian money in bribing for the consulship. Hence
he could not begin distributing his gifts to the electors till after Sep
tember 2nd^ and his rivals Domitias and Messalla got the start of him.
See Asconius, 131 seq.

■* He means that Atticus^as a lendei of money — would be glad of
anything that kept the rate of interest up (see p. 2S6). He is^ of
course, joking,

• Antius is not known, Favonius was a close imitator of Cito*s

mtmmm

llT, 17, l6; Q FK MI, t TO QUINTUS

303

at me : nevertheless, I make no promises* Is there any-

iing else you want to know ? Anything ? Yes, the trials,

[think. Dnisus and Scaurus ^ are believed not to have been

nilty. Three candidates are thought likely to be prosecuted :

^mitius Calvinus by Memmius, Messalla by Q. Pompeius

^ufus, Scaurus "^ by Triarius or by L. Caesar, ** What will you

5 able to say for them ? " quoth you. May I die if I know f

those books * certainly, of which you speak so highly, I

)id no suggestion.

CXLIX (Q FR in, 2)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

Rome, October

\ the evening of the loth of October Salvius started on
ltd ship for Ostia with the things you wished sent to you
Dm home. On that same day Memmius* gave Gabinius such
qilendid warming in public meeting that Calidius couldn*t
' a word for him. To-monrow (which is strictly the day
er to-morrow, for I am writing before daybreak) there is a
before Cato for the selection of his prosecutor between
emmius, Tiberius Nero, and Gains and Lucius, sons of
Antonius. I think the result will be in favour of
emmius^ though a strong case is being made out for Nero.
In short, he is in a fairly tight fix, unless our friend
Pompey, to the disgust of gods and men, upsets the whole
concern. Let me give you a specimen of the fellow's
impudence, and extract something amusing from the public
disasters. Gabinius having given out wherever he came
^lat he was demanding a triumph, and having suddenly, the

ncism. He was now opposing both Pompey and Caesar strenuously^
I the Civil War breaking out, attached himself strongly to Pompey.
IS put to death by Augustus after the battle of Philippi (SueL
13). He had a very biting tongue* See PluL Famp. 60-

5 was probably Livius Drusus, the father of Liria, wife of
&VQ& ; he was accused by Lucretius oi prtsvaricatio^ ** collusion."
This dmc for ambitus* " The de Oraiore,

C. Memmius, a tribune of this year, not the same as the C<
V Gcfnellus of the last letter.

3<H

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.C. 54y JET,

excellent general ! invaded the city of his enemies by night,^
did not venture to enter the senate. Meanwhile, exactly
on the tenth day, on which he was bound to report the
number of the enemy and of his own soldiers who had been
killed, he slunk into the house, which was very thinly
attended. When he made as if to go out, he was stopped by
the consuls. The publicani were introduced. The fellow
was assailed on every side, and my words stinging him more
than all, he lost patience, and in a voice quivering with
anger called me ** Exile," Thereupon — Heavens ! I never
had such a compliment paid me in all my life ! — the senate
rose up to a man with a loud shout and made a menacing
movement in his direction \ the publicani made an equal
noise and a similar movement. In fine, they all behaved
I exactly as you would have done. It is the leading topic of
I conversation out of the house. However, 1 refrain from
prosecuting, with difficulty, by Hercules I yet refrain I do :
either because I don't want to quarrel with Pompey — the im-
pending question of Milo is enough in that direction — or be-
cause we have no jurors worthy of the name. I fear a fiasco :
besides, there is the ill-will of certain persons to me, and I
am afraid my conducting the prosecution might give him
some advantage : besides, I do not despair of the thing being
done both without me and yet partly through my assist-
ance. All the candidates for the consulships have had
prosecutions for bribery lodged against them : Domitius
Calvinus by Memmius (the tribune), Memmius (the candi-
date) by Q. Acutius, an excellent young man and a good
lawyer, Messalla by Q. Pompeius, Scaurus by Triarius. The
affair causes great commotion, because it is a plain alter-
native between shipwreck for the men concerned or for the
laws. Pressure is being applied to prevent the trials taking
place. It looks like an interregnum again. The consols
desire to hold the comitia : the accused don't wish it, and
especially Memmius, because he hopes that Csesar^s approach*^

^ Referring to the fact that Gabtnkis, on his arrival outside Ro
without the usual procession of friends which met a returning procon
ikulked about till nightfall, not venturing to enter Rome (the city of h
enemies I) in daylight. By entering Rome he gave up his imptrium n
could no longer ask a triumph.

* Cscsar was accustomed to cooie to North Italy (Gallia Cisalpina) J

Q FR in, 2, 3

TO QUINTUS

305

may secure him the consulship. But he is at a very low

ebb. Domitius, with Messalla as his colleague, I think is

a certainty* Scaurus has lost his chance. Appius declares

that he will relieve Lentulus even without a curiate law/

and, indeed, he distinguished himself amazingly that day (I

^nlmost forgot to mention it) in an attack upon Gabinius.

^^ge accused him of Ihe majeste^ and gave the names of his

^■^esses without Gabinius answering a word. That is all

^^^^mblic news. At home all is well : your house itself is

■ being proceeded with by the contractors with fair expedition.

CL (Q FR III, 3)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

Rome (October)

The writing of an amanuensis must shew you the amount of

|iy engagements. I assure you that no day passes without

ny appearing for the defence of some one. Accordingly, all

composition or reflexion I reserve for the hour of my walk.

So stands my business : matters at home, however, are every-

,tfciiig I could wish. Our boys are well, diligent in their

,and affectionate to me and each other* Thedecora-

of both of our houses is still in hand : but your rural

fs at Arcanum and Laterium are now completed. For

be rest, as to the water and the road, I went into the case

tboToughly, in a certain letter of mine, without omitting any-

\ irmter lo Ravenna or Luca, and there be could be communicated
h and exercise great injfiuence^

Thai is, be would go to bis province of Cillcia on the strength of his
OomiQatkm or allotment by tbe senate. There was some doubt as to the
^estlod whether stich allotment did not give imperium even without a
As tmriaia. Besides, the consul had already imperium, and he might
r it to be uninterrupted if he left Rome immediately. However,
ilbae was always an interval between the end of the consulship and the
^*^g Rome paludaiuSf the Ux curia/a had generally been considered
aiiy (Caes. B. C, L 6). After B.C. 52 the Ux Pgrnpeia enacted a
*- yean' interval, when, of course, a taw would be neoc&saiy.
L X

B.C, 54, ^T. $2

306 CICERO'S LETTERS

thing. But, in truth, the anxiety which is now giving me
great uneasiness and pain is that for a period of fifty days I
have heard nothing from you or from Caesar — nothing has
found its way from those parts, either in the shape of a letter,
or even of a rumour. Moreover, both the sea and land
there make me uneasy, and I never cease imagining, as 01
does when one's affections are deeply involved, all that*
least desire. Wherefore I do not, indeed, for the pres<
ask you to write me an account of yourself and your doin[
for that you never omit doing when possible, but I wish y<
to know this^that I have scarcely ever been so anxious f(
anything as at the moment of writing I am for a letter from
you. Now for what is going on in politics. One day after
another for the cofniiia is struck out by notices of bad
omens, to the great satisfaction of all the loyalists : so great
is the scandal in which the consuls are involved, owing to
the suspicion of their having bargained for a bribe from the
candidates. The four candidates for the consulship are all
arraigned : their cases are difficult of defence, but I shall do
my best to secure the safety of our friend Messalla — and that
is inseparable from the acquittal of the others, Publius Sulla
has accused Gabinius of bribery — his stepson Memmius,
his cousin Caecilius, and his son Sulla backing the indict-
ment, L. Torquatus put in his claim to the conduct of the
prosecution, and, to everybody's satisfaction^ failed to estab-
lish it You ask, *^What will become of Gabinius?'* We
shall know in three days' time about the charge of Ihi
majesiL In that case he is at a disadvantage from the hatred
entertained by all classes for him ; witnesses against him
damaging as can be: accusers in the highest degree
efficient : the panel of jurors of varied character : the pn
ent a man of weight and decision — Alfius : Pompey activi
soliciting the jurors on his behalf. What the result will
I don't know ; I don't see, however, how he can maintain a
position in the state. I shew no rancour in promoting his
destruction, and await the result with the utmost good temper.
That is nearly all the news. I will add this one item : your
boy (who is mine also) is exceedingly devoted to his rhetoric
master Paeonius, a man, I think, of great experience in his
profession^ and of very good character. But you are aware
that my method of instruction aims at a somewhat more

atred

m

Q Fa ni, 3, 4

TO QUINTUS

307

Bcholarly and philosophical style, ' Accordingly 1, for my part,
am unwilling that his course of training should be interropted,
and the boy himself seems to be more drawn to that de-
clamatory style, and to hke it better ; and as that was the
style in which I was myself initiated, let us allow him to follow
in my path, for I feel sure it will eventually bring him to the

I same point ; nevertheless, if I take him with me somewhere in
Ihe country, I shall guide him to the adoption of my system
and practice. For you have held out before me a great
reward, which it certainly shall not be my fault if I fai] to fully
obtain, I hope you will write and tell me most carefully in
what district you are going to pass the winter, and what your
prospects are.

CLI (q FR III, 4)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

Rome, 24 October

Gabiniits has been acquitted. Nothing could be more

absolutely futile than his accuser, Lentulus, and the backers

of th e indictment, or more corrupt than the jury. Yet, after

^^ftad it not been for incredible exertions and entreaties on

^^Bpey's part, and even an alarming rumour of a dictatorship,

Re would not have been able to answer even Lentulus ; for

fcven as it was, with such an accuser and such a jury, he had

thirty-two votes out of seventy recorded against him. This trial

" i altogether so scandalous, that he seems certain to be con-

ficted in the other suits, especially in that for extortion. But

I must see that the Republic, the senate, the law courts are

nere cyphers, and that not one of us has any constitutional

osition at all What else should I tell you about the jurors?

Two men of praetorian rank were on the panel — Domitius

^ ivinus, who voted for acquittal so openly that everybody

5uld see ; and Cato, who, as soon as the voting tablets had

' iitT9KuiTtpov. From QitTi^f a philosophical proposition or thesis.
\ Faradox, prof* he uses diruca 01 subjects suited to such theses.

3o8

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,c, 54, .CT, sa

been counted, withdrew from the ring of people, and was tha
first to tell Pompey the news. Some people — ^for instance
Sallust — say that I ought to have been the prosecuting counse^
Was I to have exposed myself to such a jury as this ? What
would have been my position, if he had escaped when I con
ducted the case ? But there were other considerations whic"
influenced me, Pompey would have looked upon it as
contest with me, not for that man's safety, but for his own
position : he would have entered the city ; * it would have
become a downright quarrel ; I should have seemed like a
Pacideianus matched with the Samnite ^seminus ' — he
would, perhaps, have bitten off my ear,' and at least he
would have become reconciled to Clodius. For my part,
especially if you do not disapprove of it, I strongly approve
my own policy. That great man, though his advancement had
been promoted by unparalleled exertions on my part, and
f though I owed him nothing, while he owed me all, yet could
not endure that I should differ from him in politics — to put
^it mildly^-and, when in a less powerful position, shewed roe
what he could do against me when in my zenith. At this
time of day, when I don't even care to be influential^ and the
Republic certainly has no power to do anything, while he is
1 supreme in everything, was I to enter upon a contest with
him ? For that is what I should have had to have done, I
do not think that you hold me bound to have undertaken it
"Then, as an alternative," says the grave Sallust, "you
should have defended him^ and have made that concession
lo Pompey *s earnest wish, for he begged you very hard to do
so.*' An ingenious friend is Sallust, to give me the alterna-
tive of a dangerous quarrel or undying infamy I I, however,
lam quite pleased with the middle course which I have
tfiteered ; and another gratifying circumstance is that, when
[I had given my evidence with the utmost solemnity, in
[accordance with my honour and oath, the defendant said
that, if he retained his right to remain in the city, he would
repay me, and did not attempt to cross-question me.
As to the verses which you wish me to compose, it is true

* Pompey was outside the ptymarium {ad R^mam) as having kvi*

* Two gladiators, one ineoniparably superior to the other.
" A proverbial ejcpressionj cp, " snapped roy nose off."

IQ FR 111, 4

TO QUINTUS

309

that I am deficient in industry iti regard to them, which
requires not only time, but also a mind free from all anxiety,
but I am also wanting in inspiration. For I am not altogether
without anxiety as to the coming year, though without fear.
At the same time, and, upon my word, I speak without irony,
I consider you a greater master of that style of writing than
myself. As to filling up your Greek library, effecting inter-
changes of books, and purchasing Latin books, I should be
very glad that your wishes should be carried out, especially
as they would be very useful to me. But I have no one to
employ for myself in such a business : for such books as are
reaUy worth getting are not for sale, and purchases cannot
be effected except by an agent who is both well-informed
and active. However, I will give orders to Chrysippus and
speak to Tyrannio. I will inquire what Scipio has done
about the treasury. I will see that what seems to be the
right thing is done. As to Ascanio, do what you like : I
shall not interfere. As to a suburban property, I commend
your not being in a hurry, but I advise your having one, I
write this on the 24th of October, the day of the opening of
the games, on the point of starting for my Tusculan vUla,
and taking my dear young Cicero with me as though to
school (a school not for sport, but for learn mg), since I did
not wish to be at any greater distance from town, because I
purposed supporting Pomptinus's ^ claim of a triumph on the
3rd of November, For there will be, in fact, some little
difficulty ; as the praetors, Cato and Servilius,* threaten to
forbid it, though I don't know what they can do. For he
will have on his side Appius the consul, some prsetors and
tribunes. Still, they do threaten — and among the foremost
Q, Scaevola, ** breathing war." ^ Most delightful and dearest
of brothers, take good care of your health.

* C Pomptinus^ prtetor in B.c, 63 (when he hud supported Cicero),
was afterwards employed against the Allobroges as propnetor of
Narbonensis (B.C. 61). He had been, ever since Jeaving his province
I (? B.C. 58), urging his claim to a triumph. He obtained it now by the
contrivance of the praetor Serv. Sulpicius Galbaj who got a vote passed
by the comiiiu before daybreak, whicri was uncoDstitutional (Dio, 59, 65).

^ P. Serviliu5 Valla Isaurtcus (ooiisul fi*c. 48) was au admirer of
Cato. See p. 57,

\

Jio

CICERO'S LETTERS

B*C. 54, JET.

CLII (F I, 9)

TO P- LENTULUS SPINTHER (IN CILICIA>
Rome (October)

I

4

M. Cicero desires his warmest regards to P. Lentulus,
imperator,^ Your letter was very gratifying to me, from
which I gathered that you fully appreciated my devotion to
you : for why use the word kindness, when even the word
" devotion " itself, with all its solemn and holy associations,
seems too weak to express my obligations to you ? As for
your saying that my services to you are gratefully accepted,
it is you who in your overflowing affection make things,
which cannot be omitted without criminal negligence, appear
deserving of even gratitude. However, my feelings towards
you would have been much more fully known and con*
spicuous, ifj during all this time that we have been separated,
we had been together, and together at Rome. For precisely
in what you declare your ijitention of doing — what no one is
more capable of doing, and what I confidently look forward
to from you — that is to say, in speaking in the senate^ and
in every department of public life and political activity, we
should together have been in a very strong position (what
my feelings and position are in regard to politics I will
explain shortly, and will answer the questions you ask), and
at any rate I should have found in you a supporter, at once
most warmly attached and endowed with supreme wisdom,
I while in me you would have found an adviser, perhaps not
the most unskilful in the world, and at least both faithful and
devoted to your interests. However, for your own sake, of
course, I rejoice, as I am bound to do, that you have been
greeted with the title of imperator^ and are holding your pro-
vince and victorious army after a successful campaign. But
certainly, if you had been here, you would have enjoyed to a
I fuller extent and more directly the benefit of the services which

* Cicero gives him this title, by which he had been greeted by his
soldiers after some victory over Ibe predatory tribes in Cilicia. Thb
letter is Cicero's mt?st elaborate apology for his change of polic>' ia
favoux of the tnumvir& ^

^

FI, 9

TO P. LENTULUS SPrNTHER

311

}

1 am bound to render j^ou. Moreover, in taking vengeance
on those whom you know in some cases to be your enemies,
because you championed the cause of my recall, in others to
be jealous of the splendid position and renown which that
measure brought you, I should have done you yeoman's
service as your associate. However, that perpetual enemy
of his own friends, who^ in spite of having been honoured
with the highest compliments on your part, has selected you
of all people for the object of his impotent and enfeebled
violence, has saved me the trouble by punishing himself.
For he has made attempts, the disclosure of which has left
him without a shred, not only of political position, but even
of freedom of action.^ And though I should have preferred
that you should have gained your experience in my case
alone, rather than in your own also, yet in the midst of my
regret I am glad that you have learnt what the fidelity dF
mankind is worth, at no great cost to yourself, which I learnt
at the price of excessive pain* And I think that I have
now an opportunit>^ presented me, while answering the ques-
tions you have addressed to me, of also explaining my entire
position and view. You say in your letter that you have been
informed that I have become reconciled to Csesar and
Appius, and you add that you have no fault to find with
thaL But you express a wish to know what induced me
to defend and compliment Vatinius. In order to make my
explanation plainer I must go a little farther back in the
statement of my policy and its grounds.

Well, Lentulus ! At first — ^after the success of your efibrts
for my recall — ^I looked upon myself as having been restored
not alone to my friends, but to the Republic also ; and seeing
that I owed you an affection almost surpassing belief, and
every kind of service, however great and rare, that could be
bestowed on your person, I thought that to the Republic,
which had much assisted you in restoring me, I at least was
bound to entertain the feeling which I had in old times

' Cicero has been variously supposed to refer to C Calo (who pro-
posed the recall of Lentulus), to Appiuatbe consul, and finally Co Pompey.
The Isist seems on the whole most likelyj though the explanation is not
without difficulties. In t hat case the * * disclosure " will refer to Pompey's
intrigues as to the restoration of Ptolemy Auletes^ of which he wished
to have the management.

k

312

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,C. $4, v'ET. S3

shewed merely from the duty incumbent on all citizens alike,
and not as an obligation incurred by some special kindness to
myself. That these were my sentiments I declared to the
senate when you were consul, and you had yourself a full
view of them in our conversations and discussions. Yet
from the very first my feelings were hurt by many circum-
stances, when, on your mooting the question of the full
restoration of my position, I detected the covert hatred ot
some and the equivocal attachment of others. For yoti
received no support from them either in regard to my
monuments, or the illegal violence by which, in common
with my brother, I had been driven from my house ; nor, by
heaven, did they shew the goodwill which I had expected
in regard to those matters which, though necessary to me
owing to the shipwreck of my fortune, were yet regarded
by me as least valuable — I mean as to indemnifying me for
my losses by decree of the senate. And though I saw all this
— for it was not difficult to see — yet their present conduct did
not affect me with so much bitterness as what they had done
for me did with gratitude. And therefore, though according
to your own assertion and testimony I was under very great
obligation to Pompey, and though I loved him not only for
his kindness, but also from my own feelings, and, so to
speak, from my unbroken admiration of him, nevertheless,
without taking any account of his wishes, I abode by all
^ my old opinions in politics.^ With Pompey sitting in court,'
upon his having entered the city to give evidence in favour
of Sestius^ and when the witness Vatinius had asserted that,
moved by the good fortune and success of Caesar, I had
begun to be his friend, I said that I preferred the fortune of
Bibulus» which he thought a humEiation, to the triumphs and
victories of everybody else ; and I said during the examiiu*
tion of the same witness, in another part of my speech, that
the same men had prevented Bibulus from leaving his house
as had forced me from mine : my whole cross-examination,
indeed, was nothing but a denunciation of his tribuneship;*

^ I,e.t to keep in with the Optimates, wlio were at this time suspidous
of, and hostile to Pompey.

* At the trial of Sestius.

• B,c. 59, when Vatinius proposed the law for Caesar^s five y«iw* nifc
in GauL

1

s: '

TO P, LENTULUS SPINTHER

313

od In it I spoke throughout with the greatest freedom and
spirit about violence, neglect of omens, grants of royal titles,
-Kor, indeed, in the support of this view is it only of late that
II have spoken : I have done so consistently on several
■occasions in the senate. Nay, even in the consulship
of Marcellinus and Philippus,^ on the 5th of April the
senate voted on my motion that the question of the Cam-
panian land should be referred to a full meeting of the
senate on the 15th of May. Could I more decidedly invade

I the stronghold of his policy, or shew more clearly that I
forgot my own present interests, and remembered my former
political career ? On my delivery of this proposal a great
impression was made on the minds not only of those who
>»'ere bound to have been impressed, but also of those of whom
1 had never expected it. For, after this decree had passed in
accordance with my motion, Pompey, without shewing the
least sign of being offended with me, started for Sardinia
and Africa, and in the course of that journey visited Caesar
at Luca, There Caesar complained a great deal about my
|fnotion, for he had already seen Crassus at Ravenna also, and
been irritated by him against me. It was well known
tFompey was much vexed at this, as I was told by others,
^leamt most definitely from my brother. For when
ipey met him in Sardinia, a few days after leaving Luca,
be said: *'You are the very man I want to see; nothing
r could have happened more conveniently. Unless you speak
wexy strongly to your brother Marcus, you will have to pay
up what you guaranteed on his behalf."^ I need not go on.
He grumbled a great deal : mentioned his own services to
recalled what he had again and again said to my
TOther himself about the **acts" of Caesar, and what my
ler had undertaken in regard to me; and called my
himself to witness that what he had done in regard
to my recall he had done with the consent of Caesar : and
sked him to commend to me the latter's policy and claims,
I should not attack, even if I would not or could not
l&upport them. My brother having conveyed these remarks

^ B.C, 56.

* Pompey is only speaking metaphorically. Quintus had guaranteed
Cicero's support. Pompey half -jestingly speaks as though he had gone
fasil for hini for a sttni of money.

314

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, jst. 5a

to me, and Pompey having, nevertheless, sent Vibollius to
me with a message, begging nne not to commit myself on
the question of the Campanian land till his return, I recon-
sidered my position and begged the state itself, as it were, to
allow me, who had suffered and done so much for it, to fulfil
the duty which gratitude to my benefactors and the pledge
which my brother had given demanded, and to suffer one
whom it had ever regarded as an honest citizen to shew
himself an honest man. Moreover, in regard to all those
motions and speeches of mine which appeared to be giving
offence to Pompey, the remarks of a particular set of men,
whose names you must surely guess, kept on being reported
to me ; who, while in public affairs they were really in
sympathy with my policy, and had always been so, yet said
that they were glad that Pompey was dissatisfied with me,
and that Coesar would be very greatly exasperated against
me. This in itself was vexatious to me : but much more so
was the fact that they used, before my very eyes, so to
embrace, fondle, make much of, and kiss my enemy — mine
do I say ? rather the enemy of the laws, of the law courts, of
peace, of his country, of all loyal men !^that they did not
indeed rouse my bile, for I have utterly lost all that, but
imagined they did* In these circumstances, having, as far
as is possible for human prudence, thoroughly examined
my whole position, and having balanced the items of the
account, I arrived at a final result of all my reflexions, which,
as well as I can, I will now briefly put before you.

If I had seen the Republic in the hands of bad or profligate
citizens, as we know happened during the supremacy of Cinna,
and on some other occasions, I should not under the pressure,
I don't say of rewards, which are the last things to influence
me, but even of danger, by which, after all, the bravest men
are moved, have attached myself to their party, not even if
their services to me had been of the very highest kind. As
it is, seeing that the leading statesman in the Republic was
Pompey, a man who had gained this power and renown by
the most eminent services to the state and the most glorious
achievements, and one of whose position I had been a sup-
porter from my youth up, and in my praetorship and consul-
ship an active promoter also, and seeing that this same
statesman had assisted me, in his own person by the weight

■mc

j

PI, 9

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

3IS

of his influence and the expression of his opinion, and, in
conjunction with you, by his counsels and zeal, and that he
regarded my enemy as his own supreme enemy in the state
— I did not think that I need fear the reproach of inconsist-
ency, if in some of my senatorial votes I somewhat changed
my standpoint, and contributed my zeal to the promotion of
the dignity of a most distinguished man, and one to whom
I am under the highest obligations. In this sentiment I
had necessarily to include Caesar, as you see, for their
pohcy and position were inseparably united. Here I was
greatly influenced by two things — the old friendship which
you know that I and my brother Quintus have had with
Caesar, and his own kindness and liberality, of which we
have recently had clear and unmistakable evidence both by
his letters and bis personal attentions. I was also strongly
affected by the Republic itself, which appeared to me to
demand, especially considering Caesar's brilliant successes,
that there should be no quarrel maintained with these men,
and indeed to forbid it in the strongest manner possible.
Moreover, while entertaining these feelings, I was above all
ihaken by the pledge which Pompey had given for me to
Caesar, and my brother to Porapey, Besides, I was forced
to take into consideration the state maxim so divinely ex-
pressed by our master Plato — ** Such as are the chief men
in a republic, such are ever wont to be the other citizens.*'
I called to mind that in my consulship, from the very ist of
January, such a foundation was laid of encouragement for
I the senate, that no one ought to have been surprised that on
the 5th of December there was so much spirit and such
commanding influence in that house. I also remember
that when I became a private citizen up to the consulship
of Caesar and Bibulus, when the opinions expressed by
me had great weight in the senate, the feeling among all
^ibe loyalists was invariable, Afterwards, while you were
" ing the province of hither Spain with imperium and
k Republic had no genuine consuls, but mere hucksters of
ces, mere slaves and agents of sedition, an accident
r my head as an apple of discord into the midst of con-
ng factions and civil broils. And in that hour of danger,
ligh a unanimity was displayed on the part of the
[ienate that was surprising, on the part of all Italy surpassing

5^6

CICERO*S LETTERS

B,C. 54, itT, 51

lame

belief, and of all the loyalists unparalleled, in standing forth
in my defence, I will not say what happened — for the blame
attaches to many, and is of various shades of turpi tudi
will only say briefly that it was not the rank and file,
the leaders, that played me false. And in this mattei
though some blame does attach to those who failed to
defend me, no less attaches to those who abandoned me :
and if those who were frightened deserve reproach, if
there are such, still more are those to be blamed who pre-
tended to be frightened. At any rate, my policy is justly to
be praised for refusing to allow my fellow citizens (preserved
by me and ardently desiring to preserve me) to be exposed
while bereft of leaders to armed slaves, and for preferring
that it should be made manifest how much force there
might be in the unanimity of the loyalists, if they had
been permitted to champion my cause before I had fallen,
when after that fall they had proved strong enough to raise
me up again. And the real feelings of these men you not
only had the penetration to see, when bringing forward my
case, but the power to encourage and keep aUve. In pi
moting which measure — I will not merely not deny,
shall always remember also and gladly proclaim it — you
found certain men of the highest rank more courageous in
securing my restoration than they had been in preserving me
from my fall : and, if they had chosen to maintain that frame
of mind, they would have recovered their own commanding
position along with my salvation. For when the spirit of
the loyalists had been renewed by your consulship, and
they had been roused from their dismay by the extreme
I firmness and rectitude of your official conduct ; when, above
all, Pompey^s support had been secured ; and when Caesar,
too, with all the prestige of his brilliant achievements, after
being honoured with unique and unprecedented marks of
distinction and compliments by the senate, was now support-
ing the dignity of the house, there could have been do
opportunity for a disloyal citizen of outraging the Republic
But now notice, I beg, what actually ensued. First of
all, that intruder upon the women's rites, who had shewn no
more respect for the Bona Dea than for his three sisters,
secured immunity by the votes of those men who, when a
tribune wished by a legal action to exact penalties from a

my

m

yon "

t

"»9

TO K LENTULUS SPINTHER

317

>

seditious citizen by the agency of the loyalists, deprived
the Republic of what would have been hereafter a most
splendid precedent for the punishment of sedition. And
these same persons, in the case of the monument, which was
not mine, indeed — for it was not erected from the proceeds
of spoils won by me, and I had nothing to do with it
beyond giving out the contract for its construction— well, they
allowed this monument of the senate's to have branded upon
it the name of a public enemy, and an inscription written in
blood. That those men wished my safety rouses my liveliest
gratitude, but I could have wished that they had not chosen
to take my bare safety into consideration, like doctors, but,
like trainers, my strength and complexion also t As it is,
just as Apelles perfected the head and bust of his Venus
with the most elaborate art, but left the rest of her body in
the rough, so certain persons only took pains with my head,
and left the rest of my body unfinished and un worked. Yet
in this matter I have falsified the expectation, not only of
the jealous, but also of the downright hostile, who formerly
conceived a wrong opinion from the case of Quintus Metellus,
son of Lucius — the most energetic and gallant man in the
world, and in my opinion of surpassing courage and firm-
ness — whOj people say, was much cast down and dispirited
after his return from exile.* Now, in the first place, we are
asked to believe that a man who accepted exile with entire
willingness and remarkable cheerfulness, and never took any
pains at all to get recalled, was crushed in spirit about an
affair in which he had shewn more firmness and constancy
than anyone else, even than the pre-eminent M, Scaurus him-
self ! ' But, again, the account they had received, or rather the
conjectures they were indulging in about him, they now
transferred to me, imagining that I should be more than
usually broken in spirit : whereas, in fact, the RepubUc was
inspbing me with even greater courage than I had ever had

^ Q. Caedlius Metellus Numidicus, cjcpelled from the senate and
banished B.C. 100 for refusing the oatfi to the agiarian law of S^turmnuEf
but recalled in the following year* Cicero Is fond of compniing himselT
with him. See Letter CXLVH.

* M. ^Cmilius ScauruSi consul BX. 1 15 and loSj censor 109, and long
prifutps senatus, Cicero comments elsewhere on his iiveritas (dSi Off,

1 108).

318

ClOSKCfS LETTERS

BX. $4, ^flT. 52

bdbff€p hf mlm^ it ptatn that I was the one citizen it could
not do without; and by the fact that while a bill proposed by
oolf one tribime bad recalled Metellus, the whole state had
joioed as one man in recalling me — ^the senate leading the
wmy, the whole of Italy following after, eight of the tribunes
publishiiig the biU, a consul putting the question at the
centuiiate assembly, all orders and individuals pressing it
on, in fact» with all the forces at its command. Nor is it
the case that I afterwards made any pretension, or am making
any at this day, which can justly offend anyone, even the
most malevolent : my only effort is that I may not fail either
my friends or those more remotely connected with me in
either active setvice, or counsel, or personsJ exertion. This
ccKii^ of life perhaps offends those who fix their eyes on the
glitter and show of my professional position, but are unable
to appreciate its anxieties and laboriousness.

Again, they make no concealment of their dissatisfaction
on the ground that in the speeches which I make in the
senate in praise of Oesar I am def>arting from my old policy*
But while giving explanations on the points which I put
before you a short time ago, I will not keep till the last the
following, which I have already touched upon. You will
not find, my dear Lentulus, the sentiments of the loyalists
the same as you left them — strengthened by my consulshipj
suffering relapse at intervals afterwards, crushed down before
your consulship, revived by you : they have now been aban-
doned by those whose duty it was to have maintained them :
and this fact they, who in the old state of tilings as it existed in
our day used to be called OptimaUs^ not only declare by look
and expression of countenance, by which a false pretence is
easiest supported, but have proved again and again by their
actual sympathies and votes. Accordingly, the entire view and
aim of wise citizens, such as I wish both to be and to be
reckoned, must needs have undergone a change. For that is
the maxim of that same great Plato, whom I emphatically re-
gard as my master : ** Maintain a poUtical controversy only so far
as you can convince your fellow citizens of its justice : never
offer violence to parent or fatherland."^ He, it is true, alleges
. this as his motive for having abstained from politics, because.

^ Plato, Crit, xii.

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

319

iviBg found the Athenian people all but in its dotage, and
eing that it could not be ruled by persuasion, or by anything
Sort of compulsion, while he doubted the possibility of per-
suasion, he looked upon compulsion as criminal. My posi-
an was different in this : as the people was not in its dotage,
or the question of engaging in politics still an open one for
I was bound hand and foot. Yet I rejoiced that I was
rmitted in one and the same cause to support a policy at
Jic^ advantageous to myself and acceptable to every loyalist.
I additional motive was Caesar's memorable and almost
rhuman kindness to myself and my brother, who thus
uld have deserved my support whatever he undertook ;
bile as it is, considering his great success and his brilliant
ctories, he would seem, even if he had not behaved to me
I be has, to claim a panegyric from me* For I would have
believe that, putting you aside, who were the authors of
by recall, there is no one by whose good offices I would
&t only confess, but would even rejoice, to have been so
much bound.

Having explained this matter to you, the questions you
kk about Vatinius and Crassus are easy to answer. For, since
remark about Appius, as about Caesar, " that you have
fault to find," I can only say that I am glad you approve
policy. But as to Vadnius, in the first place there had
en in the interval a reconciliation effected through
Pompey, immediately after his election to the praetor ship,
though I had, it is true, impugned his canditature in some
very strong speeches in the senate, and yet not so much for
the sake of attacking him as of defending and compliment-
ing Cato. Again, later on, there followed a very pressing
quest from Caesar that I should undertake his defence,
at my reason for testifying to his character I beg you will
l>t ask, either in the case of this defendant or of others, lest
retaliate by asking you the same question when you come
[>me : though I can do so even before you return : for
remember for whom you sent a certificate of character from
the ends of the earth. However, don't be afraid, for those
same persons are praised by myself, and will continue to be
bp. Yet, after all, there was also the motive spurring
iBe on to undertake his defence,
^mslf when I appeared for him, I

of which, during the
remarked that I

was

320

CICERO'S LETTERS

8;c. 54, 4^T. sa

doing just what the paiasite in the Eunuchus advised the
captain to do :

'* As oft as she names Phsedria, jrou retort
With Patuphtla. If ever she suggest,
' Do let us have in Pha^iria to our revel : *
Qooth you, * And let us ca.Il on Pamphila
To sing a song.* If she shall praise his looks,
Do 7011 praise hers to match them : and, in fine.
Give tit for tat, that jou may sting her souL*^

i

So I asked the jurors, since certain men of high rank, who
had also done me very great favours, were much enamoured
of my enemy, and often under my very eyes in the senate
now took him aside in grave consultation, now embraced him
familiarly and cheerfully — since these men had their Publius^
to grant me another Publius, in whose person I might repay a
slight attack by a moderate retort.^ And, indeed, I am often u.
good as my word, with the applause of gods and men. So much/
for Vatinius. Now about Crassus. I thought I had done
much to secure his gratitude in having, for the sake of the
general harmony, wiped out by a kind of voluntary act of ob-
livion all his very serious injuries, when he suddenly undertook
the defence of Gabinius, whom only a few days before he had
attacked with the greatest bitterness. Nevertheless, I should
have borne that, if he had done so without casting any
offensive reflexions on me. But on his attacking me, though
I was only arguing and not inveighing against him, I fired
up not only, I think, with the passion of the moment — for
that perhaps would not have been so hot — but the smothered
wrath at his many wrongs to me, of which I thought I had
wholly got rid, having, unconsciously to myself, lingered in my
soul, it suddenly shewed itself in full force. And it was i
this precise time that certain persons (the same whom I
frequently indicate by a sign or hint), while declaring that
they had much enjoyed my outspoken style, and had never
before fully realized that I was restored to the Republic in
all my old character, and when my conduct of that contro-
versy had gained me much credit outside the house also,
began saying that they were glad both that he was do*

* Like the character in the play (Terence, ^ww. 440), if the nobltf
annoyed Cicero by their attentions to P, Clodius, he would annor^Mh*
by his compliments to Publius Vatinius.

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

321

my enemy, and that those who were involved with him
would never be my friends. So when their ill-natured
remarks were reported to me by men of most respectable
character, and when Pompey pressed me as he bad never
done before to be reconciled to Crassus, and C^sar wrote
to say that he was exceedingly grieved at that quarrel,
I took into consideration not only my circumstances, but
my natural inclination : and Crassus, that our reconciliation
might, as it were, be attested to the Roman people, started
for his province, it might almost be said, from my hearth.
For he himself named a day and dined with me in the
suburban villa of my son-in-law Crassipes. On this account,
as you say that you have been told, I supported his cause
in the senate, which I had undertaken on Pompey^s strong
recommendation, as I was bound in honour to do.

I have now told you with what motives I have sop-
ported each measure and cause, and what my position is
in politics as far as I take any part in them : and I would
wish you to make sure of this — that I should have enter-
tained the same sentiments, if I had been still perfectly uncom-
mitted and free to choose. For I should not have thought it
^ right to fight against such overwhelming power, nor to destroy
^Kthe supremacy of the most distinguished citizens, even if it
^■had been possible ; nor, again, should I have thought myself
^■bound to abide by the same view, when circumstances were
^■changed and the feelings of the loyalists altered, but rather
^Hto bow to circumstances. For the persistence in the same
^■ww has never been regarded as a merit in men eminent
for their guidance of the helm of state ; but as in steering a
ship one secret of the art is to run before the storm, even if
yoa cannot make the harbour ; yet, when you can do so by
tacking about, it is folly to keep to the course you have
begun rather than by changing it to arrive all the same at
the destination you desire : so while we all ought in the
administration of the state to keep always in view the
object I have very frequen dy mentionedf peace combined
widi di^ty, we are not bound always to use the tame lan-
guage^ but to fijc our eyes on the same object. WbereCore,
»Bs I laid down a httle while ago, if I had had as tee a band
as possible in everything, I should yet have been no other
tkin I DOW am in politics. ^\li£n, moreover, I aoi at once

323

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, jet. sa

K

induced to adopt these sentiments by the kindness of o
tain persons, and driven to do so by the injuries of
others, I am quite content to think and speak about public
affairs as I conceive best conduces to the interests both of
myself and of the Republic. Moreover, I make this declara-
tion the more openly and frequently, both because my
brother Quintus is Caesar's legate, and because no word of
mine, however trivial, to say nothing of any act, in support
of Caesar has ever transpired, which he has not received with
such marked gratitude, as to make me look upon myself as
closely bound to him. Accordingly, I have the advantag^^
of liis popularity, which you know to be very great, and 1^^|

material resources, which you know to be immense, as
though they were my own. Nor do I think that I could in
any other way have frustrated the plots of unprincipled
persons against me, unless I had now combined with those
\ protections, which I have always possessed, the goodwill also
of the men in power. I should, to the best of my belief,
have followed this same line of policy even if I had had you
here. For I well know the reasonableness and soberness
your judgment : I know your mind, while warmly attacb
to me, to be without a tinge of malevolence to others, but
the contrary as open and candid as it is great and lofty.
have seen certain persons conduct themselves towards you as
you might have seen the same persons conduct themselves to-
wards me. The same things that have annoyed me would
certainly have annoyed you. But whenever I shall have the
enjoyment of your presence, you will be the wise critic of
all my plans : you who took thought for my safety will also
do so for my dignity. Me, indeed, you will have as the
partner and associate in all your actions, sentiments, wishes
—in fact, in everything j nor shall I ever in all my life have
any purpose so steadfastly before me, as that you should
rejoice more and more warmly every day that you did me
such eminent service.

As to your request that I would send you any books I
have written since your departure, there are some sp>eecheST
which I will give Menocritus, not so very many, so don't be
afraid ! I have also written — for I am now rather withdraw-
ing from oratory and returning to the gentler Muses, which
now give me greater delight than any others, as they have

oil

I

nh9

TO P. LENTULUS SPINTHER

323

done since my earliest youth — well, then, I have written in
the Aristotelian style, at least that was my aim, three
books in the form of a discussion in dialogue "On the
Orator/* which, I think, will be of some service to your
Lentulus. For they differ a good deal from the current
maxims, and embrace a discussion on the whole oratorical
theory of the ancients, both that of Aristotle and Isocrates,
I have also written in verse three books " On my own
Times," which I should have sent you some time ago, if I
had thought they ought to be published — for they are
witnesses, and wiD be eternal witnesses, of your services to
me and of my affection^ — but I refrained because I was
afraid* not of those who might think themselves attacked,
for I have been very sparing and gentle in that respect, but
of my benefactors, of whom it were an endless task to
mention the whole list. Nevertheless, the books, such as
they are, if I find anyone to whom I can safely commit
them, I will take care to have conveyed to you : and as far
as that part of my life and conduct is concerned, I submit
it entirely to your judgment. All that I shall succeed in
accomplishing in hterature or in learning— my old favourite
relaxations — I shall with the utmost cheerfulness place before
the bar of your criticism, for you have always had a fondness
for such things. As to what you say in your letter about your
domestic affairs, and all you charge me to do, I am so attentive
them that I don^t like being reminded, can scarcely bear,
indeed, to be asked without a very painful feeling. As to your
yinf^, in regard to Quintus's business, that you could not
do anything last summer, because you were prevented by
illne'^s from crossing to Cilicia, but that you will now do
everything in your power to settle it, I may tell you that
thfi fact of the matter is that, if he can annex this property, my

t brother thinks that he will owe to you the consolidation of
this ancestral estate, I should like you to \^Tite about all
your affairs, and about the studies and training of your son
Lenttilus (whom I regard as mine also) as confidentially
and as frequently as possible, and to believe that there never
Eien anyone either dearer or more congenial to another
'ou are to me, and that I will not only make you feel
D be the case, but will make all the world and pos-
itself to the latest generation aware of it
. .-^ - -

324

CICERO'S LETTERS

B*c. 54, ,«T.

Appius used some time back to repeat in conversation,
and afterwards said openly, even in the senate, that if he
were allowed to carry a law in the comitia curiata^ he would
draw lots with his colleague for their provinces ; but if no
curiatian law were passed, he would make an arrangement with
his colleague and succeed you : that a curiatian law was a
proper thing for a consul, but was not a necessity ; that
since he was in possession of a province by a decree of the
senate, he should have imperium in virtue of the Cornelian
law until such time as he entered the city. I don't know
what your several connexions write to you on the subject :
I understand that opinion varies. There are some who
think that you can legally refuse to quit your province,
because your successor is named without a curiatian law :
some also hold that, even if you do quit it, you may leave
some one behind you to conduct its government. For
myself, I do not feel so certain about the point of law —
although there is not much doubt even about that — as I do
of this, that it is for your greatest honour, dignity, and in-
dependence, which I know you always value above every-
thing, to hand over your province to a successor without
any delay, especially as you cannot thwart his greediness
without rousing suspicion of your own. I regard my duty
as twofold — to let you know what I think, and to defend
what you have done,

P.S. — ^I bad written the above when I received your
letter about the pubUcanu to whom I cotild not but admire
the justice of your conduct I could have wished that you
had been able by some lucky chance to avoid running
counter to the interests and wishes of that order, whose
honour you have always promoted. For my part, 1 shall
not cease to defend your decrees : but you know the ways
of that class of men; you are aware how bitterly hostile
they were to the famous Q. Scaevola himself. However, I
advise you to reconcile that order to yourself, or at least
soften its feelings, if you can by any means do so. Though
difficult, I think it is, neverthelessi not beyond the reach of
your sagacity.

FI, 0; A TV, l8

TO ATTICUS

32s

CLIII (A IV, 18)

TO ATTICUS (IN ASIA)

Rome, October

As it is/ to tell you my opinion of affairs, we must put
up with it. You ask me how I have behaved With firm-
ness and dignity. "What about Pompey/' you will say,
'* how did he take it ? " With great consideration, and with
the convection that he must have some regard for my posi-
tion, until a satisfactory atonement had been made to me.
** How, then," you will say, " was the acquittal secured ? "
It was a case of mere dummies,' and incredible incompet-
ence on the part of the accusers— that is to say» of L, Len-
tulus, son of Lucius, who, according to the universal
murmur, acted collusively. In the next place, Pompey was
extraordinarily urgent; and the jurors were a mean set
of fellows. Yet, in spite of everything, there were thirty-
two votes for conviction, thirty-eight for acquittal. There
are the other prosecutions hanging over his head ; he is by
no means entirely free yet. You will say, ** Well, then,
how do you bear it?" With the best air possible, by
heaven ! and I really do plume myself on my behaviour.
VVe have lost, my dear Pomponius, not only all the healthy
sap and blood of our old constitution, but even its colour and
outward show. There is no Republic to give a moment's
pleasure or a feeling of security. " And is that, then," you

.will say, '*a satisfaction to you?" Precisely that. Fori
il what a fair course the state had for a short time, while
was at the helm, and what a return has been made me 1
It does not give me a pang that one man absorbs aO powen

'The men to burst with envy are those who were indignant at
my having had some power. There are many things which

■ console me, without my departing an inch from my regular

1 position; and I am returning to the life best suited to my

* The beginning of the letter is lost, referring to the acquittal of
[ Gahmitis on a charge of makstas.

• yopTtia j\t\k%fa^ *'mcre bugbears."

326

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.Ct 54, ^^\

natural disposition — to letters and the studies that I love.
My labour in pleading I console by my delight in oratory.
I ftnd delight in my town house and ray country residences.
I do not recall the height from which I have fallen, but the
humble position from which I have risen. As long as I
have my brother and you with me, let those fellows be
hanged, drawn, and quartered for all I care : I can play
the philosopher with you. That part of my soul, in which
in old times irritability had its home, has grown completely
callous. I find no pleasure in anything that is not private
and domestic. You will find me in a state of magnificent
repose, to which nothing contribtites more than the prospect
of your return. For there is no one in the wide world whose
feelings are so much in sympathy with my own. But now
let me tell you the rest. Matters are drifting on to an inter-
regnum ; and there is a dictatorship in the air, in fact a good
deal of talk about it, which did Gabinius also some service
with timid Jurors. All the candidates for the consulship are
charged with bribery. You may add to them Gabinius, on
whom L. Sulla had served notice, feeling certain that he was
in a hopeless position^Torquatus having, without success,
demanded to have the prosecution. But they will all be ac-
quitted, and henceforth no one will be condemned for any-
thing except homicide. This last charge is warmly pressed,
and accordingly informers are busy. M. Fulvius Nobilior
has been convicted. Many others have had the wit to
abstain from even putting in an appearance. Is there any
more news ? Yes ! After Gabinius^s acquittal another panel
of jurors, in a fit of irritation, an hour later condemned
Antiochus Gabinius, some fellow from the studio of Sopolis,
a freedman and orderly officer of Gabinius, under the kx
Fapia. Consequently he at once remarked, ** So the Re-
public will not acquit me under the law of treason as it
did you!"*

* Antiochus Gabinius was tried, not for treason {maiestas), but under the
Ux Fapia, for having, though a peit^nus^ acted as a citizen ; but he say*
* ' win not acquit me of irtasoHy^ because he means to infer that his con-
demnation was really in place of Gabinius, whose acquittal had irritaled
his jury ; therefore he was practically convicted of maicstas instead of his
patron Gabinius. I have, accordingly, ventured tt> elicit the end of a
hexameter from the Greek letters of the MS», of which no saiisfACtory

A IV, l8

TO ATTICUS

327

^

Pomptinus wants to celebrate a triumph on the 2nd of
November. He is openly opposed by the prsetors Cato and
Serrilius and the tribune Q. Mucius. For they say that no
law for his imperium was ever carried : * and this one too
was carried, by heaven, in a stupid way. But Pomptinus
will have the consul Appius on his side.* Cato, however,
declares that he shall never triumph so long as he is alive.
I think this affair, like many of the same sort, will come
to nothing. Appius thinks of going to Cilicia without
a law, and at his own expense,* I received a letter on
the 24th of October from my brother and from Caesar,
dated from the nearest coasts of Britain on the 26th of
September. Britain done with . . . hostages taken . . .
no booty ... a tribute, however, imposed ; they were on
the point of bringing back the army. Q. Pilius has just
set out to join Csesar. If you have any love for me or your
family, or any truth in you, or even if you have any taste
left, and any idea of enjoying all your blessings, it is really
time for you to be on your way home, and, in fact, almost
here. I vow I cannot get on without you. And what
wonder that I can't get on without you^ when I miss
Dionysius so much ? The latter, in fact, as soon as the day
comes, both I and my young Cicero will demand of you.
The last letter I had from you was dated Ephesus, 9th of
August.

aCcmmt has heat given, and to read Itaque dixit statim ' ' respuHHca lige
fn&iestaiis ov ooi Ktv ap'lad fi a^iri (or a^ty)" The quotation is not
known. Antiochus Gabinius was doubtless of Greek origin and natur-
ally quoted Greek poetry. Sopolis was a Greek painter living at Rome
(Pliny, N. N. xxxv. §§ 40, 43).

* Pomptinus had been waiting outside Rome for some years to get his
triamph (see p. 309). The negant latum de imperio must refer to a /ex
curiata originally conferring his imperium^ which his oppjnents alleged
had not been passed. The insulse latum refers to the law now passed
granting him the triumph in spite of this. This latter was passed by
the old trick of the praetor appearing in the campus before daybreak to
prevent obnuntiatio. The result was that the tribunes intemipted the
|irocession« which led to fighting and bloodshed (Dio, 39, 65),

' Because he wanted to go to his pfovince hunself in spite of having
fjuled to get a lex cunata (p. 324).

* I.t,^ without waiting for the senate to vote the usual outfit {omafd
praidnciaftt).

S28

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C» ?4- ,«7. «2

CLIV (Q FR III, 5-6)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

TuscuLUM (October)

You ask me wliat I have done about the books which I
begun to write when in my Cuman villa : I have not been
idle and am not being idle now; but I have frequently
changed the whole plan and arrangement of the work, I
had already completed two books, in which I represented
a conversation taking place on the Novendialia held in the
consulship of Tuditanus and Aquilius/ between Africanus,
shortly before his death, and Lselius, Philus, Manilius,
P. Rutilius, Q. Tubero, and Lzelius^s sons-in-law, Fannius
and Sc^evola ; a conversation which was extended to nine
days and the same number of books ** On the best Constitu-
tion of the State** and "On the best Citizen." The work
was excellently composed, and the rank of ttie speakers added
considerable weight to the style. But when these books
were read to me in the presence of Sallustius at Tusculum,
it was suggested to me by him that a discourse on such
subjects would come with much greater force if I were my-
self the speaker on the Republic, especially as I was a no
mere Heraclides Ponticiis/ but an ex-consul, and one who
had been engaged in the most important affairs in the state :
that when I put them in the mouth of men of such ancient
date they would have an air of unreality ; that I had shewn
good taste in my books about the science of rhetoric in
keeping the dialogue of the orators apart from myself, and yet
had attributed it to men whom I had personally seen : and,
fmaily, that Aristotle delivers in the first person his essays "On
the Republic " and **0n the Eminent Man." I was influenced
the more by this from the fact that I was unable to touch on

* B.C. 1291, The Nmtndiaiia was a nine days' festival on the occasion
of some special evil omens or prodigies ; for an instance (in B.a 202)1
see Livy, 30, 38. The book referred to is that '* On the Republic*'

• I.e.-, a mere theorist like Heraclides Ponticus, a pupil of Flato'i>
whose work ** On Constitutions " still exists.

f FR III, 5-6

TO QUINTUS

329

tie most imjx)rtant commotions in our state, because they
were subsequent to the age of the speakers. Moreover, my
express object then was not to offend anyone by launching
into the events of my own time : as it is, I shall avoid that
and at the same time be the speaker with you. Nevertheless,
when I come to Rome I will send you the dialogues as they
originally stood. For I fancy that those books will convince
you that they have not been abandoned by me without
some chagrin.

I am extremely gratified by Caesar's affection of which you
write to me» The offers which he holds out 1 do not much
reckon on, nor have I any thirst for honours or longing for
glory ; and I look forward more to the continuation of his
kindness than to the falfilment of his promises. Still, I live
a life so prominent and laborious that I might seem to be
expecting the ver>^ thing that I deprecate. As to your re*
quest that I should compose some verses, you could hardly
beheve, my dear brother, how short of time I am : nor do I
feel much moved in spirit to write poetry on the subject you
mention ♦ Do you really come to me for disquisitions on
things that I can scarcely conceive even in imagination —
yoa who have distanced everybody in that style of vivid and
descriptive writing ? Yet I would have done it if I could,
but, as you will assuredly not fail to notice, for writing
poetry there is need of a certain freshness of mind of which
tny occupations entirely deprive me. I withdraw myself, it
is true, from all political anxiety and devote myself to
literature ; still, I will hint to you what, by heaven^ I specially
wished to have concealed from you. It cuts me to the
heart, my dearest brother, to the heart, to think that there is
no Republic, no law courts, and that my present time of
life, which ought to have been in the full bloom of senatorial

Eity, is distracted with the labours of the forum or eked
by private studies, and that the object on which from
lood I had set my heart,

*' Far to excel, and tower above the crowd,"

entirely gone: that my opponents have in some cases
been left unattacked by me, in others even defended 1 that

* Horn. //. vi. 208.

330

CICERO^S LETTERS

II.C. 54, JETT. 55

not only my sympathies, but my very dislikes, are not free
and that Caesar is the one man in the world who has been
found to love me to my heart's content, or even, as others
think, the only one who was inclined to do so. However,
there is none of aU these vexations of such a kind as to be
beyond the reach of many daily consolations ; but the
greatest of consolations will be our being together. As it is,
to those other sources of vexation there is added my very
deep r^et for your absence. If I had defended Gabinius,
which Pansa thought I ought to have done, I should have
/^ been quite ruined : those who hate him — and that is entire
^ orders — would have begun to hate me for the sake of their
hatred for him, I confined myself, as I think with great
dignity, to doing only that which all the world saw me do.
And to sum up the whole case, I am, as you advise, devoting
all ray efforts to tranquiUity and peace. As to the books :
Tyrannic is a slow-coach : I uill speak to Chrysippus, but it
is a laborious business and requires a man of the utmost
industry. I find it in my own case, for, though I am as diligent
as possible, I get nothing done. As to the Latin books, I
don*t know which way to turn — they are copied and ex-
posed for sale with such a quantity of errors ! However,
whatever can possibly be done I will not neglect to da
Gains Rebilus, as I wrote to you before, is at Rome. He
solemnly affirms his great obligations to you, and reports well
of your health.* I think the question of the treasury was
settled in my absence. When yon speak of having finished
four tragedies in sixteen days, I presume you are borrowing
from some one else ? And do you deign to be indebted to
others after writing the Electra and the Troades ? Don't be
idle ; and don't think the proverbial yt^Otdt (rtavrdv was only
meant to discourage vanity : it means also that we should be
aware of our own qualities. But pray send me these tragedies
as well as the Erigona. I have now answered your last tm>
letters.

^ Reading; qui omnia adiurai dtbert tibi tt te valere fTHUrtftai.
text, however, is corrupt.

Q FR III, 5-6, 7 TO QUINTUS 33 1

CLV (Q FR III, 7)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

TuscuLUM (November)

At Rome, and espedaUy on the Appian road as fisu- as the
temple of Mars, diere is a remarkable flood. The promenade
of Crassipes has been washed away, pleasure grounds, a
great number of shops. There is a great sheet of water
ri^t up to the public fish-pond. That doctrine of Homer's
is in full play :

"The days in autumn when in violent flood
Zeus poors lus waters, wroth at sinful men " —

for it falls in with the acquittal of Gabinius —

*' Who wrench the law to suit their crooked ends
And drive oat justice, recking naught of Gods." '

But I have made up my mind not to care about such
tilings. When I get back to Rome I will write and tell you
ihy observations, and especially about the dictatorship, and I
wUl also send a letter to Labienus and one to Ligurius. I
write this before daybreak by the carved wood lamp-stand,
in which I take great delight, because they tell me diat you
had it made when you were at Samos. Good-bye, dearest
and best of brothers.

' Hom. //. zvL 38s.

332

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX. 54, iET. 5a

CLVI (F VII, l6)

TO C TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome (November)

In the " Trojan Horse," just at the end, you remember the
words, "Too kte they learn wisdom." ^ You, however, old
man, were wise in time. Those first snappy letters of yours

were foolish enough, and then 1 I don't at all blame you

for not being over-curious in regard to Britain* For the
present, however, you seem to be in winter quarters some-
what short of warm clothing, and therefore not caring tQ
stir out I

*' Not here and there, but everywhere.

Be wise and ware :
No sharper steel can warrior bear.'*

If I had been by way of dining out, I would not have failed
your friend Cn. Octavius ; to whom, however, I did remark
upon his repeated invitations, " Pray, who are you ? " But,
by Hercules, joking apart, he is a pretty fellow : I could have
wished you had taken him with you I Let me know for
certain what you are doing and whether you intend coming
to Italy at all this winter. Balbus has assured me that you
will be rich. Whether he speaks after the simple Roman
fashion, meaning that you will be well supplied with money,
or according to the Stoic dictum, that '*all are rich who
can enjoy the sky and the earth," I shall know hereafter.
Those who come from your part accuse you of pride, be-
cause they say you won't answer men who put questions to
you. However, there is one thing that will please you:
they all agree in saying that there is no better lawyer thao
you at Samarobriva ! *

^ By Livius Andronicus or Nsevius, Tyrrell would write the proverb
in exiremo sero lapiunt^ ** 'tis too late to be wise at the last.'* There was
a proverb, iero pardmQnia infundc^ something like this, Sen. Ep. i. 5,
frr>m the Greek (Hes. Op. 369), 5eiXiy 5' Iv frui^^ikvi, ^uitlt.

^ In Gallia Belgica, mod. Antietu.

r Vll, l6; A i\, 17

TO ATTIC US

333

►

CLVII (A IV, 17)

TO ATTICUS (ON HIS WAY TO ROME;

Rome (November)

At last the long-expected letter from you ! Back to Italy ^
how delightful ! What wonderful fidelity to your promise I
What a charming voyage 1 About this last, by HerculeSi I was
very nen'ous, remembering the fur wrappers of your former
crossing. But, unless I am mistaken, I shall see you sooner
than you say in your letter. For I believe you thought that
)'our ladies were in Apulia, and when you find that not to
be the case, what can there be to detain you there? Are
you bound to give Vestorius some days, and must you go
through the stale banquet of his Latin Atticism again after
an interval ? Nay, fly hither and visit (the remains) of that
genuine Republic of ours ! . . . ' Observe my strength of
mind and my supreme indifference to the Felician ^ one-
twelfth legacy, and also, by heaven, my very gratifying con-
nexion with Caesar^ — ^for this delights me as the one spar
left me from the present shipwreck — Cafsar, I say, who
treats your and my Quintus, heavens ! with what honour,
respect, and favours ! It is exactly as if I were the iV/h
pfrm/or. The choice was just lately ofiered him of selecting
any of the winter quarters, as he writes me word. Wouldn't
you be fond of such a man as that? Of which of your
friends would you, if not of him ? But look you I did I
write you word that I was legatus to Pompey, and should
be outside the city from the 13th of January onwards?
This appeared to me to square with many things. But why
say more? I will, I think, reserve the rest till we mee^

^ There are some words here too conrtipt to be translated with any
cOoEdence. They appear to convey a summary of news already written
la «eyeml letters as to the bribery at the elections, the acquittal of
Ckbiiuiis, ajid the rumour of a dictatorship.

• A legacy of a twelfth left by a certain Felix to Cicero and Quintua
Ikid been rendered duU by a mistake as to the wilL See the letter Co
QidntQs» p. 338.

3H

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, JET, 52

that you may, after all^ have something to look forward to.
My very best regards to Dionysius, for whom, indeed, I
have not merely kept a place, but have even built one. In
fine, to the supreme joy of your return, a finishing stroke
wiU be added by his arrival. The day you arrive, you and
your party will, I entreat you, stay with me.

CLVIII (Q FR m, 8)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)
Rome (November)

I

The earlier of your two letters is full of irritability and
complainings, and you say you gave another of the same
sort the day before to Labienus, who has not yet arrived —
but I have nothing to say in answer to it, for your more
recent letter has obliterated all trace of vexation from my
mind I will only give you this hint and make this request,
that in the midst of your vexations and labours you should
recall what our notion was as to your going to Caesar. For
our object was not the acquisition of certain small and un-
important gains. For what was there of that kind which
we should have thought worth the price of our separation ?
What we sought was the strongest possible security for the
maintenance of our entire political position by the counten-
ance of a man of the highest character and most commanding
influence. Our interest is not so much in the acquisition
of sums of money, as in the reahzation of this hope: all
else that you get is to be regarded only as a security against
actual loss.^ Wherefore, if you will frequently turn your
thoughts back upon what we originally proposed to our-
selves and hoped to do, you will bear with less impatience
the labours of military service of which you speak and the

^ Cicero means, '* the substantial gain to be got from your serving trodei
Cfisar in Gaul is the securing of his protection in the future : all otbei
gains, such as money etc, are merely to be regarded as securing yon
&om immediate loss in thus going to Gaul ; they don't add luiythii^
fresh to our position and prospects"

fR ni, S

TO QUINTUS

335

er things which annoy you, and, nevertheless, will resign
Bm whenever you choose. But the right moment for
_ SLt step is not yet come, though it is now not far off.
Farthermore, I give you this hint — don't commit anything
at all to writing, the publication of which would be annoying
to us* There are many things that I would rather not know
than learn at some risk. I shall write at greater length to
you with a mind less preoccupied, when my boy Cicero is,
as I hope he will be, in a good state of health. Pray be
careful to let me know to whom I should give the letter
which I shall then send you^to Caesar^s letter-carriers, for
him to forward them direct to you, or to those of Labienus ?
For where your Nervii dwell, and how far off, I have no
idea,* I derived great pleasure from your letter describing
[>urage and djgnity displayed (as you say) by Csesar in

reme sorrow. You bid me finish the poem in his

SSour which I had begun; and although I have been
fc'erted from it by business, and still more by my feelings,
since Caesar knows that I did begin something, I will
am to my design, and will complete in these leisure days
the ** supplications,"* during which I greatly rejoice that
Iriend Messalla and the rest are at last relieved from
In reckoning on him as certain to be consul with
litius, you are quite in agreement with my own opinion,
f will guarantee Messalla to Caesar : but Memmius cherishes
hope, founded on Caesar's return to Italy, in which I
kink he is under a mistake. He is, indeed, quite out of
here. Scaurus, again, has been long ago thrown over by
Pompey, The business has been put off : the comitia post-
[)n^ and postponed, till we may expect an interregnum,
tie rumour of a dictator is not pleasing to the aristocrats ;
>r myself, I like still less what they say. But the proposal,
a whole, is looked upon with alarm, and grows unpopular,
>mpey says outright that he doesn't wish it : to me pre-
>U8ly be used not personally to deny the wish. Hirrus
likely to be the proposer. Ye gods! what folly 1

' Quintus had his winter quarters among the Nervii, in a town near
be modern Chau-leroi. In this winter he was in great danger from a
Udden risiog of the Nervii and other tribes (Caes. B. G, v. 24-49).

^ Twenty days of ^pplicatio had been decreed in nonour of C^e&ar's
impftignt of B.C. 55 (C3is, B, G. iv. 38).

336

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54, i«T. 51

How in love with himself and without — a rival I He b«»

commissioned me to choke off Caelius Vinicianus, a man
much attached to me. Whether Pompey wishes it or not^ it
is difficult to be sure. However, if it is Hirrus who makes the
proposal, he will not convince people that he does not wish
it. There is nothing else being talked about in politics just
now ; at any rate, nothing else is being done. The funeral
of the son of Serranus Domesticus took place in very
melancholy circumstances on the 23rd of November, His
father delivered the funeral oration which I composed for
him. Now about Milo. Pompey gives him no support,
and is all for Gutta, saying also that he will secure Caesar
on his side. Milo is alarmed at this, and no wonder, and
almost gives up hope if Pompey is created dictator. If he
assists anyone who vetoes the dictatorship by his troop and
bodyguard,^ he fears he may excite Pompey*s enmity : if he
doesn't do so, he fears the proposal may be carried by force.
He is preparing games on a most magnificent scale, at «
cost, I assure you, that no one has ever exceeded. It is
foolish, on two or even three accounts, to give games that
were not demanded— he has already given a magnificent
show of gladiators ; he cannot afford it : he is only an
executor, and might have reflected that he is now an
executor, not an asdile. That is about all I had to write.
Take care of yourself, dearest brother.

CLIX (Q FR III, 9)

TO HIS BROTHER QUINTUS (IN GAUL)

Rome (November or December)

In regard to Gabinius, I had not to carry out any of th^
measures which you suggested with such afiFectionate soliri*
tude. " May the earth swallow tne rather, etc. T* ' I acted with
very great dignity and also with the greatest consideratioa

* His gladiators, which he kept in training for the games he
going to give in honour of a deceased friend.

^ /,€., rather than defend him. rort ft4n xovm (wfila %dmf), Hoi
//. iv. 182.

Q FR III, 9

TO QUINTUS

337

neither bore hardly on him nor helped him. I gave

>ng evidence, in other respects 1 did not stir. The dis-

efnl and mischievous result of the trial I bore with the

aost serenity* And this is the advantage which, after all

tiat has happened, has accrued to me — that I am not even

fected in the least by those evDs in the state and the

entious conduct of the shameless, which used formerly to

uake me burst with indignation : for anything more aban-

Soned than the men and the times in which we are living

there cannot be. Accordingly, as no pleasure can possibly

^e got from politics, I don't know why I should lose my

^^^Kmper. Literature and my favourite studies, along with

^Hie retirement of my country houses, and above all our two

boys, furnish my enjoyments. The one man who vexes me

is Milo. But I hope an end will be put to my anxieties by

his getting the consulship : and to obtain this for him I shall

struggle as hard as I did for my own, and you, I am sure,

jrill continue to give assistance from over there. In his

KiLse other things are all secure, unless it is snatched from

fmis grasp by downright violence ; it is about his means that

1 am frightened :

^^ •' For he is now beyond all bearing mad,** *

^D spend 1,000,000 sesterces (about ^8^000) on his games.
His want of prudence in this one particular I shall put up
with as well as I can, and you should be strong-minded
enough to do the same. In mentioning the changes to be
icpected next year, I didn't mean you to understand me to
efer to domestic alarms : the reference was wholly to the
ite of the Republic, in which, though not charged with any
Dtual duty, I can scarcely dischai^e myself from all anxiety,
^et how cautious I would have you be in writing you may
Liess from the fact that I do not mention in my letters to
you even open acts of disorder in the state, lest my letter
should be intercepted and give offence to the feelings of any-
one< Wherefore, as far as domestic affairs are concerned, I
would have you be quite easy: in politics I know how
anxious you always are. I can see that our friend Messalla will

^ 6 ik ftaitriTai ovK h' avtieruiQ (Horn. 77. viii. 355), The numerals
em doubtful. According to some MSS. the amouDt would be

»,O00,O0O, Lt.f j£&0,CXX).

1. Z

338

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. S4» J^T** 5^

be consul, if by means of an tnterrex^ without any prosecu-
tion, if by that of a dictator, ¥rithout danger of conviction.
He is not disHked by anyone. Hortensius's wann support
will stand him in good stead, Gabinius*s acquittal is looked
upon as a general act of indemnity. En passant : nothing
has, after all, been done as yet about a dictatorship. Pompey
is out of town ; Appius is intriguing darkly ; Hirrus is paving
the way : there are many tribunes calculated on to veto it :
the people are indifferent : the leading men disinclined to it :
I don't stir a finger. I am exceedingly obliged for your
promises as to slaves, and I am indeed, as you say, short-
handed both at Rome and on my estates. But pray do
nothing for my convenience unless it entirely suits your
own, and your means. About the letter of Vatinius I
laughed heartily. But though I know I am being watched
by him, I can swaUow his hatred and digest it too. You
urge me to "finish" : well, I have finished what, in my own
opinion at least, is a very pretty ** epic " on Ca&sar, but I am in
search of a trustworthy letter-carrier, lest it should share the
fate of your Erigana * — the only personage who has missed
a safe journey from Gaul during Caesar's governorship.
■ What ? because I had no good stone was I to pull down
the whole building ?^a building which I like better every
day of my life * the lower court especially and the chambers
attached to it are admirable. As to Arcanum, it is a building
worthy of Csesar, or, by heaven, of some one even more
tasteful still For your statues, palmstra, fish-pond, and
conduit are worthy of many Philotimuses, and quite above
your Diphiluses. But I will visit them personally, as well
as sending men to look after them and giving orders
about them. As to the will of Felix, you will complain more
when you know all For the document which he believed
himself to have sealed, in which your name was most certainly
entered as heir to a twelfth, this, by a mistake of his own
and of his slave Sicura, he did not seal ; while the one which
he did not intend to seal he did seal But let it go hang,
so long as we keep well 1 I am as devoted to your son
Cicero as you can wish, and as he deserves, and as I am
bound to be. However, I am letting him leave me, both to

The tragedy written by Quintus and lost in transiti

J. ^

QFKin, 9; FVii, 10 TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA

339

avoid keeping him from his teachers, and because his mother
is leaving, without whom I am very much alarmed as to the
boy's large appetite. Yet, after all, we see a great deal of
each other. 1 have now answered all your letters. Dearest
and best of brothers, good-bye.

CLX (F VII, lo)

TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome (November)

I HAVB read your letter which informs me that our Caesar con-
siders you a great lawyer. You must be glad to have found
a country where you have the credit of knowing something.
But if you had gone to Britain also, I feel sure that there
would not have been in all that great island anyone more
learned in the law than you. However — you won't mind my
laughing, for you invited me to do so — I am becomipg
positively a little jealous of you ! That you should have bee*i
actually sent for by a man whom other people — not because
of his pride, but of his many engagements— cannot venture
to approach 1

But in that letter you told me nothing about your success,
which, by heaven, is of no less concern to me than my own.
I am very much afraid you may be frozen in your winter
quarters : and therefore I think you ought to use a good
stove. Mucins and Manilius '- conctir " in this opinion,
especially on the ground of your being short of military
cloaks. However, I am told that you are having a sufficiently
warm time of It where you are — news which made me much
alarmed for you/ However, in military matters you are
much more cautious than at the bar, seeing that you wouldn*t
take a swim in the ocean, fond of swimming as you are, and
wouldn't take a look at the British charioteers, though in old
time I could never cheat you even out of a blind-folded

• He seems to refer to the rising of the Nervii against the Romcii
winter quarters {Oes. B. G^ v, 39 j^jf)*

340

CICERO*S LETTERS

B.C S4> ^T. 52

gladiator/ But enough of joking. You know how earnestly
I have written to Caesar about you ; I know how often. Yet»
in truth, 1 have lately ceased doing so, lest I should appear
to distrust the kindness of a man who has been most liberal
and affectionate to me. However, in the very last letter I
wrote I thought he ought to be reminded. I did so. Please
tell me what effect it had, and at the same time tell me about
your position in general and all your plans. For I am
i anxious to know what you are doing, what you are expecting,
how long your separation from us you think is to last I
would wish you to believe that the one consolation, enabling
me to bear your absence, is the knowledge that it is for your
advantage. But if that is not so, nothing can be more foolish
than both the one and the other of us : me for not inducing
you to come back to Rome — ^you for not flying thither. By
heavens, our conversation, whether serious or jesting, will be
worth more not only than the enemy, but even than our
*' brothers * the Aedui.* Wherefore let me know about eveiy-
thing as soon as possible :

" 1*11 be some use by comfort, rede, or pelf.***

CLXI (F I, 10)

TO L. VALERIUS (IN CILICIA)

Rome

M, Cicero wishes heath to L. Valerius, learned in the law.
For why I should not pay you this compliment I don't know,
especially considering that in these times one may employ
impudence to supply the place of learning, I have written
to our friend Lentulus, thanking him earnestly in your name.
But I could wish that you would now cease using my letter

- Andahatam^ a gladiator with a dlosed helmet covering the face,
who thus fought without seeing his adversary.

' A title granted to the Aedui by the seoate (Cses. ^. C t J3 i Tit
Ann. xi. 25), p. 53,

* Terence, HeaaionL M.

' 1, 10 xni, 49

TO M. CURIUS

341

bf intTodtiction and at last come back to us, and prefer a

city where you are of some account^ to a place where you
^appear to be the only man of legal learning. However,
those who come from where you are either say you are proud
because you give no " opinions," or insulting because you
give bad ones.^ But I am now longing to crack a joke with
Lyou face to face. So come as soon as ever you can, and
don't go and visit your native Apulia, that we may have the
of welcoming your safe return. For if you go there, like
aother Ulysses, you will not recognize any of your friends,*

CLXII (F XIII, 49)

»

TO M. CURIUS (A PROCONSUL)

R0M£

Q. PoMPKius, son of Sextus, has become my intimate friend
from many causes of long standing. As he has often in the
past been accustomed to defend his material interests, as well
as his reputation and influence, by my recommendations, so
on the present occasion assuredly, with you as governor of
the province, he ought to be able to feel that he has never
had a warmer recommendation to anyone. Wherefore I beg
you with more than ordinary earnestness that, as you ought in
view of our close friendship to regard all my friends as your
own, you would give the bearer so high a place in your
regard, that be may feel that nothing could have been more
to his interest and honour than my recommendation. Fare-
weU.

* Cicero perhaps means that Valerius's ** opinions " are too right to suit

SQch a set as are to be fo\ind tn the province. Valerius will not mind

.people there thinking him a bad lawyer. **At Rome you are con-

atd & good lawyer, in Cilicia they don't think so ! "

€tigH&s£fj tu&rum nemintm. Others read cognosun ttiorum nemini,

*yoti will not be recognized by any of your friends," which agrees

I'btiter with Homer's account of the return of Utysses. But perhaps the

1 eiact companaon is not to be pressed.

542

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 54f '^r, 53

CLXIII (Fxm,6o)
TO C. MUNATIUS (IN A PROVINCE)

ROMS

L. LiviNEius Trypho is to begin with a freedman of my
most intimate friend L, Regulus (whose disaster makes me
more than ever anxious to do him some service — for as far as
feeling goes I could not be warmer) : but I also am attached
to his freedman on his own account, for he shewed me very
great kindness at that time in my career, when I was best
able to see men's real goodwill and fidelity. I recommead
him to you with all the warmth that one who is grateful and
not oblivious should use in recommending those who have
done him good service. You will have greatly gratified me
if he is made to feel that in confronting many dangers for my
security, and often undertaking voyages in the depths of
winter, he has also put you under an obligation in view of
youi kind feeling towards me. ™

CLXIV (F xm, 73)

TO Q. PHILIPPUS (PROCONSUL OF ASIA)

Rome

I CONGRATULATE you on your safe return to your family from
your province, without loss to your reputation or to the state.
But if I had seen you at Rome I should also have thanked
you for having looked after L. Egnatius, my most intimate
friend, who is still absent^ and L. Oppius» who is here. ^Vith
Antipater of Derbe I have become not merely on visidq"
terms, but really very Jhtimate. I have been told that yd
are exceedingly angry with him, and I was very sorry to he
it. I have no means of judging the merits of the case, on ,
I am persuaded that a man of your character has done

F xni, 60, 73 ; II, I TO C. SCRIBONIUS CURIO

343

nothixig without good reason. However, I do beg of you
again and again that, in consideration of our old friendship,
you will, for my sake if for anyone's, grant his sons, who
are in your power, their liberty, unless you consider that in
doing so your reputation may be injured. If I had thought^
'" at, I would never have made the request, for your fame is
' more importance in my eyes than any friendship with him.
tut I persuade myself — though I may possibly be mistaken
" at this measure wiE bring you honour rather than abuse.
iTiat can be done in the matter, and what you can do for
\f sake (for as to your willingness I feel no doubt), I should
obliged by your inforaiing me, if it is not too much
^ trouble to you,

B5 was the year in which Crassus was defeated and killed in
a, making thus the first break in the tdumvtrate, when already
the lies between Pompey and Caesar were weakened by
the death of lulia in the previous year, Caesar, however,
had been in great difficulties in GauL At the end of
the previous year a fresh rising of the Nervii destroyed a
Roman l^on and put Q. Cicero in great danger. In the
present year Quintus met with his disaster at the hands
of the Sigambri. The chief event to Cicero personally was his election
into the college of augurs, in place of the younger Crassus, Atticus
appears to be id Rome, for there are no letters to him. There was
a series of interregna this year owing to partisan conflicts, lasting till
Jnly^ and when the consuls were at length appointed^ they failed to
hold the ejections for B,c. 52.

CLXV (F 11, I)

f.c^ sat Cora.,
M. Doautias
Calvinus,,
M. Valerius
UcasaJU.

TO C SCRIBONIUS CURIO' (IN ASIA)

Rome (January or February)

lOUGH I am sorry that you have suspected me of neglect,
et it was not so annoying to me to have my lack of atten-

* The younger Curio was now quaestor to C. Clodius, brother of
js and Appius, in Asia, He was tribvme in B*c, 50, when he
nty changed sides and joined Caesar, who purchased his adhesion
bying his immense debts.

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX, 53, .«T. S3

tion found fault with, as delightful to have it missed by you i
especially as in the particular point on which you accuse me
I happen to be innocent, while in shewing that you miss a
letter from me, you avow an affection for me, of which,
indeed, I was fully aware, but which, neverthdess, is very
soothing and gratifying to my feelings. The fact is that I
have never let anyone go, so long, that is, as I thought him
likely to reach you, without giving him a letter. Why, was
there ever such an untiring correspondent as I ? From you,
however, I have received two, or at the most three letters — and
those extremely brief. Wherefore, if you are a harsh judge of
me, I shall find you guilty on precisely the same charge. But
if you don't want me to do that, you will have to be considerate
to me. However, enough about writing ; for I am not afraid
of failing to satiate you with my correspondence, especially if
you shew a just appreciation of my zeal in that department
I have been grieved on the one hand at your long absence
from us, because I have lost the advantage of a most de-
lightful intimacy ; and yet on the other hand I rejoice at it,
because while on this foreign service you have gained all
your objects with infinite credit to yourself^ and because in
all you have undertaken fortune has answered to my wishes.
There is one injunction, a very short one, which my un-
speakable affection for you compels me to give you. Such
lofty expectations are entertained of your spirit, shall I say?
or of your ability, that I cannot refrain from imploring and be-
seeching you to return to us with a character so finished, as
to be able to support and maintain the expectations which
you have excited. And since no loss of memory will ever
obliterate my recollection of your services to me, I beg you
not to forget that, whatever increase of fortune or position
may befall you, you would not have been able to attain it,
had you not as a boy obeyed my most faithful and affectionate
counsels.* Wherefore it will be your duty to shew me such
affection, that my age — ^now on the decline — may find repose
in your devotion and youth.

^ Curio had supported Cicero against Clodius, and had worked for
his recall He seems to have attenaed at Cicero's house for the study of
ihetoric or legal practice, as was the fashion for young men to do, He
presently married Fulvia, the widow of Clodius, who after his death in
Africa (b^c. 48) mariied AnConj.

■*ii» I ; VIM I TO C TREBATIUS TESTA

345

CLXVI (F VII. ii)

TO C, TREBATIUS TESTA {IN GAUL)

Rome (January or February)

If you had not left Rome before, you certainly would have
left it now. For who wants a lawyer when there are so
many interregna f I shall advise all defendants in civil suits
to ask each tnterrex for two adjournments for obtaining
legal assistance.^ Do you think that 1 have taken a pretty
good hint from you as to civil procedure ? But come ! How
axe you ? What is happening ? For I notice in your letter a
tendency to be even jocose. These are better signs than the
signa in my Tusculan villa.* But I want to know what it
means. You say, indeed, that you are consulted by Csesar, but
I should have preferred his consulting for you. If that is
taking place, or you think it likely to take place, by all
means persevere in your military service and stay on ; I
shall console myself for my loss of you by the hope that it
will be your gain : but if, on the other hand, things are not
paying with you, come back to us. For either something will
turn up sooner or later here, or, if not, one conversation be-
tween you and me, by heaven, will be worth more than all
the Samobrivae^ in the world. Finally, if you return
speedily, there will be no talk about it ; but if you stay away
much longer without getting anything, I am in terror not

I only of Laberius, but of our comrade Valerius also. For it
I * The ifUerregHa lasting this year till July. No legal business could be
dooe, as the law courts were closed during an inlerre^num. But Cicero
jesttogl^ says that he advises clients to apply to each interrex (who only
Jield omce for five days) for two adjournments, whereby he would get
lus case postponed indefinitely: for if each adjournment was to the
third day, the two would cover each interregnum. Of coarse he is only
jetting, for in any case the cause would not come on,

• There is a play on the double meaning of iigna^ "signs'* and
** statues," Cicero did not like the statues m his Tusculanum. See
Utter CXXV.

^ Samobriva C Amiens), where Trebatius was, or had been, in Caesar's
CBiopL Caesar spells it Samarobriva.

$4fi

CICERO'S LETTERS

B*C. S3, ^ET. 53

would make a capital character for a farce — a British
lawyer I ^ I am not laughing though you may laugh, but, as
usual, when writing to you, I jest on the most serious
subject Joking apart, I advise you in the most friendly
spirit, that if you hold a position for yourself worthy of my
introduction, you should put up with the loss of my society
and farther your own career and wealth : but if things are
stagnant with you there, come back to us* In spite of
everything you will get all you want, by your own good
qualities certainly, but also by my extreme affection for
you*

CLXVII (F II, 2)

TO C SCRIBONIUS CURIO (IN ASIA)
RoM£ (? February)

I HAVE been deprived of a strong witness to my extreme
affection for you in the person of your most illustrious father ;
who would have been fortunate above the common lot, both
in his own memorable achievements and in the possession
of such a son as yourself, had it been granted him to see you
before his departure from life. But I hope our friendship
stands in no need of witnesses. Heaven bless your inherit-
ance to you I You will at least have in me one to whom
you are as dear and as precious as you have been to your
father.

* Valerius is a rival jurisconsult, Laberius writer of mimes. Though
Cicero jests at the supposed comic cbatacter, **a lawyei in Britain**
(as we might say, ** a lawyer among the Zulus "), it does not appear
that Trebatius went to Briuin with Csesar.

' li, 2, 3

TO C SCRIBONIUS CURIO

347

>

I

P

CLXVIII (¥ II, 3)

TO C SCRIBONIUS CURIO (IN ASIA)

Rome (? February)

RupA ^ was not backward in his wish to promise an exhibi-
tion of gladiators in your name, but neither I nor any of
your friends approved of an5rthing being done in your
absence which would tie your hands when you returned.
For my part, I will either write you my opinion at greater
length later on, or, to give you no opportunity of preparing
an answer to it, I will take you unprepared and state my
%new by word of mouth against yours, I shall thus either
bring you over to my opinion, or at least leave in your mind
a record of my view» so that, if at any time (which heaven
forbid !) you may see cause to repent of your decision, you
may be able to recall mine. Briefly, be assured that your
return will find the state of things to be such, that you may
gain the highest possible honours in the state more easily by
Uie advantages with which you are endowed by nature, study,
I and fortune, than by gladiatorial exhibitions. The power of "
giving such things stirs no feeling of admiration in anyone ;
for it is wholly a question of means, and not of character ;
and there is nobody who is not by this time sick and tired
of them. But I am not acting as I said I would do, for I
am embarking on a statement of the reasons for my opinion.
So I will put off this entire discussion to your arrival.
Believe me, you are expected with the greatest interest, and
hopes are entertained of you such as can only be entertained
of the highest virtue and ability. If you are as prepared for
this as you ought to be — and I feel certain you are — you will
be bestowing on us, your friends, on the whole body of your
feUow citizens, and on the entire state, the most numerous

* A Ireedraan and agent of Curio's, The question is of fanem}
tes and an exhibition of rfadiators in honour of Curio's father.
io gave them, and involved nimself in huge debt in consequence.

U

S48 CICERO'S LETTERS li.c 53, ^t. Sf

and most excellent of exhibitions. You will certainly be-
come aware that no one can be dearer or more precious
than you are to me.

CLXIX (F VII, 12)

TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome (? February)

I WAS wondering what had made you cease writing to me?
My friend Pansa ^ has informed me that you have become an
Epicurean ! What a wonderful camp yours must be I What

I would you have done if I had sent you to Tarentum ^ instead
[ of Samobriva ? I was already a little doubtful about you, when

I I found you supporting the same doctrine as my friend
I Selius \ * But on what ground will you support the principles
I of civil law, if you act always in your own interest and not in
I thai of your fellow citizens ? What, too, is to become of the

legal formula in cases of trust, " as should be done among
honest men " ? For who can be called honest who does
nothing except on his own behalf? What principle will you
lay down ** in dividing a common property/' when nothing
can be " common " among men who measure all things by
I their own pleasure ? * How, again, can you ever think it right
to swear by Jupiter lapis^ when you know that Jupiter can-

* C. Vibius Pansa had been in Gaul, and was now home to stand for
tlie tribuneship, which he obtained for B.C. 52-51.

^ Where he would have been id luxncy.

^ A follower of the new academy, with which Cicero was more in
sympathy than with the Epicurean ethics, but apparently only partly sa
The leacfing doctrine was the denial of the poissibility of knowledge, and,
applied to ethics, this might destroy all virtue.

* All these jesting objections to a lawyer being an Epicurean are
founded on the Epicurean doctrine that individual feeling is the standard
of morals J and the summum banum is the good of the individual. The
logic^ deduction that a man should therefore hold aloof from politics
and social life, aa involving social obligations and standards, was, of
course f evaded in practice.

fm, la, 13

TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA

349

not be angry with anyone?^ What is to become of the
people of UlubrsB,* if you have decided that it is not right to
take part in civic business ? Wherefore, if you are really and
tnily a per\'ert from our faith, I am much annoyed ; but if
you merely find it convenient to humour Pansa, I forgive you.
Only do write and tell us how you are, and what you want
me to do or to look after for you.

CLXX (F VII, 13)

TO C TKEBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome, 4 March

ID you suppose me to be so unjust as to be angry with
ou from the idea that you were not sufficiently persevering
id were too eager to return, and do you think that that
the reason of my long silence? I was certainly annoyed by
the uneasiness of your spirits, which your first letters con-
veyed to me ; but there was absolutely no other reason for
the interruption of my own, except my complete ignorance
of your address. Are you still, at this time of day, finding
fault with me, and do you refuse to accept my apology ? Just
listen to me, my dear Testa I Is it money that is making you
prouder, or the fact that your commander-in-chief consults
you ? May I die if I don^t believe that such is your vanity

* For the Epicureans believed the gods to exist, but not to trouble
theinselves with the affairs of men. In taking an oath by lupiUr lapis
the swearer took a stone in his hand and said, *' If I abide by this oath
may be bless me ; but if I do otherwise in thought or deed, may all
others be kept safe, each in his own country, under his OMm laws, in
enjoyment of his own ^oods, household eods, and tombs — ^may I alone
be cast out, even as this stone is now,*° Then he throws down the
stone. This passage from Polybius (iii. 25) refers to treaties, but the
same form seems to have been used in suits about land.

'^ Ulubrae — ^like other municipia — had a palronus at Rome lo look
after its interests. If Trebatius (who was its paironus) would take no
part in politics, he would be of no use to the Ulubrani. iroXirc^ir&at, ** to
tct as a citizen/' '* to act as a member of a political body.''

350

B,c. 53, JIT. S3

tlii^ |oa WQtM atther be ooosolted bf Oessr than gilded^
by faoii } But if both reasons are tnie, who will be able
pot op widi jaa caDoepC nysdC who can pot up with anf
thJo^ ? Bui to retom to our sabyoct — I am exceedingly [ '
that joa are content to be where foo are:, and as your for
state of mind was vexatioiis, so tout present is gratifying, to
me. I am only afraid that yoor special profession may '
of little advantage to fou : for, as I am told, in your pre
abode

** Tbcf by BO cbim by joimiie h^wfol b«iidSt
But chaSkai^ i^t with steeL^ *

Bat yoo are not woot * to be called in to assist at a '* forcible
cntty." Nor have you any reason to be afraid of the usual
proviso in the injunction, "into which you have not pre-
viously made entry by force and armed men," for I am
well assured that you are not a man of violence. But to give
you some hint as to what you lawyers call ** securities," I
opine that you should avoid the Treviri ; I hear they are
imsmri capitales — deadly customers : I should have prefem
their being /rwtw of the mint!* But a truce to jesting for
present. Pray write to me in the fullest detail of all
concerns you.
4 March.

^ "I win make fest the doois and gild myself

^th some more ducats."— Shaksspbare.

* Eimins, Ann^ 275. The phrase mamtm consirtum in leg&I language
.meant to make a ioint claim by the symbolical act of ©wii claimant
V|a3fhig a hand on the property (or some representation of it) in court.

But it also meant ** to join hands in war" Hence its equivocal use in
this passage, Consertum is a supine, and some such word as eutti must
be understood before it

' Reading at (u ncn sales, I cannot explain Prof. Tyrrell's reading
et tu sales in connexion with what follows.

* This elaborate joke is founded on a pun upon the name of the
Gallic Treviri ^nd the commissioners in Rome : (i) the Illvisn capttalts^
who had charge of prisons, executions, etc. j (2) the /// viri m
argtnto iETifiando f€riund&^ **the commissioners for coining gold, siK
and bronze." Also there is a reference to the meaning of caftiai
*' deadly/* " affecting the life or citizenship.''

CLXXI (F VII, 14)

TO C TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome (? March)

Chrysipfus Vettius, a freednian of the architect Cyrus,
made me think that you had not quite forgotten me ; for he
has brought me a greeting in your words. You have grown
a might>^ fine gentleman, that you can't take the trouble of
writing a letter to me — a man, I might almost say, of your own
family ! But if you have forgotten how to write, all the fewer
clients will lose their causes by having you as their advocate I
If you have forgotten me, I will take the trouble of paying you
a visit where you are, before I have quite faded out of your
mind. If it is a terror of the summer camp that is dishearten-
ing you, think of some excuse to get off, as you did in the
case of Britain. I was glad to hear one thing from that same
Chrysippus, that you were on friendly terms with Caesar.
But, by Hercules, I should have preferred, as I might fairly
have expected, to be informed of your fortunes as frequently
as possible from your own letters. And this would certainly
have been the case, if you had been more forward to learn
the laws of friendship than of suits in court. But this is
all jest in your own vein, and to some degree in mine also.
I iove you very dearly, and I both wish to be loved by you
and feel certain that I am.

CLXXII (F VII, 18)
TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

A VILLA IN THE AgER POMPTINUS, 8 ApRIL

I HAVE received several letters from you at the same time,
written at various times, in which everything else gave me great
pleasure; for they shewed that you were now sustaining

35^

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. S3, je:t. S3

your militaiy service with a btave spirit, and were a gallant
and resolute man. These are qualities which for a short
time I felt to be lacking in you, though I attributed your
uneasiness not so much to any weakness of your own spirit,
as to your feeling your absence from us. Therefore go on
as you have begun : endure your service with a stout heart :
believe me, the advantages you will gain are many; for I
will reiterate my recommendation of you, though I shall
wait for the right moment of doing so. Be assured that you
are not more anxious that your separation from me should be
as profitable as possible to yourself than I am. Accordingly,
as your " securities " are somewhat weak, I have sent you
rOne in my poor Greek, written by my own hand.' For your
part, I should wish you to keep me informed of the course
of the war in Gaul : for the less warlike my informant, the
more inclined I am to believe him.

But to return to your letters. Everything else (as I said)

I is prettily written, but I do wonder at this : who in the world

[ sends several identical letters, when he writes them with

.his own hand? For your writing on paper that has been

used before, I commend your economy : but I can't help

vondering what it was that you preferred to rub out of this

bit of paper rather than not write such poor stuff as this —

unless it were, perhaps, some of your legal formulas. For I

don't suppose you mb out my letters to replace them with

your own. Can it mean that there is no business going on, that

you are out of work, that you haven't even a supply of paper?

Well, that is entirely your own fault, for taking your modesty

abroad with you instead of leaving it behind here with us. I

* Griscuiam tiH mm cauti&nem chirographi met. Various intet'
pretations have been givea to this \ (i) "a truly Greek security/* f.
*' not to be depended on " ; (2) referring to a poem in Greek, per]
the one in praise of Casar's achievements, mentioned before (p» 33] _
in which some compliment to Trebatius was introduced ; (3) Proif.
Tyrrell would make it refer to this letter itself, which he supposes to
have been written in Greek, and afterwards translated by Tiro. But
this letter does not read like a translation, and, after all, is not of a
nature to shew as a "commendation," It is conceived in too jocular a
vein. I have taken it to refer to some inclosure written in Greek which
he might use in this way, and the mention of his "own handwriting"
to refer to the fact that he would naturally have employed a Greek
secretary to write Greek. The diminutive Griectdam I take to be
apologetic for the Greek. But it is not at all certain.

33*^

Fvn. i8, 15 TO C. TREBATIUS TESTA

353

will commend you to Balbus, when he starts to join you, in
the good old Roman style. Don't be astonished if there is
J^omewhat longer interval than usual between my letters :
^m I intend being out of town in April. I write this letter
^6 the Pomptine district, having put up at the villa of
M. ^milius PhilemOj from which I could hear the noise of
Uv clients, I mean those you confided to me I For at Ulubrae
^■s certain that an enormous mass of frogs have bestirred
Hemselves to do me honour. Take cane of your health.^
^8 April, from the Ager Pomptinus.

P.S. — Your letter which I received from I* Arruntius I
have torn up, though it didn't deserve it j for it had nothing
1 it which might not have been safely read in a public meet-
But not only did Arruntius say that such were your
;iers, but you had appended a similar injunction to your
Well, be it so ! I am surprised at your not having
Itten anything to me since, especially as you are in the
'st of such stirring events."*

CLxxm (F vii, IS)

rO a TREBATIUS TESTA (IN GAUL)

Rome

wayward people are who love may be gathered from

I was formerly annoyed that you were discontented at

Qg where you are : now, on the contrary, it stings me to

Ihc heart that you write that you are quite happy there.

^pr 1 did not like your not being pleased at my recom-

^B On his journey alon^ the via Appia to one of his seaside villas
^Bero has put tip at a Mend's house (a freedman of Lepidus), near the
^EnipdDe marshes, as was his wont {Att, vii. 5). It was oear Ulubrse,
^fwhich he was deputy /a/r^««j in the absence of Trebatius» and he
Jestingly pretends that the frogs which he hears croaking in the marshes
— ; frogs of Ulubrae turning out to do him honour, as though they were
\ citizens of the town. Ulubrse was a very dull and deaiying town.
TTie great rising in Gaul in b.c. 54-53* ^^^ the second eitpeditioa
\ the Rhine*

A A

^

354

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C, 53,^.;

mendation, and now I am vexed that you can find any
pleasant without me* But, after all, I prefer enduiing yoi
absence to your not getting what I hope for you. Howe
I cannot say how pleased I am that you have be
intimate with that most delightful man and excellent scholJ
C* Matins/ Do your best to make him as fond of you i
possible. Believe me, you can bring nothing home
your province that will give you greater pleasure. Take c
of your health.

CLXXIV(Fn, 4)

TO C. SCRIBONIUS CURIO (IN ASIA)
Rome (? May)

You are aware that letters are of many kinds; but there is]
one kind which is undeniabie, for the sake of which, indeed,!
the thing was invented, namely, to inform the absent ofl
anything that is to the interest of the writer or recipient thatl
they should know. You, however, certainly don't expect a I
letter of that kind from me. For of your domestic concerns I
you have members of your family both to write and to act as !
messengers. Besides, in my personal affairs there is really I
nothing new. There are two other kinds of letters which give
me great pleasure : the familiar and sportive, and the grave
and serious. Which of these two I ought least to employ I
do not understand. Am I to jest with you by letter ? Upon
my word, I don't think the man a good citizen who could
laugh in times like these. Shall I write in a more serious i
style ? What could be written of seriously by Cicero to '
Curio except public affairs ? And yet, under this head^ my '
position is such that I neither dare write what I think, nor
choose to write what I don't think. Wherefore, since I have
no subject left to write about, I will employ my customary

* The friendship between Trebatius and Maiius remained as long
as we know anything about tliem. Cicero afterwards acknowledge*
{F. ii. 27) the great services Matius had done him with Oesai, to wham
Ilatius remained attached to the endi

J

f"» 4, 5

TO C. SCRIBONIUS CURIO

3SS

phrase, and exhort you to the pursuit of the noblest glory.
For you have a dangerous rival already in the field, and fully
prepared, in the extraordinary expectation formed of you ;
and this rival you will vanquish with the greatest ease, only
on one condition— that you make up your mind to put out
your full strength in the cultivation of those qualities, by
which the noble actions are accomplished, upon the glory
of which you have set your heart. In support of this senti-
ment I would have written at greater length had not I felt
certain that you were sufficiently alive to it of your own
accord ; and I have touched upon it even thus far, not
in order to fire your ambition, but to testify my affection.

I

CLXXV (F II, s)

C SCRIBONIUS CURIO (ON HIS WAY
FROM ASIA)

Rome (?JimE)

^ The state of business here I dare not tell even in a letter. And
though, wherever you are, as I have told you before, you are
in the same boat, yet I congratulate you on your absence, as
[ well because you don*t see what we see, as because your
■ reputation is placed on a lofty and conspicuous pinnacle in
'. the sight of multitudes both of citizens and allies ; and it is
Jj|nveyed to us by neither obscure nor uncertain talk, but by
Be loud and unanimous voice of all. There is one thing of
Which 1 cannot feel certain — whether to congratulate you, or
! to be alarmed for you on account of the surprising expecta-
tion entertained of your return ; not because I am at all
' afraid of your not satisfying the world's opinion, but, by
heaven, lest, when you do come, there may be nothing for you
jlo preserve : so universal is the decline and almost extinction
n&ll our institutions. But even thus much I am afraid I have
^■en rash to trust to a letter : wherefore you shall learn the
Bit from others.* However, whether you have still some

r * Ia these vague though ommous sentences Cicero is referring to tb«^

356

CICERO'S LETTERS

BX* 53, MT, S3

hope of the Republic, or have given it up in despair, see that
you have ready, rehearsed and thought out in your mind, all
that the citizen and the man should have at his command
who is destined to restore to its ancient dignity and freedom
a state crushed and overwhelmed by evil times and profligate
morals*

CLXXVI (F 11. 6)

TO C. SCRIBONIUS CURIO (ARRIVED

ITALY)

Rome (? July)

News had not yet reached me of your arrival in Italy when
I sent Sext. Villius, an intimate of my friend Milo, with this
letter to you. But nevertheless, since your arrival was
thought to be approaching, and it was ascertained that you
had already started from Asia Rome-wards, the importance
of my subject made me dismiss any fear of being premature
in sending you this letter, for I was exceedingly anxious that
it should reach you as soon as possible. If the obligations,
Curio, had only been on your side, and as great as they are
usually proclaimed by you rather than as valued by me, I
should have been more shy of coming to you for any request
of importance which I might have to make. For it is very
disagreeable to a modest man to ask a great favour from
one whom he thinks under an obligation to himself, lest he
should seem rather to demand than to ask what he is seek-
ing, and to regard it more in the light of a debt than of a
favour. But since your kindnesses to me were known to the
whole world, or rather I should say were made especially
prominent and valuable by the very novelty of my drcum-
stances ; and since it is the mark of a generous heart to be
willing, when much is owed, to reckon the debt at its highest]

constant and violent hindrances to the election of magistrates, that is, to
ihe orderly working of the constitutioii, which were ooctttTl&g* No
consuls were elected till September.

TO C SCRIBONIUS CURIO

357

I did DOt hesitate to prefer to you by letter a petition for what
was of the highest importance and most vital consequence to
me of anythitig in the world. For I was not afraid of being
unable to support your kindnesses to me, even though they
were beyond calculation : especially as I felt confident that
there was no amount of favour for wliich my heart was in
capable of finding room when receiving it, or for which in
repayment it could not make a full and brilliant return, I
" ave concentrated and embarked all my zeal, all my efforts,
11 the care and industry of which I am capable, my every
liought, in fact, my whole heart and soul, on securing Milo's
Dnsulship; and I have made up my mind that in this
atter I ought to look not merely for the profit arising from
act of kindness, but also for the credit of disinterested
Section- Nor do I think that anyone was ever so anxious
^about his own personal safety and his own fortunes as I am
for his election, on which I have made up my mind that all
my interests depend. To him I see clearly that, if you
choose, you can render such substantial help that we need
ask for nothing else. We have on our side ail these advan-
tages : the favour of the loyalists won since his tribunate on
account of his supporting me (as I hope you understand); that
of the common multitude on account of the splendour of his
gladiatorial exhibitions and the liberality of his disposition ;
the favour of the young men and of those influential in securing
voi^, won by his own eminent powers of captivation, shall I
call it ? or his diligence in that department ; lastly, my own
electoral support, which, if it is not very powerful, is at any
rate regarded as only right, due and proper, and on that
account is perhaps influential also. What we want is a leader,
and what I may call a controller, or, so to speak, a pilot of
those winds which I have described : and if we had to select
one such out of the whole world, we should have no one to
compare with you. Wherefore, if (as I am sure you can) you
can regard me as a grateful, as an honest man, from the
mere fact that I am thus eagerly exerting myself for Milo, if,
in fine, you think me worthy of your kindness, I do ask you
this favour — -that you come to the rescue of this anxiety of
mine and this crisis in my reputation, or, to put it with
;reateT truth, that you will devote your zeal to what is aU
at a question of life and death to me. As to Titus

358

CICERO'S LETTERS

B,a 53, iET. 55

Annius * himself, I promise you this much — that if you re-
solve to embrace his cause, you will never have anyone of
greater spirit, solidity, firmness, or affection to yourself.
While to me you will have given so much additional honour
and prestige, that I shall have no difficulty in acknowledging
you to have been as effective in supporting my reputation
as you were in securing my safety.

Did I not know that you must be fully aware, while writ*
ing this letter to you, under what a weight of obligation I
am labouring, how strongly I am bound to work in this
election for Milo, not only with every kind of exertion, but
even with downright fighting, I should have written at greater
length. As it is, I hand over and commit the business,
the cause, and myself wholly and entirely into your hands.
Of one thing be sure : if I obtain this help from you, I shall
owe you almost more than I owe Milo himself ; for my per-
sonal safety, in which I have been conspicuously aided by
him, has not been as dear to me as the sacred dut)^ oi
returning the favour will be delightful. That object I fed
confident that your aid, and youis alone, will enable me to
secura

CLXXVII (F XIII, 75)

TO TITUS TITIUS, A LEGATUS*

Rome

Though I have no doubt that my first introduction retaini
its full value in your eyes, I yet yield to the request of a man
with whom I am very intimate, C. Avianius Flaccus, for
whose sake I not only desire, but am in duty bound to

* Milo. His foil Dome is T. Annius Milo Papianus ; originally of the
gieni Papia^ he had been adopted by his maternal grandfkther, T.
Annius.

'^ Poinpey was praftctus annona B.C. 57-52. As such he had ■
number of Ugaii^ of whom this Titus Titius was one ; but there is
nothing to shew in which of the com- supplying countries he was
employed, Avianius is a corn merchant, and wants concessions as to
the importation of his cargoes.

r xiij, 75 ; v, 17

TO P» SITTIUS

3S9

secure every possible favour. In regard to him I both spoke
earnestly to you in a personal interview — on which occasion
you answered me with the greatest kindness — and have
written with full particulars to you on a previous occasion ;
but he thinks it to his interest that I should write to you as
often as possible. Wherefore I would have you pardon me
if, in compliance with his wishes, I shall appear to be at all
forgetful of the stability of your character What I beg of
you is this — that you would accommodate Avianius as to the
place and time for landing his corn : for which he obtained
by my influence a three years' hcence whilst Pompey was at
the head of that business. The chief thing is — and you
can therein lay me under the greatest obligation — that
you should have convinced Avianius that I enjoy your affec-
tioQ, since he thinks himself secure of mine. You will
atly oblige me by doing this.

CLXXVIII (F V, 17)

K Metedus

This year again, owing to the lioLs in the previous year cKcited by
Qodius to prevent the election of Milo, began with a series of inUm^a
lasting nearly three months, January, February, and the
■-c. s»' Coss., intercaJary month. On the 17th of January C!odius was
MiSt.^C*^*^ killed near Bovilbe by Milo's servants, and by his order.
Pompeim Riots followed in Rome, the body was burnt in the

MAgnus (alone); Curia, which caught fire and was destroyed, Cicero
*">*» **'^ . . undertook Milo's defence under a new law dem brought
in by Pompey, but broke down, and Milo was con-
demned (April). Later in the year he successfnlly prose-
cuted T. Munatius Plancus Bursa, who as tribune had
noted the riots after the death of Clodius, and who had also supported
the plan of making Pompey dictator.

TO P. SITTIUS^ (IN EXILE)

Rome

It was not because I had forgotten our friendship, or had
any intention of breaking off my correspondence, that I have

' The letter in some MSS. is inscribed to Sextius or SesUus. Of

LETTE315 ■.€. s^ i

iMr yem. The icmoq is that the
\ a pcxiod of dcpra jrioo owiiig to the
■In the Refniiik jod myself vlok
lom cmn bkbI ^au e aaing and rnide-
laade le irlnrjanr to write. SiiMX^
has now dapsed, and I
your high chazacter
lofty cgM^igE, I dMMf;)it k not iocsoiisistient with my
m wnte diis to |QIL Far n^ part, mj dear
F* Sittan^ I dp l b¥W foa oqgDially* when an attempt was
laade at loar abaenoc to faring 7011 imn odiiun and under a
criaoDal dnkge; and when a ciiai^ against ]pou was in-
lolfod in die annwahon and tnal of jam niost tntunaie
^iend,' I took the verj greatest care to safeguard four
pOBtion and jostify joa. And. a^un also^ od this last occa*
sioDft aooQ after mj idmn to Roise, thoogh I found that
JOBS Qs^ had heen pot on a looting 6ir different from what
I should faa¥e advised, if I bad been tbens;, still I omitted
nothing that could contnbiite to yom security. And though
on thai oocmaon the iIMeeiiDgarisiiig firom the price of com,
the hostiHty of certain peraoosy not <Mdy to yourself, but to
all your Maids as wdl, die imEftirQess of the whole trial, and
many other abuses in die state, bad greater influence than
die merits of your case or than truth itself, I yet did not
hH to serve your son Pabtins with active assistance, advice,
petsonal influence, and direct testimony. Wherefore, as I
have carefully and religiously fulfilled all the other offices of
friendship, I thought I ought not to omit that of urging
upon you and beseeching you to lemember that you are a
human being and a gallant man — ^that is, that you should
bear philosophically accidents which are common to all and
incalculable, which none of us mortals can shun or forestall

P. Sittius of Nuceria we bear in the speech J>ro St§lJa^ %% 56, 5S.
Sulbi (who was accused of assisting Catilme) had se&t P, Sittius on %
mission to Spain, as it was all^ed^ to raise a rebellioD there in support
of Catiline. It does not, however, appear that his coi;deinnation took
place then. It seems to have been just previous to Cicero*s return from
exile (Aug^t, B.c* 57), and it is suggested that it was after his aedilcship
of the previous year» when a scarcity of com had contributed to hit
tmpopularity. The date of the letter is uncertain.

* P, Sulla, Sittius was not, it seems^ brought to trial with SaUa. but
bis journey to Spain formed part of the allegations against Sulla*

F V, 17 TO P. SITTIUS 361

by any means whatever : should confront with courage such
grief as fortune brings : and should reflect that not in our
state alone, but in all others that have acquired an empire,
such disasters have in many instances befallen the bravest
and best from unjust verdicts. Oh that I were writing un-
truly when I say, that you are exiled from a state in which
no man of foresight can find anything to give him pleasure !
As for your son, again, I fear that, if I write nothing to you,
I may seem not to have borne testimony to his high qualities
as they deserve ; while on the other hand, if I write fully all
I feel, I fear that my letter may irritate the smart of your
r^ret But, after all, your wisest course will be to regard his
loyalty, virtue, and steady conduct as being in your posses-
sion, and as accompanying you wherever you may be : for,
in truth, what we embrace in imagination is no less ours than
what we see before our eyes. Wherefore not only ought his
brilliant qualities and extreme afifection for you to afiford you
great consolation, but so also ought I and others of your
friends who value you, and always will do so, not for your
position, but your worth ; and so, above all else, ought your
own conscience, when you reflect that you have not deserved
anything that has befallen you, and when you consider besides
that the wise are distressed by guilt, not by mischance — by
their own ill-doing, not by the misconduct of others. For my
part, I shall omit no opportimity either of consoling or
alleviating your present position ; for the recollection of our
old friendship, and the high character and respectful atten-
^cos of your son, will keep me in mind of that duty. If
you, on your part, will mention by letter anything you want,
I wUl tal^ care that you shall not think that you have written
in vain.

362

CICERO*S LETTERS

B*C. 52, /ET.

CLXXIX (F V, 18)

TO T. FADIUS^ (IN EXILE)

Rome

Although I too, who am desirous of consoling you, stand
in need of consolation myself — for nothing for a long time
past has so deeply afflicted me as your disaster — ^nevertheless
I do strongly not only exhort, but even beg and implore
you, with all the earnestness that my affection dictates, to
summon all your energies, to shew a manly courage, and to
reflect under what conditions all mortals, and in what times
we particularly, have been born. Your virtue has given you
more than fortune has taken away : for you have obtained
what not many " new men *' have obtained ; you have lost
what many men of the highest rank have lost. Finally, a
state of legislation^ law courts, and politics generally appears
to be imminent, such that the man would seem to be the
most fortunate who has quitted such a republic as ours with
the lightest possible penalty. As for you, however — since
you retain your fortune and children, with myself and others
still very closely united to you, whether by relationship or
affection — and since you are likely to have much opportunity
of living with me and all your friends — and since, again, your
condemnation is the only one out of so many that is impugnedi
because, having been passed by one vote (and that a doubt-
ful one), it is regarded as a concession to a particular person's
overwhelming power "* — for all these reasons, I say, you ought

^ Titus Fadius Gallus had been a qu^stor in Cicero^s consalship
(b.C. 63), and a tribune in B.C. 58, when Cicero reckoned him
among those on whom he depended to resist Clodius. He olsOi
among others, had a motion prepared for Cicero's recall, of wbidi
Cicero speaks with approbation (p. 17S). We do not know 00
what charge he bad been coademned, but a number of prosecutions
followed Ae death of Clodius and Pompey*s legislation as to violence
and corruption of juries.

' Pompey. He uses the word potentia^ as he generally does, in an
invidious sense of ** tyrannical, or, unconstitutional power,*' as opposed
to auctorUaSf " legitimate influence.*'

msM

F V, i8; nr» I TO APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER 363

to be as little distressed as possible at the inconvenience
that has befallen you. My feding towards yourself and your
children will always be such as you wish, and such as it is
in duty bound to be.

CLXXX (F III, I)

TO APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER^ (IN CILICIA)

Rome

CfCERO to Appius, imperator. Could the Republic itself
speak and tell you of its state, you would not learn it more
easily from its own lips than from your freedman Phania 1
he is a man of such clear insight, as well as (in a good sense)
of such keen curiosity ! Wherefore he shall explain every-
thing to you ; for that will suit me best by enabling me to
curtail my letter, and will be more prudent for me in view
of other circumstances. But in regard to my good feeling
towards you, though you can learn it from this same Phania,
yet I think that I also have personally something I ought to
say on the subject. For assure yourself of this — that you
are exceedingly dear to me, from the many attractions of
your character, your kindness, and the goodness of your
heai% but also because from your letter, as well as from the
remarks of many, I understand that all my conduct towards
you has been most warmly appreciated by you. And since
that is so, I will take means to make up for the great loss of
time, which we have sustained from this interruption of our
intercourse, by the hberality, the frequency, and the import-
ance of my services ; and that I think I shall do, since you
would have it be so, by no means against the grain, or as the
phrase is, *' against the will of Minerva " — a goddess by the

^ Brother of Cicero's en«my, P. Clodius. He had been consul id
B*c 54« and wbls now proconsul in Cilicia, in which government Cicero
was to succeed him. His relations with Cicero had been varied, and
though Cicero speaks warmly to him, he does not do so often of him»
and his compliments are evidently not really sincere.

36+

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C 52, Mt. 54

way whom» if I shall chance to get possession of a statue of
her from your stock, I shall not simply designate ** Pallas,"
but "Appias."^ Your freedman Cilix was not well known
to me before, but when he delivered me your kind and
affectionate letter, he confirmed the courteous expressions of
that letter by his own words, I was much gratified by his
speech, when he described to me your feelings and the
remarks which you were daily making about me. In short,
within two days he became my intimate friend, without, how-
ever, my ceasing to regret Phania deeply. When you send
the latter back to Rome, which I imagine you intend speedily
to do, pray give him instructions as to all matters which you
wish to be transacted or looked after by me,

I commend L. Valerius the lawyer to you very strongly;
not, however, in his capacity of lawyer : for I wish to take
better precautions for him than he does for others. I am
really fond of the man : he is one of my closest and most
intimate friends. In a general way he expresses nothing but
gratitude to you ; but he also says that a letter from me will
have very great influence with you. I beg you again and
again that he may not hnd himself mistaken.

CLXXXI (F VII, 2)

TO M. MARIUS (IN CAMPANIA)

Rome (December)

I WILL look after your commission carefully. But, sharp
man that you are, you have given your commission to the very
person above all others whose interest it is that the article

* " I shall, ID compliment to your accomplislimeiits, call the goddess
of learning and wisdoto * Appias,' " i.e., the ** Appian Goddess." B«l
the meaning of the elaborate and dull joke or compliment is feir i
clear, espedaUy the phrase si forts de tuts sumpsero^ Was Ci
expecting a present of a bust of Minerva, or intending to purchase c
(lom Appius s collection? Or does he allude, as has l^n suggested, t
the Minerva he had himself dedicated before his exile, and which I
probably fallen into the han<ls of the Appian family ?

^

FVII, 2

TO M, MARIUS

365

N

should fetch the highest possible price ! However, you have
been far-sighted in fixing beforehand how far I am to go.
But if you had left it to me, I am so much attached to you
that I would have made a bargain with the heirs : as it is,
since I know your price, I will put up some one to bid rather
than let it go for less. But a truce to jesting ! I will do
your business with all care, as in duty bound. I feel sure
you are glad about Bursa,^ but your congratulations are too
half-hearted. For you suppose, as you say in your letter,
that, owing to the fellow's meanness, I don't look upon it as
a matter of much rejoicing. I would have you believe that
I am more pleased with this verdict than with the death of
my enemy. For, in the Erst place, I would rather win by
legal process than by the sword ; in the second place, by
what brings credit to a friend than hy what involves his con-
demnation.^ And, above all, I was delighted that the support
of the loyalists was given to me so decisively against the
influence exerted to an incredible degree by a most illustrious
and powerful personage. Finally — ^though, perhaps^ you
won^t think it likely — I hated this man much more flian the
notorious Clodius himself. For the latter I had attacked,
the former I had defended. The latter, too, though the very
existence of the Republic was to be risked in my person,
had yet a certain great object in view ; nor was it wholly on
his own initiative, but with the support of those who could
not be safe as long as 1 was so. But this ape of a feUoWj
in sheer wanton ness^ had selected me as an object for his
invectives, and had persuaded certain persons ^ who were
jealous of me that he would always be a ready instrument
for an attack upon me. Wherefore I bid you rejoice with

^ The coodemtkalion of T. Munatius Plancus Bursa, who, bdne
tribune in B.c. 52, had promoted the liots following the death of
Clodius, esp>ecially in regard to buniing his body in the Curia, and
had, after his office terminated (loth December), been prosecuted tie vi
by Cicero successfully. Bursa, with others, had supported Pompey*s
wish for the dictatorship, as well as his legislation, and accordingly, tn
ftttacking him, Cicero had against him the weight of Pompey's inflQCQce.
He therefore looks upon it as a great triumph.

* The condemnation of Bursa was a point in favour of Milo^ whereas
^ Milo's murder of Clodius only brought Ms ultimate condcmnatioo and
^'c3tile. Milo's trial had taken place m ApriL

^ Pompey and his friends.

366

CICERO'S LETTERS

B.C. 52, .^T, 54

all your heart : a great stroke has been struck. Never were
any citizens more courageous than those who ventured
to vote for his condemnation, in the teeth of the immense
power of the man by whom the jurors had themselves been
selected And this they never would have done had not my
grievance been theirs also. Here, in Rome, I am so dis-
tracted by the number of trials, the crowded courts, and the
new legislation,* that I daily offer prayers that there may be
na intercalation,^ so that I may see you as soon as possible.

* The new laws introduced by Pompey de w, dt magisiratiims, de
fierunia oh iuduium,

* The intercalary month was inserted between the 23rd and 24lh of
February* Whether it was to be inserted or not depended on Ihe
pontifices, who kept their secret jealoosly. If it is inserted, Cicero will
be kept all the longer in town with senatoriaJ and legal business, and «o
be prevented from seeing Marius, who lived near his Pompdan villa.

APPENDIX A
'DE PETITIONE CONSULATUS

[This is rather an essay than a letter, and is not generally
included in any of the books of the correspondence. To my
mind there are indicatiDns of its being a later composition^ the
I exercise of some one who wished to shew the nature of can-
vassing at the time. Still, there are many arguments m favour
of regarding it as the composition of Quintus, and at any rate
ft is a contributmn to the picture of the times.]

Q, CICERO TO

HIS BROTHER

ROME)

MARCUS (AT

I* Although you have all the accomplishments within the
reach of human genius^ experience, or acuteness, yet I thought
it only consistent with my affection to set down in writing what
occurred to my mind while thinking, as I do, day and night on
your canvass, not with the exf^ectation that you would leam
anything new from it, but that the considerations on a subject,
which appeared to be disconnected and without system, might
be brought nnder one view by a logical arrangement

Consider what the state is : what it is yon seek : who you are
that seek it. Almost every day as you go down to the fonim
you should say to yourself, ^* 1 am a notfus iwmo^^ " I am a candi-
date for the consulship,'^ "This is Rome,'* For the " newness "
of your name you will best compensate by the brilliancy of your
oratory* That has ever carried with it ver>' great political dis-
tinction. A man who is held worthy of defending consulars
cannot be thought unworthy of the consulship. Wherefore,
since your reputation in this is your starting-point, since what-
ever you are, you are from this, approach each individual case
with the persuasion that on it depends as a whole your entire
reputation. See that those aids to natural ability, which 1 know
are your special gifts, are ready for use and always available ;
and remember what Demetrius wrote about the hard work and
practice of Demosthenes ; and, finally, take care that both the
number and rank of your friends are unmistakable* For you
have such as few novi hotmnes have had — all the publicani^

368

CICERO'S LETTERS

DK PET. CONS.

neaiiy the whole equestrian order, many municipal towns
specially devoted to you, many persons who have been defended
by you, men of every order, many collegia^ and, besides these, a
larg:e number of the rising generation who have become attached
to you in their enthusiasm for rhetoric, and, finally, your friends
who visit you daily in large numbers and with such constant
regularity. See that you retain these advantages by reminding
these persons, by appealing to them, and by using every means
to make them understand that this, and this only, is the time for
those who are in your debt to shew their gratitude, and for
those who wish for your services in the future to place you
under an obligation. It also seems possible that a "new man"
may be much assisted by the fact that he has the good wishes
of men of high rank, and especially of consulars. It is a point
in your favour that you should be thought worthy of this
position and rank by the very men to whose position and rank
you are wishing to attain. All these men must be canvassed
with care, agents must be sent to them, and they must be con-
vinced that we have always been at one with the Optimates in
our political sentiments, that we have never been demagogues
in the very least : that if we seem ever to have said anything in
the spirit of that party, we did so with the view of attracting
Cn* PompeiuSj that we might have the man of the greatest
influence either actively on our side in our canvass, or at least
not opposed to us.^ Farthermore, take pains to get on your
side the young men of high rank, or retain the affection of
those you already have. They will contribute much to your
political position. You have very many ; make them feel how
much you think depends on them : if ym. induce those to be
positively eager who are merely not disinclined, they will be of
very great advantage to you.

II. It is also a great set-oflT to your "newness,** that the
nobles who are your competitors are of a such a kind that no
one can venture to say that their nobility ought to stand them
in greater stead than your high character* For instance, who
could think of P. Galba and L, Cassius, though by birth of the
highest rank, as candidates for the consulship ? You see, there-
fore, that there are men of the noblest families, who from defect
of ability are not your equals. But, you will say, Catiline and
Antonius are formidable. Rather I should say that a man of
energy, industry, unimpeachable character, great eloquence^
and high popularity with those who are the ultimate judges,
should wish for such rivals — both from their boyhood stained

1 It is to be observed that at this time Pompey is reckoned as inclined to
l^^fopulares. His legislation in FX. 70 had been somewhat tn their fa voqr:
but he bad not, as a fact, ever declared himself either way.

DE PRT. CONS.

APPENDIX A

369

with blood and lust, both of ruined fortuncst Of one of them

y|e have seen the property put up for sale, and actually heard

^■m declare on oath that at Rome he could not contend with a

^Ereek or obtain an impartial tribunal.* We know that he was

ejected from the senate by the judgment of genuine censors :

in our prsetorship we had him as a competitor, with such men

as Sabidius and Panthera to back him, because he had no one

else to appear for him at the scrutiny. Yet in this office he

bought a mistress from the slave market whom he kept openly

at his house. Moreover, in his canvass for the consulship, he

Rts preferred to be robbing all the innkeepers, under the dis-
aceful pretext of a libera le^atio^ rather than to be in town and
pplicate the Roman people. But the other ! Good heavens I
what is his distinction ? Is he of equally noble birth ? No. Is
! richer ? No. In manliness, then ? How do you make that
^t? Why,^ because while the former fears his own shadow,
fis man does not even fear the laws ! — A man bom in the
of a bankrupt father, nurtured in the society of an
odoned sister, grown to manhood amidst the massacre of
fellow citizens, whose first entrance to public life was made by
the slaughter of Roman Imights ! For Sulla had specially
selected Catiline to command that band of Gauls which we re-
, member, who shore off the heads of the Titinii and Nannii and
Mbnusii : and while with them he killed with his own hands the
^Bst man of the day^ his own sisters husband, Quintus Caecilius^
Rwio was a Roman eques, a man belonging to no party, always
quiet by inclination, and then so from age also.

T ' I . Why should I speak of him as a candidate for the consul-
u^ho caused M. Marius, a man most beloved by the Roman
^.^v.jii€, to be beaten with vine-rods in the sight of that Roman
people from one end of the city to the other — ^forced him up to
the tomb — rent his frame with every kind of torture, and while
be was still alive and breathing, cut off his head with his sword
in his right hand, while he held the hairs on the crown of his
head wiOi his left, and carried off his head in his own hand with
streams of blood flowing through his fingers ? ' A man who
afterwards lived with actors and gladiators on such terms that
the former ministered to his lust, the latter to his crimes — who
never approached a place so sacred or holy as not to leave
]Iiere, even if no actual crime were committed, some suspicion

' C. Aolofin^ impeached by Caesar for plundering Macedooia* appellavit

i^nar iurmfiique se forum eiuraret quod aquo iure uti turn p&sset {Ascon.

\t iffences in Macedonia, where he had been left by Sulla, were in

his impeachment, B»C. 76; his expulsion from the senate,

f' M* Maritts Gratidiantta {Ascon. f 84). These denunciations of An*
Bh^ and Caiihae seem to be taken from the oration in toga Candida,
[l» B B

370

CICE110*S LETTERS

DE PET. CONS.

of dishonour founded on his abandoned character^a man whose
closest friends in the senate were the Curii and the Annii, in
the auction rooms the Sapalae and Carvilii, in the equestrian
order the Pompilii and Vettii — ^a man of such consummate
impudence, such abandoned profligacy, in fine, such cunning
and success in lasciviousness, that he corrupted young boys
when almost in the bosoms of their parents ? Why should I
after this mention Africa to you, or the depositions of the wit-
nesses ? They are well known — read them again and again
yourself. Nevertheless, I think that I should not omit to
mention that he left that court in the first place as needy as
some of the jurors were before the trial, and in the second place
the object of such hatred, that another prosecution against him
is called for every day. His position is such that he is more
likely to be nervous even if you do nothing, than contemptuous
if you start any proceedings.

What much better fortune m your canvass is yours than that
which not long ago fell to the lot of another ** new man," Gaius
Caehus I * He had two men of the highest rank as competitors^
but they were of such a character that their rank was the least
of their recommendations — genius of the highest order, supreme
modesty, very numerous public services, most excellent methods
of conducting a canvass, and diligence in carrying them out.
And yet C^lius^ though much inferior in birth, and superior in
hardly anything, beat one of them. Wherefore, if you do what
your natural ability and studies, which you have always pursued,
enable you to do, what the exigencies of your present position
require, what you are capable of doing and are bound to do, you
will not have a difficult struggle with competitors who are by no
means so conspicuous for their birth as notorious for their vices.
For what citizen can there be found so ill-affected as to wish by
one vote to draw two daggers against the Republic ?

IV. Having thus set forth what advantages you have and
might have to set against your ** newness," I think I ought now
to say a word on the importance of what you are trying for*
You are seeking the consulship, an office of which no one thinks
you unworthy, but of which there are many who will be jealous.
For, while by birth of equestrian rank,^ you are seekmg the
highest rank in the state, and yet one which, though the highest|

1 CEelius, consul B.c* 94 with Cn. Domitiui Ahenobarbus.

9 Cicero ^ of course, was now a senator, but he was the first of his family
who had been 50. The others who came forward for the consulship were
two patriciaiis, P. Sulpidus Galba, L. Sergius CatiUna; four plebeiaos,
C. AntODius, L. Cassius Longinus^ whom Asconiiis calls n&biks, i.e., mem-
bers of families who had held cunile office ; and Q. Comificius and C. Licinius
SacerdoB, whose families had only recently risen to this position, tantuvt
non ^ritni tx/amiliis suis magistratum adepti erant ( Asc )^

I

PET. CONS.

APPENDIX A

371

Sects much greater splendour on a man of courage, eloquence,
and pure life than on others, Df>n*t suppose that those who
have already held that office are blind to the political position
you wrill occupy, when once you have obtained the same. I
suspect, however, that those who, though born of consular
families, have not attained the position of their ancestors, will,
tmless they happen to be strongly attached to you, feel some
jealousy. Even " new men " who have been praetors I think,
unless under great obligations to you, will not like to be surpassed
by you in official rank. Lastly, in the populace itself, I am sure
it will occur to you how many are envious, how many, from the
precedents of recent years, are averse to *' new men." It must
also needs be that some are anj^ with you in consequence of
the causes which you have pleaded. Nay, carefully consider
this also, whether, seeing that you have devoted yourself with
such fervour to the promotion of Pompe/s glory, you can
suppose certain men to be your friends on that account.*
Wherefore, seeing that you are seeking^ the highest place in the
state, and at the same time that there do exist sentiments
opposed to you, you must positively employ every method, and
all your vigilance, labour, and attention to business.

V. Again, the canvass for office resolves itself into an activity
of two kinds, of which one is concerned with the loyalty of
friends, the other with the feelings of the people. The loyalty
of friends must be secured by acts of kindness and attention, by
length of time, and by an easy and agreeable temper. But this
word ** friends " has a wider application during a canvass than
in other times of our life. For whosoever gives any sign
of an inclination to you, or habitually visits at your house,
must be put down in the category of friends. But yet the most
advantageous thing is to be beloved and pleasant in the eyes of
those who are friends on the more regular grounds of relation-
ship by blood or marriage, of membership of the same club, or
of some close tie or other. Farther, you must take great pains
that, in proportion as a man is most intimate and most closely
connected uith your household, he should love you and desire
your highest honour — as, for instance, your tribesmen, neigh-
bours, clients, and finally your freedmen and even your slaves ;
for nearly all the talk which forms one's public reputation
emanates from domestic sources. In a word, you must secure
friends of every class : for show — men conspicuous for their
office or name, who, even if they do not give any actual assist-
ance in canvassing, yet add some dignity to the candidate ; to

aintain your just rights — magistrates, consuls first and then

f:

_ He hints. I ihink. at Caesar, who supported Antonius and Catilinei and
ii'lo the Luculli, who were opponenls of Pompey.

372

CICERO'S LETTERS

DB FBT, COI«

tribunes ; to secure the votes of the centuries — men of eminent
popularity. Those who either have gained or hope to gain the
vote of a tribe or century, or any other advantage, through your
influence, take all pains to collect and secure. For during
recent years men of ambition have exerted themselves with aU
their might and main to become sure of getting from their
tribesmen what they sought. Do you also do your very best, by
every means in your power, to make such men attached to you
from the bottom of their hearts and with the most complete
devotion. If, indeed^ men were as grateful as they ought to be,
all this should be ready to your hand, as 1 trust in fact that it is.
For within the last two years you have put under an obligation
to you four clubs of men who have the very greatest influence in
promoting an election, those of C, Fundanius, Q. Gallius, C.
Cornelius, C. Orchivius.* When they committed the defence of
these men to you, I am acquainted with what their clubsmcn
undertook and promised you to do, for I was present at the
interview. Wherefore you must insist at the present junctxire
on exacting from them yoor due by reminding them, appealing
to them, solemnly assuring them, and taking care that they
thoroughly understand that they will never have any other
opportunity of shewing their gratitude. I cannot doubt that
these men, from hope of your services in the future as well as
from the benefits recently received, will be roused to active
exertions. And speaking generally^ since your candidature is
most strongly supported by that class of friendships which you
have gained as a counsel for the defence, take care that to all
those, whom you have placed under this obligation to you, their
duty should in every case be clearly defined and set forth. And
as you have never been in any matter importunate with themi
so be careful that they understand that you have reserved for
this occasion all that you consider them to owe you.

VI. But since men are principally induced to shew goodwill
and zeal at the hustings by three considerations^kindness re-
ceived, hope of more, personal affection and good feeling — we
must take notice how best to take advantage of each of these.
By very small favours men are induced to think that they have
sufficient reason for giving support at the poll, and surely those
you have saved (and their number is very large) cannot fail to
understand that, if at this supreme crisis they fail to do what you

1 C. Fundanius. defended by Cicero a C. 66. fir. p. ai6. Q. Gallius^
defended by Cicero on ambitus B.C. 64, fr. p, 217 {Brtit, § 277). C
Cornelius, quaestor of Pompey, tn pL B,C. 67, defended by Cicero B.C 65

SAscon. § ^b seq.]. C. Orchivius, Cicero's colleague in prsetorship B.c, 66
Or, % 160). We don't know on what charge Cicero defended him. The
passage in pro Cluent. § 147, does not mean that he was accused of pi
but that he presided over triob oipeculaius as praetor.

DB FET. CONS.

APPENDIX A

373

wish, they will never have anyone's confidence. And though
this is so, nevertheless they must be appealed to, and must even
be led to think it possible that they, who have hitherto been
under an obligation to us^ may now put us under an obligation
to them. Those, again, who are influenced by hope (a class of
people much more apt to be scrupulously attentive) you must
take care to convince that your assistance is at their service at
any moment, and to make them understand that you are care-
fully watching the manner in which they perform the duties they
^M^e you, and to allow no mistake to exist as to your clearly per-
^Kving and taking note of the amount of support coming from
^Rch one of them. The third class which I mentioned is that of
spontaneous and sincere friends, and this class you will have to
make more secure by expressions of your gratitude ; by making
your words tally wltli the motives which it shall appear to you
ofluenced them in taking up your cause ; by shewing that the
"^ection is mutual i and by suggesting that your friendship with
may ripen into intimacy and familiar intercourse. In all
classes alike consider and weigh carefully the amount of
Buence each possesses, in order to know both the kind of
enCion to pay to each, and what you are to expect and demand
pm each, For certain men are popular in their own neigh-
pujhoods and towns ; tliere are others possessed of energy and
1th, who, even if they have not heretofore sought such popu-
rity, can yet easily obtain it at the moment for the sake of one
I whom they owe or wish to do a favour. Your attention to such
sses of men must be such as to shew them that you clearly
understand what is to be expected from each, that you appreciate
what you are receiving, and remember what you have received.
There are, again, others who either have no influence or are
positively disliked by their tribesmen, and have neither the
spirit nor the ability to exert themselves on the spur of the

P"^"ment : be sure you distinguish between such men, that you
y not be disappointed in your expectation of support by
cing over*much hope on some particular person.
rn. But although you ought to rely on, and be fortified by,
^friendships already gained and firmly secured, yet in the course
"* ' the canvass itself very numerous and useful friendships are
quired. For among its annoyances a candidature has thisad-
3 Cage : you can without loss of dignity, as you cannot in other
irs of life, admit whomsoever you choose to your friendship,
[ whom if you were at any other time to offisr your society, you
tld be thought guilty of an eccentricity j whereas during a
Dvass, if you don't do so with many, and take pains about tt
sides, you would be thought to be no use as a candidate at
L^M. Moreover, I can assure you of this, that there is no one»
|Hles& be happens to be bound hy some special tie to some one

CICERO'S LETTERS

DB PET. CORSr

of your rivals, whom you could not induce, if you took pains, to
cam your affection by his good services, and to seize the oppor-
tunity of putting you under an obligation — let him but fully
understand that you value him highly, that you really mean
what you say, that he is making a good investment, and that
there will accrue from it not only a brief and electioneerings
friendship, but a firm and lasting one. There will be no onci
believe me, if he has anything in him at all, who will let sEp
this opportunity offered of establishing a friendship with yoUj
especially when by good luck you have competitors whose firiend-
ship is one to be neglected or avoided, and who not only are
unable to secure what I am urging you to secure, but cannot
even make the first step towards it For how should Antonius
make the first step towards attaching people to himself, when he
cannot even call them, unaided, by their proper names ? I, for
one^ think that there can be no greater folly than to imagine a
man solicitous to serve you whom you don*t know by sight
Extraordinary indeed must be the fame, the political position
and extent of the public services of that man whom entird
strangers, without supporters to back him, would elect to office.
That a man without principle or energy, without doing any good
service, and without ability, lying under a cloud of discredit, and
without friends, should beat a man fortified with the devotion of
a numerous circle and by the good^opinion of all, cannot possibly
occur except from gross negligence.

VIIK Wherefore see that you have the votes of all the cen-
turies secured to you by the number and variety of your friends.
The first and most obvious thing is that you should embrace the
Roman senators and knights, and the active and popular men
of all the other orders. There are many city men of good busi-
ness habits, there are many freedmen engaged in the forum who
are popular and energetic : these men try with all your might
both personally and by common friends, as far as you can, to
make eager in your behalf ; seek them out, send agents to them,
shew them that they are putting you under the greatest obi i ':- * - -'
After that review the entire city, all colleges, districts,
bourhoods. If you attach to yourself the leading men ol l.... ,
you will by their means easily keep a hold upon the multitude.
When you have done tbat^ take care to have in your mind a
chart of all Italy laid out according to the tribe of each town,
and learn it by heart, so that you may not allow any munidpium^
colony^ prefecture, or, in a word, any spot in ItaJy to exist, iD
which you have not a sufficient footholdL Inquire also for and
trace out individuals in every region, inform yourself about
them, seek them out, strengthen their resolution, secure that in
their own neighbourhoods they shall canvass for you, and be as
it were candidates in your interest. They will wish for you as a

DR PET. CONS.

APPENDIX A

375

I friend, if they once see that their friendship is an object with
you. Make sure that they do understand this by directing
your speech specially to this point. Men of country towms,
or from the country, think themselves in the position of friends
if we of the city know them by name : if, however, they think
that they are besides securing some protection for themselves,
they do not let slip the opportunity of being obliging. Of such
people others in town, anci above all your rivals, don't so much
as know the existence : you know about them and wll easily
recognize them, without which friendship is impossible. Nor is
such recognition enough (though it is a great thing) unless some
^^bope of material advantage and active fHendship follows, for
^^^ouT object is not to be looked upon as a mere " nomenclator/'
^Kbut as a sincere friend also. So when you have both got the
^■favour of these same men in the centuries, who from the means
^■tbey have taken to secure their personal objects enjoy most
■ popularity among their fellow tribesmen ; and have made those
all desirous of your success who have influence in any section
of their tribe, owing to considerations attaching to their municip-
ality or neighbourhood or college, then you may allow yourself
to entertain the highest hopes.
Again, the centuries of the knights appear to me capable of
^H being won over, if you are careful, with considerably more ease.
^■Let your first care be to acquaint yourself with the knights ; for
^" they are comparatively few : then make advances to them, for it
is much easier to gain the friendship of young men at their time
^^of life. Then again, you have on your side the best of the
^Biisiog generation, and the most devoted to learning. Moreover,
^Bos the equestrian order is yours, they will follow the example
of that order, if only you take the trouble to confirm the support
of those centuries, not only by the general good affection of the
order, but also by the friendships of individuals. Finally, the
he^ty zeal of the young in canvassing for votes, appearing at
' various places, bringing intelligence, and being in attendance
on you in public are surprisingly important as well as creditable.
IX, And since I have mentioned '* attendance," I may add
hat you should be careful to see large companies every day of
very class and order ; for from the mere number of these a
aess may well be made as to the amount of support you are
■ r to have in the campus itself Such visitors are of three
kinds : one consists of morning callers who come to your house,
. second of those who escort you to the forum, a third of those
I who attend you on your canvass. In the case of the morning
|caiJers, who are less select and, according to the prevailing
' shioDt come in greater numbers, you must contrive to make
think that you value even this slight attention very
Uglily* Let those who shall come to your house see that you

376

OCEBOTS UmMS

I thai a

rtte^ir

:iartke<

Edie]

t yen 1

tD

flglilt tD lilWt.lC ll^ Wot QIC: 1

can iie^cr be a ^acad, Yoct

nwn^ real fediiig^ ia drdcr to ifHip kov anch
to place m him.

Seooadlff of those who escort yoii to tbe faun : soice tin
is a greater actcsitiofi Ihan a mutaiu g caB, > '** iS i' pa *» and mke
dear that k is stiU more grratifym^ to yoo, and as 6r as It sMI
fie m jomr VOwkt go down to tli^ fonmi at Esed tinxs. The
daatf escort uf its nmnbers produces a g^nat impression aad
coafen great personal distinction. The third class ts that d
itnmbers perpetttalif attending you on your canrass. Sq» that
those who do so spontaneously ondeistand that yoo regard
yoitratf as for ever ohliged by thetr extreme kindness : %Mn
those, on the other hand, who owe yon this attention^ Irr^kly
demand that, as far as their age and business allow, they sb^nld
constantly be in personal attendance, and that those wh«* ate
unable to accompany you in person should find relations to
take their place m performing this duty, I am very anxHvoSi
and think it extremely important^ that you should always be
surrounded by large numbers. Besides, it confers a great
reputation and great distinction to be accompanied by those
who by your exertions have been defended, preserved, and
acquitted in the law courts. Put this demand fairly before
them, that, since by your means and without any payment some
have retained their property, others their honour, others their
civil existence and entire fortunes, and since there will never be
any other time at which they can shew their gratitude, they
should remunerate you by this service.

X. And since the point now in discussion is entirely a question
of the loyalty of fnends, 1 must not, I think, pass over one
cautiont Deception, intrigue, and treachery are everywhere.
This is not the time for a formal disquisition on the indications
by which a true friend may be distinguished from a false : all
that is in place now is to give you a hint Your exalted

|a>£ PRT- CONS.

APPENDIX A

377

^charBcter has compelled many to pretend to be your friends
rhile really jealous of you. Wherefore remember the saying of
f Epicharmus, " the muscle and bone of wisdom is to believe
I nothing rashJyt" Again, when you have got the feelings of your
friends in a sound state, you must then acquaint yourself with
the attitude and varieties of your detractors and opponents*
There are three : first, those whom you have attacked ; second,
those who dislike you without definite reason ; third, those
who are warm friends of your competitors. As to those at-
tacked by you while pleading a friend^s cause against them,
frankly excuse yourself ; remind them of the ties constraining
yoQ ; give them reason to hope that you will act with equa! xeal
and loyalty in their cases, if they become your friends. As for
those who dislike you without reason, do your best to remove
that prejudice either by some actual service, or by holding out
hopes of it, or by indicating your kindly feeling towards them.
As for those whose wishes are against you owing to friendship
for your competitors, gratify them also by the same means as
I the former, and, if you can get them to believe it, shew that
) you are kindly disposed to the very men who are standing
I against you.

XI, Having said enough about securing friendships, I must
now speak on another department of a candidate's task, which
is concerned with the conciliation of the people. This demands
, a knack of remembering names, insinuating manners, constant
I •attendance, liberality, the power of setting a report afloat and
creating a hopeful feeling in the state. First of all, make the
faculty you possess of recognizing people conspicuous, and go

ion increasing and improving it every day. I don*t think there
is anything so popular or so conciliatory. Next, if nature has
denied you some quality, resolve to assume it, so as to appear
to be acting naturally. Although nature has great force, yet in
m business lasting only a few months it seems probable that the
sutificial may be the more effective. For though you are not
lacking in the courtesy which good and polite men should
have, yet there is great need of a flattering manner which,
however faulty and discreditable in other transactions of life, is
yet necessary during a candidate ship. For when it makes a
man worse by truckling, it is wrong ; but when only more
friendly, it does not deserve so harsh a term ; while it is abso-
lutely necessary to a candidate, whose face and expression and
style of conversation have to be varied and accommodated to
the feelings and tastes of everyone he meets. As for ** constant
attendance," there is no need of laying down any rule, the
phrase speaks for itself. It is, of course, of very great conse-
quence not to go away anywhere ; but the real advantage of
^•«uch constant attendance is not only the being at Rome and m

378

CICERO'S LETTERS

DE PET. CONS,

the fonim, but the pushing one's canvass assiduously, the
addressing oneself again and again to the same persons, the
making it impossible (as far as your power goes) for anyone to
say that he has not been asked by you, and earnestly and carefully
asked. Liberality is, again, of wide application ; it is shewn in
regard to the management of your private property, which, even
if It does not actually reach the multitude, yet, if spoken of with
praise by friends, earns the favour of the multitude. It may also
be displayed in banquets, which you must take care to attend
yourself and to cause your friends to attend, whether open ones
or those confined to particular tribes. It may, again, be dis-
played in giving practical assistance, which I would have you
render available far and wide : and be careful therein to be
accessible to all by day and night, and not only by the doors of
your house, but by your face and countenance, which is the
door of the mind ; for, if that shews your feelings to be those
reserve and concealment, it is of little good to have your hoi
doors open* For men desire not only to have promises ma<
them, especially in tlieir applications to a candidate, but to have
them made in a hberal and complimentary manner. Accord-
ingly, it is an easy rule to make, that you should indicate that
whatever you are going to do you will do with heartiness and
pleasure ; it is somewhat more diflicult, and rather a concession
to the necessities of the moment than to your inclination, that
when you cannot do a thing you should [either promise] or put
your refusal pleasantly : the latter is the conduct of a good
man, the former of a good candidate. For when a request is
made which we cannot grant with honour or without loss to
ourselves, for instance, if a man were to ask us to appear in a
suit against a friend, a refusal must be given in a gentlemanly
way : you must point out to him that your hands are tied, must
shew that you are exceedingly sorry, must convince him that
you will make up for it in other ways.

XI L I have heard a man say about certain orators, to whom
he had offered his case, ** that he had been better pleased with
the words of the one who declined, than of the one who ac-
cepted." So true it is that men are more taken by look and
words than by actual services. [This latter course, however,
you will readily approve : the former it is somewhat difficult to
recommend to a Platonist like you, but yet I will have regard for
your present circumstances.] For even those to whom you are
forced by any other tie to refuse your advocacy may yet quit
you mollified and with friendly feelings. But those to whom you
only excuse a refusal by saying that you are hindered by the
aflfairs of closer friends, or by cases more important or pre-
viously undertaken, quit you with hostile feelings, and arc one
and all disposed to prefer an insincere promise to a direct

tDe

•Htfflr "

CONS.

APPENDIX A

379

I

negative froro you. C. Cotta, a master in the art of electioneer-
ing, used to say that, " so long as the request was not directly
contrary to moral duty, he used to promise his assistance to all,
to bestow it on those with whom he thought it would be most
advantageously invested : he did not refuse anyone, because
something^ often turned up to prevent the person whom he pro-
mised from availing himself of it, and it often also occurred that
he himself was less engaged than he had thought at the time ;
nor could anyone^s house be full of suitors who only undertook
what he saw his way to perform i by some accident or other the
unexpected often happens, while business, which you have
believed to be actually in hand, from some cause or other does
not come off : moreover, the worst that can happen is that the
man to whom yoti have made a false promise is angry," This last
risk, supposing you to make the promise, is uncertain, is pro-
spective, and only affects a few ; but, if you refuse, the offence
given is certain, immediate, and more widely diffused. For
many more ask to be allowed to avail themselves of the help of
another than actually do so. Wherefore it is better that some
of them should at times be angry with you in the forum,
than all of them perpetually at your own house : especially as
Ihey are more inclined to be angry with those who refuse, tian
with a man whom they perceive to be prevented by so grave a
cause as to be compatible with the desire to fulfil his promise if
he possibly could. But that I may not appear to have abandoned
my own classification, since the department of a candidate's
work on which I am now dilating is that which refers to the
populace, I insist on this, that all these observations have refer-
ence not so much to the feelings of friends as to popular rumour. /
Though there is something in what I say which comes under
the former head — such as answering with kindness, and giving
jealous assistance in the business and the dangers of firiends —
yet in this part of my argument I am speaking of the things
which enable you to win over the populace i for instance, the
having your house full of visitors before daybreak, the securing
the affection of many by giving them hope of your support, the
contriving that men should leave you with more friendly feelings
than they came, the filling the ears of as many as possible with
the most telling words.

XII 1. For my next theme must be popular report, to which
tery great attention must be paid. But what I have said
throughout the foregoing discourse applies also to the diffusion
of a favourable report : the reputation for eloquence ; the favour
of the publicani and equestrian order \ the goodwill of men of
rank ; the crowd of young men ; the constant attendance of
those whom you have defended ; the number of those from
monjcipal towns who have notoriously come to Rome on ;

38o

CICERO'S LETTERS

DB PET. CONS,

account ; the observations which men make in your favour — t]
you recognize them, address them politely, are assiduous
earnest in canvassing ; that they speak and think of you as ki;
and liberal ; the having your house full of callers long before
daybreak ; the presence of large numbers of every class ; that
your look and speech give satisfaction to all, your acts and
deeds to many ; that everything is done which can be done by
hard work, skill, and attention, not to cause the fame arising
from all these displays of feeling to reach the people, but to bring
the people itself to share them. You have already won the city
populace and the affections of those who control the public
meetings by your panegyric of Pompey, by undertaking the cause
of Manilius, by your defence of Cornelius.* We must not let
those advantages be forgotten, which hitherto no one has had
without possessing at the same time the favour of the great We
must also take care that everyone knows that Cn, Pompeius is
strongly in your favour, and that it emphatically suits his purpose
that you should win your election. Lastly, take care that your
whole candidature is full of iclat^ brilhant, splendid, suited to
the popular taste, presenting a spectacle oif the utmost dignity
and magnificence. See also, if possible, that some new scandsd
is started against your competitors for crime or looseness of life
or corruption, such as is in harmony with their characters.

Above all in this election you must see that the Republic
entertains a good hope and an honourable opinion of you*
And yet you must not enter upon pohtical measures in senate-
house and public meeting while a candidate : you must hold
such things m abeyance, in order that from your lifelong conduct
the senate may judge you likely to be the supporter of their
authority ; the Roman knights, along with the loyahsts and
wealthy, judge you from your past to be eager for peace and
quiet times ; and the people think of you as not likely to be hos-
tile to their interests from the fact that in your style of speaking
in public meetings, and in your declared convictions, you have
been on the popular side.

XIV. This is what occurred to me to say on the subject of
these two morning reflexions, which I said you ought to turn
over in your mind every day as you went down to the forum :
" I am a novus homo^* ** I am a candidate for the consulship.**
There remains the third, "This is Rome," a city made up of a

1 Manilius, tr, pL RC. 66, proposed the law for appointing Pompey to
supersede Lucullus in the East, After his year of office he was accusal of
maiestas, and later on of repetundm, but apparently neither case came on.
C. CorneUiis, tr. pi. B,c, 57, was accused of maiestas in BX. 55, and
defended by Cicero. He had become alienated fi-ora the senate by iti
opposition to his legislation gainst usury in the provinces, and 1
made a great seDsaUon.

rPET. CONS.

APPENDIX A

381

^
^

1

GombiDation of nations, in which many snares, much deception,
many vices enter into every department of life : in which you
have to put up with the arrogant pretensions, the wrong-headed*
ness, the ill-will, the hauteur, the disagreeable temper and
oflfensive manners of many. I well understand that it requires
great prudence and skill for a man, living among social vices of
every sort, so nriany and so serious, to avoid giving offence,
causing scandal, or faUing into traps, and in his single person to
adapt himself to such a vast variety of character, speech, and
fcelmg. Wherefore, 1 say again and again, go on persistently in
the path you have begun : put yourself above rivalry in
eloquence ; it is by this that people at Rome are charmed and
attracted, as well as deterred from obstructing a man's career
or inflictmg an injury upon him. And since the chief pla^e
spot of our state is that it allows the prospect of a bribe to bUnd
it to virtue and worth, be sure that you are fiiDy aware of your
own strength, that is, understand that you are the man capable
of producing in the minds of your rivals the strongest fear of
legal proceeding and legal peril Let them know that they are
watched and scrutinized by you : they will be in terror of your
energy, as well as of your influence and power of speech, and
above all of the affection of the equestrian order towards you.
But though I wish you to hold out this before them, 1 do not
wish you to make it appear that you are already meditating an
action, but to tise this terror so as to facilitate the gaining of
your object : and, in a word, in this contest strain every nerve
and use every faculty in such a way as to secure what we seek.
1 notice that there are no elections so deeply tainted with cor-
ruption, but that some centuries return men closely connected
with them without receiving money. Therefore, if we are as
vigilant as the greatness of otir object demands, and rouse our
well* wishers to put forth all their energies ; and if we allot to men
of influence and zeal in our service their several tasks ; if we put
before our rivals the threat of legal proceedings ; if we inspire
their agents with fear, and by some means cheek the distribu-
tors, it is possible to secure either that there shall be no bribery
or that it shall be ineffectual.

These are the points that I thought, not that I knew better
than you, but that I could more easily than you — in the pressing
state of your present engagements^ollect together and send
you written out. And although they are written in such terms
as not to apply to all candidates for office, but to your special
case and to your particular election, yet I should be glad if you
wotdd tell me of anything that should be corrected or entirely
struck out, or that has been omitted. For I wish this little essay
** on the duties of a candidate " to be regarded as complete in
every rcspecL

.38^

CICERO'S LETTERS

t. VKTriOi,

APPENDIX B

L- VETTIUS (Letter L, a ii, 24)

L. A^ETTIUS, a kind of Titus Dates, was like the witness m
** Great Expectations," prepared to swear "mostly anything***
The interest attaching to such a sordid person is confined to the
question whether he was really acting with the connivance of, or
under an agreement with, any of the leading politicians of the
day. If the principle of aii bono is applied, it is evident that the
gainers were the party of the trumvirs, whose popularity would
be increased by a belief being created that their opponents the
Optimates were prepared to adopt extreme measures to get rid
of them. It would give them just the advantage which the Rye
House plot gave Charles II. This is Cicero's view, it seems, of
the matter, as insinuated in this letter and in his speech against
Vatinius (§§ 24-26 ; cp, pro S£st. § 132), In the letter^ however,
his insinuations seem directed against Cassar : in the speech
Vatinius is the scape-goat. But Vettius was not only a liar, but
a bad liar. He made blunders ; and when he brought in the
name of Bibulus, he was not aware that Bibulus had got scent
of something going on, and had secured himself by givi
Pompey warning. He also did not tell consistent stori<
mentioning names (such as that of Brutus) at one time, and wii
drawing them at another. He was accordingly wholly di!
credited, and could therefore expect no protection from Caesa
who had been careful not to commit himself ; and he bad nothini
for it but suicide^ like Pigott at the time of the Pamell Com-
mission,

Cicero, then, would have us believe that Vettius had been
instigated by Vatinius (acting for C^sar) to name Bibulus,
L. LuculluSj Curio (father and son), L. Domitius Ahenobarbus,
L. Lentulus, L. Paullus, Cicero himself, his sonin-law Piso,
and M, Laterensis, as having been all more or less privy to th(
plot to murder Pompey and Caesar. That there was absolute"
no such plot, and that Vettius broke down hopelessly whi
questioned. That the object was, (1) to irritate Pompey with the
Optimates and so confirm him in his alliance with Cajsar, (3) to
discredit the Optimates generally.

It may be well to state briefly the views pat forward by our

mother authorities for this period.

1 (l) Suetonius (Q^j. 20) appears to attribute the instigation
of Vettius to Caesar, as also the murder of Vettius in prison.

uriTBR L (A II, 24) APPENDIX B 383

after he broke down so flagrantly. The text of this passage,
however, is somewhat doubtful.

(2.) Appian {B, C, ii. 12) describes the scene as happening
at the time that Caesar's agrarian law was being passed, and
Bibulus was hustled in the forum. Vettius, with a drawn dagger,
rushed into the crowd crying out that he had been sent by
Bibulus, Cicero, and Cato to assassinate Caesar and Pompey, and
that an attendant of Bibulus had given him the dagger. Vettius
was arrested, put into prison to be questioned the next day, and
was murdered during the night. Caesar meanwhile addressed
the people and excited their anger; but after the death of
Vettius the matter was hushed up.

(3.) Plutan:h {LuculL 42) says that the " Pompeians," annoyed
at finding the union with Caesar opposed by the leading Opti-
mates, induced Vettius to accuse Lucullus and others of a plot
to assassinate Pompey ; and that the corpse of Vettius shewed
evident signs of violence.

(4.) Dio Cassius (38-39) says bluntly that Vettius was em-
ployed by Lucullus and Cicero to assassinate Pompey, and was
got rid of in prison. He adds that Vettius was discredited by
farn^gmg in the name of Bibulus, who (as Cicero also says) had
seoired himself by giving Pompey warning.

The conclusions seem to be (though in such a tangled skein
of lies it is impossible to be sure), (i) that there was no plot,
properly so called, though many of the Optimates, and Cicero
among them, had used incautious language ; (2) that Vettius
was suborned by some person or party of persons to make the
people believe that there was one ; (3) that Caesar — though
diere is not sufficient evidence to shew that he had been the in-
stigator — ^was willing to take advantage of the prejudice created
by the suspicions thus aroused ; (4) that though Vettius had
served Cicero in his capacity of spy in the days of the Catilinarian
conspiracy, and was able to report words of his sufficiently
characteristic, yet this letter to Atticus exonerates Cicero from
suspicion, even if there were a plot, and even if we could believe
that he could have brought himself to plot the death of Pompey.

384

aCERO'S LETTERS

APPENDIX C

TO TIEO

The following" letters to Tiro, with one from Quintns in regard
to his manumission, are given here because of the difficulty of
dating them. The indications of time are as follows. I. Those
addressed to Tiro are earlier than that of Quintus, because they
refer to a promised emancipation, while that of Quintus speaks
of It as accomplished. II. The letter of Quintus is after the
emancipation of his own freedman Statius, which apparently
took place B.C. 59. III. Quintus is at a distance from Italy,
and is looking forward to rejoin his brother and family. IV.
Cicero is engaged on some more than ordinary literary work.
V, Pompey is visiting Cicero in his Cuman villa. Now after
his return from Asia (B.C. $%)^ Quintus was only twice thus
distant, in B.C. 57-56 in Sardinia, and in BX, 54-53 in Britain
and Gaul. In both of these periods Cicero was engaged on
literary work ; in the former on the de Orator£^ in the latter on
the de Republica, There is really no means of deciding between
these two. It is even possible that they might be placed some
time during the propraetorship of Quintus in Asia (B.C. 62-59),
during which Cicero was engaged, among other things, on a
poem on his own times and a history of his consulship. Tiro —
or M. Tullius Tiro, as he was called after his emancipation — was
not a young man, and may well have been emancipated even in
B.C. 59. According to Hieronymus, he died in B.C $ in his
hundredth year. He was therefore little more than a year
younger than Cicero himself. The illness of Tiro must have
been an earlier one than that of which we shall hear much in
B.C. 50-49,

I (F XVI, 13)
TO TIRO

(CuMiE) 10 April

I SHALL consider that I have everything possible from you,
if I see you in good health, I am awaiting the arrival of
Andricus, whom I sent to you, with the utmost anxiety.
Do take pains to recover, if you love me : and as soon as
you have thoroughly re-established your health, come to
Good-bye.
xo ApriL

Fxvi, 13, 14, 15 APPENDIX C 385

II (F XVI, 14)

TO TIRO

(CuMiE) 11 April

Andricus arrived a day later than I expected him, and
accordingly I had a night of terror and unhappiness. Your
letter does not make me at all more certain of your state,
and yet it did revive me. I can take pleasure in nothing ;
can employ myself in no literary work, which I cannot
touch till I have seen you. Give orders to promise the
doctor any fee he chooses to ask. I wrote to that effect
to Ummidius. I am told that your mind is ill at ease, and
that the doctor says this is what makes you ill. If you care
for me, rouse from their sleep your studies and your culture,
which make you the dearest object of my afFectioti. It is
your mind that requires strengthening now, in order that
your body may also recover. Pray do it both for your own
and my sake. Keep Acastus with you to help to nurse you.
Preserve yourself for me. The day for the fulfilment of my
promise is at hand, and I will be true to it, if you only
come. Good-bye, good-bye 1
II April, noon.

Ill (F XVI, 15)

TO TIRO

(CuMic) 12 April

iEoYPTA arrived on the 12th of April. Though he brought
the news that you were entirely without fever and were
pretty well, yet he caused me anxiety by saying that you
had not been able to write to me: and all the more so
because Hermia, who ought to have arrived on the same
I. c c

aCERO'S LETTERS

1t> TI10

day, has not done so. I am incredibly anxious about your
heakh* If you will relieve me from ibat, I will liberal you
firom every burden. I would have written at greater length,
if I had thought that you were now capable of taking any
pleasure in reading a letter. Concentrate your whole in-
telligence, which I value above everything, upon preserving
yourself for your own and my benefit. Use your utmost
diligence, I repeat, in nursing your health. Good-bye,

P.S. — Wlien I had finished the above Hennia arrived,
I have your letter written in a shaky hand, and no wonder
after so serious an ilbiess. I am sending ^g>^ta back to
stay with you, because he is by no means without feeling,
and seems to me to be attached to you, and with him a
cook for your especial use. Good-bye I

IV (f XVI, lo)

TO TIRO
CuM^ 19 May

I OF course wish you to come to me, but I dread

journey for you. You have been most seriously tU ; you
have been much reduced by a low diet and purgarives, and
the ravages of the disease itself. After dangerous illnesses,
if some mistake is made, drawbacks are usually dangerous.
Moreover, to the tn^'o days on the road which it will have
taken you to reach Cum^e, there will have to be added at
once five more for your return journey to Rome. I mean
to be at Formise on the 30th : be sure, my dear Tiro, that
I find you there strong and well. My poor studies, or
rather ours^ have been in a very bad way owing to your
absence. However, they have looked up a little owing to
this letter from you brought by Acastus. Pompey is staying
with me at the moment of writing this, and seems to be
cheerful and enjoying himself. He asks me to read him
something of ours, but I told him that without you the
oracle was dumb. Pray prepare to renew your services to
our Muses. My promise shall be performed on the day

F XVI, lo, i6 APPENDIX C 387

named: for I have taught you the etymology oi fides}
Take care to make a complete recovery. I shall be with
you directly. Good-bye.
19 May.

V (F XVI, 16)

Q. CICERO TO HIS BROTHER

(Gaul?)

As I hope to see you again, my dear Marcus, and my own
son Cicero, and your TuUiola and your son, I am delighted
about Tiro. He was much too good for his position, and I
am truly glad that you preferred that he should be our
freedman and friend rather than our slave. Believe me,
when I read your letter and his I jumped for joy, and I
both thank and congratulate you : for if the fidelity and good
character of my own Statins is a delight to me, how much
more valuable must those same qualities be in your man,
since there is added to them knowledge of literature, con-
versational powers, and culture, which have advantages even
over those useful virtues ! I have all sorts of most conclusive
reasons for loving you : and here is another one, either for
what you have done, or, if you choose, for your perfect manner
of announcing it to me. Your letter shewed me your whole
heart I have promised Sabinus's servants all they asked,
and I will perform my promise.

^ From >&, accoidii^ to Ocero, credammsque quia ^'fiat" qupd
aaum estf appdlatamMem (de Of- I I 23). He u rtkuiog to kw
promise to cBModpate Tiio 00 a particular dtf

EVD CF VOU L

.nmt^ OF CLASSICS

CHISWICK PRESS : CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.

Detailed Catalogue^ arranged according io thi various
Libraries^ wili be sent on application.

ALPHABETICAL LIST

OF liOOKS CONTAINED IN

BOHNS LIBRARIES.

ADDISON S Works, Wiih the
Notes of Bishop Hurd, Portmit,
and 8 Plales of Medals and Coins,
Edited by H. G. Bohn. 6 vols.
3j. M* each*

DSOHYLITSi The Dramas of.
Translated into English Verse by
Anoa Swanwick. 4th Edition,
revised* 51.

The Tragedies of. Trans-
lated into Prose by T. A. Buckley,
B,A. 3J. 6d,

IjLEN'S (Joseph, R. N.) Battles
of the British Navy, Revised
Editioni with 57 Steel Engravings*
% vols. %s. each*

[AMMTAKUa MAROELI^IKaS.
Hlatory of Rome during the
Reigns of Constantius, Julian,
foviantii, Valentinitm^ and Valens,
Translated by Prof. CD. YongCi
M«A. 71, 6i/,

LNDERSEN'3 Danish Legondi
and Fairy Talea, Irunslated
by Caroline Pcachey. With 120
Wood Engtavings. Jj.

' AITTONIN173 fM. AureUus), The
Thoagtita of. Trans. litetaUy,

with Notes and Inlruduclian by
George Long, M.A. JJ, 6r/.

AFOLLONIU3 RHODIUS.

*The Ajgonautloa/ Translated
by E. P. Coleridge, B,A. 5^.

AFFIAN'S Roman History.
Translated by Horace White,
M.A., LL.D. With Maps and
IllnstraJions. 2 vols. 6j. each.

AFULEIUS, The Works of
Comprising the Golden Ass» God
of Socratesj Florida, and Dis-
course of Magic. 5 J.

ARIOSTO'S Orlando Forioeo.

Translated into English Verse by
W, S. Rose. With Portrait, and 2 \
Steel Engravings. 2VoIs. 5;^ each.

ARISTOFHANES' Comedies.
Translated by W. J. Hickie* a
vols. 5j. each.

ARISTOTLE'S Nioomaoh^BH
Ethics. Translated, with lutio-
ductiiin and Notes, by the Vener-
able Archdeacon Browne, %s*

FollUos and Eoonomlofl.

Translated by E. Walford, M.A.,
wi\li lulto6L>i!CX\ni^Nl1 'tkv^ ^^^R^*

5*'

Ah Alphabetical List of Books

ABISTOTLE'S Metaphyslos.
Translated by the Rev. John H.
M*Mahon, M.A. 5j.

History of Animals. Trans.

by Richard Cresswell, M.A. 55.

Organon; or, Logical Trea-
tises, and the Intr<>duction of
Porphyry. Translated by the
Rev. 0. F. Owen, M.A. 2 vols.
35. 6d, each.

Rhetoric and Poetics.

Trans, by T. Buckley, B.A. 5j.

AEJUAN'S Anabasis of Alex-
ander, together with the Indlca.
Translated by E. J. Chinnock,
M.A., LL.D. With Maps and
Plans. 5j.

ATHENiEtTS. The Delpnoso-
phlsts; or, the Banquet of the
Learned. Trans, by Prof. C. D.
Yonge, M.A. 3 vols. $$, each.

BAOON'S Moral and Historical
Works, including the Essays,
Apophthegms, Wisdom of the
Ancients, New Atlantis, Henry
VII., Henry VIII., Elizabeth,
Henry Prince of Wales, History
of Great Britain, Julius Caesar,
'uid Augustus Caesar. Edited by
J. Devey, M.A. y, 6d,

— Novum Organmn and Ad-
vancement of Learning. Edited
by J. Devey, M.A. 55.

BASS'S Lexicon to the Greek
Testament. 2s,

BAX'S Manual of the History
of Philosophy, for the use of
Students. By E. Belfort Bax. 5^.

BEAUMONT and FLETCHER,

their finest Scenes, Lyrics, and
other Beauties, selected from the
whole of their woiks, vnd edtted
by Leigh Hunt. is. 6d.

BEOHSTEIN'S Oa|
Chamber Birds, their
History, Habits, Food,
and Modes of Capture. Ti
with considerable addi
Structure, Migration, a
nomy, by H. G. Adams,
with Sweet British Wi
With 43 coloured PIj
Woodcut Illustrations.

BEDE'S (Venerable) E
tlcal History of Engla:
gether with the Angl
Chronicle. Edited
Giles, D.C.L. With M

BELL (Sir Charles). 1
tomy and Philosophy
presslon, as connect
the Pine Arts. By Si
Bell, K.H. 7th edition

BEBKELET (George),
of Cloyne, The W
Edited by George Samps
Biographical Introductic
Right Hon. A. J. Ball(
3 vols. 5 J. each.

BION. See Theocritus

BJORNSON'S Ame
Fisher Lassie. Tran
W. H. Low, M.A. 3J.

BLAIB'S Chronologlca:
Revised and Enlarged,
bending the Chronology
toryof the World,from th
Times to the Russian
Peace, April 1856. B3
loughby Rosse. Doubh

Index of Dates.

prehending the principa
the Chronology and t
the World, alphabcti
ranged ; being a compl
to Blair's Chronologica
\ 'firj^.'^* Rosse, 2 vols.

iLEEE, Introductloii to the
Old TestamenL Ey FriedricH
Blcek. Edited by Johann Bleek
»ud Adolf Kamphau.^en. Trans -
I^lcd by G- II. Venablts, under
Ihc supervision oflhe Rev, Canon
Enables. 2 vols. 5j. each.

(BOETHItrS'S Consolation of
PidlOBophy. King Alfred^s Anglo*
'^^xon Version of. Wtih a itteral
English Translation on opposite
pages, Notes, Introduction, and
iilossiiy, by Rev, S. Fox, M^.
%

|B0HN'S Dictionary of Poetical
Quotations. 4th edition, 6j.

r^S Handbooks of Q^mea.

Ifew edition. In 2 vols., with

numerous Illustrations 3i« 6tl,

each.

Vol. I,— Tablk Games?— Bil-

I JiarrU, Chess, Draughts, Back-

[ fattitnon, DominotSi Solitaircj

' ilever^it Go-Bang* Roui^eet Noir,

RouleUe, K.O.. Hn^ntfl^ Faro,
Vob II — Card Gamks : —
I Whi^, Solo Whists Poker, Piquet,
' Ecirtc, Euchre, liezique, Crib^
Ihag*^, Loo,Viniit*el-un, Napoleon,
[Kewinarkct, Pope Joan, Specula-
ft ion, 5tc., ^'C.

' BOND 3 A Handy Book of Rules
and Tables for verif)'irg Dates
h with the Christian Era, &c. Giving
iiin cccount of the Chief Erus and
[Systems used by various Nation? ;
I vlth the easy Methods for deter-
I mi Cling the Corresponding Dates*
J By J. J. Bond. 5/.

>NOMI'3 Nineveh and Its
[ Palaces. 7Platesand294 Wood
Ut riluslrations. ^s,

>SWJSIjL'S lilfe of Johnson,
'with the Tour in thr Hkcrides
and JoHNSONiANA. Edited by

ktlie Rev. A. Napier, M.A, \Mth
Frontbpiece to each voU d vols.
^, 6^ each.

BKAND'S Popular Antlquitios
of Elnglsjid, Scotland, and Ire-
land. Arranged, revised^ and
greatly enlarged, by Sir lleniy
Ellis, K.H., F.R.S., &c,, &c. 3
vols* 5x. each.

BHEMilE S (Frederlka) Works.
Translated by Mary Ho Witt, .f
vols. 3J. 6t/. each,

BRIDGWATKR TREATISES.

Bell (Sir Charles) on tho Hand.

With numerous Woodcuts, p',

KJxby on the History, Habits,
and Instincts of Animals.
Edited by T. Rymer Jones.
With upwards of 100 Woodcuts,
2 vols. 5J. each.

Klc d on the Adaptation of Ex-
ternal Nature to the Physical
Condition of Man. 3 j. 6J,

Chalmers on the Adaptation
of Estnmal Nature to the
Moral and Intslleotual Con-
stitution of Man. 51.

BRINK (B. ten) Early English
Iilteratnre. By Benihard ten
Brink. Vol. L ToWyelif. Trans-
lated by Horace M. Kennedy

Vol. II. Wyclif, Chaucer, Ear-
liest Drama Renaissance. Trans-
lated by W. Clarke Robinson,
Ph.D. y. 6^.

Vol III. From the Fourteenth
Century to the Death of Surrey.
Edited by Dr. Alois Brandl.
Trans, by L. Dora Schmiti*
3J. Sti.

Five Lectures on Shake*

Epeare. Trans, by Julia Franklin.

BROWNE'S (Sir Thomas) Works
Edited b^Sm^^A\Vw\> ^'f^aU.

An Alphabetical List of Books

BXTRKB'S Works. 8 vols. 3^.6^.
etch.

I.— Vindication of Natural So-
ciety—Essay on the Sub-
lime and Beautiful, and
various Political Miscel-
lanies.

II. — Reflections on the French
Revolution— Letters re-
lating to the Bristol Elec-
tion — Speech on Fox's
East India Bill, &c.

III. — Appeal from the New to the
Old Whigs— On the Na-
bob of Arcot's Debts —
The Catholic Claims, &c.

IV.— Report on the Affairs of
India, and Articles of
Charp;e against Warren
Hastmgs.

V. — Conclusion of the Articles o\
Charge against Warren
Hastmgs — Political Let-
ters on the American War,
on a Regricide Peace, to
the Empress of Russia.

VI. — Miscellaneous Speeches —
Letters and Fragments —
Abridgments of English
Flistory, &c. With a
General Index.

Vn. & VIII.— Speeches on the Im-
peachment of Warren
Hastings ; and Letters.
With Index. 2 vols.
3x. 6d, each.

Life. By Sir J. Prior. 35. ed.

BURNBY*S Evelina. By Frances
Burney (Mme. D*Arblay). With
an Introduction and Notes by
A. R. Ellis. 3^. 6d.

OeolUa. With an Introduc-

(ion and Notes by A. K. Ellis.

2 vols. 3^. 6d, each.

BURN (R) Ancient
Its NeighboTirhoodL
trated Handbook to t
the City and the Cai
the use of Travellers.
Burn, M.A. With
Illustrations, Maps, :

BURNS (Robert), Lil
J. G. Lockhart, D
new and enlarged Ed
vised by William Scol

zs.ed,

BURTON'S (Robert) li
Melanoholy. Edited
A. R. Shilleto, M.A.
troduction by A. H. ]
full Index. 3 vob. 3

BURTON (Sir R. P.)
Narrative of a Pllg
Al-MadJnab and Me
Captain Sir Richard
K.C.M.G. With an L
by Stanley I^ne-Poo!
the original lUustratior
3J. 6d. each.
^ *«• This is the cop
tion, containing the aul
notes.

BUTLER'S (Bishop) A
Religion, Natural and
to the Constitution anc
Nature ; together wit!
sertations on Personal l
on the Nature of V
Fifteen vSermons. 31.

BUTLER'S (f3amuel)
With Variorum Note
graphy, Portrait, and
trations. 51.

or, further lUustrati

Outline Portraits. 2 vol

O^SAR. Commentary
Gallic and Civil War
lated by W. A. McDe^

Contained in Bohn's Libraries.

5

^JA^OJSNS' Lusted; or, the Dis-
^^'^'y of India. An Epic Poem.
^^nsUted by W. J. Mickle. 5th
S^^tion, revised by E. R. Hodges,

^'^^APAS (The) of Maddalonl.
J*ples under Spanish Dominion.
Translated from the German of
Aliped de Reamont. 35. (id,

^I-YLE'S Prenoh Revolution.
Ejiitcd bv J. Holland Rose,
*^tt.D. lUus. 3 vols. 5 J. each.

^ Sartor Resartua. With 75
JV^strations by Edmund J. Sul-
*ivan. 5j.

C^EPENTER'S (Dr. W. B.)

Zoology. Revised Edition, by

^. S. Dallas, F. L. S. With very

'^^merous Woodcuts. Vol. I. 6j.

[ V^oU IL out of print,

°4?^2NTBR'S Mechanical
^loBophy, Astronomy, and
horology. 181 Woodcuts. Sj.

"^ Vegetable Physiology and
SyBtematic Botany. Revised
^tion, by E. Lankester, M.D.,
**^ With very numerous Wood-

"~r^ Animal Physiology. Revised
^ition. With upwards of 300
''Voodcuts. 6j.

^^STLE (E.) Schools and
^?aters of Fei.ce, from the
pl^ddle Ages to the End of the
??SMeenth Century. By P:gerton
^tle, M.A., F.S.A. With a
^^nipleie Bibliography. Illus-
«ated with 140 Reproductions of
y'd Engravings and 6 Plates of
^^ords, showing 114 Examples.

^TTbrmoLE'S Evenhigs at
*^on Hall. With 24 En-
S'a\ing8 on Steel from designs by
j*llermole, the Lettcr/)ress by the
^^ness dc Otrabella. 5s.

CATULLUS, TibuUus, and the
Vigil of Venus. A Literal Prose
Translation. 5^.

CELL IN I (Benvenuto). Me-
moirs of, written by Himself.
Translated by Thomas Roscoe.

CERVANTES* Don Quixote de
la Mancha. Motteaux's Trans
lation revised. 2 vols. 3j. 6d.
each.

Galatea. A Pastoral Ro

mance. Translated by G. W. J
Gyll. 3J. 6J,

Exemplary Novels. Trans

lated by Walter K. Kelly. 35. 6ct.

CHAUCER'S Poetioal Works.
Edited by Robert Bell. Revised
Edition, wilh a Preliminary Essay
by Prof. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 4
vols. 3^. 6d. each.

CHESS CONGRESS of 1882.
A Collection of the Games played.
Edited by J. Lowenthal. Ss,

OHEVREUL on Colour. Trans-
lated from the French by Charles
Martel. Third Edition, with
Plates, $s, ; or with an additional
series of 16 Plates in Colours,
7j. 6d,

OHILLINGWORTH'S ReUglon
of Protestants. A Safe Way to
Salvation. 31. Sd,

CHINA. Pictorial, Descriptive,
and Historical. With Map and
nearly 100 Illustrations. 5^.

CHRONICLES OF THE CRU-
SADES. Contemporary Narra-
tives of the Crusade of Richard
Coeur de Lion, by Richard of
Devizes and Geoffrey de Vinsauf ;
and of the Crusade at St. Louis,
by Lord John de Joinville. 51.

CICERO'S Orations. Translated
by Pioi C. Vv»\oxi^^i^ "^.K, ««
vols. 5s. eac\x«

An Atf>kaiefural List of Books

GICERO'S Letters. TraQst^tedby
Evelyn 5« Shuckburgh. 4 vols.
51. each*

On Oratory and Oiatora.
Witb Letters lo Qiiintus and
Brulos. Translated by the Rev.
J, S. Watson, M.A. 5/.

— On the Nature ot the Qods»
Divination, Fate, Laws, & Re-
public, Con<;ulship. Translated
by Pf of- C D. Yonge, M.A., *nd
Fiancis Barkam. Jj.

— - Aoademlca, De Finibus, and
Tnsculan Questions. By Prof*
Cf D, Yonge, M.A- 5/.

Offioea ; or, Moral Duties.
Cato Major, an Essay on Old
Age; L^elius, an E&^y on Friend-
ship; Scipio's Dream ; Paradoxes;
Letter to Quintus on Magistrates.
TrAnslated by C R. Edmonds,

CORNELIUS NEPOS.^i'^ftf

jDSTtN.

OLARK'3 (Hugh) Infaroduotlon
to Heraldry. 18th Edilion» Re-
vised and Enlarged by J. R»
Planche» Rouge Croix. With
nearly looo Illustrations. 51. Or
with the Illustrations Coloured,
15/.

CLASSIC TALES, containing
Ra^selas, Vicar of Waketkid,
GulHver^s Travels, and The Senti-
mental Journey. 3f. 6d*

COLEBIDQE'S (S. T.) Friend.
A Series of Essays on Morals,
Politics, and Religion. 3x. M.

Alda to Reflection, and the

CONFKJiSlONS OF AN INQUIRING

Spirit, to which are added the
Essays on Faith and the Book
OP Common Prayer. 31. 6d.

Leotures and Kotoa on

kespeare and other ^n^^ia^

ete. Edited by T.Ashe, 3s, Gd,

COLERIDGE S BlographU Lite-
rarla; together with T«^o Laj
Semaons. 3/. 6dl

Table-Talk and Omnlana.'

Edited by T, Ai,he, B.A, y, Sd,

Misoellanlea, ^athetlo and

Literary; lo which is i^dded.
The Tmbory of Lipf,.
lected and arranged by T. Ashe
B.A. 3t.6d.

COMTE'S Positive Ph
i Tians!.iled and condensed
Harriet Martineau, With Intfa
ductiort by Frederic Harris
3 vols. 5r. each,

OOMTE'S Philosophy of the
Sclenoes, being an Exposition of
the Principles of the C^urs
Pkihsophk PoiiHvi, By G.
Lewes. 5/.

OONDE S History of the Bo
minion of the Arabs In Spalni
Translated by Mrs. Foster. \_
Toh, 3r. M, each.

COOPER'S Blographloal Dl<
tlonary. Containing Concij^,
Notices /upwards of 15,000) o^
Eminent Persons of all Ages andL
Countries. Bylliompson Cooper J
F.S.A. With a SupplementJ
bringing the work down to 1883,!
2 vols. 5J. each.

OOXE'S Memoirs of the Du^e of
Marlborough. With his ori^^nail
Corresprmdence. By W. Coxe,|
M.A., F.R,S. Revised editlcol
by John Wade. 3 ^^\&. y. fiiX
each,

%* An Atlas of the plans of ^
Marlborough's campaigiis, dtOi
lOf. ^cL

History of the House of

AuBtrla (1218-1792). With a

Continuation from the Accession

\ oi^TMids \, to the Revolution of

Contained in Bokn's Libraries,

0RAIK'8(G. L.) Punnilt of Enow-
ledge under Dlffioultiea. Illus-
trated by Anecdotes and Memoirs.
Revised edition, with numerous
Woodcut Portraits and Plates. 5^.

CHUUULSHANE'S Punoh and
Judy. The Dialogue of the
Puppet Show ; an Account of its
Origin, &c. With 24 Illustra-
tions, and Coloured Plates, de-
agned and engraved by G. Cruik-
shank. 5j.

GTTNNINGHAM'S Lives of the
Most Eminent British Painters.
A New Edition, vdth Notes and
Sixteen fre^ Lives. By Mrs.
Heaton. 3 vols, y, 6d, each.

DAKTX. Divine Oomedy. Trans-
lated by the Rev. H. F. Gary,
M.A. 3J. 6^

— — Translated into English Verse
by L C. Wright, M.A. 3rd Edi-
tion, revised. With Portrait, and
34 Illustrations on Steel, after |
Flaxman.

DANTE. The Inferno. A Literal
Prose Translation, with the Text
of the Original printed on the same
page. By John A. Carlyle, M.D.

— The Purgatorlo. A Literal
Prose Translation, with the Text
printed on the same page. By
W. S. Dugdale. 55.

DE GOMMINES (Philip), Me-
molrsof. Containing the Histories
of Louis XI. and Charles VIII.,
Kings of France, and Charles
the Bold, Duke of Burgundy.
Together with the Scandalous
Chronicle, or Secret History of
Louis XL, by Jean de Troyes.
Translated by Andrew K. Scoblc.
With Portraits, a vols. 3;. 6d.
each*

DEFOE'S Novels and MtsoeL
laneous Works. With Prefaces
and Notes, including those attri-
buted to Sir W. Scot. 7 vols.
3J. 6d, each.

I.— Captain Singleton, and
Colonel Jack.

II. — Memoirs of a Cavalier,
Captain Carleton^
Didcory Cronke, &c

III.— Moll Flanders, and the
History of the Devil.

IV. — Roxana, and Life of Mrs*
Christian Davies.

V. — History of the Great Plsigue
of London, 1665 ; The
Storm (1703) ; and the
True-born Englishman.

VI.— Duncan Campbell, New
Voyage round the
Worid, and Political
Tracts.

VII, — Robinson Crusoe.

DEMMIN*S History of Arms
and Armour, from the Earliest
Period. By Auguste Demmin.
Translated by C. C. Black, M.A.
With nearly 2000 Illustrations.
7s, 6d,

DEMOSTHENES' Orations.
Translated by C. Rann Kennedy.
5 vols. Vol. I., 3J. 6d.\ Vols.
II. -V., $5, each.

DE STAEL'S Oorinne or Italy.
By Madame dc Stael. Trans-
lated by Emily Baldwin and
Paulina Driver. 35. 6d,

DEVEY'S Loglo, or the Science
of Inference. A Popular Manual.
By J. Dcvey. 51.

DIOTIONABT of Latin and
Oreek Quotations; including a
Proverbs, Maxims, Mottoes, Law
T«nn&axi^VVa^sft&« ^\^Ti\^Co&

?uantitie$ marked, and EngUsh
ransJations. With Index Ver-
bonwn (622 pages). 5J.

DIOTIONABY of Obsolete and
Provlnolal Engllab. Compiled
by Thomas Wright, M.A,, F.S A.,
&c. 2 vols. $s. each,

DIB RON'S Christian loono-
gr&phy: a History of Christian
Art in the Middle Ages. Trans-
lated by E, J. MiUington and
completed by Ma.tgaret Stokes.
With 240 Illustrations. 2 vols.
$i. each.

DIOQBNES LtAERTIUS. LlvOB

and Oplniona of the Ancient
PhUoaophcra. Translated by
Prof C, D. Yonge, M.A. ^s.

DOBREE'S AdvePBailft. Edited
by the late Prof. Wagner. 2 vols.
$s. each.

D ODD'S Epigrammatists. A
Beleotlon from the Epigramrantic
Literatttre of Ancient, McdJaival,
and Modem Times. By the Rev.
Henry Philip Dodd. M.A. Ox-
ford. 2nd Edition, revised and
enlai^edt 6s>

DONALDSON'S The Theatre of
the QreekB. A Treatise on the
History and Exhibition of the
Greek Drama. With numerous
Illustrations and 3 Flans. By John
William Donaldson, D.D. p»

DBAPHR'S History of the
InteUeotual Derelopment of
Europe. By John William Draper,
M.D., LL.D, 2 vols. 5 J. each.

DUNLOP'S History of Motion,
A new Edition. Revised by
Henry Wilson, 2 vols. 51. each.

300 Wood Eagraving|^
Map« and a Flan 1 '

- — The City of Rome : its History

and Monuments. Willi Illustra'
tions. 51,

DYERtT.F. T,) British Pop

Cnatoma, Present and Pa
An Account of the various Gan
and Customs associated with Dl
ferent Days of the Year in i^
British Isles, arranged accord
to the Calendar, By the Ke
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, M.xV.

EBER3* Egyptian Prtooess.
Historical Novel. By Geor]
Ebers. Translated by E.
Buchheim. 3^. 6d,

EDGE WORTH'S Stories
Children. With 8 IlUistratioDS
by L, Speed, 3X* 6</-

ELZE'S WiUlam Shakespeare.
— Sa Shakespeare.

EMERSON^S Works. 5 vols.
3 J. 6^. each.

I, — Essays and Representati

Men.
U.— English Traits, Nature,
Conduct of Life.
IIL— Society and Sohtude— Letl
and Social Aims —
dresses.
VL— Miscellaneous Pieces,
v.— Poems.

ENNEMOSER'S History
Magio. Translated by Willij
Howitt. 2 vols. 51. each.

EPIGTETUS, The DlsooorseB \

With the Enchkiridion
Fragments. Translated by Gc
Long, M.A. SJ,

D7]B1B (Dr. T. H,). Pompeii : its : EURIPIDES, A New Uti
Bujidings and Antiquities. B^ ' Translation in Prose. By E .
T. H. Dyer, LL.D. Wi\h ne^t\^ \ C«\^xv5L^t,>ll.k. a voU. y^

Contained in Bohn's Libraries.

EXJTROPIUS.— ^'if^j Justin,

XUSEBIUS PAMPHILUS,
Eccleslastioal History of. Trans-
lated by Rev. C F. Cruse, M. A. 5 j.

EVELYN'S Diary and Corre-
spondendence. Edited from the
Origmal MSS. by W. Bray,
F.A.S. With 45 engravings. 4
vols. 51. each.

PAIRHOLT'S Coatiune In Eng-
land. A History of Dress to the
end of the Eighteenth Century.
3rd Edition, revised, by Viscount
billon, V. P. S. A. Illustrated with
above 700 Engravhigs. 2 vols,
5j. each.

FIELDING'S Adventures of
Joseph Andrews and his Friend
Mr. Abraham Adams. With
Cruikshank's Illustrations. 3^. 6^.

History of Tom Jones, a

Foundling. With Cruikshank's
Illustrations. 2 vols. 35. (ui, each.

Amelia. With Cruikshank's

Illustrations. 5^.

FLAXMAN'S Lectures on Sculp-
ture. By John Flaxman, R.A.
With Portrait and 53 Plates. 6j.

FOSTER'S (John) Life and Cor-
respondonce. Edited by J. E.
Ryland. 2 vols. 3J. 6</. each.

Critical Essays. Edited by

J. E. Ryland. 2 vols. 31. W.
each,

Essays : on Decision of Cha-
racter 5 on a Man's writing Me-
moirs of Himself ; on the epithet
Romantic ; on the aversion of
Men of Taste to Evangelical Re-
ligion. 3^. 6^.

Essays on the Evils of Popular

Ignorance ; to which is added, a
Discourse on the Propagation of
Christianity in India. 31. 6^.

FOSTER'S Essays on the Im«
provement of Time. With Notes
OF Sermons and other Pieces.
3J. (id.

GASPARY S History of Italian
Literature. Translated by Her-
man Oelsner, M.A., Ph.D.
Vol. I. 3J. 6^.

GEOFFREY OF MONMOUTH,

Chronicle oi.See Old English
Chronicles,

GESTA ROMANORXJM, or En-
tertaining Moral Stories invented
by the M'mks. Translated by the
Rev. Charles Swan. Revised
Edition, by Wynnard Hooper,
B.A. 5J.

GILDAS, Chronlclds ot—See Old
English Chronicles,

GIBBON'S Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire. Complete
and Unabridged, with Variorum
Notes. Edited by an English
Churchman. With a Maps and
Portrait. 7 vols. 3^. &d, each,

GILBART'S History, Principles,
and Practice of Banking. By
the late J. W. Gilbart, F.R.S.
New Ekiition, revised by A, S.
Michie. 2 vols. lox.

GTL BLAS, The Adyentures of.
Translated from the French of
Lesage by Smollett. Witfi 24
EngraviiAfis on Steel, after Smirke,
and 10 Etchings by George Cruik-
shank, 6s.

GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS'
Historical Works. Translated
by Th. Forester, M.A., and Sir
R. Colt Hoare. Revised Edition,
Edited by Thomas Wright, M.A.,
F.S.A. SJ.

GOETHE'S Faust. Part I. Ger-
man Text with Hajrward's Prose
Tran^^latioti mv^ '^ti^Ki.. ^«^>a*A.
b\ C. Jk. 'B.>iOc&ifc\m^^\iX>. ^^*

OOETHB*S Worki. Translated
into English by various hands.
[4 vols, $s^ 6d. each.

I. and n.— Autobiograiihy and

AnuAls.
in. — Fayst, Two Parts, com-
plete. (Swan wick;)
IV,— Novels and Tales.
V- — Wilhelm Meister's Appren*

tice&bip.
VL — Conversations with Ecker-
mann and Soret.
VI IL— Dramatic Works*
IX. — Wilhelm Meister'a Travels.
X. — Tour in Italy, and Second
Residence in Rome.
XI, — Miscellaneous Travels.
XII, — Early and Miscellaneous

Letters.
XIV.— Reineke Fox, West-Eastern
Divan and Achilletd.

GOLDSMITH'S WoirltB, A new
Ettition, by J. W, M. Gibbs. $
vols. 3 J. iut each.

aRAMMONT'3 Memolra of the
Court of Charles II. Edited by
Sir Walter Scott. Together with
the BoscoBEL Tracts, including
two not before published, ttc.
New Edition. 5;^.

GRAY'S Lett«r8. Including the
Correspondence of Gray and
Mason. Edited by the Rev,
D. C. Tovcy, M.A. Vols. I,
and 11, 3r. Sd, each.

GREEK ANTHOLOGT. Trans
latcd by George Surges, M.A. 51,

GRBEK ROMANCES of HeUo
donis, LonguB, and Aohlllea
Tatlu»— vix,, The Adventures of
Theagenes & Chariclea ; Amours
of Daphnis and Chloe ; and Loves
0/ Ciitopho and Leucippe. Trans -
hted by Rev. R. Smitb, M.A.

GREGORY'S Letteri on the
Evldenoes, Dootrlnefl, & Duties
of the Ohrlstlaci Rellgloin. By
Df. OHirlhus Grecc'ry. jj, 6fL

GREENE. MARLOWE, an
BEN JONSON. Poem*
Edited by Robert Bell 31. $ii, ]

GRIMM^S TALES, With ttj
Notes of the Original, TrAnsUta
by Mrs, A. IhmL With Intrq
duciion by Andrew Lang, M,/
2 vols. 31. 6d. each,

Gammer Qrethel; or, Ge

man Fairy Tales aud PopuU
Stories, Conlaining 42 Faij
Tales. Trans, by Edgar Taylo
With numerous Woodcuts
George Crulksbank and Lud^
Grimm* 3^, 6d,

GROSSI'S Maroo Ylsoontl.
Translated by A. F. D, Th
Ballads rendered into Englisl
Ver?e by C, M, P, 3^- 6^.

QXJIZOT'S History of the
English Revolution of 1640.
From ibe Accession of Charles
L to his Death. Translated by
William Uaxlitt, p. 6<f.

History of Civilisation, fro

the Fall of the Roman Empire 1
the French Revolution. "~
lated by William Hatlitt. 3 volJ
31. 6</. each.

HALL'S (Rev. Robert) Mlsc
laneous Works and Remains.

HAMPTON COURT: A Sho
History of the Manor
Palace, By Ernest Law, B,A.
With numerous Illustrations.

\

HARDWIOITS History of
Articles of Religion. By the U
C "^-w^^tjicV. Revised by it

^

Contained in BohCs Libraries.

II

HAXJFF'S Tales. The Caravan—
The Sheik of Alexandria— The
Inn in the SpessarU Trans, from
the German by S. Mendel. 3j. ^d,

HAWTHORNE'S Tales. 4 vols.
3J. 6df. each.
I.— Twice-told Tales, and the

Snow Image.
11.— Scarlet Letter, and the House
with the Seven Gables.
III.— Transformation [The Marble
Faun], and Blithcdalc Ro-
mance.
IV. — Mosses from an Old Manse.

HAZLITT'S Table-talk. Essays

on Men and Manners. By W.

Ilazlitt. 3 J. 6f/.
Lectures on the Literature

of the Age of Elizabeth and on

Characters of Shakespeare's Plays 1

3J. 6</.
Lectures on the English

Poets, and on the English Comic

Writers. 3J. 6^.

The Plain Speaker. Opinions

on Books, M en , and Thing's. 3^. dd*

Rovind TcMe. 3/, 6j/.

Sketches and Essays.

V. 6d.

The Spirit of the Age ; or,

Contemporary Portraits. Edited
by W. Carew Hazlitt. 3.'. 6d.

View of the English Stage.

Edited, by W. Spencer Jackson.
3J. 6d,

HEATON'S Conoifie History of
Painting. New Edition, revised
by Cosmo Monk house. 5^.

HEGEL'S Lectures on the Philo-
sophy of History. Translated by
J. Sibree, M.A.

HEINE '3 Poems, Complctt
Translated by Edgar A. Bowring,
CB. y.6d.

Travel-Pictures, including the

ToiDr in the Harz, Norderney, and

Book of Ideas, together with the
Romantic School. Translated by
Francis Storr. A New Edition,
revised throughout. With Appen-
dices and Maps. 31. 6d,

HELP'S Life of Christopher
Columbus, the Discoverer of
America. By Sir Arthur Helps,
K.C.B. y.6d.

Life of Hernando Cortes,

and the Conquest of Mexico. 2
vols. 3J. 6d. each.

Life of Piaarro. 3^. 6d.

Life of Las Casas the Apostle

of the Indies. 3j. 6d,

HENDERSON (E.) Select His-
torical Documents of the Middle
Ages, including the most famous
Charters relating to England, the
Empire, the Church, &c., from
the 6th to the 14th Centuries.
Translated from the Latin and
edited lo^ Ernest F. Henderson,
A.B., A.M., Ph.D. as.

HENFREIZ'S Guide to English
Coins, from the Conquest to the

i»resent time. New and revised
ildition by C. F. Keary, M.A.,
F.S.A. 6s.

HENRY OP HXJNTINaDON'S
History of the EngllBh. Trans-
lated by T. Forester, M.A. 51.

HENRY'S (Matthew) Exposition
of the Book of the Psalms. 5^.

HELIODORUS. Theagenesand
Chariolea. — See Grbek Ro-
mances.

HERODOTUS. Translated by the
Rev. IJenry Cary, M.A. 35- 6d.

Noted on, Origin:\l and Se-
lected from the best Commenta-
tors. By D. W. Turner, M.A.
With Coloured Map. Sj.

Analysis and Summary

12

An Alphabetical List of Books

HESIOD, OAT.T.TMAOHUS, and
THEOGNIS. Translated by the
Rev. J. Banks, M. A. 5j,

HOFFMANN'S (E. T. W.) The
Seraplon Brethren. Translated
from the German by Lt.-Col. Alex.
Ewing. 2 vols. 3J. 6d. each.

HOLBEIN'S Danoe of Death
and Bible Outs. Upwards of 150
Subjects, engraved in facsimile,
with Introduction and Descrip-
tions by Francis Douce and Dr.
Thomas P'rognall Dibden. 5j.

HOMER'S Blad. Translated into
English Prose by T. A. Buckley,
B.A. 5J.

Odyaeey. Hjmans, Epigrams,

and Battle of the Frogs and Mice.
Translated into English Prose by
T. A. Buckley, B.A. $5,

See also Pope.

HOOPER'S (G.) Waterloo : The
Downfall of the First Napo-
leon : a History of the Campaign
of 1815. By George Hooper.
With Maps and Plans. 3J. 6d,

The Campaign of Sedan :

The Downfall of the Second Em-
pire, August - September, 1870.
With General Map and Six Plans
of Battle. 3J. 6d,

HORACE. A new literal Prose
tianslation, by A. Hamilton Bryce,
LL.D. 3^. (k/.

HUGO'S (Victor) Dramatic
Works. Hernani—Ruy Bias—
The King's Diversion. Translated
by Mrs. Newton Crosland and
F. L. Slous. 3J. 6d,

Poems, chiefly Lyrical. Trans-
lated by various Writers, now first
collected by J. H. L. Williams.
2s.6d,

HUMBOLDT'S Ooamoa. Trans-
IsiLed by E. C. Ott6, B. H. Paul,
and W. S, Dallas, F.L.S. S^o^s.
J. 6d. each, excepting Vol. V. V>

HUMBOLDT'S Personal Narra-
tive of his Travels to the Equi-
noctial Regions of America durmg
the years 1799-1804. Translated
by T. Ross. 3 vols. $s, each.

Views of Nature. Translated

by E. C. Ott6 and H. G. Bohn.

HUMPHREYS' Coin CoUeotor's
Manual. By H. N. Humphreys,
with upwards of 140 Illustrations
on Wood and Steel. 2 vols. 5^.
each.

HUNGARY: its History and Re-
volution, together with a copious
Memoir of Kossuth, y, 6d,

HUTCHINSON (Colonel). Me-
molrs of the Life of. By his
Widow, Lucy : together with her
Autobiography, and an Account
of the Siege of Lathom House.
3s, 6d.

HUNT'S Poetry of Solenco. By
Richard Hunt. 3rd Edition, re-
vised and enlarged. 5J.

INGULPH'H Chronicles of the
Abbey of Croyland, with the
Continuation by Peter of Blois
and other Writers. Translated by
H. T. Riley, M.A. 51.

IRVINQ'S (Washington) Oom-
plete Works. 15 vols. With Por-
traits, &c 3^. 6d, each.
L— Salmagundi, Knicker-
bocker's History of New
York.

II.— The Sketch-Book, and the
Life of Oliver Goldsmith.
III.— Bracebridge Hall, Abbots-
ford and Newstead Abbey.

IV.— The Alhambra, Tales of a
Traveller.

V.-'Chronicle of the Conquest
^l OtAsiajda, Lannas of

Contained tn John's Libraries.

t3

Irving's (Washington) Complete

Works co^itinued.
VI. & VII.— Life and Voyages of
Columbus, together with
the Voyages of his Com-
panions.
VIII.— Astoiia, A Tour on the
Prairies.
IX. — Life of Mahomet, Livesof the
Successors of Mahomet.
X. — Adventures of Captain Bon-
neville, U.S.A., Wolfert's
Roost.
XI- — Biographies and Miscella-
neous Papers.
XII.-XV.— Life of George Wash*
ington. 4 vols.

Life and Letters. By his

Nephew, Pierre E. Irving. 2 vols,
3^. 6^. each.

ISOOBATES, The Oration3 of.
Translated by J. II. Frccse, M.A.
Vol. I. 5J.

JAMES'S (G. P. R.) Life of
Richard Gceur do Lion. 2 vols.
3J. dd. each.

JAMESON'S (Mrs.) Shake-
speare's Heroines. Character-
istics of Women: Moral, Poetical,
and Historical. By Mrs. Jameson.
3J. 6i/.

JESSE'S (J. H.) Memoirs of the
Oourt of England diirlng the
Reign of the Stuarts, including
the Protectorate. 3 vols. With
42 Portraits. 5J. each.

Memoirs of the Pretenders

and their Adherents. With 6
Portraits. 5^.

JOHNSON'S Lives of the Poets.
Edited by Mrs. Alexander Napier,
with Introduction by Professor
Hales, J wols, 3s, 6d. each.

JOSEPHUS (Playlus), The Works
of. Whiston*s Translation, re-
vised by Rev. A. R. Shillelo, M.A
With Topf>graphical and Geo.
graphical Notes by Colonel Sir
C. W. Wilson, K.C.B. 5 vols.
3x. 6f/. each.

JOYCES Scientific Dialogues.
With numerous Woodcuts. 5j.

JUKES-BROWNE {A. J), The
Building of the British Isles:
a Study in Gergraphical Evolu-
tion. Illustrated by numerous
Maps and Woodcut s. and Edition,
revised, *J5, Od,

JULIAN, the Emperor. Contain-
ing Gregory Nazianzen's Two In-
vectives and Libanus* Monody,
with Julian's extant Thcosophical
Works. Translated by C. W.
King, M.A. 5^.

JUNIUS S liCttors. With all the
Notes of Woodfall's Edition, and
important Additions. 2 vols.
3.r. 6'/. each.

JUSTIN CORNELIUS NEPOS,
and EUTROPIUS. Translated
by the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A.

JUVENAL, PERSIUS. SUL-
PICIA and LUOILIUS. Trans-
lated by L. Evans, M.A. $5.

KANT'S Critique of Pure Reason.

Translated by J. M. D. Meikle-

john. 5j.
Prolegomena and Meta-

physlcalFoundatiozvsofNatnral

Science. Translated byE. Bclfort

Bax. 5J.

KEIGHTLEY'S (Thomas) My-
thology of Ancient Greece and
Italy. 4th Edition, revised
Leonard Schmitz, Ph.D., LL
With 12 Plates from the Antiq

H

An Alphabetical List of Books

KEIQHTLEY'S Fairy MTtho-
logy, illustrative of the Romance
and Superstition of Various Coun-
tries. Revised Edition, with
Frontispiece by Cruiksbank. 5j.

LA FONTAINE'S Fables. Trans-
lated into English Verse by Elizur
Wright. New Edition, with Notes
by J. W. M. Gibbs. y, (nt

LAMABTINE'S History of the
Girondists. Translated by H. T.
Ryde. 3 vols. 31. 6d» each.

History of the Bestoration

of Monarchy in France (a Sequel
to the History of the Girondists).
4 vols. 35. 6e/. each.

History of the French Ee

volution of 1848. 3^. 6d.

ULMB'S (Charles) Essays of Ella
and Ellana. Complete Edition.
3J.6rf.

Specimens of English Dra-
matic Poets of the Time of
Elizabeth. 3^. 6^.

Memorials and Letters of

Charles Lamb. By Serjeant
Talfourd. New Edition, revised,
by W. Carew Hazlitt. 2 vols.
3f . 6d, each.

Tales from Shakespeare

With Illustrations by Byam Shaw.
3^. 6d.

LANE'S Arabian Nights' Enter-
tainments. Edited by SUnley
Lane- Poole, M.A., Litt.D. 4
vols. 3?. 6d. each.

LANZI'S History of Pahitlng In
Italy, from the Period of the
Revival of the Fine Arts to the
End of the Eighteenth Century.
Iiansiated by Thomas Ro&co«.

3 vols. 3s. dd, each.

LAPPENBERa»S History of
England under the Aziglo-
Saxon Kings. Translated by
B. Thorpe, F.S.A. New edition,
revised by E. C Ott^. 2 vols.
3J. 6d. each.

LECTURES ON .PAINTINQ,
by Barry, Opie, Fuseli. Edited
by R. Womum. 55.

LEONARDO DA VINCI'S
Treatise on Painting. Trans-
lated by J. F. Rigaud, R.A.,
With a Life of Leonardo by John
William Brown. With numerous
Plates. $s,

LEPSIUS'S Letters from Egypt,
Ethiopia, and the Peninsula of
Sinai. Translated by L. and
J. B. Horner. With Maps. 5^.

LESSING*S Dramatic Works,
Complete. Edited by Ernest Fell,
M.A. With Memoir of Lcssing
by Helen Zimmern. 2 vols.
3J. fidf. each.

Laokooa, Dramatic Notes,

and the Representation or
Death by the Ancients. Trans-
lated by E. C. Btasky and Helen
Ziminein. Edited by Edward
Bel!, M.A. With a Fiontispiece
of the Laokoon group. 35. 6d,

LILLY'S Introduction to Astro-
logy. With a Grammar of
Astrology and Tables for Cal-
culating Nativities, by Zadkiel. 51.

LTVT'S History of Rome. Trans-
lated by Dr. Spillan, C. Edmonds,
and others. 4 vols. 5^. each.

LOCKE'S Philosophical Works.
Edited by J. A. St. John. 2 vols.
3j. 6d. eacn.

Life and Letters: By Lord

King. 31. 6d,

Contained in Bohn's Libraries,

15

LODGE'S Portraits of nivstrlouB
Personages of Great Britain,
wilh Biographical and Historical
Memoirs. 240 Portraits engraved
on Steel, with the respective Bio-
graphies unabridged. 8 vols. 5J.
each.

LONGFELLOW'S Prose
Works. With 16 hill page Wood
Engravings. 5^.

LOUDON'S (Mrs.) Natural
History. Revised edition, by
W. S. Dallas, F.L.S. Wilh
numerous Woodcut lUus. 5^.

LOWNDES' BibUographer's
Manual of English Liteiature.
Enlarged Edition. By IT. G.
Bohn. 6 vols, cloth, 5^. each.
Or 4 vols, half morocco, 2/. 2j.

LONGXJS. Daphnis and Chloe.
— See Grbek Romances.

LUOAN'S Pharsalla. Translated
by H. T. Riley, M.A. Sj.

LUOIAN'S Dialogues of the
Gods, of the Sea Gods, and
of the Dead. Translated by
Howard Williams, M.A. 5^.

LUCRETIUS. Translated by the
Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A. 51.

LUTHER'S Table-Talk. Trans-
lated and. Edited by William
llazlitt. 3J. 6//.

Autobiography. — 5^^

MiCHELET.

MACHLAVELLI'S History of
Florence, together with the
Prince, Savonarola, various His-
torical Tracts, and a Memoir of
Machiavelli. 31. 6</.

MALLET'S Northern Antiqui-
ties, or an Historical Account of
the Manners, Customs, Religions
and Laws, Maritime Expeditions
and Discoveries, Language and
Literature, of the Ancient Scandi-
navians. Transkted by Pishop
Percy. Revise.l and Enlarged
Edition, with a Translation of the
PROSB Edda, by J. A. Elack-
welK V'

MANTELL'S (Dr.) PetrlfacUonfl
and their Teaohlnga. With nu-
merous illustrative Woodcuts. 6j,

Wonders of Geology. 8lh

Edition, revised by T. Rupert
Jones, F.G.S. With a coloured
Geological Map of England,
Plates, and upwards ol 200
Woodcuts. 2 vols. 7J. 6^. each.

MANZONI. The Betrothed:
being a Translation of *I Pro-
raessi Sposi.' By Alessandro
Manzoni. With numerous Wood-
cuts. 51.

MARCO POLO'S Travels; the
Translation of Marsden revised
by T. Wright, M.A., F.S.A. 55/

MARRYAT'S (Capt R.N.)
Masterman Ready. With 93
Woodcuts. 3j. 6fl?.

Mission ; or, Scenes in Africa.

Illustrated by Gilbert and Dalziel.

Pirate and Three Cutters.

With 8 Steel Engravings, from
Drawings by Clarkson Stanfield,
R.A. 3 J. ^cU

Prlvateersman. 8 Engrav-
ings on Steel. 3/. 6a

Settlers in Canada. 10 En-

j gravings by Gilbert and Dalziel.
j 3J- 6e/.

: Poor Jack. With 16 Illus-

traiions after Clarkson Stansfield,
R.A. 3J. 6^.

i Peter Simple. With 8 full-

; page Illustrations. 3;. dd,

j Midshipman Easy. With 8

I full page Illustrations. 3^. (yd,

MARTIAL'S Epigrams, c(»mplete.
Translated into Prose, each ac-
companied by one or more Vr
; TiansUlions selected from
I Works of English Pv^els^ \
\ Ol\kCl soMicev T^.W,

i6

An Alphabetical List of Books

MARTINBAIT'S {Hanriet) HIj-
toiy of En^and, from iSoo-
1815, 31. 6/,

— - Hktory olth© Thirty Teart'

Pew©, A.D, 1815-46* 4 vols.
y, 6/, each.

MATTHEW PARISS Englkt
HlatoJTi from the Year 1235 to
1273. TrEiiislated by Rev. J. A.
Giles, D.CX. 3 vols. 5/. each.

MATTHEW OP WBSTMIK-
STEB'S Flowers of History,
from the beginning of the World
to A,D. 1307- Translated by C. D,
Yonge, M.A, 2 ^ols, 5^* each,

MAXWELL'S Victories of Wei-
Ingtoti siid tho British Arm let .
Frontispiece and 5 Portraits, 51.

MENZEL'S History of Germany,
from Ihe Earliest Period to 184a.
3 voJs, 3/, 6d^ each.

MICHAEL ANGELO AND
HAPHAEL. tbelr Llvee and
Works, By Dtippa aud Qnatre-
mere de Quincy, With Portraits,
and Engraving on Steel. $s*

MlOELELET'a Luthor^a Anto-
biography, Ttans. by William
IlazlitL With an Appendix (uo
pa^es) of Notes. 3J. 6 A

^— History of the 5"renoh Revo-
lution from its earliest indications
to the Sight of the King in 1 791.
3 J' ^^

MIGNET'S History of thePrenoli
Pi^volutlon, from 1789 to 1814.

MILL (J, S.). Early EBiays by
John Staart Mill* Collected from
various sources by J, W, M. Gibbs,

MILLER (Professor}, History
PbilosophloaEy Illustrated.f rom
the Fall of ihe Roman Empire to
the French Revolution, 4 vok.

, 6d ^&ch^

MILTON'S Prone Works, Edited
by J* A, St, Jobn. 5 vols, jj, 6d,
each,

Poetical Works, with a Me-
moir and Critical Remarks by
James Montgomery, an Index to
Paradise Lost, Todd's Verbal Index
to alt the Poems, and a Selection
of Explanatory Notes by Henry
G- Bohn, Iliustraled with 12a
Wood Engj^vings from Drawings
by W. Har\rey, 2 vols. 3/, 6rf,
each,

MITFOHD^S (Miss) Our TlUags
Sketches of Rural Character arid
Scenery, With 2 Engravitigs on
SleeK 2 vols, jj. 6J. each,

MOLIEHE'a Drainatlc Works.

A new Tmnslation in English

Prose, by C. H, Wall, 3 vols.
p. 6d. each.

MONTAGU. The Letters and
Works of Lady Mary WorOoy
Montagu. Edited by her great -
l^randson^ Lord Whamcliffe's Edi-
tion, and revised by W, Moy
Thomas, New Edition, revised,
with 5 PoTtrahs* 2 vols. $/. each.

MONTAIGNE'S Essays. Cotton's
Translation, revised by W* C\
HajiHtt, New Edition. 3 vols,
3J. 6d. each.

MONTESQUIEU'S Spirit Ol
Laws. New Edition, revised and
corrected. By J. V. Pritchard,
A,M, 2 vols. 3/. 6d. each.

MORPHY'S Games of Cbess.
Being the Matches and best Games
played by the American Champion,
with Ex-planatory and Analytical
Notes by J. Lowenthal. 5^.

MOTLEY (J. L.). The Klse of
the Dutoh Eepublio. A History.
By John Lothrop Motley. New
Edition, with Biographical Intro-
duction by Moncure D. Conway.

Contained in Bohn's Libraries,

17

MUDIEi'S Brltlflh Birds ; or, His-
tory of the Feathered Tribes of the
British Islands. Revised by W.
C. L. Martin. With 52 Figures
of Birds and 7 Coloured Plates of
~ 2 vols.

NEANDER (Dr. A.). Hlfltory
of the ChrlBtian Religion aud
Church. Trans, from the (ierman
byJ.Torrcy. 10 vols. 3^.6^?. each.

Life of Jesus Christ. Trans-
lated by J. McClintock and C.
Blumcnthal. 3?. 6«/.

History of the Planting and

Training of the Christian
Church by the Apostles.
Translated by J. E. Ryland.
2 vols. 3J. 6</. each.

Memorials of Christian Life

In the Early and Middle Ages ;
including Light in Dark Places.
Trans, by J. E. Ryland. 3^. ^d.

NIBELUNGEN LIED. The
Lay of the Nibelungs, metrically
translated from the old German
text by Alice Horton, and edited
by Edward Bell, M.A. To which
is prefixed the Essay on the Nibe-
lungen Lied by Thomas Carlyle.

NEW TESTAMENT (The) in
Greek. Griesbach's Text, with
various Readings at the foot of
the page, and Parallel References
in the margin ; also a Critical
Introduction and Chronological
Tables. By an eminent Scholar,
with a Greek and English Lexicon.
3rd Edition, revised and corrected.
Two Facsimiles of Greek Manu-
scripts. 900 pages. 5^.

The Lexicon may be had sepa-
rately, price 2J.

NICOLINI'S History of the
Jesuits: their Origin, Progress,
Doctrines, and Designs. With 8
Portraits. 5^.

-NORTH (B.) Lives of the Right
Hon. Francis North, Baron Guild-
ford, the Hon. Sir Dudley North,
and the Hon. and Rev. Dr. John
North. By the Hon. Roger
North. Together with the Auto-
biography of the Author. Edited
by Augustus Jessopp, D.D. 3 vols.
3J. 61/. each.

ND'GENT'S (Lord) Memorials
of Hampden, his Fcurty and
Times. With a Memoir of the
Author, an Autograph Letter, and
Portrait. 5^.

OLD ENGLISH CHRON-
lOLES, including Ethelwerd's
Chronicle, Asser's Life of Alfred,
Geoffrey of Monmouth's British
History, Gildas, Nennius, and the
spurious chronicle of Richard of
Cirencester. Edited by J. A
Giles, D.C.L. ^j.

OMAN (J. C.) The Great Indian
Epics : the Stories of the Rama-
YANA and the Mahabharata.
By John Campbell Oman, Prin-
cipal of Khalsa Collie, Amrit^ur.
With Notes, Appendices, and
Illustrations. 3^. 6^.

ORDERIOUS VITALIS' Eccle-
siastical History of England
and Normandy. Translated by
T. Forester, M.A. To which is
added the Chroniclk of St.
EvROULT. 4 vols. 51. each.

OVID'S Works, complete. Literally
translated into Prose. 3 vols.
5^. each.

PASCAL'S Thoughts. Translated
from the Text of M. Auguste
Molinier by C Kegan Paul. 3rd
Edition. 3 J, 6//.

PAULI'S (Dr. B.) Life of Alfirad
the Great. Translated from th<
German. To which is appended
A\fteA'» \\*ci\A-^ic«i^ N^^SMS

OP Orosius. With a litetal
Trotisbtion interpajjerl, Notes*
andanAmiLO Saxon Grammar
and Glossary, by B. Thorpe. 51.

PACTSANIAS' Descrlptloa of
Ghpeeo©. Newly translsitedbyA.R,
ShiUelo, M.A, 3 vols. 51. each-

E PHARSOM'S Expositioti of the
Gi-eed. FMe\ by E. W.^ifcrd.
M.A. 5f.

PEPYS* Diary and Corteapond-
er)ce. Decipherctt by Ibe Rev.
J. Smilhi M.A.. from tlie ciriginal
Shorthand MS, in Ihe Tepysian
Library, Ediled by Lord Briy-
biooke. 4 vols. Wirh 31 En-
gravings. Sj, each.

PERCY'S Rellquea of Anolent
EngUfth Poetry. With an Essay
on Ancient Minstrels and a Glos-
sary. Edited by J. V. Pritchard,
A.M. 2 vols. 31. M. each.

PERSnjS.-^S><f Juvenal.

PETRARCH'S Somieta, Trl^
nmphs, and othor Poenm.
Translated into EngHf^h Verse by
vanous Hands. With a Life of
the Poet by Thomas Campbell.
With Portrait and 15 Steel En-
gravings. 5-r.

PHIIiO - JUD^US, Works of.
Translated by Prof. C. D. Yongc,
M*A. 4 vols* 5J-, each,

PIQKERIKQ'S Hletory of the
Baoea of Man, and their Ge^j-
graphical Distxibiition. With An
Analytical Synopsis of the
Natural History op Man by
Dr. Hall. With a Map of the
World flod la coloured Piatt;*, p,

PINDAR. Translated into Prose
i)y Dawson W. Turner. To which
is Added fbe Metrical Version \iY

PI4AI7CHE. Hlatory of BrlUs|
Cootiwne, from the Earliest Tlroi
to the Close of the Eiyhtccntj
Century. By J. R. Plajich^
Semerset Herald. With upward
of 400 Illustrations, ^j.
PLATO*S Worka. Literally tran
lattjdf with Intrfxluction anfl
Notes. 6 vols. 51. each,
L — The Apology of Socrates,
Crito, Phaedo, Gorgias, PrQ
tagoras, Ph^dnis, Theisetetu
Futhyphron, Lysis- Tran
lated by the Rev. H, Cixeyj
n, — The Republic, Timseus,

Crilias. Translated by Hcnrj

Davis.

UL—Mcno, Emhydctnus. Th

Sophist, Statesman, Cratyluj

Parmcnides, and the Banque

Translated by G, Barges.

IV.— Philebus, Charmides, Lache _

Menexenns, Hippias, Ion,

The Two Aldbiades, Tht-

agnes, Rivals, Hipparchas,

Minos, CHlopho, Epistles.

Translated by G, Burges,

v.— The Laws. Translated

G. Burges.
VL— The Doubtful Worlcs* Tra
lated by G. Burges,

Summary and Analysla of^

the Dialogues. With Analytica;
Index. By A. Day, LL.D. 5js
PLAUTUS'S Comediea. Trani
lated by H. T. Riley, M.A.
vols, 5^. each.
PLINTHS Natural Hlatory.
Translated by the late tohn
Bostock, M.D., F.R-S.,and HT.
Riley, M.A. 6 vols. 5^. each.
PLINY. The Lettara of PUny
the Younger. Melmoth's trans-
lation, revised by the Rev. F, C,
T. Bosanquet, M,A. 51,
PLOTINUS, Select Works
Translated by Thomas T
With an Intioduction cool
the stibstance of Porphyry ii i
V\T\as, Edited by G. R. S, Me

\

^^

Contained in Bohn's Libraries,

19

FliUTABCH'S Lives. Translated
by A. Stewart, M.A., and George
Long, M.A. 4 vols. 35. dd. each.

Morals. Theosophical Essays.

Translated by C. W. King, M.A.

Morals. Ethical Essays.

Translated by the Rev. A. R.
Shilleto, M.A. Sj.

PO£TBY OF AMERICA. Se-
leotlons from One Hundred
American Poets, from 1776 to
1876. By W. J. Linton. 3J. 6^.

POLITICAL CYCLOPEDIA.
A Dictionary of Political, Con-
stitutional, Statistical, and Fo-
rensic Knowledge ; forming a
Work of Reference on subjects of
Civil Administration, Political
Economy, Finance, Commerce,
Laws, and Social Relations. 4
vols. 3^. dd. each.

POPE'S Poetical Works. Edited,
with copious Notes, by Robert
Camithers. With numerous Illus-
trations. 2 vols. 51. each.

Homer's Iliad. Edited by

the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A.
Illustrated by the entire Series of
Flaxman's Designs. 5j.

Homer's Odyssey, with the

Battle of Frogs and Mice, Hymns,
&c., by other translators. Edited
by the Rev. J. S. Watson, M.A.
With the entire Series of Flax-
man's Designs. 51.

Life, including many of his

Letters. By Robert Camithers.
With numerous Illustrations. 51.

POXJSHKIK'S Prose Tales: The
Captain's Daughter — Doubrovsky
— The Queen of Spades — An
Amateur Peasant Girl— The Shot
— Tlie Snow Storm— The Post-
master — The Coffin Maker —
Kirdjali—The Egyptian Nights-
Peter the Great's Negro. Trans-
lated by T. Kq^h^c, y, 6d.

PR£SCOTT'S Conquest of
Mexico. Copyright edition, with
the notes by John Foster Kirk,
and an introduction by G. P.
Winship. 3 vols. 3s. 6d, each.

Conquest of Peru. Copyright

edition, with the notes of John
Foster Kirk. 2 vols. 35. 6d. each.

Beign of Ferdinand and

Isabella. Copyright edition,
with the mAes of John Foster
Kirk. 3 vols. 3s, 6d, each.

PROPERTIUS. Translated by
Rev. P. J. F. Gantillon, M.A.,
and accompanied by Poetical
Versions, from various sources.
3J. 6d.

PROVERBS, Handbook of. Con-
taining an entire Republication
of Ray's Collection of English
Proverbs, with his additions from
Foreign Languages and a com-
plete Alphal)etical Index; in which
are introduced large additions as
well of Proverbs as of Sayings,
Sentences, Maxims, and Phrases,
collected by H. G. Bohn. 51.

PROVERBS, A Polyglot of
Foreign. Comprising French,
Italian, German, Dutch, Spanish,
Portuguese, and Danish. With
English Translations & a General
Index by H. G. Bohn. 5j.

POTTERY AND PORCELAIN,
and otlier Objects of Vertu. Com-
prising an Illustrated Catalogue of
the Bemal Collection of Works
of Art, with the prices at which
they were sold by auction, and
names of the possessors. To which
are added, an Introductory Lecture
on Pottery and Porcelain, and an
Engraved List of all the known
Marks and Monograms. By Henry
G. ?.t»hn. With numerous Wood
Engravings, 5.'. ; or with Coloured
Illustrations, lOJ. 6d.

PROUT'S (Father) Roliques. Col-
lected and arranged by Rev. F.
Mahony. New issue, with 21
Etchings by D. Macli&e^ R.A.

20

An A Iphabetical List of Books

QXJINTILIAN'S Institutea of
Oratory, or Education of an
Orator. Translated by the Rev.
J. S. Watson, M.A. 2 vols. 5*5
each.

RAOINE'S (Jean) Dramatlo
Works. A metrical English ver-
sion. By R. Bruce Boswell, M.A.
Oxon. 2 vols. 3f. 6r/. each.

RAl^^KE'S History of thd Popes,
their Church and State, and espe-
cially of their Conflicts with Pro-
testantism in the i6th and 17th
centuries. Translated by E.
Foster. 3 vols. 31. 6^. each.

History of Servla and the

Servian Revolution. With an
Accoiml of the Insurrection in
Bosnia. Translated by Mrs. Kerr,
3J. 6</.

RECREATIONS in SHOOTING.
By * Craven.' With 62 Engravings
on Wood after Harvey, and 9
Engravings on Steel, chiefly after
A. Cooper, R.A. 5^.

RENNIE'S Insect Arohltocturo.
Revised and enlarged by Rev.
J. G. Wood, M.A. With 186
Woodcut Illustrations. 55.

REYNOLD'S (Sir J.) Literary
Works. Edited by II. W. Beechy.
2 vols. 3^". dd, each.

RICARDO on the Principles of
Political Economy and Taxa-
tion, Edited by E. C. K. Conner,
M.A. 5J.

RICHTER (Jean Paul Friedrich).
Levana, a Treatise on Education:
together with the Autobiography
(a Fragment), and a short Pre-
fatory Memoir. 31. dd,

Flower, Prult, and Thorn

Pieces, or the Wedded Life, Death,
and Marrij^e of Firmian Stanis-
laus Siebenkaes, Parish Advocate
in the Parish of Kuhschnapptel.

Newly translated by Lt.-Co\. Mtit.

Ewing, 3/. 6d,

ROGER DE HOYEDEN'S An-
nals of English History, com-
prising the History of England
and of other Countries of Ekirope
from A.D. 732 to A.D. 1 201.
Translated by H. T. Riley, M.A.
2 vols. $s, each.

ROGER OF WENDOVER'S

Flowers of Hit^tory, comprising
the History of England firoin the
Descent of the Saxons to A.D.
i235,formerly ascribed to Matthew
Paris. Translated by J. A. Giles,
D.C.L. 2 vols. 5f. each.

ROIiO! in the NINETEENTH
CENTURY. Containing a com-
plete Account of the Ruins of the
Ancient City, the Remains of the
Middle Ages, and the Monuments
of Modern Times. By C. A. Eaton.
With 34 Steel Engravings. 2 vols.
5 J. each.

Sec Burn and Dyer.

ROSOOE'S (W.) Life and PonU-
floate of Leo X. Final edition,
revised by Thomas Roscoe. 2
vols. 3^. 6d, each.

Life of Lorenzo de' Medio!,

called « the Magnificent.' With
his poems, letters, <&c. loth
Edition, revised, with Memoir of
Roscoe by his Son. 3^. M.

RUSSIA. History of, from the
earliest Period, compiled from
the most authentic sources by
Walter K. Kelly. With Portraits.
2 vols. 3^. 6d. each.

SALLUST, FLORUS. and VEL-
LEIUS PATEROHLHS.
Translated by J. S.Watson, M. A.

SCHILLER'S Worka. Translated
by various hands. 7 vols, js, 6d,
each; —

V— ^^sfcaxv of the Thirty Yctra'

\

Contained in Bohn^s Libraries,

21

ScHiLLB&'s Works continued,

II. — History of the Revolt in the
Netherlands, the Trials of
Counts Egmont and Horn,
the Siege of Antwerp, and
the Disturbances in France
preceding the Reign of
Henry IV.

III. — Don Carlos, Mary Stuart,
Maid of Orleans, Bride of
Messina, together with the
Use of the Chorus in
Tragedy (a short Essay).
These Dramas are all
translated in metre.

IV.—Robbers ( with Schiller's
original Preface), Fiesco,
Love and Intrigue, De-
metrius, Ghost Seer, Sport
of Divinity.

The Dramas in this
volume are translated into
Prose.
V. — Poems.

VI. — Essay SjiEsthetical and Philo-
sophical
VII. — Wallenstein*s Camp, Pic-
colomini and Death of
WaUenstein,William Tell.

SOHILLER and GOETHE.
Correspondence between, from
A.D. 1794- 1805. Translated by
L. Dora Schmitz. 2 vols. 31. 6d.
each.

SCHIiEGEL'S (F.) Lectures on
the Philosophy of Life and the
Philosophy of Language. Trans-
lated by the Rev. A. J. W. Mor-
rison, M.A. 35". 6d.

Lectures on the History of

Literature, Ancient and Modern.
Translated from the German. 31.6^.

Leotures. on the Philosophy

of History. Translated by J. B.
Robertson, p. 6d*

SOHIiB GEL'S Lectures on
Modem History, together with
the Lectures entitled Caesar and

Alexander, and The Beginning of
our History. Translated by L.
Purcell and R. 11. Whitctock.
3J. 6d,

JEsthetio and Miscellaneous

Works. Translated by E. J.
Millington. 31. 6d,

SCHLEGEL (A. W.) Leotures
on Dramatic Art and Literature.
Translated by J. Black. Revised
Edition, by the Rev. A. J. W.
Morrison, M.A. 3^. 6.1?.

SCHOPENHAUER on the Four-
fold Root of the Principle of
Sufacient Reason, and On the
Will In Nature. Translated by
Madame Hillebrand. 5^.

Essays. Selected and Trans-
lated. With a Biographical Intro-
duction and Sketch of his Philo-
sophy, by E. Belfort Bax. 5^.

SOHOUW'S Earth, Plants, and
Man. Translated by A. Henfrey.
With colouied Map of the Geo-
graphy of Plants. 5j.

SCHUMANN (Robert). His Life
and Works, by August Reissmann.
Translated by A. L. Alger. 3^. 6d.

Early Letters. Originally pub-

Wished by his Wife. Translated
by May Herbert. With a Preface
by Sir Geoige Grove, D.C.L.
3J. 6dr.

SENECA on Benefits. Newly
translated by A. Stewart, M.A.
Zs,6d,

Minor Essays and On Clem-
ency. Translated by A. Stewart,
M.A. 5^.

SHAKESPEARE DOCU-
MENTS. Arranged by D. H.
Lambert, B.A. 3^. 6d,

SHAKESPEARE^S DramaUo
Art. The History and Character
of Shakespeare*s Plays. By Dr.
Hermann Ulrici. Translated b^
L. Doia ^cYiocaXx. ^^c^&. 7^%^^%
eac\i.

22

An Alphabetical List of Books

SHAKESPEARE {WHllftm), A
LitLTary Biography \jy Karl Ehe,
Ph,D., LL,D. Translated by
L, Dora SchmiU. $s,

SHABPE (S.y The History of
Egypt, from the Earliest Times
till the Conquest by the Arabs,
A.D. 640. By Saraucl Sharpe.
2 Maps and upwards of 400 Illus-
Iradre Wnodcurs, 2 vols* $s, each.

SH£RIDAN'S Dramatio Warka,
Complete. With Life by G. G. S,

SIBMONDTS History of tiie
Literature of the Soutb ol
Earope. Translated by Thomas
Roscoe. z vols. 3^, 6rA each.

SMITH'S Synonyms and An-
tonyms, vt Kindred 'Words and
thcii Oppoaltes. Revised Edi-
tion. 5;.

Synonyma DlBcrimlnated.

A Dictionary of Synonymous
Words ID the Engli-^h Language,
showing the Accurate signification
of words of similar mesining.
Edited hy the Rev. H. Fercy
Smith, M.A* 6/.

SIdlTH S <Adam) The Wealth of
Nations. Edited by E. Belfort
Bax. 2 vols. 3x. td, each.

Theory 01 Moml Sentiments,

With a Memoir of the Author by
Dugald Stewart. 31. 61/,

SMYTH'S (Professor) Lectures
on Modem History. 2 vols*
3J. 6./. each.

SMTTH'S (Professor) Leoturee
on the French Revolution.
2 vols. 3.r. 6^/, each,

SMITH'S ( Pye ) Geology and
Sorlpture. 2nd Edition. 51,

SMOLLETT'S Adventures 01
Rodariok Random. With short
Memoir and EibUogtap\iY4 ^sA
CraiJfshank'sIUustialions. ^s.6d.

SMOLLETT'S Advetitur63 of
Peregrine Pickle. With Biblio-
graphy and Cruikshank's Illus-
trations, 2 vols. 3/, f)d. eich.

~ The Expedition of Hum-
phry Oil nicer. With BibliDg[taphjr
and Cruikshank's Illustrations.
3J. 6d,

SOORATES (sumamed 'SoholaB-
tlcua ' ) . The EoolesiaaUcaJ r
toryof (A.D, 305-445). Traasla
from the Greek. 5^.

SOPHOOLES, The Tragodiea i
A New Prose Translation, widi
Memoir, Notes, &c., by E. j
Coleridge, M.A. 5*.

SOUTHBT'S Life of Ne
With Portraits, Plans, and
wards of 50 Engravings on Std
and Wood, 5j,

Life of Wesley, and the Rise

and Progress of Methodism, S^-

Robert Southey, The Story

of his Life WTitten in his Letters,
Edited by John Dennis. 31. 6^.

SO SOMEN'S Ecclesi&Btioal His-
tory. Translated from the Greek,
TogeHierwith the Ecclesiasti-
cal History of Philo^i n.^
GIU5, as epitomhed by I
Translated by Rev. E. V.
M.A. 5 .

SPINOZA S Chief Works. Tions-
lated, ^ ith In troduction, by R, I LM,
Elwes. 2 vols. Sj. «tch.

STANLEY'S Classified Synopsis
of the Principal Painters of i
Dutoh and Flemish Soho
By George Stanley. $s.

STARLINCS^'S (Mias)Noblel
of Women. With 14 Steel ]
gravings, 5^

STAUNTON'S OhesaPlay|

Handbook. 5^.
— ^ Cheaa PraxlB. A Supplen

to the Chess-player's Ilandb

Contained in Bohn's Libraries.

23

STAUNTON'S Chess - player's
Companion. Comprising a Trea-
tise on Odds, Collection of Match
Gaines, and a Selection of Original
Problems. 51.

Chess Tournament of 1851.

With Introduction and Notes, ^s,

STOCEHABDT'S Experimental
Chemistry. Edited by C. W.
Heaton, F.C.S. S^.

STOWE (Mrs.H.B.) Uncle Tom's
Cabin. Illustrated. 3J. 6d,

STBABO'S Geography. Trans-
lated by W. Falconer, M.A.,
and H. C. Hamilton. 3 vols.
55. each.

STIUCEZiAND'S (Agnes) Lives
of the Queens of England, from
the Norman Conquest. Revised
Edition. With 6 Portraits. 6 vols.
5f . each.

Life of Mary Queen of Scots.

2 vols. $s. each.
Lives of the Tudor and Stuart

Princesses. With Portraits. 51.

STUART and REVETT'S Anti-
qultles of Athens, and other
Monuments of Greece. With 71
Plates engraved on Steel, and
numerous Woodcut Capitals. 5j.

SUETONTCrS' Lives of theTwelve
CsBsars and Lives of the Gram-
marians. Thomson's translation,
revised by T. Forester. 51.

SWIPT'S Prose Works. Edited
by Temple Scott. With a Bio-
graphical Introduction by the Right
Hon. W. E. H. Lecky, M.P.
V^th Portraits and Facsimiles.
12 vols. 35. 6d, each.

[Vols, L-X, ready.
I.— A Tale of a Tub, The Battle
of the Books, and other
early works. Edited by
Temple Scott. With a
Biographical Introduction
bv W. E. IL Lecky.

Swift's Prose Works ctrntinited,

IL— The Journal to Stella. Edited
by Frederick Rvland,M. A.
With 2 Portraits and Fac-
simile.
II I. & IV. — ^Writings on Religion and
the Church,
v.— Historical and Political

Tracts (English).
VI.— The Drapier's Letters.
With facsimiles of Wood's
Coinage, &;c.
VII.— Historical and Political

Tracts (Irish).
VIII.— Gulliver's Travels. Edited
by G. R. Dennis. With
Portrait and Maps.
IX. —Contributions to Periodicals.
X. — Historical Writings.
XI. — Literary Essays.

[In preparation,
XII. — Index and Bibliography.

[In preparaii4m,

TACITUS. The Works of. Liter-
ally translated. 2 vols. 51. each.

TALES OF THE GENII. Trans-
lated from the Persian by Sir
Charles MorelL Numerous Wood-
cuts and 12 Steel Engravings. 5x.

TASSO'S Jerusalem DeUvereoL
Translated into English Spenserian
Verse by J. H. Wiffen. With 8
Engravings on Steel and 24 Wood-
cuts by Tnurston. 51.

TAYLOR'S (Bishop Jeramy)
Holy Living and Dying. 35. 6«/.

TEN BRINE.— i'tf^ Brink.

TERENCE and FHiBDRnS.
Literally translated byH.T. Riley,
M. A. To which is added, Smart's
Metrical Version of Phsedrus. 5r.

THEOCRITUS, BION, MOS-
CHUS, and TYRT.SXJS. Liter-
ally translated by the Rev. J.
Banks, M.A. To which «sw. <ft3^

24

An Alpliabetical List of Books

THEODOBET andEVAGRIUS.
Histories of the Church from a.d.
332 to A.D. 427 ; and from A.D.
431 to A.D. 544. Translated. 5j.

THIERRY'S History of the
Conquest of England by the
Normans. Translated by Wil-
liam ITazlitt. 2 vols. 3J. dd. each.

THUOYDIDES. The Pelopon-
neslan War. Literally translated
by the Rev. H. Dale. 2 vols.
3r. dd, each.

An Analysis and Summary

of. By J. T.Wheeler. 5^.

THUDICHUM (J. L. W.) A Trea-
tlse on Wines. Illustrated. 5^.

XJRte'S (Dr. A.) Cotton Manufac-
ture of Great Britain. Edited
by P. L. Simmonds. 2 vols. 5x.
each.

Philosophy of Manufactures.

Edited by P. L. Simmonds. 71. dd,

VASARI*S Lives of the most
Eminent Painters, Sculptors,
and Architects. Translated by
Mrs. J. Foster, with a Commen-
tary by J. P. Richter, Ph.D. 6
vols. 3J. (id, each.

VIRGIL. A Literal Prose Trans-
lation by A, Hamilton Bryce,
LLD. With Portrait V^ 6^-

VOLTAIRE'S Tales. Translated
by R. B. Boswell. Containing
Bebouc, Memnon, Candide, L'ln-
gdnu, and other Tales. 3^. 6d,

WALTON'S Complete An^er.
Edited by Edward Jesse. With
Portrait and 203 Engravings on
Wood and 26 Engravings on
Steel. 5j.

Lives of Donne, Hooker, &o.

New Edition revised by A. H.
BuUen, with a Memoir of Izaak
Walton by Wm. Dowling. With
numerous Illustrations. 5^.

WELLINGTON, Life of. By 'An
Old Solditx. ' From the materials
of Maxwell. With Index and 1%

St^el Engravings. Js.

WELLINGTON, Vlotorlea ol
Set Maxwell.

WERNER'S Templar* la
Cyprus. Translated by E. A M.
Lewis. 3J. 6^.

WESTROFF (H. M.) A Hftod-
book of Archteology, Egyptian,
Greek, Etruscan, Roman. Illus-
trated. 5j.

WHITE'S Natural Histcny of
Selbome. With Notes by Sir
William Jardine. Edited by Ed-
ward Jesse. With 40 Portraits
and D^loured Plates. 51.

WHE ATLET*S A Rational Dlus-
tratlon of the Book of Common
Prayer. 3^. 6//.

WHEELER'S Noted Names of
Fiction, Dictionary of. 51.

WIESELER'S Chronological
Synopsis of the Four Gospels.
Translated by the Rev. Canon
I Venables. 31. 6^/.

WILLI A^MofMALMESBURY'S
Chronicle cf the Kings of Eng-
land. Translated by the Rev. J.
Sharpe. Edited by J. A. Giles,
D.C.L. 5J.

XENOFHON'S Works. Trans-
lated by the Rev. J. S. Watson,
M.A., and the Rev. II. Dale. In
3 vols. 5j. each.

YOUNG (Arthur). Travela in
France during the years 1787,
1788, and 1789. Edited l^
M. Betham Edwards. 3/. 6^.

Tour In Ireland, with

General Observations on the state
of the country during the years
1776-79. Edited by A. W.
Hutton. With Complete Biblio-
graphy by J. P. Anderson, and
Map. 2 voIj. 3j. 6i/. each.

YULE-TIDB STORIES. A Col-
lection of Scandinavian and North-
OwKva-xi '^Q^'^W Tales and Tra-

w

THE YORK LIBRARY

A NEW SERIES OF REPRINTS ON THIN PAPER.

The volumes are printed in a handy size (6J x 4J in.), , on

thin but opaque paper, aud are simply and

attractively bound.

Price, in cloth, 2S. net ; in leather, 3s. net.

* The Yoik Library is noticeable by reason of the wisdom and intelli^
gence displayed in the choice of unhackneyed classics. ... A most
attractive series of reprints. . . . The size and style of the volumes are
exactly what they should be.* — Bookman.

* These books should find their way to every home that owns any
cultivation.' — Notes and Queries,

The following volumes are no*w ready :

CHARLOTTE BRONTE'S JANE EYRE.

BURNEY'S EVELINA. Edited, with an Introduction and
Notes, by AnnIe Raine Ellis.

BURNEY'S CECILIA. Edited by Annie Raine EllIs.

2 vols.

BURTON'S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY. Edited by the
Rev. A. R. Shilleto, M.A., with Introduction by A H. Bullen.

3 vols.

BURTON'S (SIR RICHARD) PILGRIMAGE TO AL-
MADINAH AND MECCAH. With Introduction by Stanley Lane-
Poole. 2 vols.

CERVANTES' DON QUIXOTE. Motteux's Translation, re-
vised. With LoCKH art's Life and Notes. 2 vols.

CLASSIC TALES : Johnson's Rasselas, Goldsmith's Vicar
OF Wakefield, Sterne's Sentimental Journey, Walpole's
Castle of Otranto. With Introduction by C. S. Fearenside, M.A.

COLERIDGE'S AIDS TO REFLECTION, and the Confessions
of an Inquiring Spirit.

COLERIDGE'S FRIEND. A series of Essays on Morals,
Politics, and Religion,

COLERIDGE'S TABLE TALK AND OMNIANA. Arranged

and Edited by T. Ashe, B.A.

DRAPER'S HISTORY OF THE INTELLECTUAL DE-
VELOPMENT OF EUROPE. 2 vols.

GEORGE ELIOT'S ADAM BEDE.

EMERSON'S WORKS. A new edition in 5 volumes, with the
Text edited and collated by George Sampson.

FIELDING'S TOM JONES. 2 vols.

GASKELVS SYLVIA'S LOVERS.

The York Library — continued,

GESTA ROMANORUM, or EntertainiDg Moral Stories in-
vented by the Monks. Translated from the Latin by the Rev. Chari.es
Swan. Revised edition, by Wyknard Hooper, M. A

GOETHE'S FAUST. Translated by Anna Swanwick, LL.D.
Revised edition, with an Introduction and Bibliography by KARL Breul,
LiitD.. Pb.D.

HAWTHORNE'S TRANSFORMATION (The Marble Faun).

IRVING'S SKETCH BOOK.

JAMESON'S SHAKESPEARE'S HEROINES. Characteris-
tics of Women : Moral, Poetical, and Historical

LAMB'S ESSAYS. Including the Essays of Elia, Last Essays

of Elia, and Eliana.

MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS, THE THOUGHTS
OF. Translated by George Long, M.A. With an Essay on Marcus
Aurelius by Matthew Arnold.

MARRYAT'S MR. MIDSHIPMAN EASY. With 8 Illustra-
trations by E. T. Wheeler.

MARRYAT'S PETER SIMPLE. With 8 Illustrations by F. A.
Fraser.

MONTAIGNE'S ESSAYS. Cotton's translation. Revised by
W. C. Hazlitt. 3 vols.

MORE'S UTOPIA. With the Life ot Sir Thomas More, by
William Roper, and his Letters to Margaret Roper and others. Edited,
with Introduction and Notes, by George Sampson. {In the Press,

MOTLEY'S RISE OF THE DUTCH REPUBLIC. With a
Biographical Introduction by Moncure D. Conway. 3 vols.

PASCAL'S THOUGHTS. Translated from the Text of M.
Augusts Molinier by C. Kegan Paul. Third edition.

PLUTARCH'S LIVES. Translated, with Notes and a Life by
Aubrey Stewart, M.A., and George Long, M.A 4 vols.

SWIFT'S GULLIVER'S TRAVELS. Edited, with Introduction

and Notes, by G. R. Dennis, with facsimiles of the original illustrations.

SWIFT'S JOURNAL TO STELLA. Edited, with Introduction
and Notes, by F. Ryland, M.A.

TROLLOPE'S THE WARDEN. With an Introduction by
Frederic Harrison.

TROLLOPE'S BARCHESTER TOWERS.

TROLLOPE'S DR. THORNE.

TROLLOPE'S FRAMLEY PARSONAGE.

TROLLOPE'S SMALL HOUSE AT ALLINGTON. 2 vols:

TROLLOPE'S LAST CHRONICLE OF BARSET. 2 vols.

ARTHUR YOUNG'S TRAVELS IN FRANCE, during the
years 17^7^ 1788, and 1789. Edited with Introduction and Notes, by M.
Betham Edwards.

Other Voluniis are in Pret^aration.

BELL'S HANDBOOKS

OF

THE GREAT MASTERS

IN PAINTING AND SCULPTURE.

Edited by G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D.
Post 8vo. With 40 Illustrations and Photogravure Frontispiece. $s. net each.

TAe foll<nving Volumes have been issued :
BOTTICELLI. By A. Strekter. 2nd Edition.
BRUNELLESCHI. By Leader Scott.
CORREGGIO. By Selwyn Brinton, M.A. 2nd Edition.
* CARLO CRIVELLI. By G. McNeil Rushforth, M.A.
DELLA ROBBIA. By the Marchesa Burlamacchi. 2nd Edition.
ANDREA DEL SARTO. By H. Guinness. 2nd Edition.
DONATELLO. By Hope Rea. 2nd Edition.
GERARD DOU. By Dr. W. Martin. Translated by Clara Bell.
GAUDENZIO FERRARL By Ethel Halsey.
FRANCIA. By George C. Williamson, Litt.D.
GIORGIONE. By IIerbebt Cook, M.A.
GIOTTO. By F. Mason Perkins.
FRANS HALS. By Gerald S. Davies, M.A.

BERNARDINO LUINI. By George C. Williamson, Litt.D. 3rd Edition.
LEONARDO DA VINCL By Edward McCurdy, M.A.
MANTEGNA. By Maud Cruttwell.
MEMLINC. By W. H. James Weale.
MICHEL ANGELO. By Lord Ronald Sutherland Gower, M.A.,

F.S.A.
PERUGINO. By G C. Williamson, Litt.D. 2nd Edition.
PIERO DELLA FRANCESCA. By W. G. Waters, M.A.
PINTORICCHIO. By Evelyn March Phillipps.
RAPHAEL. By H. Strachey. 2nd Edition.
REMBRANDT. By Malcolm Bell. 2nd Edition.
RUBENS. By Hope Rea.

LUCA SIGNORELLL By Maud Cruttwell. 2nd Edition.
SODOMA. By the Contessa Lorenzo Priuli-Bon.
TINTORETTO. By J. B. Stoughton Holborn, M. A.
VAN DYCK. By Lionel Cust, M.V.O., F.S.A.
VELASQUEZ. By R. A. M. Stevenson. 3rd Edition.
WATTEAU. By Edgcumbe Staley, B.A.
WILKIE. By Lord Ronald Sutherland Gower, M.A., F.S.A.

Otiers tofolhw.

THE

CHISWICK SHAKESPEARE.

niustrcUed by BYAM SHAW.
With Introductions and Glossaries by JOHN DENNIS.

A

Printed at the Chiswick Press, pott 8vo., price \s. 6d. net per volume ;
also a cheaper edition, is. net per volume ; or zs, net in limp leather; also
a few copies, on Japanese vellum, to be sold only in sets, price 5^. net per
volume.

Now Complete in 39 Volumes,

ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST.

WELL. MACBETH. \

ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA. MEASURE FOR MEASURE.

AS YOU LIKE IT. MERCHANT OF VENICE.

COMEDY OF ERRORS. MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR.

CORIOLANUS. MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM.

CYMBELINE. MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.

HAMLET. OTHELLO.

JULIUS C/ESAR. PERICLES.

KING HENRY IV. Part I. ROMEO AND JULIET.

KING HENRY IV. Part II. THE TAMING OF THE SHREW.

KING HENRY V. THE TEMPEST.

KING HENRY VI. Part I. TIMON OF ATHENS.

KING HENRY VI. Part II. TITUS ANDRONICUS.

KING HENRY VI. Part IIL TROILUS AND CRESSIDA.

KING HENRY VIII. TWELFTH NIGHT.

KING JOHN. TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA

KING LEAR. WINTER'S TALE.

KING RICHARD II. POEMS.

KING RICHARD IIL SONNETS.

* A fascmating little e6\don.'— Notes and Qrteries.

* A cheap, very comely, and altogether desirable cdition.'-^IVestmiHster Gazette.
But a few years ago such volumes would have been deemed worthy to be considered

iditions de luxe. To-day, the low price at which they are offered to the public alone
prevents them being so regarded.' — Studio.

* Handy in shape and size, wonderfully cheap, beautifully printed from the Cam-
bridge text, and illustrated quaintly yet admirably by Mr. By«m Shaw, we have nothing
but praise for it. No one who wants a good and convenient Shakespeare — wiUiout
excursuses, discursuses, or even too many notes — can do better, in our opinion, than
subscribe to this issue : which is saying a good deal in these days of cheap reprints.'—
Vanity Fair,

'What we like about these elegant booklets is the attention that has been paid to the
paper, as well as to the print and decoration ; such stout laid paper will last for ages.
On this account alone, the 'Chiswick' should easily be first among pocket Shake-
speares.' — Pall Mall Gazette,

*,* Tke Chiswick Shakespeare may also be had bound in 12 volunus^
full qilt backf prict 365. ntt.

29

Now Editions, fcap. 8vo. St. 6<i. each net.

THE ALDINE EDITION

BRITISH POETS.

*Thi8 excellent edition of tho Eu(?lish clsu<Bio8» with tlieir aompletpt text", and
nholarly introductions, are eomothing ^^^ diifcrent from tho choap volcmea of
^ ntracta vhioh arc jnat now so niooh too common.' — 8t. JoAnes's QasetU,

' An excellent series. Small, handy, and complete.'— Saturdoy Ueoiew.

Akenside. Edited by Bcv. A. Dyee.

Beattle. Edited by Bev. A. Dyce.

Blake. Edited by W.M.Bo8settL

Barns. Edited by Q. A. Aitken.
StoIb.

BuUer. Edited by B. B. JohneoD.

2 TOlfl.

Campbell. Edited by His Son-
in-law, the Bev. A. W. Em. With
Mem<^ by W. Allingham.

Chatterton. Edited by the Bev.
W. W. Skeat, M.A. 2 voli.

Cliaaoar. Edited by Dr. B. Morris,
with Memoir by Sir H. Nicolas. 6 vols.

Ohurohni. Edited by Jas. Haxinay.
2 role.

Coleridge. Edited by T. Ashe,
B.A. 2 YoLit,

CoUinfl. Euit£d by W. Moy
Thooias.

Cowper. Edited by John Bruce,
F.S.A. STolfl.

Dryden. EdiUd by the Bev. B.
Hooper, H.A. 5 voIb.

QoldBmiih. Bsvided Edition by
Anstin Dobeon. With Portrait.

Cray. Edited by J. Brsdshaw,
I1L.D.

Herbert Edited by the Bev A. B.

ChtMit.
Herrlok. Edited by George

Baintsbnry. 2 rob.
Keats. Edited by the l&te Lord

HoBglrtoB.

Klrke White. Edited, with a

Memoir, by Sir H. Nicobg.
MlltoxL Edited by Dr. Brddshaw.

2to18.
PameU. Edited by Q. A. Aitken.
Pope. Edited by G. B. Dennia,

With Memoir by John Dennis. 8 toIb.
Prior. Edited by B. B. Johnson.

2 vols.
Raleigh and Wotton. With Se-

loctionfl from the Writings of otlier

CX)URTLY P0KT8 from 1^ to 1«50.

Edited by Yen. Archdeacon Hsnnrib.

D.C.Ii.

Bcgers. Edited by Edwari Bell,
M.A.

Soott. Edited by John Donnii.
5 vols.

Shakespeare's Poems. Edited by
Rer. A. Dyce.

Shelley. Edited by H. Bnxton
Forman. 5 vols.

Spenser. Edited by J. Payne Col-
lier. 5 vols.

Surrey. Edited by J. Teowell.

Swift Edited by the Bev. J.

Mitforl. StoIs.
Thomson. Edited by the Bev. D.

0. ToT'^y. 2 Tolfl.
Vaughan. Sacred Poems and

Fiona Eja:nlatinns. Edjt€4 by the

H«v. H. Lyte.

Wordsworth. Edited by Prof.

Do-wilai. 7 vols.

Wyatt. Edited by J. Yeowell.

Young. S vols. Edited by the
aev.J.Uit{a.d.

*HE ALL-ENGLAND SERl

HANDBOOKS OF ATHLETIC QAME8.

Tb* duly 8»rlo« tMTied at « mo<l«Tato price, by Wrlt^r^ whA
the tift raulE In tbeLr respocUTe depArtmente,
' Tbe hemt lAjrtmeticMi on gftmai end spofta by Uio beit Anihodtice, at

gmaO 8va. doth, ninfitmied. Price U. each.

GitolLet. By Fkej» G. Hou>akp.
OriokeL By the Hon. and Bev,

E, Ltttm,to».
Croquet By liecit. Col. the Hod.

Lawn Tennis. By H. W. W.

WiLBfisvoBCK. With a tliapter lor

Squaah Tennlfl. By ErarAOi H.

Mu.Kfl. D, nhlft vol. 2«.
TannlB and Racketa and Fivea.

and Ri^. J. A. AjiWAir Tait.
Oolf. By H. 8, C. Eyeb^bd,

Doulile voL 2f.
Rowlne and Soulllug. By Gin

Rixoir.
Rowing and Soulling. By W. B.

WOODflATE.

Sailing. By E, F. Kwtght^ dblyol. 2t.
Swimming. By Mabtin and J.

EAcaxm Ooveimt,
Camping out. By A. A. lifACDON-

ELL. Doable toL 2«.

Canoeing. By Dr. J, D. Hatwabd.

Double vol. 29.
Mountolneortng. By Dr. Oi*Aui>a

WiLflov. Double ToL 2i.
Athletics. By H. H. Gbeftin.
Riding. By W. A. Kerb, V.O.

Ponblfl vol. 24<

Ladles' Riding. By W AKebb.V.G.

BoxinK. By B, G, AiiLANsoN-WiWN.

Witb Prefatorr Note by Eat MuUina*

Fencing. BvH.A,Colmo
Cycling. Byn.H.GBim

N.aU.p O.T.O. With a OS
Lodi^.B, by Miss Aqs^es Wo<3
ToL 2p.

WreatUng. By Wau

BTBOKO. New EdJtioa.
Broadsword and Sli

Br B. G. AtLAVSOV-WlK^r u

LIPPa-WOLLBTS,

QymnaatlcB, By A. F,

Dc'uVilo vol. 2*.
Gynmastio Competition

play Uxerolsea. Cocc

F. Cbaf.
Indian Clubs. By O. T,

BEIT &rnl A. F. JK^xisr.
DumbbeUa. By F. Oiui
Football -^ Rugby Q

tLlill&T VAa.SAXL.

Football— Association Q

C, W, Alcock, l^^visticl EOf

Hockey. By F. S. O

Kew Edition.

Skating. By Dcuoi*ab "
With a Chapter for Laillep,!
CirKSTRAS, and a CLiLpter
Skating, by a Von Stator. I

i BaBeball. By Newtom Ck

Houndera, Fleldball,i

Quoita, Curling, Skitl

Ey J. M. WALir>rn situI 0. OL

Dancing. By Euwabj
Donble I'd. 2s.

THE CLim SERIBS OF CABD AND TABLE 6AME3,
^ Ko well-rofn^atod club or conatry hoiwR ahonW be without tbij usefal iorta
Small 8vo. cloth, Illuatttwted, Prloo li. encb.

Bridge. By 'Templab.'
Whiat By Dr. Wnt. Polr. F.aS.
Solo Whl at. By BoBBBT P , Gbbk N.
BlUlarda. By Major Gen. A. W.

Dratsov, F.ll,A.8. With a Prcfaco

by W. J. PeaU.

Hlnta on Blillarda. By J. P,

BncitiVNAw^ DotiVilp vol. 2a.
Cheas, By lioEEiir F. Green.
The Two-Movo Ckoea Problem.

By B. y. Laws.
Cheaa Openings. By L Gunbbkbq.
Praughta and Backgammon.

By ' Bkhkieiby/
B^versl and Go Banft.

By ' ni^BltELBT/

\

Dominoes and SoUtalra.

By * BsBitKf.nT/
B^alque and Cribbage.

By * Berkklet.*

j^carttj and Buobro.

JBj * Bjcrkklet.*
Piquet and Rubicon Piq

By ' Bebcklft,'
SbAt* By Loui3 DiEHL.
•»* A Skat Scoriug*book,'

Bound GamoB, iudadisj

Nai>oleoTi. Ikm, Virgt-et-WB
Baxtkk Waat-.

"£BX\avia Mi^^\sr|-ccQCLnd

^

L'S CATHEDRAL SERIES.

^ftisefy lUuUraied^ cloth^ crown teuo, is. W. ne/ each.

I CATHEDRALS. An Itinerary and Description. Compiled by Jambs G.

nsT, A.M , M.D. Re\-ued anti edited with an Introdacdoa on Cathfrfral

■ctnre by the Re%-. T. Perkins, M.A., F R.A.S.

LSGOR. By P. B. Ikosside Bax.

USTOL. By H. J. L. J. yix^t, M A-

iNTERBURY. By Hartley Withers. 5th Edidoo.

JtLISLE By C King Eley.

lESTER. By Charles Hiatt. srd Edition.

ilCHESTER. By H. C. Corlette, A.R-I.B.A. and E*iiiiaa.

JRHAM. By J. E. Bygate, A.R.C.A. 3rd Edition.

A'. By R-v. W. D. SwEETi.vG, M.A. 2nd Edition.

CETER. By Pekcy Addleshaw, B.A. 2r.d Edition, revised.

,OUCE5TER. By H. J. L J. Masse. M.A. 3rd Edition.

EREFORD. My A. H'jgh Fisher, A.R.E. and Edition, revijed.

CHFIELD. By A. B. Cliftok. and Edition.

NCOLN. By K. F. Kendrick, B.A. 3rd Edition.

ANCHESTER. By Rev. T. Perkins, M.A.

5RWICH. By C. H. B. Qvessell. sod Edition.

LFORD. By Rev. Percy Dearmer, M.A. and Edzti^o, revised.

;TE:RE0R0UGH. By Rev. W. D. Swteetimc. and Edition, revise-i.

PON. By Cecil Hallett, B.A.

X:HESTER. By G. H. Palmer, B.A. and Edition, revised.

•. ALBANS. By Rev. T. Pe«ikins, M.A.

•. ASAPH. By P. B. Ironside Bax.

'. DAVID S. By Philip Robson, A.R-I.B.A.

•. PATRICKS, DUBLIN. By Rev. J. H. Bernard, M.A., D.D. zadEditioa.

•. PAUL S. Br Rev. Arthur Dimock, M.A- ard Edition, revised.

\ SAVIOURS, SOUTHWARK. By George Worley.

XISBURV. By Gleesc-n White. 3rd Editioo, revised.

>UTH\VELL. By Rev. Arthur Dimock. M.A. and Edition, revised.

ELLS. Ey Rev. Percy Dearuer, M.A. 3rd Edition.

INCHES! ER. By P. W. Sergeant. 3rd Edition.

0RCE5TER. By E. F. Strange, and Edition.

)RK. Ey A. CLUTTOJi-B?.ocK, M.^V. 3rd Edition.

Uniform ivith aiove Series, New readj. is. 6d. net emch.

.TIN S CHURCH, CANTERBURY. By the Rev. Canok Rotrrunx.

F.S..A.

Vi MINSTER. By Chasles Hiatt.

NE MINSTER and CHRISTCHURCH PRIORY. By tbe Rev. T.

«s, M.A.

BURY ABBEY AND DEERHURST PRIORY. By H. J. L. J. IfASsi, llJi.

BEV. MALME5BURV ABBEY, and BRADFORDON-AVON CHURCH.

V. T. Pe?>;in = . M.A.

<STER ABBEY. By Charles Hiatt.

>RD ON AVON CHURCH. By Harold Baker-

S HANDBOOKS TO CONTINENTAL CHURCHES.

Profu-.ely IlluitraUd. Crown 8zw, clcik^ 2S, 6d, neicoik^
By tr.- Ptv. T. Pexkins, M.A.
. By \\'z Rev. R. S. Mylne.

ES : T:.- _^:-.'.^.'^ ar.i Other Churches. By H. J. L. J. IfASsi, MJL
r. MICHLL. By H. J. L. J. Mass£, M.A.
01 RE-LA Mh;. By Charles Hiatt.
I'he C<i:r.ed:a: and Other Churcfao. By the Rev. T. PUkiks, MJL

Th0 Be«l Practical Workini: Dictionary off tii
Engllsli Langrua^e.

WEBSTER'S

INTERNATIONAL

DICTIONARY.

2348 PAGES. 5000 ILLUSTRATION!

NEW EDITION, REVISED THROUGHOUT WITH h

NEW SUPPLEMENT OF 25,000 ADDITIONAL

WORDS AND PHRASES.

The Appendices comprise a PronouDcing Gazetteer of the WufI
Vocabularies of Scripture, Greek, Latin, and English Proper Nam
a Dictionary of the Noted Names of Fiction, a Brief History of I
English Language, a Dictionary of Foreign Quotations, Words, Phras
Proverbs, &c., a Biographical Dictionary with io,oc» names, &c., &c

Dr. MCTRRAT, E4iti4fr of the * Oxjord English Dictionarr^ sa5rs :— * In thii
latest form,^ and with its large Supplement and numerous appendice*;, it b a wonde
volame, which well maintains its ground against all rix'als on its own lines. The ' def
dons,' or more properly, ' explanations of meaning ' in * Welister ' ha\-e always struck
as particularly terse and well-put ; and it is bard to see how anything better coald
done within the limits.'

Professor JOSEPH WRIGHT, M.A.. Ph.D., D.C.t... LL.D., Editor
the ^English Dialed Dictionary^ says : — *The new edition of "Webster's Intematio
Dictionary " is undoubtedly the most useful and reliable work of its kind in any coiml
No one who has not examined the work carefully would believe that such a vast amo
of lexicographical information cotdd possibly be found within so small a compass.'

FrofCHMOr A. H. 8ATCE, U^D., D.D., says:— 'It is indeed a mar^ell
w(Mk ; it is difficult to conceive of a Dictionary more exhaustive and complete. £v(
thing is in it — not only what we might expect to find in such a work, but also what
of us would ever have thought of looking for.'

Rev. JOSEPH WOOD, D.D., Head Master oj Harrow, s^ys :— ' I have al«
thought very highly of its merits. Indeed, I consider it to be far the most accu;
Ez^hsh Dictionary in existence, and much more reliable than the "Century."
daily and hourly reference, " Webster " seems to me unri\alled.'

Prospectuses^ with Prices a»td Specimen Pages^ on Application.

LONDON : GEORGE BELL <&• SONS, YORK HOUSE,
PORTUGAL STREET, W.C.
50^000. S. ft S. ii.q6.

I 7C '
o 1^ ^

c. 7

STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES/;
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA
94505

1

^

JFjJtS/ ifjj

'IBB

?i i-

',««.«= asr-
