The Shepherd's Calendar (John Clare, 1827)
==========================================
Twelve months of village life — the peasant poet's calendar in verse. Public domain. Internet Archive (1829 reprint of 1827 text).

mm 


OHNSON 


OF  THE 
UNIVERSITY 
or    ILLINOIS 

HcbTs 

V.I 


>A1 


G, 


vKE,"  &c.  &c. 


EDINBURGH 
>NDON. 


LNSON 


THE 


SHEPHERD'S  CALENDAR 


BY  JAMES  HOGG, 

AUTHOR  OF    "  THE  QUEEN'S  WAKE,"  &c.  &c. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 


VOL.  I. 


WILLIAM  BLACKWOOD,  EDINBURGH 
AND  T.  CADELL,  LONDON. 
MDCCCXXIX. 


i 


\^ 


4 


^^1 


c^^-  ADVERTISEMENT. 


The  greater  number  of  the  Tales  contained 
in  these  volumes  appeared  originally  in  Black- 
wood's Edinburgh  Magazine.  They  have 
been  revised  with  care ;  and  to  complete  the 
Collection,  several  Tales  hitherto  unpublished 
have  been  added. 


T, 


<l 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  I. 


PAGK- 

Chap.  I.         Rob  Dodds, 1 

II.  Mr  Adam  son  of  Laverhope, 33 

III.  The  Prodigal  Son, 69 

IV.  The  School  of  Misfortune,  ......   112 

V.  George  Dobson's  Expedition  to  Hell,      .     ,131 

VI.  The  Souters  of  Selkirk, 148 

VII.  The  Laird  of  Cassway, 176 

VIII.  Tibby  Hyslop's  Dream, 212 

IX.  Mary  Burnet, 247 

X.  The  Brownie  of  the  Black  Haggs,     .     .     .285 
XL     The  Laird  of  Wineholm, 311 


THE 


SHEPHERD'S  CALENDAR. 


CHAPTER  I. 


ROB   DODDS. 


It  was  on  the  13th  of  February  1823,  on  a  cold 
stormy  day,  the  snow  lying  from  one  to  ten  feet  deep 
on  the  hills,  and  nearly  as  hard  as  ice,  when  an  exten- 
sive store-farmer  in  the  outer  limits  of  the  coimty  of 
Peebles  went  up  to  one  of  his  led  farms,  to  see  how 
his  old  shepherd  was  coming  on  with  his  flocks.  A 
paitial  thaw  had  blackened  some  spots  here  and  there 
on  t^?  brows  of  the  mountains,  and  over  these  the 
half-starving  flocks  were  scattered,  picking  up  a  scanty 
sustenance,  while  all  the  hollow  parts,  and  whole  sides 
of  mountains  that  lay  sheltered  from  the  winds  on  the 
preceding  week,  when  the  gi*eat  drifts  blew,  were 
heaped  and  over-heaped  with  immense  loads  of  snow, 
so  that  every  hill  appeared  to  the  farmer  to  have 
changed  its  form.     There  was  a  thick  white  haze  on 

VOL.  I.  A 


2  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

the  sky,  corresponding  exactly  with  the  wan  frigid 
colour  of  the  high  mountains,  so  that  in  casting  one's 
eye  up  to  the  heights,  it  was  not  apparent  where  the 
limits  of  the  earth  ended,  and  the  heavens  began.  There 
was  no  horizon — no  blink  of  the  sun  looking  tlirough 
the  pale  and  impervious  mist  of  heaven  ;  but  there,  in 
that  elevated  and  sequestered  hope,  the  old  shepherd 
and  his  flock  seemed  to  be  left  out  of  nature  and  all 
its  sympathies,  and  embosomed  in  one  interminable 
chamber  of  waste  desolation.— So  his  master  thought; 
and  any  stranger  beholding  the  scene,  would  have  been 
still  more  deeply  impressed  that  the  case  was  so  in 
reality. 

But  the  old  shepherd  thought  and  felt  otherwise. 
He  saw  God  in  the  clouds,  and  watched  his  arm  in 
the  direction  of  the  storm.  He  perceived,  or  thought 
he  perceived,  one  man's  flocks  suffering  on  account  of 
their  owner's  transgi-ession ;  and  though  he  bewailed 
the  hardships  to  which  the  poor  hai'mless  creatures 
were  reduced,  he  yet  acknowledged  in  his  heart  the 
justness  of  the  punishment.  "  These  temporal  scourges 
are  laid  upon  sinners  in  mercy,"  said  he,  "  and  it  will 
be  well  for  them  if  they  get  so  away.  It  will  teach 
them  in  future  how  to  diink  and  carouse,  and  speak 
profane  things  of  the  name  of  Him  in  whose  hand  are 
the  issues  of  life,  and  to  regard  liis  servants  as  the 
dogs  of  their  flock." 


ROB  DODDS.  3 

Again,  he  beheld  from  his  heights,  when  the  days 
were  clear,  the  flocks  of  others  more  favourably  situ- 
ated, which  he  interpreted  as  a  reward  for  their  acts 
of  charity  and  benevolence  ;  for  this  old  man  believed 
that  all  temporal  benefits  are  sent  to  men  as  a  reward 
for  good  works  ;  and  all  temporal  deprivations  as  a 
scom'ge  for  e\^l  ones. 

"  I  hae  been  a  herd  in  this  hope,  callant  and  man, 
for  these  fifty  years  now,  Janet,"  said  he  to  his  old 
wife,  "  and  I  think  I  never  saw  the  face  o'  the  coun- 
try look  waur." 

"  Hout,  gudeman,  it  is  but  a  clud  o'  the  despond- 
ency o'  auld  age  come  ower  your  een ;  for  I  hae  seen 
waur  storms  than  tliis,  or  else  my  sight  deceives  me. 
This  time  seven  and  thirty  years,  when  you  and  I 
were  married,  there  was  a  deeper,  and  a  harder  snaw 
baith,  than  this.  There  was  mony  a  bum  dammed  up 
wi'  dead  hogs  that  year !  And  what  say  ye  to  this 
time  nine  years,  gudeman  ?" 

"  Ay,  ay,  Janet,  these  were  hard  times  when  they 
were  present.  But  I  think  there's  somethmg  in  our 
corrupt  nature  that  gars  us  aye  trow  the  present  burden 
is  the  heaviest.  However,  it  is  either  my  strength 
failing,  that  I  canna  won  sae  weel  through  the  snaw, 
or  I  never  saw  it  lying  sae  deep  before.  I  canna  steer 
the  poor  creatures  frae  ae  knowe-head  to  another,  with- 
out rowing  them  ower  the  body.     And  sometimes 


4  THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

when  they  wad  spraughle  away,  then  I  stick  finri  and 
fast  mysell,  and  the  mair  I  fight  to  get  out,  I  gang  aye 
the  deeper.  This  same  day,  nae  farther  gane,  at  ae 
step  up  in  the  Gait  Cleuch,  I  slumpit  in  to  the  neck. 
Peace  be  wi'  us,  quo'  I  to  myself,  where  am  I  now  ? 
If  my  auld  wife  wad  but  look  up  the  hill,  she  wad  see 
nae  mair  o'  her  poor  man  but  the  bannet.  Ah  I  Janet, 
Janet,  I'm  rather  feared  that  our  Maker  has  a  craw  to 
pook  wi'  us  even  now  !" 

"  I  hope  no,  Andrew ;  we're  in  good  hands  ;  and  if 
he  should  e'en  see  meet  to  pook  a  craw  wi'  us,  he'll 
maybe  fling  us  baith  the  bouk  and  the  feathers  at  the 
end.  Ye  shouldna  repine,  gudeman.  Ye're  something 
ill  for  thrawing  yoiu-  mou'  at  Providence  now  and 
then." 

"  Na,  na,  Janet ;  far  be't  frae  me  to  grumble  at 
Providence.  I  ken  ower  weel  that  the  warst  we  get 
is  far  aboon  our  merits.  But  it's  no  for  the  season 
that  I'm  sae  feared, — that's  ruled  by  Ane  that  canna 
err ;  only,  I  dread  that  there's  something  rotten  in  the 
government  or  the  religion  of  the  country,  that  lays  it 
under  His  curse.  There's  my  fear,  Janet.  The  scourge 
of  a  land  often  fa's  on  its  meanest  creatures  first,  and 
advances  by  degrees,  to  gie  the  boonmost  orders  o' 
society  warning  and  time  to  repent.  There,  for  in- 
stance, in  the  saxteen  and  seventeen,  the  scourge  fell 
on  our  flocks  and  our  herds.     Then,  in  aughteen  and 


ROB  DODDS.  5 

nineteen,  it  fell  on  the  weavers, — they're  the  neist 
class,  ye  ken ;  then  our  merchants, — they're  the  neist 
again ;  and  last  of  a'  it  has  fallen  on  the  farmers  and 
the  shepherds, — they're  the  first  and  maist  sterling 
class  of  a  country.  Na,  ye  needna  smudge  and  laugh, 
Janet ;  for  it's  time.  They  are  the  boonmost,  and  hae 
aye  been  the  boonmost  sin'  the  days  o'  Abel ;  and 
that's  nae  date  o'  yesterday.  And  ye'll  observe,  Janet, 
that  whenever  they  began  to  fa'  low,  they  gat  aye 
another  lift  to  keep  up  their  respect.  But  I  see  oui* 
downfa'  coming  on  us  wi'  rapid  strides. — There's  a 
heartlessness  and  apathy  croppen  in  amang  the  sheep- 
farmers,  that  shows  their  warldly  hopes  to  be  nearly 
extinct.  The  maist  o'  them  seem  no  to  care  a  bodle 
whether  their  sheep  die  or  live.  There's  our  master, 
for  instance,  when  times  were  gaun  weel,  I  hae  seen 
him  up  ilka  third  day  at  the  farthest  in  the  time  of  a 
storm,  to  see  how  the  sheep  were  doing ;  and  this 
winter  I  hae  never  seen  his  face  sin'  it  came  on.  He 
seems  to  hae  forgotten  that  there  are  sic  creatures 
existing  in  this  wilderness  as  the  sheep  and  me. — His 
presence  be  about  us,  gin  there  be  nae  the  very  man 
come  by  the  window  !" 

Janet  sprung  to  her  feet,  swept  the  hearth,  set  a 
chair  on  the  cleanest  side,  and  wiped  it  with  her  check 
apron,  all  ere  one  could  well  look  about  him. 


6  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

"  Come  away,  master ;  come  in  by  to  the  fire  here ; 
lang-lookit-for  comes  at  length." 

"  How  are  you,  Janet  ? — still  living,  I  see.  It  is  a 
pity  that  you  had  not  popped  off  before  this  great  storm 
came  on." 

"  Dear,  what  for,  master  ?" 

"  Because  if  you  should  take  it  into  your  head  to 
coup  the  creels  just  now,  you  know  it  would  be  out 
of  the  power  of  man  to  get  you  to  a  Chiistian  burial. 
We  would  be  obliged  to  huddle  you  up  in  the  nook  of 
the  kail-yard." 

"  Ah,  master,  what's  that  you're  saying  to  my  auld 
wife  ?  Aye  the  auld  man  yet,  I  heai' !  a  gi'eat  deal 
o'  the  leaven  o'  corrupt  nature  aye  sprouting  out  now 
and  then.  I  wonder  you're  no  fear'd  to  speak  in  that 
regardless  manner  in  these  judgment-looking  times  !" 

"  And  you  are  still  the  old  man  too,  Andrew ;  a 
great  deal  of  cant  and  hypocrisy  sprouting  out  at  times. 
But  tell  me,  you  old  sinner,  how  has  your  Maker 
been  serving  you  this  storm  ?  I  have  been  right  ter- 
rified about  your  sheep  ;  for  I  know  you  will  have  been 
very  impertinent  with  him  of  evenings." 

"  Hear  to  that  now  !  There's  no  hope,  I  see  !  I 
thought  to  find  you  humbled  wi'  a  thir  trials  and 
warldly  losses ;  but  I  see  the  heart  is  hardened  like 
Pharaoh's,  and  you  will  not  let  the  multitude  of  your 
sins  go.     As  to  the  storm,  I  can  tell  you,  my  sheep 


ROB  DODDS.  7 

are  just  at  ane  mae  wi't.  I  am  waur  than  ony  o'  my 
neighbom-s,  as  I  lie  higher  on  the  hills  ;  but  I  may  hae 
been  as  it  chanced,  for  you ;  for  ye  hae  never  lookit 
near  me  mail'  than  you  had  had  no  concern  in  the 
creatures." 

"  Indeed,  Andrew,  it  is  because  neither  you  nor  the 
creatures  are  much  worth  looking  after  now-a-days. 
If  it  hadna  been  the  fear  I  was  in  for  some  mishap 
coming  over  the  stock,  on  account  of  these  hypocriti- 
cal prayers  of  yours,  I  would  not  have  come  to  look 
after  you  so  soon." 

"  Ah,  there's  nae  mense  to  be  had  o'  you  !  It's  a 
good  thing  I  ken  the  heart's  better  than  the  tongue,  or 
ane  wad  hae  little  face  to  pray  either  for  you,  or  aught 
that  belangs  t'ye.  But  I  hope  ye  hae  been  nae  the 
waur  o'  auld  Andrew's  prayers  as  yet.  An  some  didna 
pray  for  ye,  it  wad  maybe  be  the  waur  for  ye.  I 
prayed  for  ye  when  ye  couldna  pray  for  yoursell,  and 
had  hopes  that,  when  I  turned  auld  and  doited,  you 
might  say  a  kind  word  for  me ;  but  I'm  fear'd  that 
wai'ld's  wealth  and  warld's  pleasures  hae  been  leading 
you  ower  lang  in  their  train,  and  that  ye  hae  been 
trusting  to  that  which  will  soon  take  wings  and  flee 
away." 

"  If  you  mean  riches,  Andrew,  or  warld's  wealth,  as 
you  call  it,  you  never  said  a  tnier  word  in  your  life ; 
for  the  little  that  my  forbears  and  I  have  made,  is  ac- 


8  THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

tually,  under  the  influence  of  these  long  prayers  of 
yours,  melting  away  from  among  my  hands  faster  than 
ever  the  snow  did  from  the  dike." 

"  It  is  perfectly  tnie,  what  you're  saying,  master. 
I  ken  the  extent  o'  your  bits  o'  sales  weel  enough,  and 
I  ken  your  rents ;  and  weel  I  ken  you're  telling  me  nae 
lee.  And  it's  e'en  a  hard  case.  But  I'll  tell  you  what 
I  would  do — I  would  throw  their  tacks  in  then*  teeth, 
and  let  them  mak  aught  o'  them  they  likit." 

"  Why,  that  would  be  ruin  at  once,  Andrew,  with 
a  vengeance.  Don't  you  see  that  stocks  of  sheep  are 
fallen  so  low,  that  if  they  were  put  to  sale,  they  would 
not  pay  more  than  the  rents,  and  some  few  arrears  that 
eveiy  one  of  us  have  got  into ;  and  thus,  by  throwing 
up  our  farms,  we  would  throw  ourselves  out  beggars? 
We  are  all  willing  to  put  off  the  evil  day  as  long  as 
we  can,  and  rather  trust  to  long  prayers  for  a  while." 

"  Ah !  you're  there  again,  are  you  ? — canna  let 
alane  profanity !  It's  hard  to  gar  a  wicked  cout  leave 
off  flinging.  But  I  can  tell  you,  master  mine — An 
you  farmers  had  made  your  hay  when  the  smi  shone, 
ye  might  a'  hae  sitten  independent  o'  your  screwing 
lairds,  wha  are  maistly  sair  out  at  elbows  ;  and  ye  ken, 
sir,  a  hungiy  louse  bites  wicked  sau'.  But  this  is  but 
a  just  judgment  come  on  you  for  your  behaviour.  Ye 
had  the  gami  days  o'  prosperity  for  twenty  years  !  But 
instead  o'  laying  by  a  little  for  a  sair  leg,  or  making 


ROB  DODDS.  9 

provision  for  an  evil  day,  ye  gaed  on  like  madmen. 
Ye  biggit  houses,  and  ye  plantit  vineyards,  and  threw 
away  money  as  ye  had  been  sawing  sklate-stanes.  Ye 
drank  wine,  and  ye  drank  punch ;  and  ye  roared  and 
ye  sang,  and  spake  imseemly  things.  And  did  ye 
never  think  there  was  an  ear  that  heard,  and  an  ee 
that  saw,  a'  thae  things  ?  And  did  ye  never  think  that 
they  wad  be  visited  on  your  heads  some  day  when  ye 
couldna  play  paw  to  help  yoursells?  If  ye  didna 
thuik  sae  then,  ye'll  think  sae  soon.  And  ye'll  maybe 
see  the  day  when  the  like  o'  auld  Andrew,  wi'  his 
darned  hose,  and  his  cloutit  shoon ;  his  braid  bannet, 
instead  of  a  baiver ;  his  di-ink  out  o'  the  clear  spring, 
instead  o'  the  punch  bowl ;  and  Ms  good  steeve  ait- 
meal  parritch  and  his  hora  spoon,  instead  o'  the  draps 
o'  tea,  that  costs  sae  muckle — I  say,  that  sic  a  man  wi' 
a'  thae,  and  his  worthless  prayers  to  boot,  will  maybe 
keep  the  crown  o'  the  causeway  langer  than  some  that 
caiTied  their  heads  higher." 

"  Hout  fie,  Andrew !"  quoth  old  Janet ;  "  Gude- 
ness  be  my  help,  an  I  dinna  think  shame  o'  you !  Our 
master  may  weel  think  ye'll  be  impudent  wi'  your 
Maker;  for  troth  you're  very  impudent  wi'  liimsell. 
Dinna  ye  see  that  ye  hae  made  the  douce  sonsy  lad 
that  he  disna  ken  where  to  look  ?" 

"  Ay,  Janet,  your  husband  may  weel  crack.  He 
a2 


10         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

kens  he  has  feathered  his  nest  off  my  father  and  me. 
He  is  independent,  let  the  world  wag  as  it  will." 

"  It's  a'  fairly  come  by,  master,  and  the  maist  part 
o't  came  through  your  ain  hands.  But  my  baims  are 
a'  doing  for  themsells,  in  the  same  way  that  I  did  ; 
and  if  twa  or  three  hunder  pounds  can  beet  a  mister 
for  you  in  a  strait,  ye  samia  want  it,  come  of  a'  what 
wiU." 

«  It  is  weel  said  of  you,  Andrew,  and  I  am  obliged 
to  you.  There  is  no  class  of  men  in  this  kingdom  so 
independent  as  you  shepherds.  You  have  your  sheep, 
your  cow,  your  meal  and  potatoes  ;  a  regular  income 
of  from  sixteen  to  thirty  pounds  yearly,  without  a 
farthing  of  expenditure,  except  for  shoes ;  for  your 
clothes  are  all  made  at  home.  If  you  would  even 
wish  to  spend  it,  you  cannot  get  an  opportunity,  and 
every  one  of  you  is  rich,  who  has  not  lost  money  by 
lending  it.  It  is  therefore  my  humble  opinion,  that 
all  the  farms  over  this  country  will  soon  change  occu- 
pants ;  and  that  the  shepherds  must  ultimately  become 
the  store-farmers." 

"  I  hope  in  God  I'll  never  live  to  see  that,  master, 
for  the  sake  of  them  that  I  and  mine  hae  won  our 
bread  frae,  as  weel  as  some  others  that  I  hae  a  great 
respect  for.  But  that's  no  a  thing  that  hasna  happened 
afore  this  day.  It  is  little  mair  than  a  hundred  and 
forty  years,  sin'  a'  the  land  i'  this  country  changed 


ROB  DODDS.  11 

masters  already;  sin'  every  farmer  in  it  was  reduced, 
and  the  farms  were  a'  ta'en  by  common  people  and 
strangers  at  half  naething.  The  Welshes  came  here 
then,  out  o'  a  place  they  ca'  Wales,  in  England ;  the 
Andersons  came  frae  a  place  they  ca'  Rannoch,  some 
gate  i'  the  north ;  and  your  ain  family  came  first  to 
tliis  country  then  frae  some  bit  lairdship  near  Glasgow. 
There  were  a  set  o'  MacGregors  and  MacDougals, 
said  to  have  been  great  thieves,  came  into  YaiTow 
then,  and  changed  their  names  to  Scotts ;  but  they 
didna  thrive ;  for  they  warna  likit,  and  the  hinderend 
o'  them  were  in  the  Catslackbum.  They  ca'd  them 
aye  the  Pinolys,  frae  the  place  they  came  frae ;  but  I 
dinna  ken  where  it  was.  The  Ballantynes  came  frae 
Galloway ;  and  for  as  flourishing  folks  as  they  are  now, 
the  first  o'  them  came  out  at  the  Birkhill-path,  riding 
on  a  haltered  pony,  wi'  a  goat-skin  aneath  him  for  a 
saddle.  The  Cunninghams,  likewise,  began  to  spread 
their  wings  at  the  same  time  ;  they  came  a'  frae  a  little 
fat  curate  that  came  out  o'  Glencaim  to  Ettrick.  But 
that's  nae  disparagement  to  ony  o'  thae  families ;  for 
an  there  be  merit  at  a'  inherent  in  man  as  to  warldly 
things,  it  is  certainly  in  raising  himsell  frae  naething  to 
respect.  There  is  nae  very  ancient  name  amang  a'  our 
farmers  now,  but  the  Tweedies  and  the  Murrays;  I 
mean  of  them  that  anciently  belanged  to  this  district. 
The  Tweedies  are  very  auld,  and  took  the  name  frae 


12         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

the  water.  They  were  lairds  o'  Drummelzier  hunders 
o'  years  afore  the  Hays  got  it,  and  hae  some  o'  the 
best  blood  o'  the  land  in  their  veins ;  and  sae  also  have 
the  MuiTays ;  but  the  maist  part  o'  the  rest  are  up- 
starts and  come-o'-wills.  Now  ye  see,  for  as  far  out- 
bye  as  I  live,  I  can  tell  ye  some  things  that  ye  dinna 
hear  amang  your  drinking  cronies." 

"  It  is  when  you  begin  to  these  old  traditions  that  I 
like  to  listen  to  you,  Andrew.  Can  you  tell  me  what 
was  the  cause  of  such  a  complete  overthrow  of  the 
farmers  of  that  age  ?" 

"  Oh,  I  canna  tell,  su' — I  canna  tell ;  some  overturn 
o'  aiFaii's,  like  the  present,  I  fancy.  The  farmers  had 
outher  lost  a'  their  sheep,  or  a'  their  siller,  as  they  are 
like  to  do  now ;  but  I  canna  tell  how  it  was ;  for  the 
general  change  had  ta'en  place,  for  the  maist  part,  afore 
the  Revolution.  My  ain  grandfather,  who  was  the  son 
of  a  gi'eat  farmer,  hired  himsell  for  a  shepherd  at  that 
time  to  young  Tarn  Linton;  and  mony  ane  was 
wae  for  the  downcome.  But,  speaking  o'  that,  of  a 
the  downcomes  that  ever  a  country  kenn'd  in  a  farm- 
ing name,  there  has  never  been  ought  like  that  o'  the 
Lintons.  When  my  giandfather  was  a  young  man, 
and  ane  o'  their  herds,  they  had  a'  the  principal  store- 
fai-ms  o'  Ettrick  Forest,  and  a  part  in  this  shire.  They 
had,  when  the  gi-eat  Mr  Boston  came  to  Ettrick,  the 
fai'ms  o'  Blackliouse,  Dryhope,  Henderland,  Chapel- 


ROB  DODDS.  13 

hope,  Scabcleuch,  Shorthope,  Midgehope,  Meggat- 
knowes,  Buccleuch,  and  Gilmanscleuch,  that  I  ken  of, 
and  likely  as  mony  mae ;  and  now  there's  no  a  man  o' 
the  name  in  a'  the  bounds  aboon  the  rank  of  a  cow- 
herd. Thomas  Linton  rode  to  kirk  and  market,  wi'  a 
liveryman  at  his  back  ;  but  where  is  a'  that  pride  now  ? 
— a  buried  in  the  mools  wi'  the  bearers  o't !  and  the 
last  representative  o'  that  great  overgrown  family,  that 
laid  house  to  house,  and  field  to  field,  is  now  sair  gane 
on  a  wee,  wee  farm  o'  the  Duke  o'  Buccleuch's.  The 
ancient  curse  had  lighted  on  these  men,  if  ever  it 
lighted  on  men  in  this  world.  And  yet  they  were 
reckoned  good  men,  and  kind  men,  in  their  day;  for 
the  good  Mr  Boston  wrote  an  epitaph  on  Thomas,  in 
metre,  when  he  died  ;  and  though  I  have  read  it  a  bun- 
der times  in  St  Mary's  kirk- yard,  where  it  is  to  be  seen 
to  this  day,  I  canna  say  it  ower.  But  it  says  that  he 
was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  to  the  lame,  and  that 
the  Lord  would  requite  him  in  a  day  to  come,  or 
something  to  that  purpose.  Now  that  said  a  great 
deal  for  him,  master,  although  Providence  has  seen 
meet  to  strip  his  race  of  a'  theii'  worldly  possessions. 
But  take  an  auld  fool's  advice,  and  never  lay  farm 
to  farm,  even  though  a  fair  opportunity  should  offer  ; 
for,  as  sure  as  He  lives  who  pronounced  that  curse,  it 
will  take  effect.  I'm  an  auld  man,  and  I  hae  seen 
mony  a  dash  made  that  way ;  but  I  never  saw  ane  o' 


14         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

them  come  to  good!  There  was  first  Mmray  of 
Glenrath ;  why,  it  was  untelling  what  land  that  man 
possessed.  Now  his  family  has  not  a  furr  in  the  twa 
counties.  Then  there  was  his  neighbom-  Simpson  of 
Posso :  I  hae  seen  the  day  that  Simpson  had  two-and- 
twenty  farms,  the  best  o'  the  twa  comities,  and  a' 
stockit  wi'  good  sheep.  Now  there's  no  a  drap  o'  his 
blood  has  a  fun-  in  the  twa  counties.  Then  there  was 
Grieve  of  Willenslee  ;  ane  wad  hae  thought  that  body 
was  gaun  to  take  the  haill  kingdom.  He  was  said  to 
have  had  ten  thousand  sheep,  a'  on  good  farms,  at  ae 
time.  Where  are  they  a'  now  ?  Neither  him  nor  his 
hae  a  furr  in  the  twa  counties.  Let  me  tell  ye,  master 
— for  ye're  but  a  young  man,  and  I  wad  aye  fain  have 
ye  to  see  things  in  a  right  light — that  ye  may  blame 
the  wars ;  ye  may  blame  the  Government ;  and  ye  may 
blame  the  Parliamenters :  but  there's  a  hand  that  rules 
higher  than  a'  these ;  and  gin  ye  dinna  look  to  that, 
ye'll  never  look  to  the  right  source  either  o'  your  pros- 
perity or  adversity.  And  I  sairly  doubt  that  the  pride 
o'  the  farmers  has  been  raised  to  ower  great  a  pitch, 
that  Providence  has  been  brewing  a  day  of  humiliation 
for  them,  and  that  there  will  be  a  change  o'  hands 
aince  mair,  as  there  was  about  this  time  hunder  and 
forty  years." 

"  Then  I  suppose  you  shepherds  expect  to  have  cen- 


ROB  DODDS.  15 

tury  about  with  us,  or  so  ?    Well,  I  don't  see  any  thing 
very  unfair  in  it." 

"  Ay,  but  I  fear  we  will  be  as  far  aneath  the  right 
medium  for  a  while,  as  ye  are  startit  aboon  it.  We'll 
make  a  fine  hand  doing  the  honom-s  o'  the  grand  man- 
sion-houses that  ye  hae  biggit  for  us  ;  the  cavalry  exer- 
cises; the  gims  and  the  pointers;  the  wine  and  the 
punch  diinking ;  and  the  singing  o'  the  deboshed  sangs ! 
But  we'll  just  come  to  the  right  set  again  in  a  genera- 
tion or  twa ;  and  then,  as  soon  as  we  get  ower  hee, 
we'll  get  a  downcome  in  om*  turn. — But,  master,  I  say, 
how  will  you  grand  gentlemen  tak  wi'  a  shepherd's 
life  ?  How  will  ye  like  to  be  turned  into  reeky  holes 
like  this,  where  ye  can  hardly  see  your  fingers  afore  ye, 
and  be  reduced  to  the  parritch  and  the  horn  spoon  ?" 

"  I  cannot  tell,  Andrew.  I  suppose  it  will  have 
some  advantages — It  will  teach  us  to  say  long  prayers 
to  put  off  the  time  ;  and  if  we  should  have  the  misfor- 
tune afterwards  to  pass  into  the  bad  place  that  you 
shepherds  are  all  so  terrified  about,  why,  we  will  scarce- 
ly know  any  difference.  I  account  that  a  great  advan- 
tage in  dwelling  in  such  a  place  as  this.  We'll  scarce- 
ly know  the  one  place  from  the  other." 

"  Ay,  but  oh  what  a  surprise  ye  will  get  when  ye 
step  out  o'  ane  o'  your  grand  palaces  into  hell !  And 
gin  ye  dinna  repent  in  time,  ye'll  maybe  get  a  little  ex- 
periment o'  that  sort.     Ye  think  ye  hae  said  a  very 


16        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

witty  thing  there :  but  a'  profane  wit  is  sinfu' ;  and 
whatever  is  sinfu'  is  shamefu' ;  and  therefore  it  never 
suits  to  be  said  either  afore  God  or  man.  Ye  are  just 
a  good  standing  sample  o'  the  young  tenantry  o'  Scot- 
land at  this  time.  Ye're  ower  genteel  to  be  devout, 
and  ye  look  ower  high,  and  depend  ower  muckle  on  the 
arm  o'  flesh,  to  regard  the  rod  and  Him  that  hath  ap- 
pointed it.  But  it  will  fa'  wi'  the  mair  weight  for  that ! 
A  blow  that  is  seen  coming  may  be  wardit  off;  but  if 
ane's  sae  proud  as  no  to  regard  it,  it's  the  less  scaith 
that  he  suifer." 

"I  see  not  how  any  man  can  ward  off  this  blow, 
Andrew.  It  has  gathered  its  overwhelming  force  in 
springs  over  which  we  have  no  control,  and  is  of  that 
nature  that  no  industry  of  man  can  avail  against  it — 
exertion  is  no  more  than  a  drop  in  the  bucket :  and  I 
greatly  fear  that  this  grievous  storm  is  come  to  lay  the 
axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree." 

"  I'm  glad  to  heai',  however,  that  ye  hae  some  Scrip- 
tm-e  phrases  at  your  tongue-roots.  I  never  heard  you 
use  ane  in  a  serious  mode  before ;  and  I  hope  there  will 
be  a  reformation  yet.  If  adversity  hae  that  effect,  I 
shall  willingly  submit  to  my  share  o'  the  loss  if  the 
storm  should  lie  still  for  a  while,  and  cut  off  a  wheen 
o'  the  creatures,  that  ye  aince  made  eedals  o',  and  now 
dow  hardly  bide  to  see.  But  that's  the  gate  wi'  a 
things  that  ane  sets  up  for  warldly  worship  in  place  o' 


ROB  DODDS.  17 

the  true  object ;  they  turn  a'  out  curses  and  causes  o' 
shame  and  disgrace.  As  for  warding  off  the  blow, 
master,  I  see  no  resource  but  throwing  up  the  farms 
ilk  ane,  and  trying  to  save  a  remnant  out  o'  the  fire. 
The  lairds  want  naething  better  than  for  ye  to  rin  in 
arrears ;  then  they  will  get  a'  your  stocks  for  neist  to 
naething,  and  have  the  land  stockit  themsells  as  they 
had  langsyne  ;  and  you  will  be  their  keepers,  or  vassals, 
the  same  as  we  are  to  you  at  present.  As  to  hinging 
on  at  the  present  rents,  it  is  madness — the  very  extre- 
mity of  madness.  I  hae  been  a  herd  here  for  fifty 
years,  and  I  ken  as  weel  what  the  ground  will  pay  at 
every  price  of  sheep  as  you  do,  and  I  daresay  a  great 
deal  better.  When  I  came  here  first,  your  father  paid 
less  than  the  third  of  the  rent  that  you  are  bound  to 
pay ;  sheep  of  every  description  were  dearer,  lambs, 
ewes,  and  wedders ;  and  I  ken  weel  he  was  making  no 
money  of  it,  honest  man,  but  merely  working  his  way, 
with  some  years  a  little  over,  and  some  naething.  And 
how  is  it  possible  that  you  can  pay  three  times  the  rent 
at  lower  prices  of  sheep  ?  I  say  the  very  presumption 
of  the  thing  is  sheer  madness.  And  it  is  not  only  this 
farm,  but  you  may  take  it  as  an  average  of  all  the  farms 
in  the  country,  that  before  the  French  icar  began,  the 
sheep  were  dearer  than  they  are  now — the  farms  were 
not  above  one-third  of  the  rents  at  an  average,  and  the 
farmers  were  not  making  any  money.  They  have  lost 


18         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

their  summer  day  during  the  French  war,  which  will 
never  return  to  them ;  and  the  only  resource  they  have, 
that  I  can  see,  is  to  abandon  their  farms  in  time,  and 
try  to  save  a  remnant.  Things  will  come  to  their  tme 
level  presently,  but  not  afore  the  auld  stock  o'  fai-mers 
are  crushed  past  rising  again.  And  then  I  little  wat 
what's  to  come  o'  ye ;  for  an  we  herds  get  the  land,  we 
winna  employ  you  as  our  shepherds, — that  you  may 
depend  on." 

"  Well,  Andrew,  these  are  curious  facts  that  you  tell 
me  about  the  land  having  all  changed  occupiers  about 
a  certain  period.  I  wish  you  could  have  stated  the 
causes  with  certainty.  Was  there  not  a  gi-eat  loss  on 
this  farm  once,  when  it  was  said  the  burn  was  so 
dammed  up  with  dead  carcasses  that  it  changed  its 
course  ?" 

"  Ay,  but  that's  quite  a  late  story.  It  happened  in 
my  own  day,  and  I  believe  mostly  through  mischance. 
That  was  the  year  Rob  Dodds  was  lost  in  the  Earney 
Cleuch.  I  remember  it,  but  cannot  tell  what  year  it 
was,  for  I  was  but  a  little  bilsh  of  a  callant  then." 

"  Who  was  Rob  Dodds  ?  I  never  heard  of  the  inci- 
dent before." 

"  Ay,  but  your  father  remembered  it  weel ;  for  he 
sent  a'  his  men  mony  a  day  to  look  for  the  corpse,  but 
a'  to  nae  pm-pose.  I'll  never  forget  it ;  for  it  made  an 
impression  on  me  sae  deep  that  I  couldna  get  rest 


ROB  DODDS.  19 

i'  my  bed  for  months  and  days.    He  was  a  young  hand- 
some bonny  lad,  an  lionest  man's  only  son,  and  was 
herd  wi'  Tarn  Linton  in  the  Birkhill.     The  Lintons 
were  sair  come  down  then ;  for  this  Tarn  was  a  herd, 
and  had  Rob  hired  as  his  assistant.  Weel,  it  sae  happened 
that  Tam's  wife  had  occasion  to  cross  the  wild  heights 
atween  the  Bukhill  and  Tweedsmuir,  to  see  her  mo- 
ther, or  sister,  on  some  express ;  and  Tam  sent  the 
young  man  wi'  her  to  see  her  ower  Donald's  Clench 
Edge.     It  was  in  the  middle  o'  winter,  and,  if  I  mind 
right,  this  time  sixty  years.    At  the  time  they  set  out, 
the  morning  was  calm,  frosty,  and  thi-eatening  snaw, 
but  the  ground  clear  of  it.     Rob  had  orders  to  set  his 
mistress  to  the  height,  and  return  home ;  but  by  the 
time  they  had  got  to  the  height,  the  snaw  had  come  on, 
so  the  good  lad  went  all  the  way  tlu'ough  Guemshope 
with  her,  and  in  sight  of  the  water  o'  Fruid.    He  crossed 
all  the  wildest  o'  the  heights  on  his  retmn  in  safety ; 
and  on  the  Middle-End,  west  of  Loch- Skene,  he  met 
with  Robin  Laidlaw,  that  went  to  the  Highlands  and 
grew  a  great  farmer  after  that.     Robin  was  gathering 
the  Polmoody  ewes ;  and  as  they  were  neighbours,  and 
both  herding  to  ae  master,  Laidlaw  testified  some  an- 
xiety lest  the  young  man  should  not  find  his  way  hame ; 
for  the  blast  had  then  come  on  very  severe.     Dodds 
leugh  at  him,  and  said, '  he  was  nae  man*  feared  for  find- 
ing the  gate  hame,  than  he  was  for  finding  the  gate  to 


20         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

his  mouth  when  he  was  hungry.' — '  Weel,  weel,'  quo' 
Robin, '  keep  the  band  o'  the  hill  a'  the  way,  for  I  hae  seen 
as  clever  a  fellow  waured  on  sic  a  day ;  and  be  sui"e  to 
hund  the  ewes  out  o'  the  Brand  Law  Scores  as  ye  gang 
by.' — '  Tammy  charged  me  to  bring  a  backfu'  o'  peats 
wi'  me,'  said  he ;  *  but  I  think  I'll  no  gang  near  the 
peat  stack  the  day.' — '  Na,'  quo'  Robin,  <  I  think  ye'll 
no  be  sae  mad !' — '  But,  O  man,'  quo'  the  lad,  '  hae  ye 
ony  bit  bread  about  your  pouches ;  for  I'm  unco  hungry? 
The  wife  was  in  sic  a  hurry  that  I  had  to  come  away 
without  getting  ony  breakfast,  and  I  had  sae  far  to  gang 
wi'  her,  that  I'm  grown  unco  toom  i'  the  inside.' — '  The 
fient  ae  inch  hae  I,  Robie,  my  man,  or  ye  should  hae 
had  it,'  quo'  Laidlaw. — '  But  an  that  be  the  case,  gang 
straight  hame,  and  never  heed  the  ewes,  come  o'  them 
what  will.' — '  O  there's  nae  fear !'  said  he,  *  I'll  turn 
the  ewes,  and  be  hame  in  good  time  too.'  And  with 
that  he  left  Laidlaw,  and  went  down  the  Middle-Craig- 
End,  jumping  and  playing  in  a  frolicsome  way  ower  his 
stick.  He  had  a  large  lang  nibbit  staff  in  his  hand, 
which  Laidlaw  took  particular  notice  of,  thinking  it 
would  be  a  good  help  for  the  young  man  in  the  rough 
way  he  had  to  gang. 

"  There  was  never  another  word  about  the  matter 
till  that  day  eight  days.  The  storm  having  increased 
to  a  terrible  drift,  the  snaw  had  grown  very  deep,  and 
the  herds,  wha  lived  about  three  miles  sindry,  hadna 


ROB  DODDS.  2  I 

met  for  a'  that  time.  But  that  day  Tam  Linton  and 
Robin  Laidlaw  met  at  the  Tail  Burn  ;  and  after  crack- 
ing a  lang  time  thegither,  Tam  says  to  the  tither,  just 
as  it  war  by  chance,  '  Saw  ye  naething  o'  our  young 
dinnagood  this  day  eight  days,  Robin  ?  He  gaed  awa 
that  morning  to  set  our  gudewife  ower  the  height,  and 
has  never  sin'  that  time  lookit  near  me,  the  careless 
rascal !' 

"  '  Tam  Linton,  what's  that  you're  saying  ?  what's 
that  I  hear  ye  saying,  Tam  Linton?'  quo'  Robin,  wha 
was  dung  clean  stupid  wi'  horror.  '  Hae  ye  never 
seen  Rob  Dodds  sin'  that  morning  he  gaed  away  wi' 
your  wife  ?' 

"  '  Na,  never,'  quo'  the  tither. 

"  '  Why  then,  sir,  let  me  tell  ye,  you'll  never  see 
him  again  in  this  world  alive,'  quo'  Robin  ;  '  for  he  left 
me  on  the  Middle-End  on  his  way  hame  that  day  at 
eleven  o'clock,  just  as  the  day  was  coming  to  the  warst. 
— But,  Tam  Linton,  what  was't  ye  war  saying  ?  Ye're 
telling  me  what  canna  be  true— Do  ye  say  that  ye  hae- 
na  seen  Rob  Dodds  sin'  that  day  ?' 

"  '  Haena  I  tauld  ye  that  I  hae  never  seen  his  face 
sinsyne  ?'  quo'  Linton. 

"  *  Sae  I  hear  ye  saying,'  quo'  Robin  again.  <  But 
ye're  telling  me  a  downright  made  lee.  The  thing's 
no  possible ;  for  ye  hae  the  very  staff  i'  your  hand  that 
he  had  in  his,  when  he  left  me  in  the  drift  that  day.' 


22      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  « I  ken  naetliing  about  sticks  or  staves,  Robin 
Laidlaw,'  says  Tam,  looking  rather  like  ane  catched  in 
an  ill  turn.  *  The  staff  wasna  likely  to  come  hame 
without  the  owner ;  and  I  can  only  say,  I  hae  seen  nae 
mair  o'  Rob  Dodds  sin'  that  morning ;  and  I  had 
thoughts  that,  as  the  day  grew  sae  ill,  he  had  hadden 
forrit  a'  the  length  wi'  our  wife,  and  was  biding  wi'  her 
folks  a  this  time  to  bring  her  hame  again  when  the 
storm  had  settled.' 

"  '  Na,  na,  Tam,  ye  needna  get  into  ony  o'  thae 
lang-windit  stories  wi'  me,'  quo'  Robin.  *  For  I  tell 
ye,  that's  the  staff  Rob  Dodds  had  in  his  hand  when 
I  last  saw  him  ;  so  ye  have  either  seen  him  dead  or  li- 
ving— Til  gie  my  oath  to  that.' 

"  '  Ye  had  better  take  care  what  ye  say,  Robin  Laid- 
law,' says  Tam,  very  fiercely,  '  or  I'll  maybe  make  ye 
blithe  to  eat  in  your  words  again.' 

"  '  What  I  hae  said.  Til  stand  to,  Tam  Linton,'  says 

Robin '  And  mair  than  that,'  says  he,  *  if  that  young 

man  has  come  to  an  untimely  end,  I'll  see  his  blood 
required  at  your  hand.' 

"  Then  there  was  word  sent  away  to  the  Hope- 
house  to  his  parents,  and  ye  may  weel  ken,  master, 
what  heavy  news  it  was  to  them,  for  Rob  was  their 
only  son ;  they  had  gien  him  a  good  education,  and 
muckle  muckle  they  thought  o'  him  ;  but  naething  wad 
serve  him  but  he  wad  be  a  shepherd.    His  father 


ROB  DODDS.  23 

canie  wi'  the  maist  pairt  o'  Ettrick  paiish  at  his  back ; 

and  mony  shai^p  and  tlireatening  words  past  atween 

him  and  Linton  ;  but  what  could  they  make  o't  ?    The 

lad  was  lost,  and  nae  law,  nor  nae  revenge,  could 

restore  him  again ;  sae  they  had  naething  for't,  but  to 

spread  athwai-t  a'  the  hills  looking  for  the  corpse.  The 

haill  country  rase  for  ten  miles  round,  on  ane  or  twa 

good  days  that  happened  ;  but  the  snaw  was  still  lying, 

and  a'  their  looking  was  in  vain.  Tam  Linton  wad  look 

nane.     He  took  the  dorts,  and  never  heeded  the  folk 

mair  than  they  hadna  been  there.     A'  that  height 

atween  Loch-Skene  and  the  Birkhill  was  just  moving 

wi'  folk  for  the  space  o'  three  weeks  ;  for  the  twa  auld 

folk,  the  lad's  parents,  couldna  get  ony  rest,  and  folk 

sympathized  unco  muckle  wi'  them.     At  length  the 

snaw  gaed  maistly  away,  and  the  weather  turned  fine, 

and  I  gaed  out  ane  o*  the  days  wi'  my  father  to  look 

for  the  body.     But,  aih  wow  I  I  was  a  feared  wight ! 

whenever  I  saw  a  bit  sod,  or  a  knowe,  or  a  grey  stane, 

I  stood  stiU  and  trembled  for  fear  it  was  the  dead  man, 

and  no  ae  step  durst  I  steer  farther,  till  my  father  gaed 

up  to  a'  thae  things.    I  gaed  nae  mair  back  to  look  for 

the  corpse  ;  for  I'm  sure  if  we  had  found  the  body  I 

wad  hae  gane  out  o'  my  judgment. 

"  At  length  every  body  tked  o'  looking,  but  the  auld 
man  himsell.  He  travelled  day  after  day,  ill  weather 
and  good  weather,  without  intermission.     They  said 


S4        THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

it  was  the  waesomest  thing  ever  was  seen,  to  see  that 
auld  grey-headed  man  gaun  sae  lang  by  himsell,  look- 
ing for  the  corpse  o'  his  only  son !  The  maist  part  o' 
his  friends  advised  him  at  length  to  give  up  the  search, 
as  the  finding  o'  the  body  seemed  a  thing  a'thegither 
hopeless.  But  he  declared  he  wad  look  for  his  son  till 
the  day  o'  his  death  ;  and  if  he  could  but  find  his  bones, 
he  would  carry  them  away  from  the  wild  moors,  and 
lay  them  in  the  giave  where  he  was  to  lie  himsell.  Tam 
Linton  was  apprehended,  and  examined  afore  the  She- 
riflp ;  but  nae  proof  could  be  led  against  him,  and  he 
wan  off.  He  swore  that,  as  far  as  he  remembered,  he 
got  the  staff  standing  at  the  mouth  o'  the  peat  stack ; 
and  that  he  conceived  that  either  the  lad  or  himsell  had 
left  it  there  some  day  when  bringing  away  a  burden  of 
peats.  The  shepherds'  peats  had  not  been  led  home 
that  year,  and  the  stack  stood  on  a  hill-head,  half  a 
mile  frae  the  house,  and  the  herds  were  obliged  to  carry 
them  home  as  they  needed  them. 

"  But  a  mystery  hung  ower  that  lad's  death  that  was 
never  cleared  up,  nor  ever  will  a'thegither.  Every 
man  was  convinced,  in  his  own  mind,  that  Linton 
knew  where  the  body  was  a'  the  time  ;  and  also,  that 
the  young  man  had  not  come  by  his  death  fairly.  It 
was  proved  that  the  lad's  dog  had  come  hame  several 
times,  and  that  Tam  Linton  had  been  seen  kickmg  it 
frae  about  his  house ;  and  as  the  dog  could  be  nowhere 
5 


ROB  DODDS.  •2iJ' 

all  that  time,  but  waiting  on  the  body,  if  that  had  no 
been  concealed  in  some  more  than  ordinary  way,  the 
dog  would  at  least  have  been  seen.  At  length,  it  wa>s 
suggested  to  the  old  man,  that  dead-lights  always  ho- 
vered over  a  corpse  by  night,  if  the  body  was  left  ex- 
posed to  the  air ;  and  it  was  a  fact  that  two  drowned 
men  had  been  foimd  in  a  field  of  whins,  where  the  wa- 
ter had  left  the  bodies,  by  means  of  the  dead-lights,  a 
very  short  while  before.  On  the  first  calm  night,  there- 
fore, the  old  desolate  man  went  to  the  Merk-Side-Edge, 
to  the  top  of  a  high  hill  that  overlooked  all  the  ground 
where  there  was  ony  likelihood  that  the  body  would 
be  lying.  He  watched  there  the  lee-lang  night,  keep- 
ing liis  eye  constantly  roaming  ower  the  broken  wastes 
before  him  ;  but  he  never  noticed  the  least  glimmer  of 
the  dead-lights.  About  midnight,  however,  he  heard 
a  dog  bai'kmg ;  it  likewise  gae  twa  or  three  melancho- 
ly yowls,  and  then  ceased.  Robin  Dodds  was  con- 
vinced it  was  his  son's  dog ;  but  it  was  at  such  a  dis- 
tance, being  about  twa  miles  off,  that  he  couldna  be 
sure  where  it  was,  or  which  o'  the  hills  on  the  oppo- 
site side  of  the  glen  it  was  on.  The  second  night  he 
kept  watch  on  the  Path  Know,  a  hill  which  he  sup- 
posed the  howling  o'  the  dog  cam  frae.  But  that  hill  be- 
ing all  suiTOunded  to  the  west  and  north  by  tremendous 
ravines  and  cataracts,  he  heard  nothing  o'  the  dog.  In 
the  course  of  the  night,  however,  he  saw,  or  fancied  he 

VOL.  I.  B 


26      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

saw,  a  momentary  glimmer  o'  light,  in  the  depth  of  the 
gi-eat  gulf  immediately  below  where  he  sat ;  and  that 
at  three  diiFerent  times,  always  in  the  same  place.  He 
now  became  convinced  that  the  remains  o'  his  son  were 
in  the  bottom  of  the  linn,  a  place  which  he  conceived 
inaccessible  to  man  ;  it  being  so  deep  from  the  summit 
where  he  stood,  that  the  roar  o'  the  waterfall  only 
reached  liis  ears  now  and  then  wi'  a  loud  whush  /  as  if 
it  had  been  a  sound  wandering  across  the  hills  by  it- 
sell.  But  sae  intent  was  Robin  on  this  Willie-an-the- 
wisp  light,  that  he  took  landmarks  frae  the  ae  summit 
to  the  other,  to  make  sure  o'  the  place ;  and  as  soon 
as  daylight  came,  he  set  about  j&nding  a  passage  down 
to  the  bottom  of  the  linn.  He  effected  this  by  coming 
to  the  foot  of  the  linn,  and  tracing  its  course  backward, 
sometimes  wading  in  water,  and  sometimes  clambering 
over  rocks,  till  at  length,  with  a  beating  heart,  he  reach- 
ed the  very  spot  where  he  had  seen  the  light ;  and  in 
the  grey  o*  the  morning,  he  perceived  something  lying 
there  that  differed  in  colour  from  the  iron-hued  stones, 
and  rocks,  of  which  the  linn  was  composed.  He  was 
in  great  astonishment  what  this  could  be ;  for,  as  he 
came  closer  on  it,  he  saw  it  had  no  likeness  to  the  dead 
body  of  a  man,  but  rather  appeared  to  be  a  heap  o'  bed- 
clothes. And  what  think  you  it  turned  out  to  be  ? 
for  I  see  ye're  glowring  as  your  een  were  gaun  to  loup 
out — Just  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  strong  mineral 


ROB  DODDS.  37 

well ;  or  what  the  doctors  ca'  a  callybit  spring,  a* 
boustered  about  wi'  heaps  o'  soapy,  limy  kind  o'  stuff, 
that  it  seems  had  thi'own  out  fiery  vapours  i'  the  night- 
time. 

"  However,  Robin,  being  unable  to  do  ony  mair  in 
the  way  o'  searching,  had  now  nae  hope  left  but  in 
finding  his  dead  son  by  some  kind  o'  supernatural 
means.  Sae  he  determined  to  watch  a  third  night, 
and  that  at  the  very  identical  peat  stack  where  it  had 
been  said  his  son's  staff  was  found.  He  did  sa«  ;  and 
about  midnight,  ere  ever  he  wist,  the  dog  set  up  a 
howl  close  beside  him.  He  called  on  him  by  his 
name,  and  the  dog  came,  and  fawned  on  his  old  ac- 
quaintance, and  whimpered,  and  whinged,  and  made 
sic  a  wark,  as  could  hardly  hae  been  trowed.  Robin 
keepit  baud  o'  him  a'  the  night,  and  fed  him  wi'  pieces 
o'  bread,  and  then  as  soon  as  the  sun  rose,  he  let  liim 
gang ;  and  the  poor  affectionate  creature  went  straight 
to  liis  dead  master,  who,  after  all,  was  lying  in  a  little 
green  spritty  hollow,  not  above  a  musket-shot  from 
the  peat  stack.  This  rendered  the  whole  affair  more 
mysterious  than  ever ;  for  Robin  Dodds  himself,  and 
above  twenty  men  beside,  could  all  have  made  oath 
that  they  had  looked  into  that  place  again  and  again, 
so  minutely,  that  a  dead  bird  could  not  have  been  there 
without  their  having  seen  it.  However,  there  the  body 
of  the  youth  was  gotten,  after  having  been  lost  for  the 


28       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

long  space  of  ten  weeks ;  and  not  in  a  state  of  gi-eat 
decay  neither,  for  it  rather  appeared  swollen,  as  if  it 
had  been  lying  among  water. 

"  Conjecture  was  now  driven  to  great  extremities 
in  accounting  for  all  these  circumstances.  It  was  ma- 
nifest to  every  one,  that  the  body  had  not  been  all  the 
time  in  that  place.  But  then,  where  had  it  been  ?  or 
what  could  have  been  the  reasons  for  concealing  it  ? 
These  were  the  puzzling  considerations.  There  were 
a  hunder  different  things  suspectit ;  and  mony  o'  them, 
I  dare  say,  a  hunder  miles  frae  the  truth ;  but  on  the 
whole,  Linton  was  sair  lookit  down  on,  and  almaist 
perfectly  abhoned  by  the  country ;  for  it  was  weel 
kenn  d  that  he  had  been  particulaily  churlish  and  se- 
vere on  the  young  man  at  a'  times,  and  seemed  to  have 
a  peculiar  dislike  to  him.  An  it  hadna  been  the  wife, 
wha  was  a  kind  considerate  sort  of  a  body,  if  Tam  had 
gotten  his  will,  it  was  reckoned  he  wad  hae  hungered 
the  lad  to  dead.  After  that,  Linton  left  the  place,  and 
gaed  away,  I  watna  where  ;  and  the  country,  I  believe, 
came  gayan  near  to  the  truth  o'  the  story  at  last : 

"  There  was  a  girl  in  the  Birkhill  house  at  the  time, 
whether  a  daughter  o'  Tarn's,  or  no,  I  hae  forgot, 
though  I  think  otherwise.  However,  she  durstna  for 
her  life  tell  a'  she  kenn'd  as  lang  as  the  investigation 
was  gaun  on ;  but  it  at  last  spunkit  out  that  Rob 
Dodds  had  got  hame  safe  eneugh ;  and  that  Tam  got 


ROB  DODDS.  29 

into  a  great  rage  at  him,  because  he  had  not  brought  a 
burden  o'  peats,  there  being  none  in  the  house.     The 
youth  excused  himself  on  the  score  of  fatigue  and 
hunger ;  but  Tam  swore  at  him,  and  said,  '  The  deil 
be  in  yom'  teeth,  gin  tliey  shall  break  bread,  till  ye 
gang  back  out  to  the  hill-head  and  bring  a  burden  o' 
peats!'     Dodds  refused;  on  which  Tam  struck  him, 
and  forced  him  away ;  and  he  went  crying  and  greet- 
ing out  at  the  door,  but  never  came  back.     She  also 
told,  that  after  poor  Rob  was  lost,  Tam  tried  several 
times  to  get  at  his  dog  to  fell  it  with  a  stick ;  but  the 
creatm'e  was  tenified  for  hira,  and  made  its  escape.  It 
was  therefore  thought,  and  indeed  there  was   little 
doubt,  that  Rob,  through  fatigue  and  hunger,  and  reck- 
less of  death  from  the  way  he  had  been  guidit,  went 
out  to  the  hill,  and  died  at  the  peat  stack,  the  mouth 
of  which  was  a  shelter  from  the  drift-wind  ;  and  that 
his  cruel  master,  conscious  o'  the  way  in  which  he  had 
used  him,  and  dreading  skaith,  had  trailed  away  the 
body,  and  sunk  it  in  some  pool  in  these  unfathomable 
linns,  or  otherwise  concealed  it,  wi'  the  intention,  that 
the  world  might  never  ken  whether  the  lad  was  ac- 
tually dead,  or  had  absconded.    If  it  had  not  been  for 
the  dog,  from  which  it  appears  he  had  been  unable  to 
conceal  it,  and  the  old  man's  perseverance,  to  whose 
search  there  appeared  to  be  no  end,  it  is  probable  he 
would  never  have  laid  the  body  in  a  place  wliere  it 


30         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

could  have  been  found.  But  if  he  had  allowed  it  to 
remain  in  the  first  place  of  concealment,  it  might  have 
been  discovered  by  means  of  the  dog,  and  the  inten- 
tional concealment  of  the  corpse  would  then  have  been 
obvious  ;  so  that  Linton  all  that  time  could  not  be  quite 
at  his  ease,  and  it  was  no  wonder  he  attempted  to  fell 
the  dog.  But  where  the  body  could  have  been  depo- 
sited, that  the  faitliful  animal  was  never  discovered  by 
the  searchers,  during  the  day,  for  the  space  of  ten 
weeks,  baffled  a'  the  conjectures  that  ever  could  be 
made. 

''  The  two  old  people,  tJie  lad's  father  and  mother, 
never  got  over  then*  loss.  They  never  held  up  their 
heads  again,  nor  joined  in  society  ony  man-,  except  in 
attending  divine  worship.  It  might  be  truly  said  o' 
them,  that  they  spent  the  few  years  that  they  sur^dved 
their  son  in  constant  prayer  and  humiliation  ;  but  they 
soon  died,  short  while  after  ane  anither.  As  for  Tam 
Linton,  he  left  this  part  of  the  country,  as  I  told  you  ; 
but  it  was  said  there  was  a  curse  hung  ower  liim  and 
his  a'  his  life,  and  that  he  never  mair  did  weel. — That 
was  the  year,  master,  on  which  our  burn  was  dammed 
wi'  the  dead  sheep  ;  and  in  fixing  the  date,  you  see,  I 
hae  been  led  into  a  lang  story,  and  am  just  nae  farther 
wi'  the  main  point  than  when  I  began." 

"  I  wish,  from  my  heart,  Andrew,  that  you  would 
try  to  fix  a  great  many  old  dates  in  the  same  manner ; 


ROB  DODDS.  31 

for  I  confess  I  am  more  interested  in  yom-  lang  stories, 
than  in  either  your  lang  prayers,  or  your  lang  sermons 
about  repentance  and  amendment.  But  pray,  you 
were  talking  of  the  judgments  that  overtook  Tarn  Lin- 
ton— ^Was  that  the  same  Tam  Linton  that  was  preci-' 
pitated  from  the  Brand  Law  by  the  break  of  a  snaw- 
wreath,  and  he  and  all  his  sheep  jammed  mto  the  hi- 
deous gulf,  called  the  Grey  Mai'e's  Tail  ?" 

"  The  very  same,  sir ;  and  that  might  be  accountit 
ane  o'  the  first  judgments  that  befell  him ;  for  there 
were  many  of  liis  ain  sheep  in  the  flock.  Tam  assert- 
ed all  liis  life,  that  he  went  mto  the  linn  along  with 
his  hirsel,  but  no  man  ever  believed  him ;  for  there 
was  not  one  of  the  sheep  came  out  alive,  and  how  it 
was  possible  for  the  carl  to  have  come  safe  out,  nae- 
body  could  see.  It  was,  indeed,  quite  impossible  ;  for 
it  had  been  such  a  break  of  snaw  as  had  scarcely  ever 
been  seen.  Tlie  gulf  was  crammed  sae  fu',  that  ane 
could  hae  gane  ower  it  like  a  pendit  brig ;  and  no  a 
single  sheep  could  be  gotten  out,  either  dead  or  li- 
ving. When  the  thaw  came,  the  bum  wrought  a  pass- 
age for  itself  below  the  snaw,  but  the  arch  stood  till 
summer.  I  have  heard  my  father  oft  describe  the  ap- 
pearance of  that  vault  as  he  saw  it  on  his  way  from 
Moffat  fair.  Ane  hadna  gane  far  into  it,  he  said,  till  it 
turned  darkish,  like  an  ill-hued  twilight ;  and  sic  a  like 
arch  o'  carnage  he  never  saw !    There  were  limbs  o' 


32       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

sheep  hinging  in  a'  directions,  the  snaw  was  wedged 
sae  firm.  Some  entire  carcasses  hung  by  the  neck, 
some  by  a  spauld  ;  then  there  was  a  haill  forest  o'  legs 
sticking  out  in  ae  place,  and  horns  in  another,  terribly 
mangled  and  broken ;  and  it  was  a'thegither  sic  a 
frightsome-looking  place,  that  he  was  blithe  to  get 
out  o't  again." 

After  looking  at  the  sheep,  tasting  old  Janet's  best 
kebbuck,  and  oatmeal  cakes,  and  preeing  the  whisky 
bottle,  the  young  farmer  again  set  out  tlu-ough  the 
tleep  snow,  on  his  way  home.  But  Andrew  made  him 
promise,  that  if  the  weather  did  not  amend,  he  would 
come  back  in  a  few  days  and  see  how  the  poor  sheep 
were  coming  on  ;  and,  as  an  inducement,  promised  to 
tell  him  a  great  many  old  anecdotes  of  the  shepherd's 
Hfe. 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  33 


CHAPTER  II. 

MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE. 

One  of  those  events  that  have  made  the  deepest 
impression  on  the  shepherds'  minds  for  a  century  by- 
gone,, seems  to  have  been  the  fate  of  Mr  Adamson, 
who  was  tenant  in  Laverhope  for  the  space  of  twenty- 
seven  yeai's.  It  stands  in  their  calendar  as  an  era 
from  which  to  date  summer  floods,  water  spouts,  hail 
and  thunder-storms,  &c. ;  and  appears  from  tradition 
to  have  been  attended  with  some  awful  circumstances, 
expressive  of  divine  vengeance.  This  Adamson  is  re- 
presented, as  having  been  a  man  of  an  ungovernable 
temper — of  irritability  so  extreme,  that  no  person 
could  be  for  a  moment  certain  to  what  excesses  he 
might  be  hurried.  He  was  otherwise  accounted  a 
good  and  upright  man,  and  a  sincere  Chi-istian  ;  but  in 
these  outbreakings  of  temper  he  often  committed  acts 
of  cmelty  and  injustice,  for  which  any  good  man 
olight  to  have  been  ashamed.  Among  other  qualities, 
he  had  an  obliging  disposition,  there  being  few  to 
B  2 


34j  the  SHEi'HEaD's  CALENDAR. 

whom  a  poor  man  would  sooner  have  applied  in  a 
strait.  Accordingly,  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  as- 
sisting a  less  wealthy  neighbom*  of  his  with  a  little 
credit  for  many  years.  This  man's  name  was  Irvine, 
and  though  he  had  a  number  of  rich  relations,  he  was 
never  out  of  difficulties.  Adamson,  from  some  whim 
or  caprice,  sued  this  poor  farmer  for  a  few  hundred 
merks,  taking  legal  steps  against  liim,  even  to  the  very 
last  measures  short  of  poinding  and  imprisonment. 
Irvine  paid  little  attention  to  this,  taking  it  for  granted 
that  his  neighbour  took  these  steps  only  for  the  pur- 
pose of  inducing  his  debtor's  friends  to  come  forward 
and  support  him. 

It  happened  one  day  about  this  period,  that  a  thought- 
less boy,  belonging  to  Irvine's  faim,  hwited  Adamson  s 
cattle  in  a  way  that  gave  gi'eat  offence  to  their  owner, 
on  which  the  two  farmers  differed,  and  some  hard 
words  passed  between  them.  The  next  day  Irvine 
was  seized  and  throwTi  into  jail ;  and  shortly  after,  his 
effects  were  poinded,  and  sold  by  auction  for  ready 
money.  They  were  consequently  thrown  away,  as 
the  neighbours,  not  having  been  forewarned,  were 
wholly  unprovided  with  ready  money,  and  unable  to 
purchase  at  any  price.  Mrs  Irvine  came  to  the  en- 
raged creditor  with  a  child  in  her  amis,  and  implored 
him  to  put  ojff  the  sale  for  a  month,  that  she  might 
try  what  could  be  done  amongst  her  friends  to  prevent 


MB  ADAMSON  OF  LAVE  RH OPE.  35 

a  wreck  so  irretrievable.  He  was  at  one  time  on  the 
very  point  of  yielding ;  but  some  bitter  recollections 
coming  over  his  mind  at  the  moment,  stimulated  his 
spleen  against  her  husband,  and  he  resolved  that  the 
sale  should  go  on.  William  Camiders  of  Grradiston 
heai'd  the  following  dialogue  between  them ;  and  he 
said  that  his  heait  almost  trembled  within  him ;  for 
Mrs  Irvine  was  a  violent  woman,  and  her  eloquence 
did  more  harm  than  good. 

"  Are  ye  really  gaun  to  act  the  part  of  a  devil,  the 
day,  Mr  Adamson,  and  tiu-n  me  and  thae  bairns  out  to 
the  bare  high-road,  helpless  as  we  are  ?  Oh,  man,  if 
your  bowels  binna  seared  in  hell-fire  already,  take  some 
compassion  ;  for  an  ye  dinna,  they  ivill  be  seared  afore 
baith  men  and  angels  yet,  till  that  hard  and  cruel  heart 
o'  yours  be  nealed  to  an  izle." 

"  I'm  gaun  to  act  nae  part  of  a  devil^  Mrs  Irvine ; 
I'm  only  gaun  to  take  my  ain  in  the  only  way  I  can 
get  it.  I'm  no  baith  gaun  to  tine  my  siller,  and  hae 
my  beasts  abused  into  the  bargain." 

"  Ye  sail  neither  lose  plack  nor  bawbee  o'  your 
siller,  man,  if  ye  will  gie  me  but  a  month  to  make  a 
shift  for  it — I  swear  to  you,  ye  sail  neither  lose,  nor 
rae  the  deed.  But  if  ye  winna  grant  me  that  wee 
wee  while,  when  the  bread  of  a  haill  family  depends 
on  it,  ye're  waur  than  ony  deil  that's  yammering  and 
cursing  i'  the  bottomless  pit." 


36         THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

"  Keep  your  ravings  to  yoursell,  Mrs  Irvine,  for  I 
hae  made  up  my  mind  what  I'm  to  do ;  and  I'll  do  it ; 
sae  it's  needless  for  ye  to  pit  yom'sell  into  a  bleeze ; 
for  the  surest  promisers  are  aye  the  slackest  payers. 
It  isna  likely  that  your  bad  language  will  gar  me  alter 
my  pui-pose." 

"  If  that  be  your  purpose,  Mr  Adamson,  and  if  you 
put  that  pui*po8e  in  execution,  I  wadna  change  condi- 
tions wi'  you  the  day  for  ten  thousand  times  a'  the 
gear  ye  are  worth.  Ye're  gaun  to  do  the  thing  that 
ye'll  repent  only  aince — for  a'  the  time  that  ye  hae  to 
exist  baith  in  this  world  and  the  neist,  and  that's  a 
lang  lang  look  forrit  and  ayon3.  Ye  have  assisted  a 
poor  honest  family  for  the  purpose  of  taking  them  at 
a  disadvantage,  and  cnishing  them  to  beggars ;  and 
when  ane  thinks  o'  that,  what  a  heart  you  must  hae  I 
Ye  hae  fii*st  put  my  poor  man  in  prison,  a  place  where 
he  little  thought,  and  less  deserved,  ever  to  be;  and 
now  ye  aie  reaving  his  sackless  family  out  o'  their  last 
bit  o'  bread.  Look  at  this  bit  bonny  innocent  thing 
in  my  arms,  how  it  is  smiling  on  ye  !  Look  at  a'  the 
rest  standing  leaning  against  the  wa's,  ilka  ane  wi'  his 
een  fixed  on  you  by  way  o'  imploring  yom*  pity  !  If 
ye  reject  thae  looks,  ye'll  see  them  again  in  some  try- 
ing moments,  that  will  bring  this  ane  back  to  your 
mind ;  ye  will  see  them  i'  your  dreams ;  ye  will  see 
them  on  your  death-bed,  and  ye  will  think  ye  see 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAYEUHOPE.  37 

them  gleaming  on  ye  through  the  reek  o'  hell, — but  it 
wiima  be  them." 

"  Haud  your  tongue,  woman,  for  ye  make  me  feared 
to  hear  ye/* 

"  Ay,  but  better  be  feared  in  time,  than  torfelled 
for  ever !  Better  conquess  yom'  bad  humour  for  aince, 
than  be  conquessed  for  it  through  sae  mony  lang  ages. 
Ye  pretend  to  be  a  religious  man,  Mr  Adamson,  and 
a  gi-eat  deal  mail*  sae  than  your  neighbours — do  you 
think  that  religion  teaches  you  acts  o'  cruelty  like  this  ? 
Will  ye  hae  the  face  to  laieel  afore  your  Maker  the 
night,  and  pray  for  a  blessing  on  you  and  yours,  and  that 
He  will  forgive  you  your  debts  as  you  forgive  your 
debtors  ?  I  hae  nae  doubt  but  ye  will.  But  aih  I  how 
sic  an  appeal  will  heap  the  coals  o'  divine  vengeance 
on  your  head,  and  tighten  the  belts  o'  burning  yettlin 
ower  your  hard  heart !  Come  fonit,  bairns,  and  speak 
for  yoursells,  ilk  ane  o'  ye." 

"  O,  Maister  Adamson,  ye  maunna  turn  my  father 
and  mother  out  o'  their  house  and  their  fai'm ;  or  what 
think  ye  is  to  come  o'  us  ?"  said  Thomas. 

No  consideration,  however,  was  strong  enough  t^ 
turn  Adamson  from  his  purpose.  The  sale  went  on  ; 
and  still,  on  the  calling  off  of  every  favourite  animal, 
Mrs  Irvine  renewed  her  anathemas. 

"  Gentlemen,  this  is  the  mistress's  favourite  cow, 
and  gives  thuteen  pints  of  milk  every  day.     She  is 


38       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

valued  in  my  roup-roU  at  fifteen  pounds ;  but  we  sliall 
begin  her  at  ten.  Does  any  body  say  ten  pounds  for 
this  excellent  cow  ?  ten  pounds — ten  pounds  ?  No- 
body says  ten  pounds  ?  Gentlemen,  this  is  extraor- 
dinary !  Money  is  surely  a  scarce  article  here  to-day. 
Well,  then,  does  any  gentleman  say  five  pounds  to 
liegin  this  excellent  cow  that  gives  twelve  pints  of 
milk  daily  ?  Five  pounds — only  five  pounds  ! — No- 
body bids  five  pounds  ?  Well,  the  stock  must  posi- 
tively be  sold  without  reserve.  Ten  shillings  for  the 
cow — ten  sliillings — ten  shillings — Will  nobody  bid 
ten  shillings  to  set  the  sale  a-going  ?" 

"  I'll  gie  five-and-twenty  shilluigs  for  her,"  cried 
Adamson. 

"  Thank  you,  sir.  One  pound  five — one  pound  five, 
and  just  a-going.  Once — twice— thrice.  Mr  Adam- 
son,  one  pound  five." 

Mrs  Irvine  came  forward,  drowned  in  tears,  with 
the  babe  in  her  arms,  and  patting  the  cow,  she  said, 
"  Ah,  poor  lady  Bell,  this  is  my  last  sight  o'  you, 
and  the  last  time  I'll  clap  yom*  honest  side  !  And  hae 
we  really  been  deprived  o'  your  support  for  the  mi- 
serable sum  o'  five-and-twenty  shillings? — ^my  curse 
light  on  the  head  o'  him  that  has  done  it  I  In  the  name 
of  my  destitute  bairns  I  curse  him  ;  and  does  he  think 
that  a  mother's  cm-se  will  sink  fizzenless  to  the  ground  ? 
Na,  na !    I  see  an  ee  that's  looking  down  here  in  pity 


Mil  ADAJISON  OF  LAYER  HOPE.         39 

and  in  anger ;  and  I  see  a  Iiand  that's  gathering  the 
bolts  o'  Heaven  thegither,  for  some  pm-pose  that  I 
could  divine,  but  dauma  utter.  But  that  hand  is  un- 
eiTing,  and  where  it  throws  the  bolt,  there  it  will  stiike. 
Fareweel,  poor  beast  I  ye  hae  supplied  us  wi'  mony  a 
meal,  but  ye  will  never  supply  us  wi'  another." 

This  sale  at  Kukheugh  was  on  the  11th  of  July. 
On  the  day  following,  Mr  Adamson  went  up  to  the 
folds  in  the  hope,  to  shear  his  sheep,  with  no  fewer 
than  twenty-five  attendants,  consisting  of  all  liis  own 
servants  and  cottars,  and  about  as  many  neighbouring 
shepherds  whom  he  had  collected ;  it  being  customary 
for  the  farmers  to  assist  one  another  reciprocally  on 
these  occasions.  Adamson  continued  more  than  usu- 
ally capricious  and  unreasonable  all  that  forenoon.  He 
was  discontented  with  himself ;  and  when  a  man  is  ill 
pleased  with  himself,  he  is  seldom  well  pleased  with 
others.  He  seemed  altogether  left  to  the  influences  of 
.the  Wicked  One,  running  about  in  a  rage,  finding  fault 
with  every  thing,  and  every  person,  and  at  times  cur- 
sing bitterly,  a  practice  to  which  he  was  not  addicted ; 
80  that  the  sheep-shearing,  that  used  to  be  a  scene  of 
liilarity  among  so  many  young  and  old  shepherds,  lads, 
lasses,  wives,  and  callants,  was  that  day  turned  intx) 
one  of  gloom  and  dissatisfaction. 

After  a  number  of  other  provoking  outrages,  Adam- 
son at  length,  with  the  buisting-iron  which  he  held  in 


40         THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

his  hand,  struck  a  dog  belonging  to  one  of  his  own 
shepherd  boys,  till  the  poor  animal  fell  senseless  on  the 
ground,  and  lay  sprawling  as  in  the  last  extremity. 
This  brought  matters  to  a  point  which  tlireatened  no- 
thing but  anarchy  and  confusion ;  for  every  shepherd's 
blood  boiled  with  indignation,  and  each  almost  wished 
in  his  heart  that  the  dog  had  been  his  own,  that  he 
might  have  retaliated  on  the  tyrant.  At  the  time  the 
blow  was  struck,  the  boy  was  tending  one  of  the  fold- 
doors,  and  perceiving  the  plight  of  his  faithful  animal, 
he  ran  to  its  assistance,  lifted  it  in  his  arms,  and  hold- 
ing it  up  to  recover  its  breath,  he  wept  and  lamented 
over  it  most  piteously.  "  My  poor  little  Nimble !" 
he  cried ;  "  I  am  feared  that  mad  body  has  killed  ye, 
and  then  what  am  I  to  do  wanting  ye  ?  I  wad  ten 
times  rather  he  had  strucken  mysell !" 

He  had  scarce  said  the  words  ere  his  master  caught 
him  by  the  hair  of  the  head  with  the  one  hand,  and  be- 
gan to  drag  him  about,  while  with  the  other  he  struck 
him  most  unmercifully.  When  the  boy  left  the  fold- 
door,  the  unshorn  sheep  broke  out,  and  got  away  to 
the  hill  among  the  lambs  and  the  clippies;  and  the  far- 
mer being  in  one  of  his  "  mad  tantrums,"  as  the  ser- 
vants called  them,  the  mischance  had  almost  put  him 
beside  himself;  and  that  boy,  or  man  either,  is  in  a 
ticklish  case  who  is  in  the  hands  of  an  enraged  person 
far  above  him  in  strength. 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  41 

The  sheep-shearers  paused,  and  the  girls  screamed, 
when  they  saw  their  master  lay  hold  of  the  boy.  But 
Robert  Johnston,  a  shepherd  from  an  adjoining  farm, 
flung  the  sheep  from  his  knee,  made  the  shears  ring 
against  the  fold- dike,  and  in  an  instant  had  the  farmer 
by  both  wrists,  and  these  he  held  with  such  a  grasp, 
that  he  took  the  power  out  of  his  arms ;  for  Johnston 
was  as  far  above  the  farmer  in  might,  as  the  latter  was 
above  the  boy. 

"  Mr  Adamson,  what  are  ye  about  ?"  he  cried ; 
"  hae  ye  tint  your  reason  a'thegither,  that  ye  are  gaun 
on  rampauging  like  a  madman  that  gate  ?  Ye  hae  done 
the  thing,  sir,  in  your  ill-timed  rage,  that  ye  ought  to 
be  ashamed  of  baith  afore  God  and  man." 

"  Are  ye  for  fighting,  Rob  Johnston  ?"  said  the 
farmer,  struggling  to  free  himself.  "  Do  ye  want  to 
hae  a  fight,  lad  ?  Because  if  ye  do,  I'll  maybe  gie  you 
enough  o'  that." 

"  Na,  sir,  I  dinna  want  to  fight ;  but  I  winna  let  you 
fight  either,  unless  wi'  ane  that's  your  equal ;  sae  gie 
ower  spraughling,  and  stand  still  till  I  speak  to  ye ;  for 
an  ye  winna  stand  to  hear  reason,  I'll  gar  ye  lie  till  ye 
hear  it.  Do  ye  consider  what  ye  hae  been  doing  even 
now  ?  Do  ye  consider  that  ye  hae  been  striking  a  poor 
orphan  callant,  wha  has  neither  father  nor  mother  to 
protect  him,  or  to  right  his  wrangs  ?  and  a'  for  naething, 
but  a  bit  start  o'  natural  affection  ?    How  wad  ye  like 


4«2  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

sii',  an  ony  body  were  to  guide  a  bairn  o'  yom's  that 
gate  ?  and  ye  as  little  ken  what  they  are  to  come  to 
afore  their  deaths,  as  that  boy's  parents  did  when  they 
were  rearing  and  fondling  ower  him.  Fie  for  shame, 
Mr  Adamson  I  fie  for  shame !  Ye  first  strak  his  poor 
dmnb  brute,  which  was  a  greater  sin  than  the  tither, 
for  it  didna  ken  what  ye  were  striking  it  for ;  and  then, 
because  the  callant  ran  to  assist  the  only  creature  he 
has  on  the  earth,  and  I'm  feared  the  only  true  and 
faitJbfu'  friend  beside,  ye  claught  him  by  the  hair  o'  the 
head,  and  fell  to  the  dadding  him  as  he  war  your  slave  ! 
Od,  sir,  my  blood  rises  at  sic  an  act  o'  cruelty  and  in- 
justice ;  and  gin  I  thought  ye  worth  my  while,  I  wad 
tan  ye  like  a  pellet  for  it." 

The  farmer  struggled  and  fought  so  viciously,  that 
Johnston  was  obliged  to  tlirow  him  down  twice  over, 
somewhat  roughly,  and  hold  him  by  main  force.  But 
on  laying  him  down  the  second  time,  Johnston  said, 
"  Now,  sir,  I  just  tell  ye,  that  ye  deserve  to  hae  your 
banes  weel  throoshen ;  but  ye're  nae  match  for  me, 
and  rU  scorn  to  lay  a  tip  on  ye.  I'll  leave  ye  to  Him 
who  has  declaimed  himself  the  stay  and  shield  of  the 
ca-phan ;  and  gin  some  visible  testimony  o'  his  displea- 
sure dinna  come  ower  ye  for  the  abusing  of  his  ward, 
I  am  right  sair  mista'en." 

Adamson,  finding  himself  fairly  mastered,  and  that 
no  one  seemed  disposed  to  take  his  part.,  was  obliged 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  43 

to  give  in,  and  went  sullenly  away  to  tend  the  hirsel 
that  stood  beside  the  fold.  In  the  meantime  the  sheep- 
sheaiing  went  on  as  before,  with  a  little  more  of  hilarity 
and  glee.  It  is  the  busmess  of  the  lasses  to  take  the 
ewes,  and  carry  them  from  the  fold  to  the  clippers ; 
and  now  might  be  seen  every  young  shepherd's  sweet- 
heart, or  favourite,  waiting  beside  him,  helping  him  to 
clip,  or  holding  the  ewes  by  the  hind  legs  to  make 
them  lie  easy,  a  great  matter  for  the  fuitherance  of  the 
operator.  Others  again,  who  thought  themselves 
slighted,  or  loved  a  joke,  would  continue  to  act  in  a 
different  manner,  and  plague  the  youths  by  bringing 
them  such  sheep  as  it  was  next  to  impossible  to  clip. 

"  Aih,  Jock  lad,  I  hae  brought  you  a  grand  ane  this 
time !  Ye  will  clank  the  shears  ower  her,  and  be  the 
first  done  o'  them  a  !" 

"  My  truly,  Jessy,  but  ye  hae  gi'en  me  ane !  I  de- 
clare tlie  beast  is  woo  to  the  cloots  and  the  een  holes ; 
and  afore  I  get  the  fleece  broken  up,  the  rest  will  be 
done.  Ah,  Jessy,  Jessy !  ye're  worldng  for  a  mischief 
the  day ;  and  ye'll  maybe  get  it." 

"  She's  a  braw  sonsie  sheep,  Jock.  I  ken  ye  like 
to  hae  your  arms  weel  filled.  She'll  amaist  fill  them 
as  weel  as  Tibby  Tod." 

"  There's  for  it  now  I  there's  for  it !  What  care  I 
for  Tibby  Tod,  dame  ?  Ye  are  the  most  jealous  elf, 
Jessy,  that  ever  drew  coat  ower  head.     But  wha  was't 


44       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

that  sat  half  a  night  at  the  side  of  a  grey  stane  wi'  a 
crazy  cooper  ?  And  wha  was't  that  gae  the  poor  pre- 
centor the  whiskings,  and  reduced  a'  liis  shai'ps  to 
downright  flats  ?  An  ye  cast  up  Tibby  Tod  ony  mair 
to  me,  I'll  tell  something  that  will  gar  thae  wild  een 
reel  i'  your  head,  Mistress  Jessy." 

"  Wow,  Jock,  but  I'm  unco  wae  for  ye  now.  Poor 
fellow !  It's  really  very  hard  usage !  If  ye  canna 
clip  the  ewe,  man,  gie  me  her,  and  I'll  tak  her  to  ani- 
tlier ;  for  I  canna  bide  to  see  ye  sae  sair  put  about.  I 
winna  bring  ye  anither  Tibby  Tod  the  day,  take  my 
word  on  it.  The  neist  shall  be  a  real  May  Henderson 
o'  Firthhope-cleuch — ane,  ye  ken,  wi'  lang  legs,  and  a 
good  lamb  at  her  fit." 

"  Gudesake,  lassie,  baud  your  tongue,  and  dinna 
affront  baith  yoursell  and  me.  Ye  are  fit  to  gar  ane's 
cheek  bum  to  the  bane.  I'm  fairly  quashed,  and  daur- 
na  say  anither  word.  Let  us  therefore  hae  let-a-be  for 
let-a-be,  which  is  good  bairns's  greement,  till  after  the 
close  o'  the  day  sky ;  and  then  Til  tell  ye  my  mind." 

"  Ay,  but  whilk  o'  your  minds  will  ye  tell  me, 
Jock?  For  ye  will  be  in  five  or  six  different  anes 
afore  that  time.  Ane,  to  ken  your  mind,  wad  need  to 
be  tauld  it  every  hour  o'  the  day,  and  then  cast  up  the 
account  at  the  year's  end.  But  how  wad  she  settle  it 
then,  Jock  ?    I  fancy  she  wad  hae  to  multiply  ilk  yeai-'s 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  45 

minds  by  dozens,  and  divide  by  four,  and  then  we  a' 
ken  what  wad  be  the  quotient." 

"  Aih  wow,  sirs  I  heard  ever  ony  o'  ye  the  like  o' 
that  ?  For  three  things  the  sheep-fauld  is  disquieted, 
and  there  are  four  which  it  cannot  bear." 

"  And  what  are  they,  Jock  ?" 

"  A  witty  wench,  a  woughing  dog,  a  waukit-woo'd 
wedder,  and  a  pair  o'  shambling  shears." 

After  this  manner  did  the  gleesome  chat  go  on,  now 
that  the  surly  goodman  had  withdrawn  from  the  scene. 
But  this  was  but  one  couple  ;  every  pair  being  enga- 
ged according  to  their  biasses,  and  after  their  kind — 
some  settling  the  knotty  points  of  divinity ;  others 
telling  auld-warld  stories  about  persecutions,  forays, 
and  fairy  raids ;  and  some  whispering,  in  half  sen- 
tences, the  soft  breathings  of  pastoral  love. 

But  the  farmer's  bad  humour,  in  the  meanwhile 
was  only  smothered,  not  extinguished ;  and,  like  a 
flame  that  is  kept  down  by  an  overpowering  weight  of 
fuel,  wanted  but  a  breath  to  rekindle  it ;  or  like  a  bar- 
rel of  gunpowder,  that  the  smallest  spark  will  set  in  a 
blaze.  That  spark  imfortunately  fell  upon  it  too  soon. 
It  came  in  the  form  of  an  old  beggar,  ycleped  Patie 
Maxwell,  a  well-known,  and  generally  a  welcome 
guest,  over  all  that  district.  He  came  to  the  folds  for 
his  annual  present  of  a  fleece  of  wool,  which  had  ne- 
ver before  been  denied  him  ;  and  the  farmer  being  the 


46      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

first  person  he  came  to,  he  approaclied  him,  as  in  re- 
spect bound,  accosting  him  in  his  wonted  obsequious 
way. 

"  Weel,  gTideman,  how's  a'  wi'  ye  the  day  ?"— (No 
answer.) — "  This  will  be  a  thrang  day  w'ye  ?  How 
are  ye  getting  on  wi'  the  clipping  ?" 

"  Nae  the  better  o'  you,  or  the  like  o'  you.  Gang 
away  back  the  gate  ye  came.  What  are  ye  coming 
doiting  up  through  amang  the  sheep  that  gate  for, 
putting  them  a'  tersyversy  ?" 

"  Tut,  gudeman,  what  does  the  sheep  mind  an  auld 
creeping  body  like  me  ?  I  hae  done  nae  ill  to  your 
piclde  sheep  ;  and  as  for  ganging  back  the  road  I  cam, 
I'll  do  that  whan  I  like,  and  no  till  than." 

"  But  I'll  make  you  blithe  to  turn  back,  auld  vaga- 
bond I  Do  ye  imagine  I'm  gaun  to  hae  a'  my  clippers 
and  grippers,  buisters  and  binders,  laid  half  idle,  gaff- 
ing and  giggling  wi'  you  ?" 

"  Why,  then,  speak  like  a  reasonable  man,  and  a 
courteous  Christian,  as  ye  used  to  do,  and  I'se  crack 
wi*  yoursell,  and  no  gang  near  them." 

"  I'll  keep  my  Christian  cracks  for  others  than  auld 
Papist  dogs,  I  trow." 

"  Wha  do  ye  ca'  auld  Papist  dogs,  Mr  Adamson  ? 
— Wha  is  it  that  ye  mean  to  denominate  by  that  fine- 
sounding  title  ?" 

"  Just  you,  and  the  like  o'  ye,  Pate.     It  is  weel 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  47 

ketin'd  that  ye  are  as  rank  a  Papist  as  ever  kissed  a 
crosier,  and  that  ye  were  out  in  the  very  fore-end  o' 
the  unnatural  Rebellion,  in  order  to  subvert  our  reli- 
gion, and  place  a  Popish  tyrant  on  the  throne.  It  is  a 
shame  for  a  Protestant  parish  like  this  to  support  ye, 
and  gie  you  as  liberal  awmosses  as  ye  were  a  Chris- 
tian saint.  For  me,  I  can  tell  you,  ye'll  get  nae  mae 
at  my  hand  ;  nor  nae  rebel  Papist  loun  amang  ye." 

"  Dear  sir,  ye're  surely  no  yoursell  the  day  ?  Ye 
hae  kenn'd  I  professed  the  Catholic  religion  these 
thretty  years — it  was  the  faith  I  was  brought  up  in, 
and  that  in  which  I  shall  dee  ;  and  ye  kenn'd  a*  that 
time  that  I  was  out  in  the  Forty-Five  wi'  Prince 
Charles,  and  yet  ye  never  made  mention  o'  the  facts, 
nor  refused  me  my  awmos,  till  the  day.  But  as  I  hae 
been  obliged  t'ye,  I'll  baud  my  tongue ;  only,  I  wad 
advise  ye  as  a  friend,  whenever  ye  hae  occasion  to 
speak  of  ony  community  of  brother  Christians,  that  ye 
will  in  future  hardly  make  use  o'  siccan  harsh  terms. 
Or,  if  ye  will  do't,  tak  care  wha  ye  use  them  afore, 
and  let  it  no  be  to  the  face  o'  an  auld  veteran." 

"  What,  ye  auld  profane  wafer-eater,  and  worship- 
per of  graven  images,  dare  ye  heave  yom-  pikit  kent  at 
me?" 

"  I  hae  heaved  baith  sword  and  spear  against  mony 
a  better  man  ;  and,  in  the  cause  o'  my  religion,  I'll  do 
it  again." 


48       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

He  was  proceeding,  but  Adamson's  clioler  rising  to 
an  ungoveniable  height,  he  drew  a  race,  and,  running 
against  the  gaberlunzie  with  his  whole  force,  made 
him  fly  heels-over-head  down  the  hill.  The  old  man's 
bonnet  flew  off,  his  meal-pocks  were  scattered  about, 
and  his  mantle,  with  two  or  three  small  fleeces  of  wool 
in  it,  rolled  down  into  the  bum. 

The  servants  observed  what  had  been  done,  and  one 
elderly  shepherd  said,  "  In  troth,  sirs,  our  master  is  no 
himsell  the  day.  He  maun  really  be  looked  to.  It 
appears  to  me,  that  sin'  he  roupit  out  yon  poor  family 
yesterday,  the  Lord  has  ta'en  his  guiding  arm  frae 
about  him,  Rob  Johnston,  ye'U  be  obliged  to  rin  to 
the  assistance  of  the  auld  man." 

"  I'll  ti-ust  the  auld  Jacobite  for  another  shake  wi' 
him  yet,"  said  Rob,  "  afore  I  steer  my  fit ;  for  it 
strikes  me,  if  he  hadna  been  ta'en  unawares,  he  wad 
hardly  hae  been  sae  easily  coupit." 

The  gaberlunzie  was  considerably  astounded  and 
stupified  when  he  first  got  up  his  head ;  but  finding 
all  his  bones  whole,  and  his  old  frame  disencumbered 
of  every  superfluous  load,  he  sprung  to  his  feet,  shook 
his  grey  burly  locks,  and  cursed  the  aggressor  in  the 
name  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  the  Mother  of  our  Lord, 
and  all  the  blessed  Saints  above.  Then  approaching 
him  with  his  cudgel  heaved,  he  warned  him  to  be  on 
his  guard,  or  make  out  of  his  reach,  else  he  would 
8 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  49 

send  him  to  eternity  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  The 
farmer  held  up  his  staff  across,  to  defend  his  head 
against  the  descent  of  old  Patie's  piked  kent,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  made  a  break  in,  with  intent  to  close 
with  his  assailant ;  but,  in  so  doing,  he  held  down  his 
head  for  a  moment,  on  which  the  gaberlunzie  made  a 
swing  to  one  side,  and  lent  Adamson  such  a  blow  over 
the  neck,  or  back  part  of  the  head,  that  he  fell  vio- 
lently on  his  face,  after  ninning  two  or  three  steps 
precipitately  forward.  The  beggar,  whose  eyes  gleam- 
ed with  wild  fury,  wliile  his  grey  locks  floated  over 
them  like  a  winter  cloud  over  two  meteors  of  the 
night,  was  about  to  follow  up  his  blow  with  another 
more  efficient  one  on  his  prostrate  foe  ;  but  the  farm- 
er, perceiving  these  unequivocal  symptoms  of  danger, 
wisely  judged  that  there  was  no  time  to  lose  in  provi- 
ding for  his  own  safety,  and,  rolling  himself  rapidly 
two  or  three  times  over,  he  got  to  his  feet,  and  made 
his  escape,  though  not  before  Patie  had  hit  him  what 
he  called  "  a  stiff  lounder  across  the  rumple." 

The  fai-mer  fled  along  the  brae,  and  the  gaberlunzie 
pursued,  while  the  people  at  the  fold  were  convulsed 
with  laughter.  The  scene  was  highly  picturesque,  for 
the  beggar  could  run  none,  and  still  the  faster  that  he 
essayed  to  run,  he  made  the  less  speed.  But  ever  and 
anon  he  stood  still,  and  cursed  Adamson  in  the  name 
of  one  or  other  of  the  Saints  or  Apostles,  brandishing 

VOL.  I.  c 


50         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

his  cudgel,  and  stamping  with  his  foot.  The  other, 
keeping  still  at  a  small  distance,  pretended  to  laugh 
at  him,  and  at  the  same  time  uttered  such  bitter  abuse 
against  tlie  Papists  in  general,  and  old  Patie  in  parti- 
cular, that,  after  the  latter  had  cursed  himself  into  a 
proper  pitch  of  indignation,  he  always  broke  at  him 
again,  making  vain  efforts  to  reach  him  one  more  blow. 
At  length,  after  chasing  him  by  these  starts  about  half 
a  mile,  the  beggar  returned,  gathered  up  the  scattered 
implements  and  fruits  of  his  occupation,  and  came  to 
the  fold  to  the  busy  group. 

Patie's  general  character  was  that  of  a  patient,  jo- 
cular, sarcastic  old  man,  whom  people  liked,  but  da- 
red not  much  to  contradict ;  but  that  day  his  manner 
and  mien  had  become  so  much  altered,  in  consequence 
of  the  altercation  and  conflict  which  had  just  taken 
place,  that  the  people  were  almost  frightened  to  look 
at  him ;  and  as  for  social  converse,  there  was  none  to 
be  had  with  him.  His  countenance  was  grim,  haughty, 
and  had  something  Satanic  in  its  lines  and  deep  wrinkles ; 
and  ever  and  anon,  as  he  stood  leaning  against  the 
fold,  he  uttered  a  kind  of  hollow  growl,  with  a  broken 
interrupted  sound,  like  a  war-horse  neighing  in  his 
sleep,  and  then  muttered  curses  on  the  farmer. 

The  old  shepherd  before-mentioned,  ventured,  at 
length,  to  caution  him  against  such  profanity,  saying, 
<'  Dear  Patie,  man,  dinna  sin  away  your  soul,  venting 


MR  ADA3IS0N  OF  LAVERHOPE.  51 

siccan  curses  as  these.  They  will  a'  turn  back  on  your 
ain  head  ;  for  what  harm  can  the  cui'ses  of  a  poor  sin- 
fu'  worm  do  to  our  master  ?" 

"  My  curse,  sh',  has  blasted  the  hopes  of  better  men 
than  either  you  or  him,"  said  the  gaberlunzie,  in  an 
earthquake  voice,  and  shivering  \^dth  vehemence  as  he 
spoke.  "  Ye  may  think  the  like  o'  me  can  hae  nae 
power  wi'  Heaven  ;  but  an  I  hae  power  wi'  hell,  it  is 
sufficient  to  cow  ony  that's  here.  I  sanna  brag  what 
effect  my  curse  will  have,  but  I  shall  say  this,  that 
either  yom'  master,  or  ony  o'  his  men,  had  as  good  have 
auld  Patie  Maxwell's  blessing  as  his  curse  ony  time, 
Jacobite  and  Roman  Catholic  though  he  be." 

It  now  became  necessary  to  bring  into  the  fold  the 
sheep  that  the  farmer  was  tending  ;  and  they  were  the 
last  hirsel  that  was  to  shear  that  day.  The  farmer's 
face  was  reddened  with  ill-nature  ;  but  yet  he  now 
appeared  to  be  somewhat  humbled,  by  reflecting  on 
the  ridiculous  figure  he  had  made.  Patie  sat  on  the 
top  of  the  fold-dike,  and  from  the  bold  and  hardy  as- 
severations that  he  made,  he  seemed  disposed  to  pro- 
voke a  dispute  with  any  one  present  who  chose  to 
take  up  the  cudgels.  While  the  shepherds,  under  fire 
of  the  gaberlunzie's  bitter  speeches,  were  sharping 
their  shears,  a  thick  black  cloud  began  to  rear  itself 
over  the  height  to  the  southward,  the  front  of  which 
seemed  to  be  boiling — both  its  outsides  rolling  rapidly 


U.  OF  ILL  ua 


52      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

forward,  and  again  wheeling  in  toward  the  centre.  I 
have  heard  old  Robin  Johnston,  the  stout  young  man 
mentioned  above,  but  who  was  a  very  old  man  when 
I  knew  him,  describe  the  appearance  of  the  cloud  as 
greatly  resembling  a  whirlpool  made  by  the  eddy  of  a 
rapid  tide,  or  flooded  river ;  and  he  declared,  to  his 
dying  day,  that  he  never  saw  aught  in  nature  have  a 
more  ominous  appearance.  The  gaberlunzie  was  the 
first  to  notice  it,  and  drew  the  attention  of  the  rest  tO" 
wards  that  point  of  the  heavens  by  the  following  sin- 
gular and  profane  remark  : — "  Aha,  lads  !  see  what's 
coming  yonder.  Yonder's  Patie  Maxwell's  curse  co- 
ming rowing  and  reeling  on  ye  already ;  and  what 
will  ye  say  an  the  curse  of  God  be  coming  backing 
it?" 

"  Gudesake,  baud  your  tongue,  ye  profane  body ;  ye 
mak  me  feai'ed  to  hear  ye,"  said  one. — "  It's  a  strange 
delusion  to  think  that  a  Papish  can  hae  ony  influence 
wi'  the  Almighty,  either  to  bring  down  his  blessing  or 
his  curse." 

"  Ye  speak  ye  ken  nae  what,  man,"  answered  Pate ; 
"  ye  hae  learned  some  rhames  frae  your  poor  cauld-rife 
Protestant  Whigs  about  Papists,  and  Antichrist,  and 
children  of  perdition ;  yet  it  is  plain  that  ye  haena  ae 
spark  o'  the  life  or  power  o'  religion  in  your  whole 
frame,  and  dinna  ken  either  what's  truth  or  what's  false- 
hood.— Ah !  yonder  it  is  coming,  grim  and  gurly !  Now 


MR  ADAMSON  OP  LAVERHOPE.  53 

I  hae  called  for  it,  and  it  is  coming,  let  me  see  if  a  the 
Protestants  that  are  of  ye  can  order  it  back,  or  pray  it 
away  again !  Down  on  your  knees,  ye  dogs,  and  set 
your  mou's  up  against  it,  like  as  many  spiritual  cannon, 
and  let  me  see  if  you  have  influence  to  turn  aside  ane 
o'  the  hailstanes  that  the  deils  are  playing  at  chucks  wi' 
in  yon  dark  chamber !" 

"  I  wadna  wonder  if  our  clipping  were  cuttit  short," 
said  one. 

"  Na,  but  I  wadna  wonder  if  something  else  were 
cuttit  short,"  said  Patie ;  "  What  will  ye  say  an  some 
o'  your  weazons  be  cuttit  short  ?  HmTaw  !  yonder  it 
comes  !  Now,  there  will  be  sic  a  hurly-burly  in  La- 
verhope  as  never  was  sin'  the  creation  o'  man !" 

The  folds  of  Laverhope  were  situated  on  a  gently 
sloping  plain,  in  what  is  called  "  the  forkings  of  a  buna." 
Laver-bum  runs  to  the  eastward,  and  Widehope-bum 
runs  north,  meeting  the  other  at  a  right  angle,  a  little 
below  the  folds.  It  was  around  the  head  of  this  Wide- 
hope  that  the  cloud  first  made  its  appearance,  and  there 
its  vortex  seemed  to  be  impendmg.  It  descended  lower 
and  lower,  with  uncommon  celerity,  for  the  elements 
were  in  a  turmoil.  The  cloud  laid  fiist  hold  of  one 
height,  then  of  another,  till  at  length  it  closed  over  and 
around  the  pastoral  group,  and  the  dark  hope  had  the 
appearance  of  a  huge  chamber  hung  with  sackcloth. 
The  big  clear  drops  of  rain  soon  began  to  descend,  on 


64      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

which  the  sliepherds  covered  up  the  wool  with  blankets, 
then  huddled  together  under  their  plaids  at  the  side  of 
the  fold,  to  eschew  tlie  speat,  which  they  saw  was  go- 
ing to  be  a  teiTible  one.  Patie  still  kept  undauntedly 
to  the  top  of  the  dike,  and  Mr  Adamson  stood  cower- 
ing at  the  side  of  it,  with  his  plaid  over  his  head,  at  a 
little  distance  from  the  rest.  The  hail  and  rain  min- 
gled, now  began  to  descend  in  a  way  that  had  been  sel- 
dom witnessed ;  but  it  was  apparent  to  them  all  that 
the  tempest  raged  with  much  greater  fury  in  Widehope- 
head  to  the  southwaid Anon  a  whole  volume  of  light- 
ning burst  from  the  bosom  of  the  darkness,  and  quivered 
through  the  gloom,  dazzling  the  eyes  of  every  behold- 
er;—even  old  Maxwell  clapi>ed  both  his  hands  on  his 
eyes  for  a  space ;  a  crash  of  thunder  followed  the  flash, 
that  made  all  the  mountains  chatter,  and  shook  the  fir- 
mament so,  that  the  density  of  the  cloud  was  broken 
up  ;  for,  on  the  instant  that  the  thunder  ceased,  a  rush- 
ing sound  began  in  Widehope,  that  soon  increased  to  a 
loudness  equal  to  the  thunder  itself;  but  it  resembled 
the  noise  made  by  the  sea  in  a  storm.  "  Holy  Virgin  !" 
exclaimed  Patie  Maxwell,  "  What  is  this  ?  What  is 
this  ?  I  declare  we're  a'  ower  lang  here,  for  the  dams 
of  heaven  are  broken  up  ;"  and  with  that  he  flung  him- 
self ft'om  the  dike,  and  fled  toward  the  top  of  a  rising 
ground.  He  knew  that  the  sound  proceeded  from  the 
descent  of  a  tremendous  water-spout ;  but  the  rest,  not 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  55 

conceiving  what  it  was,  remained  where  they  were. 
The  storm  increased  every  minute,  and  in  less  than  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  retreat  of  the  gaberlunzie, 
they  heaid  him  calling  out  with  the  utmost  earnestness ; 
and  when  they  eyed  him,  he  was  jumping  like  a  mad- 
man on  the  top  of  the  hillock,  waving  his  bonnet,  and 
screaming  out,  "  Run,  ye  deil's  buckles  !  Run  for  your 
bare  lives !"  One  of  the  shepherds,  jumping  up  on  the 
dike,  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  beheld  the  bum  of 
Widehope  coming  down  in  a  manner  that  could  be 
compared  to  nothing  but  an  ocean,  whose  boundaries 
had  given  way,  descending  into  the  abyss.  It  came  with 
a  cataract  front  more  than  twenty  feet  deep,  as  was 
afterwai'ds  ascertained  by  measurement ;  for  it  left  suf- 
ficient marks  to  enable  men  to  do  this  with  precision. 
The  shepherd  called  for  assistance,  and  leaped  into  the 
fold  to  drive  out  the  sheep  ;  and  just  as  he  got  the  fore- 
most of  them  to  take  the  door,  the  flood  came  upon  the 
head  of  the  fold,  on  which  he  threw  himself  over  the 
side-wall,  and  escaped  in  safety,  as  did  all  the  rest  of 
the  people. 

Not  so  Mr  Adamson's  ewes ;  the  greater  part  of  the 
hirsel  being  involved  in  this  mighty  current.  The 
large  fold  nearest  the  burn  was  levelled  with  the  earth 
in  one  second.  Stones,  ewes,  and  sheep-house,  all  were 
carried  before  it,  and  all  seemed  to  bear  tlie  same 
weight.     It  must  have  been  a  dismal  sight,  to  see  so 


56       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

many  fine  animals  tumbling  and  rolling  in  one  iiTesist- 
ible  mass.  They  were  strong,  however,  and  a  few 
plunged  out,  and  made  theii'  escape  to  the  eastward ; 
a  greater  number  were  earned  headlong  down,  and 
thrown  out  on  the  other  side  of  Laver-bmn,  upon  the 
side  of  a  dry  hill,  to  which  they  all  escaped,  some  of 
them  considerably  maimed ;  but  the  greatest  number 
of  all  were  lost,  being  overwhelmed  among  the  rubbish 
of  the  fold,  and  entangled  so  among  the  falling  dikes, 
and  the  toiTent  wheeling  and  boiling  amongst  them, 
that  escape  was  impossible.  The  wool  was  totally 
swept  away,  and  all  either  lost,  or  so  much  spoiled, 
that,  when  afterwards  recovered,  it  was  unsaleable. 

When  first  the  flood  broke  in  among  the  sheep,  and 
the  women  began  to  run  screaming  to  the  hills,  and  the 
despairing  shepherds  to  fly  about,  unable  to  do  any 
thing,  Patie  began  a-laughing  with  a  loud  and  hellish 
guffaw,  and  in  that  he  continued  to  indulge  till  quite 
exhausted.  "  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha !  what  think  ye  o'  the 
auld  beggar's  curse  now  ?  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha  !  I  think  it 
has  been  backit  wi'  Heaven's  and  the  deil's  baith.  Ha, 
ha,  ha,  ha  !"  And  then  he  mimicked  the  thunder  with 
the  most  outrageous  and  ludicrous  jabberings,  tm-ning 
occasionally  up  to  the  cloud  streaming  with  lightning 
and  hail,  and  calling  out, — "  Louder  yet,  deils  !  louder 
yet !  Kindle  up  your  crackers,  and  yerk  away !  Rap, 
rap,  rap,  rap — Ro-ro,  ro,  ro — Roo — Whush." 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  57 

"  I  daresay  that  body's  the  vera  deevil  himsell  in  the 
shape  o'  the  auld  Papish  beggar !"  said  one,  not  think- 
ing that  Patie  could  hear  at  such  a  distance. 

"  Na,  na,  lad,  I'm  no  the  deil,"  cried  he  in  answer ; 
"  but  an  I  war,  I  wad  let  ye  see  a  stramash !  It  is  a 
sublime  thing  to  be  a  Roman  Catholic  amang  sae  mony 
weak  apostates  ;  but  it  is  a  sublimer  thing  still  to  be  a 
deil — a  master-spirit  in  a  forge  like  yon.  Ha,  ha,  ha, 
ha !  Take  care  o'  your  heads,  ye  cock-chickens  o'  Cal- 
vin— take  care  o'  the  auld  Coppersmith  o'  the  Black 
Cludd!" 

From  the  moment  that  the  first  thunder-bolt  shot 
from  the  cloud,  the  countenance  of  the  farmer  was 
changed.  He  was  manifestly  alarmed  in  no  ordinary 
degree ;  and  when  the  flood  came  rushing  from  the  dry 
mountains,  and  took  away  his  sheep  and  his  folds  be- 
fore his  eyes,  he  became  as  a  dead  man,  making  no  ef- 
fort to  save  his  store,  or  to  give  directions  how  it  might 
be  done.  He  ran  away  in  a  cowering  posture,  as  he 
had  been  standing,  and  took  shelter  in  a  little  green  hol- 
low, out  of  his  servants'  view. 

The  thunder  came  nearer  and  nearer  the  place  where 
the  astonished  hinds  were,  till  at  length  they  perceived 
the  bolts  of  flame  striking  the  earth  around  them,  in 
every  direction ;  at  one  time  tearing  up  its  bosom,  and 
at  another  splintering  the  rocks.  Robin  Johnston,  in 
describing  it,  said,  that  "  the  thmmerbolts  came  shim- 
c2 


58      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

mering  out  o'  the  cludd  sae  thick,  that  they  appeared 
to  be  linkit  thegither,  and  fleeing  in  a'  directions. 
There  war  some  o'  them  blue,  some  o'  them  red,  and 
some  o'  them  hke  the  coloiu-  o'  the  lowe  of  a  candle ; 
some  o'  them  diving  into  the  earth,  and  some  o'  them 
springing  up  out  o'  the  earth  and  darting  into  the 
heaven."  I  cannot  vouch  for  the  tinith  of  this,  but  I  am 
sure  my  informer  thought  it  true,  or  he  would  not  have 
told  it ;  and  he  said  farther,  that  when  old  Maxwell 
saw  it,  he  cried — "  Fie,  tak  care,  cubs  o'  hell !  fie,  tak 
care  !  cower  laigh,  and  sit  sicker ;  for  your  auld  dam  is 
aboon  ye,  and  aneath  ye,  and  a'  round  about  ye.  O 
for  a  good  wat  nurse  to  spean  ye,  like  John  Adamson's 
lambs !  Ha,  ha,  ha !" — The  lambs,  it  must  be  observed, 
had  been  turned  out  of  the  fold  at  fii'st,  and  none  of 
them  perished  with  their  dams. 

But  just  when  the  storm  was  at  the  height,  and  ap- 
parently passing  the  bounds  ever  witnessed  in  these 
northern  climes  ;  when  the  embroiled  elements  were 
in  the  state  of  hottest  convulsion,  and  when  our  little 
pastoral  gi'oup  were  every  moment  expecting  the  next 
to  be  their  last,  all  at  once  a  lovely  "  blue  bore,"  frin- 
ged with  downy  gold,  opened  in  the  cloud  behind,  and 
in  five  minutes  more  the  sun  again  appeared,  and  all 
was  beauty  and  serenity.  What  a  contrast  to  the  scene 
so  lately  witnessed ! 

The  most  remarkable  circumstance  of  the  whole 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  39 

was  perhaps  the  contrast  between  the  two  burns.  The 
burn  of  Laverhope  never  changed  its  colour,  but  con- 
tinued pure,  limpid,  and  so  shallow,  that  a  boy  might 
have  stepped  over  it  dry-shod,  all  the  while  that  the 
other  burn  was  coming  in  upon  it  like  an  ocean  broken 
loose,  and  canying  all  before  it.  In  mountainous  dis- 
tricts, however,  instances  of  the  same  kind  are  not  in- 
frequent in  times  of  summer  speats.  Some  other  cir- 
cumstances connected  with  this  storm,  were  also  de- 
scribed to  me :  The  storm  coming  from  the  south,  over 
a  low-lying,  wooded,  and  populous  district,  the  whole 
of  the  crows  inhabiting  it  posted  away  up  the  glen  of 
Laverhope  to  avoid  the  fire  and  fury  of  the  tempest. 
"  There  were  thoosands  and  thoosands  came  up  by  us," 
said  Robin,  "  a'  laying  theirsells  out  as  they  had  been 
mad.  And  then,  whanever  the  bright  bolt  played  flash 
through  the  darkness,  ilk  ane  o'  them  made  a  dive  and 
a  wheel  to  avoid  the  shot :  For  I  was  persuaded  that 
they  thought  a'  the  artillery  and  musketry  o'  the  haill 
coontry  were  loosed  on  them,  and  that  it  was  time  for 
them  to  tak  the  gate.  There  were  likewise  several 
colly  dogs  came  by  us  in  great  extremity,  hinging  out 
their  tongues,  and  looking  aye  ower  their  shouthers, 
rinning  straight  on  they  kenn'dna  where  ;  and  amang 
other  things,  there  was  a  black  Highland  cow  came 
roaring  up  the  glen,  wi'  her  stake  hanging  at  her 
neck." 


60         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

Wlien  the  gush  of  waters  subsided,  all  the  group, 
men  and  women,  were  soon  employed  in  pulling  out 
dead  sheep  from  among  rubbish  of  stones,  banks  of 
gravel,  and  pools  of  the  bura ;  and  many  a  row  of 
carcasses  was  laid  out,  which  at  that  season  were  of  no 
use  whatever,  and  of  course  utterly  lost.  But  all  the 
time  they  were  so  engaged,  Mr  Adamson  came  not 
near  them  ;  at  which  they  wondered,  and  some  of  them 
remarked,  that  "  they  thought  their  master  was  fey  the 
day,  mae  ways  than  ane." 

"  Ay,  never  mind  him,"  said  the  old  shepherd, 
"  he'll  come  when  he  thinks  it  his  ain  time ;  he's  a 
right  sair  humbled  man  the  day,  and  I  hope  by  this 
time  he  has  been  brought  to  see  his  errors  in  a  right 
light.  But  the  gaberlunzie  is  lost  too.  I  think  he  be 
sandit  in  the  yud,  for  I  hae  never  seen  him  sin'  the 
last  great  crash  o'  thunner." 

"  He'll  be  gane  into  the  howe  to  wi'ing  his  duds," 
said  Robert  Johnston,  "  or  maybe  to  make  up  matters 
wi'  your  master.  Gude  sauf  us,  what  a  profane  wretch 
the  auld  creature  is  !  I  didna  think  the  muckle  homed 
deil  himsell  could  hae  set  up  his  mou'  to  the  heaven, 
and  braggit  and  blasphemed  in  sic  a  way.  He  gart 
my  heart  a'  grue  within  me,  and  dirle  as  it  had  been 
bored  wi'  reid-het  elsins." 

"  Oh,  what  can  ye  expect  else  of  a  Papish  ?"  said 
the  old  shepherd,  with  a  deep  sigh.  "  They're  a'  deil's 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  61 

bairns  ilk  ane,  and  a'  employed  in  carrying  on  their 
father's  wark.  It  is  needless  to  expect  gnde  branches 
frae  sic  a  stock,  or  gude  fruit  frae  siccan  branches." 

"  There's  ae  wee  bit  text  that  folks  should  never 
lose  sight  o',"  said  Robin,  "  and  it's  this, — *  Judge  not, 
that  ye  be  not  judged.'  I  think,"  remarked  Robin,  when 
he  told  the  story,  "  I  think  that  steekit  their  gabs  !" 

The  evening  at  length  drew  on ;  the  women  had 
gone  away  home,  and  the  neighbouring  shepherds  had 
scattered  here  and  there  to  look  after  their  own  flocks. 
Mr  Adamson's  men  alone  remained,  lingering  about 
the  brook  and  the  folds,  waiting  for  their  master. 
They  had  seen  him  go  into  the  little  green  hollow,  and 
they  knew  he  was  gone  to  his  prayers,  and  were  im- 
willing  to  disturb  him.  But  they  at  length  began  to 
think  it  extraordinary  that  he  should  continue  at  his 
prayers  the  whole  afternoon.  As  for  the  beggar,  though 
acknowledged  to  be  a  man  of  strong  sense  and  sound 
judgment,  he  had  never  been  known  to  say  prayers  all 
his  life,  except  in  the  way  of  cursing  and  swearing  a 
little  sometimes ;  and  none  of  them  could  conjecture 
what  was  become  of  him.  Some  of  the  rest,  as  it  grew 
late,  applied  to  the  old  shepherd  before  oft  mention- 
ed, whose  name  I  have  forgot,  but  he  had  herded  with 
Adamson  twenty  years — some  of  the  rest,  I  say,  ap- 
plied to  him  to  go  and  bring  their  master  away  home, 
thinking  that  perhaps  he  was  taken  ill. 


62         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

"  O,  I'm  unco  laith  to  disturb  him,"  said  the  old 
man ;  "  he  sees  that  the  hand  o'  the  Lord  has  fa'en 
heavy  on  him  the  day,  and  he's  humbUng  himsell  afore 
him  in  great  bitterness  o'  spirit,  I  daresay.  I  count  it 
a  sin  to  brik  in  on  sic  devotions  as  thae," 

"  Na,  I  carena  if  he  should  lie  and  pray  yonder  till 
the  mom,"  said  a  young  lad,  "  only  I  wadna  like  to 
gang  hame  and  leave  him  lying  on  the  hill,  if  he  should 
hae  chanced  to  turn  no  weel.  Sae,  if  nane  o'  ye  will 
gang  and  bring  him,  or  see  what  ails  him,  I'll  e'en  gang 
mysell ;"  and  away  he  went,  the  rest  standing  still  to 
await  the  issue. 

When  the  lad  went  first  to  the  brink  of  the  little 
slack  where  Adamson  lay,  he  stood  a  few  moments,  as 
if  gazing  or  listening,  and  then  turned  his  back  and 
fled.  The  rest,  who  were  standing  watching  his  mo- 
tions, wondered  at  this  ;  and  they  said,  one  to  another, 
that  their  master  was  angry  at  being  disturbed,  and  had 
been  tlu-eatening  the  lad  so  i-udely,  that  it  had  caused 
him  to  take  to  his  heels.  But  what  they  thought  most 
strange  was,  that  the  lad  did  not  fly  towards  them,  but 
straight  to  the  hill ;  nor  did  he  ever  so  much  as  cast 
his  eyes  in  their  direction  ;  so  deeply  did  he  seem  to 
be  impressed  with  what  had  passed  between  him 
and  his  master.  Indeed,  it  rather  appeared  that  he 
did  not  know  what  he  was  doing  ;  for,  after  ninning  a 
space  with  great  violence,  he  stood  and  looked  back, 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  63 

and  then  broke  to  the  hill  again — always  looking  first 
over  the  one  shoulder,  and  then  over  the  other.  Then 
he  stopped  a  second  time,  and  returned  cautiously  to- 
wards the  spot  where  his  master  reclined ;  and  all  the 
while  he  never  so  much  as  once  turned  his  eyes  in  the 
direction  of  liis  neighbours,  or  seemed  to  remember 
that  they  were  there.  His  motions  were  strikingly  er- 
ratic ;  for  all  the  way,  as  he  returned  to  the  spot  where 
his  master  was,  he  continued  to  advance  by  a  zigzag 
course,  like  a  vessel  beating  up  by  short  tacks  ;  and  se- 
veral times  he  stood  still,  as  on  the  very  point  of  re- 
treatmg.  At  length  he  vanished  from  their  sight  in  the 
little  hollow. 

It  was  not  long  till  the  lad  again  made  his  appear- 
ance, shouting  and  waving  his  cap  for  them  to  come 
likewise ;  on  wliich  they  all  went  away  to  him  as  fast 
as  they  could,  in  great  amazement  what  could  be  the 
matter.  When  they  came  to  the  green  hollow,  a  shock- 
ing spectacle  presented  itself :  There  lay  the  body  of 
their  master,  who  had  been  struck  dead  by  the  light- 
ning ;  and,  his  right  side  having  been  torn  open,  his 
bowels  had  gushed  out,  and  were  lying  beside  the  bo- 
dy. The  earth  was  rutted  and  ploughed  close  to  his 
side,  and  at  his  feet  there  was  a  hole  scooped  out,  a 
full  yard  in  depth,  and  very  much  resembling  a  grave. 
He  had  been  cut  off  in  the  act  of  prayer,  and  the  body 
was  still  lying  in  the  position  of  a  man  praying  in  the 


64         THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

field.  He  had  been  on  his  knees,  with  his  elbows  lean- 
ing on  the  brae,  and  his  brow  laid  on  his  folded  hands  ; 
his  plaid  was  drawn  over  his  head,  and  his  hat  below 
his  arm ;  and  this  affecting  circumstance  proved  a 
great  somxe  of  comfort  to  his  widow  afterwards,  when 
the  extremity  of  her  suffering  had  somewhat  abated. 

No  such  awful  visitation  of  Providence  had  ever 
been  witnessed,  or  handed  down  to  our  hinds  on  the 
ample  records  of  tradition,  and  the  impression  which 
it  made,  and  the  interest  it  excited,  were  also  without 
a  parallel.  Thousands  visited  the  spot,  to  view  the 
devastations  made  by  the  flood,  and  the  furrows  form- 
ed by  the  electrical  matter ;  and  the  smallest  circum- 
stances were  inquired  into  with  the  most  minute  cu- 
riosity :  above  all,  the  still  and  drowsy  embers  of  su- 
perstition were  rekindled  by  it  into  a  flame,  than 
which  none  had  ever  burnt  brighter,  not  even  in  the 
darkest  days  of  ignorance  ;  and  by  the  help  of  it  a 
theory  was  made  out  and  believed,  that  for  hoiTor  is 
absolutely  unequalled.  But  as  it  was  credited  in  its 
fullest  latitude  by  my  informant,  and  always  added  by 
him  at  the  conclusion  of  the  tale,  I  am  bound  to  men- 
tion the  circumstances,  though  far  from  vouching  them 
to  be  authentic. 

It  was  asserted,  and  pretended  to  have  been  proved, 
that  old  Peter  Maxwell  was  not  in  the  glen  of  Laver- 
hope  that  day,  but  at  a  great  distance  in  a  different 


MR  ADAJMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  65 

county,  and  that  it  was  the  devil  who  attended  the 
folds  in  his  likeness.  It  was  faither  believed  by  all 
the  people  at  the  folds,  that  it  was  the  last  explosion 
of  the  whole  that  had  slain  Mr  Adam  son ;  for  they 
had  at  that  time  observed  the  side  of  the  brae,  where 
the  little  green  slack  was  situated,  covered  with  a 
sheet  of  flame  for  a  moment.  And  it  so  happened, 
that  thereafter  the  profane  gaberlunzie  had  been  no 
more  seen  ;  and  therefore  they  said — and  here  was  the 
most  horrible  part  of  the  story — there  was  no  doubt 
of  his  being  the  devil,  waiting  for  his  prey,  and  that 
he  fled  away  in  that  sheet  of  flame,  carrying  the  soul 
of  Jolm  Adamson  along  with  him. 

I  never  saw  old  Pate  Maxwell, — for  I  believe  he 
died  before  I  was  bom;  but  Robin  Johnston  said, 
that  to  his  dying  day,  he  denied  having  been  within 
forty  miles  of  the  folds  of  Laverhope  on  the  day  of 
the  thunder-storm,  and  was  exceedingly  angry  when 
any  one  pretended  to  doubt  the  assertion.  It  was 
likewise  reported,  that  at  six  o'clock  afternoon  a 
stranger  had  called  on  Mrs  Irvine,  and  told  her,  that 
John  Adamson,  and  a  great  part  of  his  stock,  had  been 
destroyed  by  the  lightning  and  the  hail.  Mrs  Irvine's 
house  was  five  miles  distant  fi'om  the  folds  ;  and  more 
than  that,  the  farmer's  death  was  not  so  much  as 
knoAvn  of  by  mortal  man  until  two  hours  after  Mrs 
Irvine  received  this  information.     The  storm  exceeded 


66         THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

any  thing  remembered,  either  for  its  \iolence  or  con- 
sequences, and  these  mysterious  ciicum stances  having 
been  bmited  abroad,  gave  it  a  hold  on  the  minds  of  the 
populace,  never  to  be  erased  but  by  the  erasure  of  ex- 
istence.    It  fell  out  on  the  12th  of  July,  1753. 

The  death  of  Mr  Copland  of  Minnigapp,  in  Annan- 
dale,  forms  another  era  of  the  same  sort.  It  happen- 
ed, if  I  mistake  not,  on  the  18th  of  July,  1804.  It 
was  one  of  those  days  by  which  all  succeeding  thun- 
der-storms liave  been  estimated,  and  from  which  they 
are  dated,  both  as  having  taken  place  so  many  years 
before,  and  so  long  after. 

Adam  Copland,  Esquu'e,  of  Mimiigapp,  was  a  gen- 
tleman esteemed  by  all  who  knew  him.  Handsome 
in  his  person,  and  elegant  in  his  manners,  he  was  the 
ornament  of  rural  society,  and  the  delight  of  his  family 
and  friends  ;  and  his  loss  was  felt  as  no  common  mis- 
fortune. As  he  occupied  a  pastoral  farm  of  consi- 
derable extent,  his  own  property,  he  chanced  like- 
wise to  be  out  at  his  folds  on  the  day  above-mention- 
ed, with  his  own  servants,  and  some  neighbours,  wean- 
ing a  part  of  his  lambs,  and  shearing  a  few  sheep. 
About  mid-day  the  thunder,  lightning,  and  hail,  came 
on,  and  deranged  their  operations  entirely  ;  and,  among 
other  things,  a  part  of  the  lambs  broke  away  from  the 
folds,  and  being  in  gi'eat  fright,  they  continued  to  run 
on.   Mr  Copland  and  a  shepherd  of  his,  named  Thomas 


MR  ADAMSON  OF  LAVERHOPE.  67 

Scott,  pursued  them,  and,  at  the  distance  of  about  half 
a  mile  from  the  folds,  they  turned  them,  mastered 
them,  after  some  ninning,  and  were  bringing  them 
back  to  the  fold,  when  the  dreadful  catastrophe  hap- 
pened. Thomas  Scott  was  the  only  person  present,  of 
course  ;  and  though  he  was  within  a  few  steps  of  his 
master  at  the  time,  he  could  give  no  account  of  any 
thing.  I  am  well  acquainted  mth  Scott,  and  have 
questioned  him  about  the  particulars  fifty  times ;  but 
he  could  not  so  much  as  tell  me  how  he  got  back  to 
the  fold ;  whether  he  brought  the  lambs  with  him  or 
not ;  how  long  the  storm  continued ;  nor,  indeed,  any 
thing  after  the  time  that  his  master  and  he  tm-ned  the 
lambs.  That  cu'cumstance  he  remembered  perfectly, 
but  thenceforward  his  mind  seemed  to  have  become  a 
blank.  I  should  likewise  have  mentioned,  as  an  in- 
stance of  the  same  kind  of  deprivation  of  conscious- 
ness, that  when  the  young  lad  who  went  first  to  the 
body  of  Adamson  was  questioned  why  he  fled  from  the 
body  at  first,  he  denied  that  ever  he  fled ;  he  was  not 
conscious  of  having  fled  a  foot,  and  never  would  have 
believed  it,  if  he  had  not  been  seen  by  four  eye-wit- 
nesses. The  only  things  of  which  Thomas  Scott  had 
any  impressions  were  these  :  that,  when  the  lightning 
stnick  his  master,  he  sprung  a  great  height  into  the 
air,  much  higher,  he  thought,  than  it  was  possible  for 
any  man  to  leap  by  his  own  exertion.     He  also  thinks, 


68  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

that  the  place  where  he  fell  dead  was  at  a  considerable 
distance  from  that  on  which  he  was  struck  and  leaped 
from  the  gi'ound ;  but  when  I  inquired  if  he  judged 
that  it  would  be  twenty  yards  or  ten  yards,  he  could 
give  no  answer — he  could  not  tell.  He  only  had  an 
impression  that  he  saw  his  master  spring  into  the  air, 
all  on  fire  ;  and,  on  running  up  to  him,  he  found  him 
quite  dead.  If  Scott  was  correct  in  this,  (and  he  be- 
ing a  man  of  plain  good  sense,  truth,  and  integrity, 
there  can  scarce  be  a  reason  for  doubting  him,)  the 
circumstance  would  argue  that  the  electric  matter  by 
which  Mr  Copland  was  killed  issued  out  of  the  earth. 
He  was  speaking  to  Scott  with  his  very  last  breath ; 
but  all  that  the  survivor  could  do,  he  could  never  re- 
member what  he  was  saying.  Some  melted  drops  of 
silver  were  standing  on  the  case  of  his  watch,  as  well 
as  on  some  of  the  buttons  of  his  coat,  and  the  body 
never  stiifened  like  other  corpses,  but  remained  as 
supple  as  if  every  bone  had  been  softened  to  jelly. 
He  was  a  manied  man,  scarcely  at  the  prime  of  life, 
and  left  a  young  widow  and  only  son  to  lament  his 
loss.  On  the  spot  where  he  fell  there  is  now  an  obelisk 
erected  to  his  memory,  with  a  warning  text  on  it,  rela- 
ting to  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  human  life, 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  69 


CHAPTER  III. 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON. 


"  Bring  me  my  pike-staff,  daughter  Matilda, — the 
one  with  the  head  tmned  round  like  cnimmy's  horn  ; 
I  find  it  easiest  for  my  hand.  And  do  you  hear, 
Matty  ? — Stop,  I  say  ;  you  are  always  in  such  a  huny. 
— Bring  me  likewise  my  best  cloak, — not  the  taitan 
one,  but  the  grey  mai'led  one,  lined  with  green  flannel. 
I  go  over  to  Shepherd  Gawin's  to-day,  to  see  that  poor 
young  man  who  is  said  to  be  dying." 

"  I  would  not  go,  father,  were  I  you.  He  is  a 
great  reprobate,  and  will  laugh  at  every  good  precept ; 
and,  more  than  that,  you  will  heat  yourself  with  the 
walk,  get  cold,  and  be  confined  again  with  your  old 
complaint." 

"  What  was  it  you  said,  daughter  Matilda  ?  Ah, 
you  said  that  which  was  very  wiong.  God  only  knows 
who  are  reprobates,  and  who  are  not.  We  can  judge 
from  nought  but  external  evidence,  which  is  a  false 
ground  to  build  calculations  upon ;  but  He  Imows  the 


70         THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

heart,  with  all  oui*  motives  of  action,  and  judges  very 
differently  from  us.  You  said  very  wi'ong,  daughter. 
But  women  will  always  be  speaking  unadvisedly.  Al- 
ways rash  !  always  rash  ! — Bring  me  my  cloak,  daugh- 
ter, for  as  to  my  being  injured  by  my  walk,  I  am  go-, 
ing  on  my  Master's  business  ;  my  life  and  health  are 
in  his  hands,  and  let  him  do  with  me  as  seemeth  good 
in  his  sight ;  I  will  devote  all  to  his  service  the  little 
wliile  I  have  to  sojom-n  here." 

"  But  this  young  man,  father,  is  not  only  wicked 
himself,  but  he  delights  in  the  wickedness  of  others. 
He  has  ruined  all  his  associates,  and  often  not  without 
toiling  for  it  with  earnest  application.  Never  did  your 
own  heart  yearn  more  over  the  gaining  of  an  immortal 
soul  to  God  and  goodness,  than  this  same  young  profli- 
gate's bosom  has  yearaed  over  the  destruction  of  one." 

"  Ah  !  it  is  a  dismal  picture,  indeed !  but  not,  per- 
haps, so  bad  as  you  say.  Women  are  always  disposed 
to  exaggerate,  and  often  let  their  tongues  outnm  their 
judgments.  Bring  me  my  cloak  and  my  staff,  daugh- 
ter Mat.  Though  God  withdraw  his  protecting  arm 
from  a  fellow-creature  for  a  time,  are  we  to  give  all  up 
for  lost  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  his  grace  abomidetli 
to  the  chief  of  sinners?" 

"  I  know  more  of  this  youth  than  you  do,  my  dear 
father ;  would  to  Heaven  I  knew  less !  and  I  advise 
you  to  stay  at  home,  and  leave  him  to  the  mercy  of 


THE  PRODIGAL  SOX.  71 

that  God  whom  he  has  offended.  Old  age  and  de- 
crepitude are  his  derision,  and  he  will  mock  at  and 
laugh  you  to  scorn,  and  add  still  more  pangs  to  the 
hearts  of  his  disconsolate  parents.  It  was  he,  who, 
after  much  travail,  overturned  the  principles  of  your 
beloved  grandson,  which  has  cost  us  all  so  much  grief, 
and  so  many  tears." 

"  That  is  indeed  a  bitter  consideration;  neverthe- 
less it  shall  be  got  over.  I  will  not  say.  The  Lord  re- 
ward him  according  to  his  works,  although  the  words 
almost  brooded  on  my  tongue;  but  I  will  say,  in  the 
sincerity  of  a  Christian  disposition.  May  the  Lord  of 
mercy  forgive  liim,  and  open  his  eyes  to  his  undone 
state  before  it  be  too  late,  and  the  doors  of  forgiveness 
be  eternally  shut  I  Thanks  to  my  Maker,  I  now  feel 
as  I  ought !  Go  bring  me  my  cloak,  daughter  Matil- 
da ;  not  that  tartan  one,  with  the  gaudy  spangles,  but 
my  comfortable  grey  marled  one,  with  the  green  flan- 
nel lining." 

"  Stay  till  I  tell  you  one  thing  more,  father." 

"  Well,  what  is  it  ?  Say  on,  daughter,  I'll  hear  you. 
Surely  you  are  not  desirous  that  tliis  young  man's 
soul  should  perish  ?  Women's  prejudices  are  always 
too  strong,  either  one  way  or  another.  But  I  will 
hear  you,  daughter — I  will  hear  you.     What  is  it  ?" 

"  You  knew  formerly  somewhat  of  the  evil  this  pro- 
fligate youth  did  to  your  grandson,  but  you  do  not 


72         THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

know  that  he  has  most  basely  betrayed  his  sister,  your 
darling  Euphemia." 

Old  Isaac's  head  sunk  down,  while  some  tears  in- 
voluntarily dropped  on  his  knee ;  and  to  conceal  his 
emotion,  he  remained  silent,  save  that  he  uttered  a  few 
stifled  groans.  Natural  affection  and  duty  were  at 
strife  within  him,  and  for  a  time  neither  of  them  would 
yield.  His  daughter  perceived  the  struggle,  and  con- 
tented herself  with  watching  its  effects. 

"  Where  is  my  cloak,  daughter  Matilda  ?"  said  he, 
at  length,  without  raising  his  head. 

"  It  is  hanging  on  one  of  the  wooden  knags  in  the 
garret,  sir,"  said  she. 

"  Ay.  Then  you  may  let  it  hang  on  the  knag  where 
it  is  all  day.  It  is  a  weary  world  this !  and  we  are 
all  guilty  creatures  !  I  fear  I  cannot  converse  and  pray 
with  the  iTithless  seducer  of  both  my  children." 

"  Yoiir  resolution  is  prudent,  sir.  All  efforts  to  re- 
gain such  a  one  are  vain.  He  is  not  only  a  reprobate, 
and  an  outcast  from  his  Maker,  but  a  determined  and 
avowed  enemy  to  his  laws  and  government." 

«  You  do  not  know  what  you  say,  daughter,"  said 
old  Isaac,  starting  to  his  feet,  and  looking  her  sternly 
in  the  face.  "  If  I  again  hear  you  presume  to  prejudge 
any  accountable  and  immortal  being  in  such  a  man- 
ner, I  shall  be  more  afraid  of  your  own  state  than  of 
his.  While  life  remains,  we  are  in  a  land  where  re- 
5 


THE  PRODIGAL  SOX,  73 

pentance  is  to  be  had  and  hoped  for,  and  1  will  not 
hear  the  mercy  of  God  aiTaigned.  Bring  me  my  cloak 
and  my  staff  instantly,  without  another  word.  When 
I  think  of  the  country  beyond  the  grave,  and  of  the 
eternal  fate  that  awaits  this  hapless  prodigal,  all  my  in- 
juries vanish,  and  my  trust  in  the  Lord  is  strengthened 
anew.  I  shall  at  least  pray  with  him,  and  for  him ;  if 
he  will  not  hear  me,  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven  may 
hear  me,  and  haply  He  will  open  the  victim's  eyes  to 
the  hope  that  is  set  before  him ;  for  the  hearts  of  all 
the  childien  of  men  are  in  his  hands,  and  as  the  rivers 
of  water  He  tumeth  them  whithersoever  He  pleaseth." 

So  old  Isaac  got  his  staff  in  his  hand  that  had  the 
head  turned  round  like  the  horn  of  a  cow,  and  also  his 
cloak  round  his  shoulders,  not  the  tartan  one  with  its 
gaudy  spangles,  but  the  gi*ey  marled  one  Imed  with 
green  flannel.  Well  might  old  Isaac  be  partial  to  that 
cloak,  for  it  was  made  for  him  by  a  beloved  daughter 
who  had  been  removed  from  him  and  from  her  family  at 
the  age  of  twenty-three.  She  was  the  mother  of  his 
two  darlings,  Isaac  and  Euphemia,  mentioned  before ; 
and  the  feelings  with  which  he  put  on  the  mantle  that 
day  can  only  be  conceived  by  those  who  have  learned 
to  coimt  all  things  but  loss  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him 
crucified  ;  and  how  few  are  the  number  who  attain  this 
sublime  and  sacred  height ! 

"  The  blessing  of  liim  that  is  ready  to  perish  shall 

VOL.  I.  D 


74      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

light  on  the  head  of  my  father,"  said  Matilda,  as  she 
followed  with  her  eye  the  bent  figure  of  the  old  man 
hasting  with  tottering  steps  over  the  moor,  on  the  road 
that  led  to  Shepherd  Gawin's  ;  and  when  he  vanished 
from  her  view  on  the  height,  she  wiped  her  eyes,  drew 
the  window  screen,  and  applied  herself  to  her  work. 

Isaac  lost  sight  of  his  own  home,  and  came  in  view 
of  Shepherd  Gawin's  at  the  same  instant ;  but  he  only 
gave  a  slight  glance  back  to  his  own,  for  the  concern 
that  lay  before  him  dwelt  on  his  heart.  It  was  a  con- 
cern of  life  and  death,  not  only  of  a  temporal,  but  of 
a  spiritual  and  eternal  nature ;  and  where  the  mortal 
concerns  are  centred,  on  that  place,  or  towards  that 
place,  will  the  natural  eye  be  turned.  Isaac  looked 
only  at  the  dwelling  before  him  :  All  wore  a  solemn 
stillness  about  the  place  that  had  so  often  resounded 
with  rustic  mirth  ;  the  cock  crowed  not  at  the  door  as 
was  his  wont,  nor  stratted  on  the  top  of  his  old  dung- 
hill, that  had  been  accumulating  there  for  ages,  and 
had  the  appearance  of  a  small  green  mountain ;  but 
he  sat  on  the  kailyard  dike,  at  the  head  of  his  mates, 
with  his  feathers  niffled,  and  every  now  and  then  his 
one  eye  turned  up  to  the  sky,  as  if  watching  some  ap- 
pearance there  of  which  he  stood  in  dread.  The  blithe- 
some collies  came  not  down  the  green  to  bark  and 
frolic  half  in  kindness  and  half  in  jealousy ;  they  lay 
coiled  up  on  the  shelf  of  the  hay-stack,  and  as  the  stran- 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  1'^ 

ger  approached,  lifted  up  their  heads  and  viewed  him 
with  a  Sullen  and  sleepy  eye,  then,  uttering  a  low  and 
stifled  growl,  mufiled  their  heads  again  between  their 
hind  feet,  and  sln-ouded  their  social  natures  in  the  very 
depth  of  sullemiess. 

"  This  is  either  the  abode  of  death,  or  deep  moui'n- 
ing,  or  perhaps  both,"  said  old  Isaac  to  himself,  as  he 
approached  the  house  ;  "  and  all  the  domestic  animals 
are  affected  by  it,  and  join  in  the  general  dismay.  If 
this  young  man  has  departed  with  the  eyes  of  his  un- 
derstanding blinded,  I  have  not  been  in  the  way  of  my 
duty.  It  is  a  hard  case  that  a  blemished  lamb  should 
be  cast  out  of  the  flock,  and  no  endeavour  made  by  the 
shepherd  to  heal  or  recall  it ;  that  the  poor  stray  thing 
should  be  left  to  perish,  and  lost  to  its  Master  s  fold. 
It  behoveth  not  a  faithful  shepherd  to  suffer  this  ;  and 
yet — Isaac,  thou  art  the  man  !  May  the  Lord  pardon 
his  servant  in  this  thing !" 

The  scene  continued  precisely  the  same  until  Isaac 
reached  the  solitary  dwelling.  There  was  no  one  pass- 
ing in  or  out  by  the  door,  nor  any  human  creature  to 
be  seen  stimng,  save  a  little  girl,  one  of  the  family, 
who  had  been  away  meeting  the  carrier  to  procure 
some  medicines,  and  who  approached  the  house  by  a 
different  path.  Isaac  was  first  at  the  door,  and  on 
reaching  it  he  heard  a  confused  noise  within,  like  the 
sounds  of  weeping  and  praying  commingled.    Unwill- 


76      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

ing  to  break  in  upon  them,  ignorant  as  he  was  how 
matters  stood  with  the  family,  he  paused,  and  then  with 
a  soft  step  retreated  to  meet  the  little  girl  that  ap- 
proached, and  make  some  inquiries  of  her.  She  tried 
to  elude  him  by  running  past  him  at  a  little  distance, 
but  he  asked  her  to  stop  and  tell  him  how  all  was 
within.  She  did  not  hear  what  he  said,  but  guessing 
the  purport  of  his  inquiry,  answered,  "  He's  nae  better, 
sir." —  "  Ah  me  !  still  in  the  same  state  of  suffering  ?" 
— "  Aih  no, — no  ae  grain, — I  tell  ye  he's  nae  better 
ava."  And  with  that  she  stepped  into  the  house,  Isaac 
following  close  behind  her,  so  that  he  entered  without 
being  either  seen  or  announced.  The  first  sounds  that 
he  could  distinguish  were  the  words  of  the  dying  youth; 
they  had  a  hoarse  whistling  sound,  but  they  were  the 
words  of  wrath  and  indignation.  As  he  crossed  the 
hallan  he  perceived  the  sick  man's  brother,  the  next  to 
him  in  age,  sitting  at  the  window  with  his  elbow  lean- 
ing on  the  table,  and  his  head  on  his  closed  fist,  while 
the  tints  of  sorrow  and  anger  seemed  mingled  on  his 
blunt  countenance.  Farther  on  stood  his  mother  and 
elder  sister  leaning  on  each  other,  and  their  eyes  shaded 
with  their  hands,  and  close  by  the  sick  youth's  bed- 
side ;  beyond  these  kneeled  old  Gawin  the  shepherd, 
his  fond  and  too  indulgent  father.  He  held  the  shri- 
velled hand  of  his  son  in  his,  and  with  the  other  that 
of  a  damsel  who  stood  by  his  side  :  And  Isaac  heard 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  77 

him  conjuring  his  son  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  hea- 
ven. Here  old  Isaac's  voice  interrupted  the  affecting 
scene.  "  Peace  be  to  this  house, — may  the  peace  of 
the  Almighty  be  within  its  walls,"  said  he,  with  an 
audible  voice.  The  two  women  uttered  a  stifled  shriek, 
and  the  dying  man  a  "  Poh !  poh !"  of  abhorrence. 
Old  Gawin,  though  he  did  not  rise  from  his  knees, 
gazed  round  with  amazement  in  his  face  ;  and  looldng 
first  at  his  dying  son,  and  then  at  old  Isaac,  he  drew  a 
full  breath,  and  said,  ^dth  a  quivering  voice,  "  Sm-ely 
the  hand  of  the  Almighty  is  in  this  !" 

There  was  still  another  object  in  the  apartment  well 
worthy  of  the  attention  of  him  who  entered — it  was 
the  damsel  who  stood  at  the  bedside  ;  but  then  she 
stood  with  her  back  to  Isaac,  so  that  he  could  not  see 
her  face,  and  at  the  sound  of  his  voice,  she  drew  her 
cloak  over  her  head,  and  retired  behind  the  bed,  sobbing 
so,  that  her  bosom  seemed  like  to  rend.  The  cloak  was 
similar  to  the  one  worn  that  day  by  old  Isaac,  for,  be 
it  remembered,  he  had  not  the  gaudy  tartan  one  about 
him,  but  the  russet  grey  plaid  made  to  him  by  liis  be- 
loved daughter.  Isaac  saw  the  young  woman  retiring 
behind  the  bed,  and  heard  her  weeping ;  but  a  stroke 
like  that  of  electricity  seemed  to  have  affected  the 
nerves  of  all  the  rest  of  the  family  on  the  entrance  of 
the  good  old  man,  so  that  his  attention  was  attracted 
by  those  immediately  under  his  eye.    The  mother  and 


78       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

daughter  whispered  to  each  other  in  great  pei*plexity. 
Old  Gawin  rose  from  his  knees  ;  and  not  knowing  well 
what  to  say  or  do,  he  diligently  wiped  the  dust  from 
the  linee-caps  of  his  corduroy  breeches,  even  descend- 
ing to  the  minutiae  of  scraping  away  some  specks  more 
adhesive  than  the  rest,  with  the  nail  of  his  mid  finger. 
No  one  welcomed  the  old  man,  and  the  dying  youth 
in  the  bed  grumbled  these  bitter  words,  "  I  see  now 
on  what  eiTand  Ellen  was  sent !  Confound  your  offi- 
ciousness !" 

"  No,  Graham,  you  are  mistaken.     The  child  was 

at  T r  to  meet  the  carrier  for  your  drogs,"  said  old 

Gawin. 

"  Poh !  poh !  all  of  a  piece  with  the  rest  of  the 
stuff  you  have  told  me.  Come  hither,  Ellen,  and  let 
me  see  what  the  doctor  has  sent." — The  girl  came  near, 
and  gave  some  vials  with  a  sealed  direction. 

"  So  you  got  these  at  T r,  did  you  ?" 

"  Yes,  I  got  them  from  Jessy  Clapperton ;  the  car- 
rier was  away." 

"  Lying  imp !  who  told  you  to  say  that  ?  Answer 
me !" — The  child  was  mute  and  looked  frightened. — 
"  Oh  !  I  see  how  it  is  !  You  have  done  very  well,  my 
dear,  very  cleverly,  you  give  very  fair  promise.  Get 
me  some  clothes,  pray — I  will  try  if  I  can  leave  this 
house." 

"  Alas,  my  good  friends,  what  is  this  ?"  said  Isaac  ; 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  79 

"  the  young  man's  reason,  I  fear,  is  wavering.  Good 
Gawin,  why  do  you  not  give  me  your  hand  ?  I  am  ex- 
tremely sorry  for  your  son's  great  bodily  sufferings,  and 
for  what  you  and  your  family  must  suffer  mentally  on 
his  account.     How  are  you  ?" 

"  Right  weel,  sir — as  weel  as  may  be  expected," 
said  Gawin,  taking  old  Isaac's  hand,  but  not  once  lift- 
ing his  eyes  from  the  ground  to  look  the  good  man  in 
the  face. 

"  And  how  are  you,  good  dame  ?"  continued  Isaac, 
shaking  hands  with  the  old  woman. 

"  Right  weel,  thanks  t'ye,  sir.  It  is  a  cauld  day  this. 
Ye'll  be  cauld?" 

"  Oh  no,  I  rather  feel  warm." 
"  Ay,  ye  have  a  comfgrtable  plaid  for  a  day  like  this ; 
a  good  plaid  it  is." 

"  I  like  to  hear  you  say  so,  Agnes,  for  that  plaid 
was  a  Clu*istmas  present  to  me,  from  one  who  has  now 
been  several  years  in  the  cold  grave.  It  was  made  to 
me  by  my  kind  and  beloved  daughter  Euphy.  But 
enough  of  this — I  see  you  have  some  mantles  in  the 
house  of  the  very  same  kind." 

"  No ;  not  the  same.  We  have  none  of  the  same 
here." 

"  Well,  the  same  or  nearly  so, — it  is  all  one.  My 
sight  often  deceives  me  now." — The  family  all  looked 
at  one  another. — "  But  enough  of  this,"  continued  old 


80         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

Isaac,  "  I  came  not  thus  far  to  discuss  such  matters. 
The  sick  young  man,  from  what  I  heard,  I  fear,  is  in- 
capable of  spiritual  conversation  ?" 

"  Yes,  I  am,"  said  he,  from  the  bed,  with  a  squeak- 
ing voice;  "  and  I  would  this  moment  that  I  were 
dead  !  Why  don't  you  give  me  my  clothes  ?  Sure 
never  was  a  poor  unfortunate  being  tormented  as  I 
am  !  Won't  you  have  pity  on  me,  and  let  me  have  a 
little  peace  for  a  short  time  ?  It  is  not  long  I  will 
trouble  you.  Is  it  not  mean  and  dastardly  in  you  all 
to  combine  against  an  object  that  cannot  defend  him- 
self?" 

"  Alack,  alack !"  said  old  Isaac,  "  the  calmness  of 
reason  is  departed  for  the  present.  I  came  to  converse 
a  little  with  him  on  that  which  concerns  his  peace 
here,  and  his  happiness  hereafter :  to  hold  the  mirror 
up  to  his  conscience,  and  point  out  an  object  to  him, 
of  which,  if  he  take  not  hold,  all  his  hope  is  a  wreck." 

"  I  knew  it  I  I  knew  it !"  vociferated  the  sick  man. 
"  A  strong  and  great  combination :  but  I'll  defeat  it, — 
ha,  ha,  ha !  I  tell  you.  Father  Confessor,  I  have  no 
right  or  part  in  the  object  you  talk  of.  I  will  have  no 
farther  concern  with  her.  She  shall  have  no  more  of 
me  than  you  shall  have.  If  the  devil  should  have  all, 
that  is  absolute — Will  that  suffice  ?" 

"  Alas  I  he  is  not  himself,"  said  old  Isaac,  "  and 
has  nearly  been  guilty  of  blasphemy.     We  must  not 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  81 

iiiitate  him  farther.  All  that  we  can  do  is  to  join  in 
prayer  that  the  Lord  will  lay  no  more  upon  him  than 
he  is  able  to  bear,  that  he  will  heal  his  wounded  spirit, 
and  restore  him  to  the  use  of  reason  ;  and  that,  in  the 
midst  of  his  wanderings,  should  he  blaspheme,  the  sin 
may  not  be  laid  to  his  charge." 

Gawin  was  about  to  speak,  and  explain  something 
that  apparently  affected  him ;  the  dying  youth  had 
likewise  raised  himself  on  his  elbow,  and,  with  an  angry 
countenance,  was  going  to  reply ;  but  when  the  old 
man  took  off  his  broad-brimmed  hat,  and  discovered  the 
wrinkled  forehead  and  the  thin  snowy  hair  waving 
around  it,  the  sight  was  so  impressive  that  silence  was 
imposed  on  every  tongue.     He  sung  two  stanzas  of  a 
psalm,  read  a  chapter  of  the  New  Testament,  and  then 
kneeling  by  the  bedside,  prayed  for  about  half  an  horn-, 
with  such  fervency  of  devotion,  that  all  the  family  were 
deeply  affected.     It  was  no  common-place  prayer,  nor 
one  so  general  that  it  suited  any  case  of  distress  ;  every 
sentence  of  it  spoke  home  to  the  heart,  and  alluded 
particularly  to  the  very  state  of  him  for  whom  the  pe- 
titions were  addressed  to  heaven.     Old  Gawin  gave 
two  or  three  short  sighs,  which  his  wife  hearing,  she 
wiped  her  eyes  with  her  apron.     Their  fair  daughter 
made  the  same  sort  of  noise  that  one  does  who  takes 
snuff,  and  the  innocent  youth,  their  second  son,  who 
leaned  forward  on  the  table  instead  of  kneeling,  let 
D  2 


83         THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

two  tears  fall  on  the  board,  which  he  formed  with  his 
forefinger  into  the  initials  of  his  name  ;  the  little  girl 
looked  from  one  to  another,  and  wondered  what  ailed 
them  all,  then  casting  down  her  eyes,  she  tried  to  look 
devout,  but  they  would  not  be  restrained.     The  dying 
youth,  who  at  the  beginning  testified  the  utmost  im- 
patience, by  degi-ees  became  the  most  affected  of  all. 
His  features  first  grew  composed,  then  rueful,  and 
finally  he  turned  himself  on  his  face  in  humble  pros- 
tration.    Isaac  pleaded  fervently  with  the  Almighty 
that  the  sufferer's  days  might  be  lengthened,  and  that 
he  might  not  be  cut  off  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  and  ex- 
uberance of  levity — at  that  season  when  man  is  more 
apt  to  speak  than  calculate,  and  to  act  than  consider, 
even  though  speech  should  be  crime,  and  action  irre- 
trievable rum.     "  Spare  and  recover  him,  O  merciful 
Father,  yet  for  a  little  while,"  said  be,  "  that  he  may 
have  his  eyes  opened  to  see  his  ruined  state  both  by 
nature  and  by  wicked  works  ;  for  who  among  us  liveth 
and  sinneth  not,  and  what  clianges  may  be  made  in  his 
dispositions  in  a  few  years  or  a  few  months  by  thy  for- 
bearance ?     Thou  takest  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of 
sinners,  but  rather  that  all  should  repent,  and  turn  unto 
thee,  and  live  ;  therefore,  for  his  immortal  soul's  sake, 
and  for  the  sake  of  what  thy  Son  hath  suffered  for 
ruined  man,  spare  him  till  he  have  time  and  space  to  re- 
pent.    Should  his  youthful  mind  have  been  tainted 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  83 

with  the  prevailing  vice  of  infidelity,  so  that  he  hath 
been  tempted  to  lift  up  his  voice  against  the  most  sa- 
cred truths  ;  and  should  he,  like  all  the  profane,  have 
been  following  his  inclinations  rather  tBan  his  judg- 
ment, how  is  he  now  prepared  to  abide  the  final  result  ? 
or  to  be  ushered  into  the  very  midst  of  those  glorious 
realities  which  he  hath  hitherto  treated  as  a  fiction  ? 
And  how  shall  he  stand  before  thee,  when  he  discovers, 
too  late,  that  there  is  indeed  a  God,  whose  being  and 
attributes  he  hath  doubted,  a  Saviom*  whom  he  hath 
despised,  a  heaven  into  which  he  cannot  enter,  and  a 
hell  which  he  can  never  escape  ?  Perhaps  he  hath  been 
instramental  in  unhinging  the  principles  of  othei-s,  and 
of  misleading  some  unwary  being  from  the  paths  of 
tmth  and  holiness  ;  and  in  the  flush  of  reckless  depra- 
vity, may  even  have  deprived  some  iimocent,  loving, 
and  trusting  being  of  vu'tue,  and  left  her  a  prey  to 
sorrow  and  despair ;  and  with  these  and  more  grievous 
crimes  on  his  head, — all  unrepented  and  unatoned, — 
how  shall  he  appear  before  thee  ?" 

At  this  part  of  the  prayer,  the  sobs  behind  the  bed 
became  so  audible,  that  it  made  the  old  man  pause 
in  the  midst  of  his  fervent  supplications  ;  and  the  dy- 
ing youth  was  heard  to  weep  in  suppressed  breathings, 
Isaac  went  on,  and  prayed  still  for  the  sufferer  as  one 
insensible  to  all  that  passed  ;  but  he  prayed  so  earnest- 
ly for  his  forgiveness,  for  the  restoration  of  his  right 


84         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

reason,  and  for  health  and  space  for  repentance  and 
amendment,  that  the  sincerity  of  his  heart  was  appa- 
rent in  every  word  and  every  tone. 

When  he  ?ose  from  his  knees  there  was  a  deep  si- 
lence ;  no  one  knew  what  to  say,  or  to  whom  to  address 
himself ;  for  the  impression  made  on  all  their  minds 
was  peculiai'ly  strong.  The  only  motion  made  for  a 
good  while  was  hy  the  soft  young  man  at  the  table, 
who  put  on  his  bonnet  as  he  was  wont  to  do  after 
prayers ;  but  remembering  that  the  Minister  was  pre- 
sent, he  slipped  it  oflf  again  by  the  ear,  as  if  he  had 
been  stealing  it  from  his  own  head.  At  that  instant 
the  dying  youth  stretched  out  his  hand.  Isaac  saw  it, 
and  looking  to  his  mother,  said  he  wanted  something. 
"  It  is  yours — your  hand  that  I  want,"  said  the  youth, 
in  a  kind  and  expressive  tone.  Isaac  started,  he  had 
judged  him  to  be  in  a  state  of  delirium,  and  his  sur- 
prise may  be  conceived  when  he  heard  him  speak  with 
calmness  and  composm-e.  He  gave  him  his  hand,  but 
from  what  he  had  heard  fall  from  his  lips  before,  knew 
not  how  to  address  him.  "  You  are  a  good  man,"  said 
the  youth,  "  God  in  heaven  reward  you  I" 

"  \Miat  is  this  I  hear  ?"  cried  Isaac,  breathless  with 
astonishment.  "  Have  the  disordered  senses  been  ral- 
lied in  one  moment  ?  Have  our  unworthy  prayers  in- 
deed been  heard  at  the  throne  of  Omnipotence,  and  an- 
swered so  suddenly  ?     Let  us  bow  ourselves  with 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  85 

gratitude  and  adoration.  And  for  thee,  my  dear  young 
fiiend,  be  of  good  cheer ;  for  there  are  better  tilings 
intended  towards  thee.  Thou  shalt  yet  live  to  repent 
of  thy  sins,  and  to  become  a  chosen  vessel  of  mercy  in 
the  house  of  him  that  saved  thee." 

"  If  I  am  spared  in-  life  for  a  little  while,"  said  the 
youth,  "  I  shall  make  atonement  for  some  of  my  trans- 
gressions, for  the  enormity  of  which  I  am  smitten  to 
the  heart." 

"  Tmst  to  no  atonement  you  can  make  of  your- 
self," cried  Isaac  fervently.  "  It  is  a  bruised  reed,  to 
which,  if  you  lean,  it  will  go  into  your  hand  and  pierce 
it ;  a  shelter  that  will  not  break  the  blast.  You  must 
trust  to  a  higher  atonement,  else  your  repentance  shall 
be  as  stubble,  or  as  chafiTthat  the  wind  carrieth  away." 

"  So  disinterested  1"  exclaimed  the  youth.  "  Is  it 
my  wellbeing  alone  over  which  yom-  soul  yearns  ? 
This  is  more  than  I  expected  to  meet  with  in  human- 
ity !  Good  father,  I  am  unable  to  speak  more  to  you 
to-day,  but  give  me  your  hand,  and  promise  to  come 
back  to  see  me  on  Friday.  If  I  am  spared  in  life,  you 
shall  find  me  all  that  you  wish,  and  shall  never  more 
have  to  chaige  me  with  ingi-atitude." 

In  the  zeal  of  his  devotion,  Isaac  had  quite  forgot 
all  personal  injm-ies ;  he  did  not  even  remember  that 
there  were  such  beings  as  his  grandchildren  in  ex- 
istence at  that  time ;  but  when  the  young  man  said. 


86         THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

that  "  he  should  find  him  all  that  he  wished,  and  that 
he  would  no  more  be  ungrateful,"  the  sobs  and  weep- 
ing behind  the  bed  grew  so  audible,  that  all  farther 
exchange  of  sentiments  was  inteiTupted.  The  youth 
grasped  old  Isaac's  hand,  and  motioned  for  him  to  go 
away ;  and  he  was  about  to  comply,  out  of  respect  for 
the  feelings  of  the  sufferer,  but  before  he  could  with- 
draw his  hand  from  the  bed,  or  rise  from  the  seat  on 
which  he  had  just  sat  down,  the  weeping  fair  one  burst 
from  behind  the  bed ;  and  falling  on  his  knees  with  her 
face,  she  seized  his  hand  with  both  hers,  kissed  it  an 
hundred  times,  and  bathed  it  all  over  with  her  tears. 
Isaac's  heart  was  at  all  times  soft,  and  at  that  particu- 
lar time  he  was  in  a  mood  to  be  melted  quite  ;  he  tried 
to  soothe  the  damsel,  though  he  himself  was  as  much 
affected  as  she  was — but  as  her  mantle  was  still  over 
her  head,  how  could  he  know  her  ?  His  old  dim  eyes 
were,  moreover,  so  much  suffused  with  tears,  that  he 
did  not  perceive  that  mantle  to  be  the  very  same  with 
his  own,  and  that  one  hand  must  have  been  the  maker 
of  both.  ''  Be  comforted,"  said  old  Isaac  ;  "  he  will 
mend — He  will  mend,  and  be  yet  a  stay  to  you  and  to 
them  all — ^be  of  good  comfort,  dear  love." 

When  he  had  said  this,  he  wiped  his  eyes  hastily 
and  impatiently  with  the  lap  of  his  plaid,  seized  his 
old  pike-staff;  and  as  he  tottered  across  the  floor, 
drawing  up  his  plaid  around  his  waist,  its  puqile  rus- 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  87 

tic  colours  caught  his  eye,  dim  as  it  w^as ;  and  he  per- 
ceived that  it  was  not  his  tartan  one  with  the  gaudy 
spangles,  but  the  grey  marled  one  that  was  made  to 
him  by  his  beloved  daughter.  Who  can  trace  the  links 
of  association  in  the  human  mind  ?  The  chain  is  more 
angled,  more  oblique,  than  the  course  marked  out  by 
the  bolt  of  heaven — as  momentarily  formed,  and  as 
quickly  lost.  In  all  cases,  they  are  indefinable,  but  on 
the  mind  of  old  age,  they  glance  like  dreams  and  vi- 
sions of  something  that  have  been,  and  ai*e  for  ever 
gone.  The  instant  that  Isaac's  eye  fell  on  his  mantle, 
he  looked  hastily  and  involuntarily  around  him,  first 
on  the  one  side  and  then  on  the  other,  his  visage  ma- 
nifesting trepidation  and  uncertainty.  "  Pray  what 
have  you  lost,  sir  ?"  said  the  kind  and  officious  dame. 
"  I  cannot  tell  what  it  was  that  I  missed,"  said  old 
Isaac,  "  but  methought  I  felt  as  if  I  had  left  something 
behind  me  that  was  mine."  Isaac  went  away,  but  left 
not  a  dry  eye  in  the  dwelling  which  he  quitted. 

On  leaving  the  cottage  he  was  accompanied  part  of 
the  way  by  Gawin,  in  whose  manner  there  still  re- 
mained an  unaccountable  degree  of  embarrassment. 
His  conversation  laboured  under  a  certain  restraint,  in- 
somuch that  Isaac,  who  was  an  observer  of  human  na- 
ture, could  not  help  taking  notice  of  it ;  but  those  who 
have  never  witnessed,  in  the  same  predicament,  a  home- 
bred, honest  countryman,  accustomed  to   speak  his 


88  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

thoughts  freely  at  all  times,  can  form  no  conception  of 
the  appearance  that  Gawin  made.  From  the  time  that 
the  worthy  old  man  first  entered  his  cot,  till  the  time 
they  parted  again  on  the  height,  Gawin's  lips  were  curl- 
ed, the  one  up,  and  the  other  down,  leaving  an  inordi- 
nate extent  of  teeth  and  gums  displayed  between  them ; 
whenever  his  eyes  met  those  of  his  companion,  they 
were  that  instant  withdrawn,  and,  with  an  involuntary 
motion,  fixed  on  the  summit  of  some  of  the  adjacent 
hills  ;  and  when  they  stopped  to  converse,  Gawin  was 
always  laying  on  the  ground  with  his  staff,  or  beating 
some  unfortunate  tliistle  all  to  pieces.  The  one  family 
had  suffered  an  injury  from  the  other,  of  a  nature  so 
flagrant  in  Gawin's  eyes,  that  his  honest  heart  could  not 
brook  it ;  and  yet  so  delicate  was  the  subject,  that 
when  he  essayed  to  mention  it,  his  tongue  refused  the 
office.  "  There  has  a  sair  misfortune  happened,"  said 
he  once,  "  that  ye  aiblins  dinna  ken  o'. — But  it's  nae 
matter  ava !"  And  with  that  he  fell  on  and  beat  a 
thistle,  or  some  other  opposing  shrub,  most  unmerci- 
fully. 

There  was,  however,  one  subject  on  which  he  spoke 
with  energy,  and  that  was  the  only  one  in  which  old 
Isaac  was  for  the  time  interested.  It  was  his  son's  re- 
ligious state  of  mind.  He  told  Isaac,  that  he  had  form- 
ed a  correct  opinion  of  the  youth,  and  that  he  was  in- 
deed a  scoffer  at  religion,  because  it  had  become  fa- 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  89 

shionable  in  certain  college  classes,  where  religion  was 
never  mentioned  but  with  ridicule  ;  but  that  his  infi- 
delity sprung  from  a  perverse  and  tainted  inclination, 
in  opposition  to  his  better  judgment,  and  that  if  he 
could  have  been  brought  at  all  to  think  or  reason  on 
the  subject,  he  would  have  thought  and  reasoned 
aright ;  this,  however,  he  had  avoided  by  every  means, 
seeming  horrified  at  the  very  mention  of  the  subject, 
and  glad  to  escape  from  the  tormenting  ideas  that  it 
brought  in  its  train. — "  Even  the  sight  of  your  face  to- 
day," continued  Gawin,  "  drove  him  into  a  fit  of  tem- 
porary derangement.  But  from  the  unwonted  docili- 
ty he  afterwards  manifested,  I  have  high  hopes  that 
this  visit  of  yours  will  be  accompanied  by  the  blessing 
of  Heaven.  He  has  been  a  dear  lad  to  me  ;  for  the 
sake  of  getting  him  foiTet  in  his  lau*,  I  hae  pinched 
baith  mysell  and  a'  my  family,  and  sitten  down  wi' 
them  to  mony  a  poor  and  scrimpit  meal.  But  I  never 
grudged  that,  only  I  hae  whiles  been  gi-ieved  that  the 
rest  o'  my  family  hae  gotten  sae  little  justice  in  their 
schooling.  And  yet,  puir  things,  there  has  never  ane 
o'  them  grieved  my  heart, — which  he  has  done  aftener 
than  I  like  to  speak  o'.  It  has  pleased  Heaven  to  pu- 
nish me  for  my  paitiality  to  him  ;  but  I  hae  naething 
for  it  but  submission. — Ha  !  do  ye  ken,  sir,  that  that 
day  I  first  saw  him  mount  a  poopit,  and  heard  him  be- 
gin a  discoui-se  to  a  croudit  congi-egation,  I  thought  a' 


90         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

my  pains  and  a'  my  pinching  poverty  overpaid.  For  the 
first  quarter  of  an  hour  I  was  sae  upliftit,  that  I  hardly 
kenn'd  whether  I  was  sitting,  standing,  or  flying  in  the 
air,  or  whether  the  kirk  was  standing  still,  or  rinning 
round  about.  But,  alake  !  afore  the  end  o'  his  twa  dis- 
courses, my  heart  tuined  as  cauld  as  lead,  and  it  has 
never  again  hett  in  my  breast  sinsyne.  They  were  twa 
o'  thae  cauldrife  moral  harangues,  that  tend  to  uplift 
poor  wrecked,  degenerate  human  nature,  and  rin  down 
divine  gi'ace.  There  was  nae  dependence  to  be  heard 
tell  o'  there,  beyond  the  weak  arm  o'  sinfu'  flesh ;  and 
oh,  I  thought  to  mysell,  that  will  afford  sma'  comfort, 
my  man,  to  either  you  or  me,  at  our  dying  day  !" 

Here  the  old  shepherd  became  so  much  overpower- 
ed, that  he  could  not  proceed,  and  old  Isaac  took  up 
the  discourse,  and  administered  comfort  to  the  sorrow- 
ing father :  then  shaking  him  kindly  by  the  hand,  he 
proceeded  on  his  way,  while  Gawin  returned  slowly 
homeward,  still  waging  war  with  every  intrusive  and 
superfluous  shrub  in  his  path.  He  was  dissatisfied 
with  himself  because  he  had  not  spoken  his  mind  to  a 
person  who  so  well  deserved  his  confidence,  on  a  sub- 
ject that  most  of  all  preyed  on  his  heart. 

Matilda,  who  sat  watching  the  path  by  which  her 
father  was  to  return  home,  beheld  him  as  soon  as  he 
came  in  view,  and  continued  to  watch  him  all  the  way 
with  that  tender  solicitude  which  is  only  prompted  by 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  91 

the  most  sincere  and  disinterested  love. — "  With  what 
agility  he  walks  !"  exclaimed  she  to  herself;  "  bless 
me,  su's,  he  is  running  !  He  is  coming  pacing  down 
yon  green  sward  as  if  he  were  not  out  of  his  teens  yet. 
I  hope  he  has  been  successful  in  his  mission,  and  pre- 
vailed with  that  abandoned  profligate  to  mal^e  some 
amends  to  my  hapless  niece." 

How  different  are  the  views  of  different  persons ! 
and  how  various  the  objects  of  their  pursuit !  Isaac 
thought  of  no  such  thing.  He  rejoiced  only  in  the 
goodness  and  mercy  of  his  Maker,  and  had  high  hopes 
that  he  would  make  him  (unworthy  as  he  was)  instiTi- 
mental  in  gaining  over  an  immortal  soul  to  Heaven  and 
happiness.  He  sung  praises  to  Heaven  in  his  heart, 
and  the  words  of  gratitude  and  thankfulness  hung  up- 
on his  tongue.  His  daughter  never  took  her  eye  from 
him,  in  his  approach  to  his  little  mansion.  Her  whole 
dependence  was  on  her  father — her  whole  affection 
was  centred  in  him  :  she  had  been  taught  from  her  in- 
fancy to  regard  him  as  the  first  and  best  of  men ;  and 
though  she  had  now  lived  with  him  forty  yeais,  he  had 
never  in  one  instance  done  an  action  to  lessen  that 
esteem,  or  deface  that  pm*e  image  of  uprightness  and 
sincerity,  which  her  affectionate  heart  had  framed. 
Wlien  he  came  in,  her  watchful  kindness  assailed  him 
in  a  multitude  of  ways — every  thing  was  wrong ;  she 
would  have  it  that  his  feet  were  damp,  although  he 


92 


THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 


assured  her  of  the  contrary — his  right-hand  sleeve  was 
wringing  wet ;  and  there  was  even  a  dampness  between 
his  shoulders,  which  was  exceedingly  dangerous,  as  it 
was  so  nearly  opposite  the  heart.  In  short,  old  Isaac's 
whole  apparel  had  to  be  shifted  piecemeal,  though  not 
without  some  strong  remonstrances  on  his  part,  and 
the  good-natured  quotation,  several  times  repeated, 
from  the  old  song  : 

*'  Nought's  to  be  won  at  woman's  hand, 
Unless  ye  gie  her  a'  the  plea." 

When  she  had  got  him  all  made  comfortable  to  her 
mind,  and  his  feet  placed  in  slippers  well-toasted  be- 
fore the  fire,  she  then  began  her  inquiries.  "  How  did 
you  find  all  at  Gawin's  to-day,  now  when  I  have  got- 
ten time  to  speir  ?" 

"  Why,  daughter  Matty,  poorly  enough,  very  poor- 
ly. But,  thanks  be  to  God,  I  think  I  left  them  some- 
what better  than  I  found  them." 

"  I  am  so  glad  to  hear  that !  I  hope  you  have  taken 
Graham  over  the  coals  about  Phemy  ?" 

«  Eh  !  about  Phemy  ?" 

"  You  know  what  I  told  you  before  you  went  away  ? 
You  were  not  so  unnatural  as  to  forget  your  own  flesh 
and  blood,  in  communing  with  the  man  who  has  wrong- 
ed her  ?" 

"  I  did  not  think  more  of  the  matter ;  and  if  I  had, 
there  would  have  been  no  propriety  in  mentioning  it, 


TPIE  PRODIGAL  SON.  -  93 

as  none  of  tlie  family  spoke  of  it  to  me.  And  how 
was  I  assured  that  there  was  no  mis-statement?  Women 
are  always  so  rash-spoken,  and  so  fond  of  exaggeration, 
that  I  am  afraid  to  trust  them  at  the  first  word ;  and 
besides,  my  dear  Matty,  you  know  they  are  apt  to  see 
things  double  sometimes." 

"  Well,  my  dear  father,  I  must  say  that  your  wit,  or 
raillery,  is  very  ill  timed,  considering  whom  it  relates 
to.  Your  grand-daughter  has  been  most  basely  de- 
ceived, under  a  pretence  of  marriage ;  and  yet  you  will 
break  your  jokes  on  the  subject !" 

"  You  know,  Matty,  I  never  broke  a  joke  on  such  a 
subject  in  my  life.  It  was  you  whom  I  was  joking ; 
for  your  news  cannot  always  be  depended  on.  If  I 
were  to  take  up  every  amour  in  the  parish,  upon  the 
faith  of  yom*  first  hints,  and  to  take  the  delinquents 
over  the  coals,  as  you  recommend,  I  should  often  com- 
mit myself  sadly." 

Matilda  was  silenced.  She  asked  for  no  instances, 
in  order  to  deny  the  insinuation ;  but  she  murmured 
some  broken  sentences,  like  one  who  has  been  fairly 
beat  in  an  argument,  but  is  loath  to  yield.  It  was  ra- 
ther a  hard  subject  for  the  good  lady ;  for  ever  since 
she  had  bidden  adieu  to  her  thirtieth  year,  she  had  be- 
come exceedingly  jealous  of  the  conduct  of  the  younger 
portion  of  her  sex.  But  Isaac  was  too  kind-hearted  to 
exult  in  a  severe  joke ;  he  instantly  added,  as  a  palli- 


94      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

ative,  "  But  I  should  hold  my  tongue.  You  have 
many  means  of  hearing,  and  coming  to  the  truth  of 
such  matters,  that  I  have  not." 

"  I  wish  this  were  false,  however,"  said  Matilda, 
turning  away  her  face  from  the  fire,  lest  the  flame 
should  scorch  her  cheek  ;  "  but  I  shall  say  no  more 
about  it,  and  neither,  I  suppose,  will  you,  till  it  be  out 
of  time.  Perhaps  it  may  not  be  true,  for  I  heard, 
since  you  went  away,  that  she  was  to  be  there  to-day, 
by  appointment  of  his  parents,  to  learn  his  final  deter- 
mination, which  may  be  as  much  without  foundation 
as  the  other  part  of  the  story.  If  she  had  been  there, 
you  must  have  seen  her,  you  know." 

"  Eh  ?"  said  Isaac,  after  biting  his  lip,  and  making  a 
long  pause  ;  "  What  did  you  say,  daughter  Matty  ? 
Did  you  say  my  Phemy  was  to  have  been  there  to- 
day?" 

"  I  heard  such  a  report,  which  must  have  been  un- 
true, because,  had  she  been  there,  you  would  have  met 
with  her." 

"  There  was  a  lass  yonder,"  said  Isaac.  "  How 
many  daughters  has  Gawin  ?" 

"  Only  one  who  is  come  the  length  of  woman,  and 
whom  you  see  in  the  kirk  every  day  capering  with  her 
bobbs  of  crimson  ribbons,  and  looking  at  Will  Fergu- 
son." 

"  It  is  a  pity  women  are  always  so  censorious,"  said 


THE  PRODIGAL  SOX.  93 

Isaac — "  always  construing  small  matters  the  wi-ong 
way.  It  is  to  be  hoped  these  little  constitutional  fail- 
ings will  not  be  laid  to  their  charge — So  Gawin  has 
but  one  daughter  ?" 

"  I  said,  one  that  is  a  grown-up  woman.  He  has, 
besides,  little  Ellen  ;  a  pert  idle  creature,  who  has  an 
eye  in  her  head  that  will  tell  tales  some  day." 

"  Then  there  was  indeed  another  damsel,"  said  old 
Isaac,  "  whom  I  did  not  know,  but  took  her  for  one  of 
the  family.     Alake,  and  wo  is  me  !    Could  I  think  it 
was  my  own  dear  child  hanging  over  the  couch  of  a 
dying  man  !   The  girl  that  I  saw  was  in  tears,  and  deep- 
ly affected.     She  even  seized  my  hand,  and  bathed  it 
with  tears.     What  could  she  think  of  me,  who  neither 
named  nor  kissed  her,  but  that  I  had  cast  her  off  and 
renounced  her  ?     But  no,  no,  I  can  never  do  that ;  I 
will  forgive  her  as  heartily  as  I  would  beg  for  her  for- 
giveness at  the  throne  of  mercy.   We  are  all  fallible  and 
offending  creatures ;  and  a  young  maid,  that  giows  up 
as  a  willow  by  the  water-courses,  and  who  is  in  the 
flush  of  youth  and  beauty,  ere  ever  she  has  had  a  mo- 
ment's time  for  serious  reflection,  or  one  trial  of  world- 
ly experience — that  such  a  one  should  fall  a  victim  to 
practised  guilt,  is  a  consequence  so  natural,  that,  how- 
ever deeply  to  be  regretted,  it  is  not  matter  of  asto- 
nishment.    Poor  misguided  Phemy !    Did  you  indee<l 
kneel  at  my  knee,  and  bathe  my  hand  with  your  affec- 


96       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

tionate  tears,  without  my  once  deigning  to  acknowledge 
you?  And  yet  how  powerful  are  the  workings  of 
natuie !  They  are  indeed  the  workings  of  the  Deity 
himself :  for  when  I  arose,  all  unconscious  of  the  pre- 
sence of  my  child,  and  left  her  weeping,  I  felt  as  if  I 
had  left  a  part  of  my  body  and  blood  behind  me." 

"  So  she  was  indeed  there,  whining  and  whimpering 
over  her  honourable  lover  ?"  said  Matilda.  "  I  wish 
I  had  been  there,  to  have  told  her  a  piece  of  my  mind  ! 
The  silly,  inconsiderate  being,  to  allow  herself  to  be 
deprived  of  fair  fame  and  character  by  such  a  worth- 
less profligate,  bringing  disgrace  on  all  connected  with 
her  !  And  then  to  go  whimpering  over  his  sick-bed  ! 
— O  deal-  love,  you  must  many  me,  or  I  am  undone ! 
I  have  loved  you  with  all  my  heart,  you  know,  and  you 
must  make  me  your  wife.  I  am  content  to  beg  my 
bread  with  you,  now  that  I  have  loved  you  so  dearly ! 
only  you  must  many  me.  Oh  dear  I  Oh  deai"  I  what 
shall  become  of  me  else !" 

"  Dear  daughter  Matilda,  where  is  the  presumptuous 
being  of  the  fallen  race  of  Adam  who  can  say.  Here 
will  I  stand  in  my  own  strength  ?  What  will  the  best 
of  us  do,  if  left  to  ourselves,  better  than  the  erring,  in- 
experienced being,  whose  turning  aside  you  so  bitterly 
censure  ?  It  is  better  that  we  lament  the  sins  and 
failings  of  oui*  relatives,  my  dear  Matty,  than  rail 
6 


THE  PRODIGAL  SOX,  97 

against  them,  putting  ourselves  into  sinful  passion,  and 
thereby  adding  one  iniquity  to  another." 

The  argument  was  kept  up  all  that  evening,  and  all 
next  day,  with  the  same  effect ;  and  if  either  of  the 
disputants  had  been  asked  what  it  was  about,  neither 
could  have  told  very  precisely:  the  one  attached  a 
blame,  which  the  other  did  not  deny ;  only  there  were 
different  ways  of  speaking  about  it.  On  the  third  day, 
which  was  Friday,  old  Isaac  appeared  at  breakfast  in 
his  Sunday  clothes,  giving  thus  an  intimation  of  a  se- 
cond intended  visit  to  the  house  of  Gawin  the  shepherd. 
The  first  cup  of  tea  was  scarcely  poured  out,  till  the 
old  subject  was  renewed,  and  the  debate  seasoned  with 
a  little  more  salt  than  was  customary  between  the  two 
amiable  disputants.  Matilda  disapproved  of  the  visit, 
and  tried,  by  all  the  eloquence  she  was  mistress  of,  to 
make  it  appear  indecorous.  Isaac  defended  it  on  the 
score  of  disinterestedness  and  purity  of  intention  ;  but 
finding  himself  hard  pressed,  he  brought  forward  his 
promise,  and  the  impropriety  of  breaking  it.  Matty 
would  not  give  up  her  point ;  she  persisted  in  it,  till 
she  spoiled  her  father's  breakfast,  made  his  hand  shake 
so,  that  he  could  scarcely  put  the  cup  to  his  head,  and, 
after  all,  staggered  his  resolution  so  much,  that  at  last 
he  sat  in  silence,  and  Matty  got  all  to  say  herself.  She 
now  accounted  the  conquest  certain,  and  valuing  herself 
on  the  influence  she  possessed,  she  began  to  overburden 

VOL.  I.  E 


98       THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

her  old  father  with  all  manner  of  kindness  and  teasing 
officiousness.  Would  he  not  take  this,  and  refrain 
from  that,  and  wear  one  part  of  di-ess  in  preference  to 
another  that  he  had  on  ?  There  was  no  end  of  con- 
troversy with  Isaac,  however  kind  might  be  the  intent. 
All  that  he  said  at  that  time  was,  "  Let  me  alone, 
dear  Matty ;  let  me  have  some  peace.  Women  are 
always  overwise — always  contrary." 

WTien  matters  were  at  this  pass,  the  maid-servant 
came  into  the  room,  and  announced  that  a  little  girl  of 
shepherd  Gawin's  wanted  to  speak  with  the  Minister. 
"  Alas,  I  feai"  the  young  man  will  be  at  his  rest !"  said 
Isaac.  Matilda  grew  pale,  and  looked  exceedingly 
alarmed,  and  only  said,  "  she  hoped  not."  Isaac  in- 
qiured  of  the  maid,  but  she  said  the  girl  refused  to  tell 
her  any  thing,  and  said  she  had  orders  not  to  tell  a  word 
of  aught  that  had  happened  about  the  house. 

"  Then  something  has  happened,"  said  Isaac.  "  It 
must  be  as  I  feared !     Send  the  little  girl  ben." 

Ellen  came  into  the  pailour  with  a  beck  as  quick  and 
as  low  as  that  made  by  the  water  ouzel,  when  standing 
on  a  stone  in  the  middle  of  the  water ;  and,  without 
waiting  for  any  inquiries,  began  her  speech  on  the  in- 
stant, with,  "  Sir — hem — heh — my  father  sent  me,  sir 
— hem — to  tell  ye  that  ye  wama  to  forget  your  pro- 
mise to  come  ower  the  day,  for  that  there's  muckle 
need  for  yer  helping  hand  yonder — sir ;  that's  a',  sir." 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  99 

"  You  may  tell  your  father,"  said  Isaac,  "  that  I  will 
come  as  soon  as  I  am  able.  I  will  be  there  by  twelve 
o'clock,  God  willing," 

"  Are  you  wise  enough,  my  dear  father,  to  send  such 
a  message  ?"  remonstrated  Matilda.  "  You  are  not  able 
to  go  a  journey  to-day.  I  thought  I  had  said  enough 
about  that  before. — You  may  tell  your  father,"  con- 
tinued she,  turning  to  Ellen,  "  that  my  father  cannot 
come  the  length  of  his  house  to-day." 

"  I'll  tell  my  father  what  the  Minister  bade  me,' 
replied  the  girl.  "  I'll  say,  sh*,  that  ye'U  be  there  by 
twall  o'clock ; — ^will  I,  sir  ?" 

"  Yes,  by  twelve  o'clock,"  said  Isaac. 

Ellen  had  no  sooner  made  her  abnipt  curtsey,  and 
left  the  room,  than  Matilda,  with  the  desperation  of  a 
general  who  sees  himself  on  the  point  of  being  driven 
from  a  position  which  it  had  cost  him  much  exertion  to 
gain,  again  opened  the  fii-e  of  her  eloquence  upon  her 
father.  "  Were  I  you,"  said  she,  "  I  would  scorn  to 
enter  theii*  door,  after  the  manner  in  which  the  profli- 
gate villain  has  behaved:  first,  to  make  an  acquaintance 
with  your  giandson  at  the  College — pervert  all  his 
ideas  of  rectitude  and  truth — then  go  home  with  him 
to  his  father's  house,  during  the  vacation,  and  there  live 
at  heck  and  manger,  no  lady  being  in  the  house  save 
your  simple  and  unsuspecting  Phemy,  who  now  is  re- 
duced to  the  necessity  of  going  to  a  shepherd's  cottage, 


100  THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

and  begging  to  be  admitted  to  the  alliance  of  a  family, 
the  best  of  whom  is  far  beneath  her,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  unhappy  individual  in  question.  Wo  is  me,  that  I 
have  seen  the  day !" 

-'  If  the  picture  be  correctly  drawn,  it  is  indeed  very 
l)ad ;  but  I  hope  the  recent  sufferings  of  the  young  man 
will  have  the  effect  of  restoring  him  to  the  principles  in 
which  he  was  bred,  and  to  a  better  sense  of  his  heinous 
offences.  I  must  go  and  see  how  the  family  fares,  as 
in  duty  and  promise  bound.  Content  yourself,  dear 
daughter.  It  may  be  that  the  unfortunate  youth  has 
already  appeared  at  that  bar  from  which  there  is  no 
appeal." 

This  consideration,  as  it  again  astounded,  so  it  put  to 
silence  the  offended  dame,  who  suffered  her  father  to 
depart  on  his  mission  of  humanity  without  farther  op- 
position ;  and  old  Isaac  again  set  out,  meditating  as  he 
went,  and  often  conversing  with  himself,  on  the  sinful- 
ness of  man,  and  the  gi'eat  goodness  of  God.  So  deep- 
ly was  he  wi-apt  in  contemplation,  that  he  scarcely  cast 
an  eye  over  the  wild  mountain  scenery  by  which  he  was 
surrounded,  but  plodded  on  his  way,  with  eyes  fixed  on 
the  giound,  till  he  approached  the  cottage.  He  was 
there  aroused  from  his  reverie,  by  the  bustle  that  ap- 
peared about  the  door.  The  scene  was  changed  indeed 
from  that  to  which  he  introduced  himself  two  days  be- 
fore.   The  collies  came  yelping  and  wagging  their  tails 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  101 

to  meet  him,  while  the  imnates  of  the  dwelling  were 
peeping  out  at  the  door,  and  as  quickly  vanishing  again 
into  the  interior.  There  were  also  a  pair  or  two  of 
neighbouring  shepherds  sauntering  about  the  side  of  the 
kail-yard  dike,  all  dressed  in  their  Sunday  apparel,  and 
every  thing  bespeaking  some  "  occasion,"  as  any  un- 
common occurrence  is  generally  denominated. 

"  What  can  it  be  that  is  astir  here  to-day?"  said 
Isaac  to  himself. — "  Am  I  brought  here  to  a  funeral  or 
corpse-chesting,  without  being  apprised  of  the  event  ? 
It  must  be  so.  What  else  can  cause  such  a  bustle  about 
a  house  where  trouble  has  so  long  prevailed  ?  Ah ! 
there  is  also  old  Robinson,  my  session-clerk  and  pre- 
centor. He  is  the  true  emblem  of  mortality :  then  it 
is  indeed  all  over  with  the  poor  young  man  I" 

Now  Robinson  had  been  at  so  many  funerals  all  over 
the  country,  and  was  so  punctual  in  his  attendance  on 
all  within  his  reach,  that  to  see  him  pass,  with  his  staff, 
and  black  coat  without  the  collar,  was  the  very  same 
thing  as  if  a  coffin  had  gone  by.  A  burial  was  always 
a  good  excuse  for  giving  the  boys  the  play,  for  a  re- 
freshing walk  into  the  country,  and  was,  besides,  a  fit 
opportunity  for  moral  contemplation,  not  to  say  any 
thing  of  hearing  the  country  news.  But  there  was 
also  another  motive,  which  some  thought  was  the 
most  powerful  inducement  of  any  with  the  old  Do- 
minie.    It  arose  from  that  longing  desire  after  pre- 


102       THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

eminence  which  reigns  in  every  human  breast,  and 
which  no  man  fails  to  improve,  however  small  the  cir- 
cle may  be  in  which  it  can  be  manifested.  At  every 
funeral,  in  the  absence  of  the  Minister,  Robinson  was 
called  on  to  say  grace ;  and  when  they  were  both  present, 
whenever  the  Parson  took  up  his  station  in  one  apait- 
ment,  the  Dominie  took  up  his  in  another,  and  thus  had 
an  equal  chance,  for  the  time,  with  his  superior.  It 
was  always  shi-ewdly  suspected,  that  the  Clerk  tried  to 
outdo  the  Minister  on  such  occasions,  and  certainly 
made  up  in  length  what  he  wanted  in  energy.  The  ge- 
neral remarks  on  this  important  point  amounted  to  this, 
"  that  the  Dominie  was  langer  than  the  Minister,  and 
though  he  was  hardly  just  sae  conceese,  yet  he  meant 
as  weel ;"  and  that,  "  for  the  maist  part,  he  was  stronger 
on  the  graver  Suffice  it,  that  the  appearance  of  old 
Robinson,  in  the  present  case,  confirmed  Isaac  in  the 
belief  of  the  solemnity  of  the  scene  awaiting  him ;  and 
as  his  mind  was  humbled  to  acquiesce  in  the  Divine 
will,  his  mild  and  reverend  features  were  correspondent 
therewith.  He  thought  of  the  disappointment  and  suf- 
ferings of  the  family,  and  had  already  begun  in  his  heart 
to  intercede  for  them  at  the  throne  of  Mercy. 

Vv^hen  he  came  near  to  the  house,  out  came  old 
Gawin  himself.  He  had  likewise  his  black  coat  on, 
and  his  Sunday  bonnet,  and  a  hand  in  each  coat-pock- 
et ;  but  for  all  his  misfortune  and  heavy  trials,  he  strode 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  103 

to  the  end  of  the  house  with  a  firm  and  undismayed 
step. — Ay,  he  is  quite  right,  thought. Isaac  to  him- 
self; that  man  has  his  trust  where  it  should  be,  fix- 
ed on  the  Rock  of  Ages ;  and  he  has  this  assurance, 
that  the  Power  on  whom  he  tmsts  can  do  nothing 
wi'ong.  Such  a  man  can  look  death  in  the  face,  un- 
dismayed, in  all  his  steps  and  im*oads. 

Gawin  spoke  to  some  of  his  homely  guests,  then 
tm*ned  round,  and  came  to  meet  Isaac,  whom  he  salu- 
ted, by  taking  off  his  bonnet,  and  shaking  him  heartily 
by  the  hand. — The  bond  of  restraint  had  now  been 
removed  from  Gawin's  lips,  and  his  eye  met  the  Mi- 
nister's with  the  same  frankness  it  was  wont.  The 
face  of  affairs  was  changed  since  they  had  last  parted. 

"  How's  a'  w'ye  the  day,  sir  ? — How's  a*  w'ye  ? — 
I'm  unco  blythe  to  see  ye,"  said  Gawin. 

"  Oh,  quite  well,  thank  you.  How  are  you  your- 
self ?  And  how  are  all  within  ?" 

"  As  weel  as  can  be  expectit,  sir — as  weel  as  can 
be  expectit." 

"  I  am  at  a  little  loss,  Gawin — Has  any  change 
taken  place  in  family  circumstances  since  I  was  here  ?" 

"  Oh,  yes  ;  there  has  indeed,  su* ;  a  material  change 
— I  hope  for  the  better." 

Gawin  now  led  the  way,  without  fuither  words,  into 
the  house,  desiring  the  Minister  to  follow  him,  and 


104        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

''  tak'  care  o'  his  head  and  the  banks,  and  no  fa'  ower 
the  bit  stirk,  for  it  was  sure  to  be  lying  i'  the  dark." 

^\Tien  Isaac  went  in,  there  was  no  one  there  but  the 
goodwife,  neatly  dressed  m  her  black  stuff  gown,  and 
check  apron,  with  a  close  'kerchief  on  her  head,  well 
crimped  in  the  border,  and  tied  round  the  crown  and 
below  the  chin  with  a  broad  black  ribbon.  She  also 
saluted  the  Minister  with  uncommon  frankness — 
"  Come  away,  sir,  come  away.  Dear,  dear,  how  aie 
ye  the  day  ?  It's  but  a  slaitery  kind  o'  day  this,  as  I 
was  saying  to  my  man,  there  ;  Dear,  dear,  Gawin^  says 
I,  I  wish  the  Minister  may  be  nae  the  waur  o'  coming 
ower  the  muir  the  day.  That  was  joost  what  I  said. 
And  dear,  dear,  sir,  how's  Miss  Matty,  sir  ?  Oh,  it  is 
lang  sin'  I  hae  seen  her.  I  like  aye  to  see  Miss  Matty, 
ye  ken,  to  get  a  rattle  frae  her  about  the  folk,  ye  ken, 
and  a'  our  neighbours,  that  fa'  into  sinfu'  gates ;  for 
there's  muckle  sin  gangs  on  i'  the  parish.  Ah,  ay  !  I 
wat  weel  that's  very  true.  Miss  Matty,  says  I.  But 
what  can  folk  help  it  ?  ye  ken,  folk  are  no  a'  made  o' 
the  same  metal,  as  the  aim  tangs, — like  you— — " 

— "  Bless  me  with  patience !"  said  Isaac  in  his 
heart ;  "  this  poor  woman's  misfortunes  have  crazed 
her  !  What  a  salutation  for  the  house  of  mourning  !" 
Isaac  looked  to  the  bed,  at  the  side  of  which  he  had 
so  lately  kneeled  in  devotion,  and  he  looked  with  a  re- 
verent dread,  but  the  corpse  was  not  there  !    It  was 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  105 

neatly  spread  with  a  clean  corerlid. — It  is  best  to 
conceal  the  pale  and  ghostly  features  of  mortality  from 
the  gazer's  eye,  thought  Isaac.  It  is  wisely  done,  for 
there  is  nothing  to  be  seen  in  them  but  what  is  fitted 
for  corruption. 

''  Gawin,  can  nae  ye  tak'  the  Minister  ben  the  house, 
or  the  rest  o'  the  clanjamphery  come  in  ?"  said  the 
talkative  dame. — "  Hout,  ay,  sir,  step  your  ways  ben 
the  house.  We  hae  a  ben  end  and  a  but  end  the  day, 
as  weel  as  the  best  o'  them.  And  ye're  ane  o'  our  ain 
folk,  ye  ken.  Ah,  ay  I  I  wat  weel  that's  very  true  ! 
As  I  said  to  my  man,  Gawin,  quo'  I,  whenever  I  see 
our  Minister's  face,  I  think  I  see  the  face  of  a  friend." 

"  Gudewife,  I  hae  but  just  ae  word  to  say,  by  way 
o'  remark,"  said  Gawin ;  "  folk  wha  count  afore  the 
change-keeper,  hae  often  to  count  twice,  and  sae  has 
the  herd,  wha  counts  his  hogs  afore  Beltan. — Come 
this  way,  sir ;  follow  me,  and  tak'  care  o'  yoiu"  head 
and  the  banks." 

Isaac  followed  into  the  rustic  parlour,  where  he  was 
introduced  to  one  he  little  expected  to  see  sitting  there. 
This  was  no  other  than  the  shepherd's  son,  who  had 
so  long  been  attended  on  as  a  dying  person,  and  with 
whom  Isaac  had  so  lately  prayed,  in  the  most  fei-vent 
devotion,  as  with  one  of  whose  life  little  hope  was  en- 
tertained. There  he  sat,  with  legs  like  two  poles, 
hands  like  the  hands  of  a  skeleton  ;  yet  his  emaciated 
:e  2 


106        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

featui-es  were  lighted  up  with  a  smile  of  serenity  and 
joy.  Isaac  was  petrified.  He  stood  still  on  the  spot, 
even  though  the  young  man  rose  up  to  receive  him. 
He  deemed  he  had  come  there  to  see  his  lifeless  form 
laid  in  the  coffin,  and  to  speak  words  of  comfort  to  the 
survivors.  He  was  taken  by  surprise,  and  his  heart 
thrilled  with  unexpected  joy. 

"  My  dear  young  friend,  do  I  indeed  see  you  thus  ?" 
he  said,  taking  him  kindly  and  gently  by  the  hand. 
"  God  has  been  merciful  to  you,  above  others  of  your 
race.  I  hope,  in  the  mercy  that  has  saved  you  from 
the  gates  of  death,  that  you  feel  gi*ateful  for  your  de- 
liverance ;  for,  trust  me,  it  behoves  you  to  do  so,  in  no 
ordinary  degree." 

"  I  shall  never  be  able  to  feel  as  I  ought,  either  to 
my  deliverer  or  to  yom-self,"  said  he.  "  Till  once  I 
heard  the  words  of  truth  and  seriousness  from  your 
mouth,  I  have  not  dared,  for  these  many  years,  to 
think  my  own  thoughts,  speak  my  own  words,  or  per- 
form the  actions  to  which  my  soul  inclined.  I  have 
been  a  truant  from  the  school  of  truth  ;  but  have  now 
returned,  with  all  humility,  to  my  Master,  for  I  feel 
that  I  have  been  like  a  wayward  boy,  groping  in  the 
dark,  to  find  my  way,  though  a  path  splendidly  light- 
ed up  lay  open  for  me.  But  of  these  things  I  long  ex- 
ceedingly to  converse  with  you,  at  full  length  and  full 
leisure.     In  the  meantime,  let  me  introduce  you  to 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  107 

Other  Mends  who  are  longing  for  some  little  notice. 
This  is  my  sister,  su' ;  and — shake  hands  with  the  Mi- 
nister, Jane — And  do  you  know  this  yomig  lady,  sir, 
with  the  mantle  about  her,  who  seems  to  expect  a 
word  from  you,  acknowledging  old  acquaintance  ?" 

"  My  eyes  are  grown  so  dim  now,"  said  old  Isaac, 
"  that  it  is  with  difficulty  I  can  distinguish  young  peo- 
ple from  one  another,  imless  they  speak  to  me.  But 
she  will  not  look  up.  Is  this  my  dear  yomig  friend, 
Miss  Maiy  Sibbet  ?" 

"  Nay,  sir,  it  is  not  she.  But  I  think,  as  you  two 
approach  one  another,  your  plaids  appear  very  nearly 
the  same." 

"  Phemy  I  My  own  child  Phemy  I  Is  it  yourself  ? 
Why  did  you  not  speak  ? — But  you  have  been  an  alien 
of  late,  and  a  stranger  to  me.  Ah,  Phemy  I  Phemy  ! 
I  have  been  hearing  bad  news  of  you.  But  I  did  not 
believe  them — no,  I  would  not  believe  them." 

Euphemia  for  a  while  uttered  not  a  word,  but  keep- 
ing fast  hold  of  her  grandfather's  hand,  she  drew  it  un- 
der her  mantle,  and  crept  imperceptibly  a  degree  near- 
er to  his  breast.  The  old  man  waited  for  some  reply, 
standing  as  in  the  act  of  listening ;  till  at  length,  in  a 
trembling  whisper,  scarcely  audible,  she  repeated  these 
sacred  words — "  Father,  forgive  me,  for  I  knew  not 
what  I  did  !"  The  expression  had  the  effect  desired  on 
Isaac's  mind.     It  brought  to  his  remembrance  that 


108        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

gracious  petition,  the  most  fully  fraught  with  mercy 
and  forgiveness  that  ever  was  uttered  on  earth,  and 
bowed  his  whole  soul  at  once  to  follow  the  pattern  of 
his  great  Master.  His  eye  beamed  with  exultation  in 
his  Redeemer's  goodness,  and  he  answered,  "  Yes,  my 
child,  yes.  He  whose  words  you  have  unworthily  ta- 
ken, will  not  refuse  the  petition  of  any  of  his  repent- 
ant children,  however  great  their  enormities  may  have 
been ;  and  why  should  such  a  creature  as  I  am  pre- 
sume to  pretend  indignation  and  offence,  at  aught  fur- 
ther than  his  high  example  waiTants  ?  May  the  Al- 
mighty forgive  you  as  I  do  I" 

"  May  Heaven  bless  and  reward  you !"  said  the 
young  man.  "  But  she  is  blameless — blameless  as  the 
babe  on  the  knee.  I  alone  am  the  guilty  person,  who 
infringed  the  rights  of  hospitality,  and  had  neaily  broken 
the  bonds  of  confidence  and  love.  But  I  am  here  to- 
day to  make,  or  offer  at  least,  what  amends  is  in  my 
power — to  offer  her  my  hand  in  wedlock  ;  that  whe- 
ther I  live  or  die,  she  may  live  without  dishonour.  But, 
reverend  sir,  all  depends  on  your  fiat.  Without  your 
approbation  she  will  consent  to  nothing  ;  saying,  that 
she  had  offended  deeply  by  taking  her  own  will  once,  but 
nought  should  ever  induce  her  to  take  it  unadvisedly 
again.  It  was  for  this  purpose  that  we  sent  for  you 
so  expressly  to-day,  namely,  that  I  might  entreat  your 
consent  to  our  union.     I  could  not  be  removed  from 


THE  PRODIGAL  SOX.  109 

home,  so  that  we  could  not  all  meet,  to  know  one  an- 
other's mind,  in  any  other  place.  We  therefore  await 
your  approbation  with  earnest  anxiety,  as  that  on  which 
our  future  happiness  depends." 

After  some  mild  and  impressive  reprehensions,  Isaac's 
consent  was  given  in  the  most  unqualified  manner,  and 
the  names  were  given  in  to  the  old  Dominie's  hand, 
with  proper  vouchers,  for  the  publication  of  the  bans. 
The  whole  party  dined  together  at  old  Gawin's.  I  was 
there  among  the  res''/>^' \d  thought  to  enjoy  the  party  ex- 
ceedingly ;  but  the  party  was  too  formal,  and  too  much 
on  the  reserve  before  the  Minister.  I  noted  down,  when 
I  went  home,  all  the  conversation,  as  far  as  I  could 
remember  it,  but  it  is  not  worth  copying.  I  see  that 
Gawin's  remarks  are  all  measured  and  pompous,  and, 
moreover,  delivered  in  a  sort  of  bastard  English,  a  lan- 
guage which  I  detest.  He  considered  himself  as  now 
to  be  nearly  connected  with  the  Manse  Family,  and 
looking  forward  to  an  eldership  in  the  church,  deemed 
it  incumbent  on  him  to  talk  in  a  most  sage  and  instmc- 
tive  ra'Anner.  The  young  shepherd,  and  an  associate 
of  his,  talked  of  dogs,  Cheviot  tups,  and  some  remark- 
ably bonny  lasses  that  sat  in  the  west  gallery  of  the 
church.  John  Grierson  of  the  Hope  recited  what  they 
called  "  lang  skelps  o'  metre,"  a  sort  of  homely  rhymes, 
that  some  of  them  pronounced  to  be  "  far  ayont  Bums's 
fit."  And  the  goodwife  ran  bustling  about ;  but  when- 


110        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

ever  she  could  get  a  little  leisure,  she  gave  her  tongue 
free  vent,  without  regard  either  to  Minister  or  Domi- 
nie. She  was  too  well  trained  in  the  old  homely 
Scotch,  to  attempt  any  of  the  flights,  which  to  Gawin, 
who  was  more  sparing  in  his  speech,  were  more  easy 
to  be  accomplished.  "  Dear,  dear,  sus,  can  nae  ye  eat 
away  ?  Ye  hae  nae  the  stamacks  o'  as  mony  cats. 
Dear,  dear,  I'm  sure  an  the  flesh  be  nae  good,  it  sude 
be  good,  for  it  never  saw  either  braxy  or  breakwind, 
bleer-ee  nor  Beltan  pock,  but  \i\  p  the  cantiest  crock  o' 
the  Kaim-law.  Dear,  dear,  Johnie  Grierson,  tak'  an- 
other rive  o't,  and  set  a  good  example  ;  as  I  said  to  my 
man  there,  Gawin,  says  I,  it's  weel  kenn'd  ye're  nae 
flae-bitten  about  the  gab ;  and  I  said  very  tnie  too." 

Many  such  rants  did  she  indulge  in,  always  reminding 
her  guests  that  "  it  was  a  names-gieing-in,  whilk  was, 
o'  a'  ither  things,  the  ane  neist  to  a  wedding,"  and  of- 
ten hinting  at  their  new  and  honourable  alliance,  scarce- 
ly even  able  to  keep  down  the  way  in  which  it  was 
brought  about;  for  she  once  went  so  far  as  to  say, 
"  As  I  said  to  my  gudeman,  Gawin,  says  I,  for  a'  the 
fy-gae-to  ye  hae  made,  it's  weel  kenn'd  faint  heart  ne- 
ver wan  fair  lady.  Ay,  weel  I  wat,  that's  very  true,  says 
I ;  a  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  twa  on  the  bush. — Won 
a'  to  and  fill  yoursells,  sirs  ;  there's  routh  o'  mair  where 
that  came  frae.  It's  no  aye  the  fattest  foddering  that 
mak's  the  fu'est  aumry — and  that's  nae  lee." 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON.  Ill 

Miss  Matilda,  the  Minister's  maiden  daughter,  was 
in  towering  indignation  about  the  mamage,  and  the 
connexion  with  a  shepherd's  family ;  and  it  was  ru- 
moured over  all  the  parish  that  she  would  never  coun- 
tenance her  niece  any  more.  How  matters  went  at 
first  it  is  perhaps  as  well  for  Miss  Matilda's  reputation, 
in  point  of  good-natm-e,  that  I  am  not  able  to  say ; 
but  the  last  time  I  was  at  the  Manse,  the  once  profli- 
gate and  freethinking  student  had  become  Helper  to 
old  Isaac,  and  was  beloved  and  revered  by  all  the  pa- 
rish, for  the  warmth  of  his  devotion,  and  soundness  of 
his  principles.  His  amiable  wife  Euphemia  had  two 
sons,  and  their  aunt  Matty  was  nursing  them  with  a 
fondness  and  love  beyond  that  which  she  bore  to  life 
itself. 

In  conclusion,  I  have  only  further  to  remark,  that  I 
have  always  considered  the  prayers  of  that  good  old 
man  as  having  been  peculiarly  instrumental  in  saving 
a  wretched  victim,  not  only  from  immediate  death,  but 
from  despair  of  endless  duration. 


112        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  SCHOOL  OF  iMlSFORTUNE. 

The  various  ways  in  wliich  misfortunes  affect  dif- 
ferent minds,  are  often  so  opposite,  that  in  contempla- 
ting them,  we  may  well  be  led  to  suppose  the  human 
soul  animated  and  directed  in  some  persons  by  corpo- 
real functions,  formed  after  a  different  manner  from 
those  of  others — persons  of  the  same  family  frequently 
differing  most  widely  in  this  respect. 

It  will  appear,  on  a  philosophic  scrutiny  of  human 
feelings,  that  the  extremes  of  laughing  and  crying  are 
more  nearly  allied  than  is  sometimes  believed.  With 
children,  the  one  frequently  dwindles,  or  breaks  out  into 
the  other.  I  once  happened  to  sit  beside  a  negro,  in  the 
pit  of  the  Edinburgh  theatre,  while  the  tragedy  of  Dou- 
glas was  performing.  As  the  dialogue  between  Old  Nor- 
val  and  Lady  Randolph  proceeded,  he  grew  more  and 
more  attentive ;  his  eyes  grew  very  large,  and  seemed 
set  immovably  in  one  direction;  the  tears  started 
from  them ;  his  features  went  gradually  awry ;  his  un- 


THE  SCHOOL  OF  MISFORTUNE.  118 

der-lip  curled  and  turned  to  one  side ;  and  just  when  I 
expected  that  he  was  going  to  cry  outright,  he  burst 
into  the  raost  violent  fit  of  laughter. 

I  have  a  female  friend,  on  whom  unfortunate  acci- 
dents have  the  singular  effect  of  causing  violent  laugh- 
ter, which,  with  her,  is  much  better  proportioned  to  the 
calamity,  than  crying  is  with  many  others  of  the  sex.  I 
have  seen  the  losing  of  a  rubber  at  whist,  when  there 
was  every  probability  that  her  party  would  gain  it, 
cause  her  to  laugh  till  her  eyes  streamed  with  tears. 
The  breaking  of  a  tureen,  or  set  of  valuable  china, 
would  quite  convulse  her.  Danger  always  makes  her 
sing,  and  misfortimes  laugh.  If  we  hear  her  in  any 
apartment  of  the  farm-house,  or  the  offices,  singing  very 
loud,  and  very  quick,  we  are  sure  something  is  on  the 
point  of  going  wrong  with  her ;  but  if  we  hear  her  burst 
out  a-laughing,  we  know  that  it  is  past  redemption. 
Her  memory  is  extremely  defective ;  indeed  she  scai'ce- 
ly  seems  to  retain  any  perfect  recollection  of  past 
events ;  but  her  manners  are  gentle,  easy,  and  engaging ; 
her  temper  good,  and  her  humour  inexhaustible ;  and, 
with  all  her  singularities,  she  certainly  enjoys  a  greater 
share  of  happiness  than  her  chequered  fortune  could 
possibly  have  bestowed  on  a  mind  differently  consti- 
tuted. 

I  have  another  near  relation,  who,  besides  being  pos- 
sessed of  an  extensive  knowledge  in  literature,  and  a 


114  THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

refined  taste,  is  endowed  with  every  qualification  re- 
quisite to  constitute  the  valuable  friend,  the  tender  pa- 
rent, and  the  indulgent  husband ;  yet  his  feelings,  and 
his  powers  of  conception,  are  so  consti-ucted,  as  to  ren- 
der him  a  constant  prey  to  coiToding  care.  No  man 
can  remain  many  days  in  his  company  without  saying, 
in  his  heart,  "  that  man  was  made  to  be  unhappy." 
What  others  view  as  slight  misfortunes,  affect  him 
deeply;  and  in  the  event  of  any  such  happening  to 
himself,  or  those  that  are  dear  to  him,  he  will  groan 
from  his  inmost  soul,  perhaps  for  a  whole  evening  after 
it  first  comes  to  his  knowledge,  and  occasionally,  for 
many  days  afterwards,  as  the  idea  recuis  to  him.  In- 
deed, he  never  wants  something  to  make  him  miser- 
able ;  for,  on  being  made  acquainted  with  any  favour- 
able turn  of  fortune,  the  only  mark  of  joy  that  it  pro- 
duces is  an  involuntaiy  motion  of  the  one  hand  to 
scratch  the  other  elbow ;  and  his  fancy  almost  instan- 
taneously presents  to  him  such  a  number  of  difficulties, 
dangers,  and  bad  consequences  attending  it,  that  though 
I  have  often  hoped  to  awake  him  to  joy  by  my  tidings, 
I  always  left  him  more  miserable  than  I  found  him. 

I  have  another  acquaintance  whom  we  denomi- 
nate "  the  Knight,"  who  falls  upon  a  method  totally  dif- 
ferent to  overcome  misfortunes.  In  the  event  of  any 
cross  accident,  or  vexatious  circumstance,  happening  to 
him,  he  makes  straight  towai'ds  his  easy  chair — sits 


THE  SCHOOL  OP  MISFORTUNE,  115 

calmly  down  upon  it — clenches  his  right  hand,  with  the 
exception  of  his  fore-finger,  which  is  suflfered  to  con- 
tinue straight — strikes  his  fist  violently  against  his  left 
shoulder — keeps  it  in  that  position,  with  his  eyes  fixed 
on  one  particular  point,  till  he  has  cursed  the  event  and 
all  connected  with  it  most  heartily,— then,  with  a  coun- 
tenance of  perfect  good-humoui-,  he  indulges  in  a  plea- 
sant laugh,  and  if  it  is  possible  to  di*aw  a  comical  or  ri- 
diculous inference  fi'om  the  whole,  or  any  part  of  the 
aiFau-,  he  is  sure  to  do  it,  that  the  laugh  may  be  kept 
up.  If  he  fails  in  effecting  this,  he  again  resumes  his 
former  posture,  and  consigns  all  connected  with  the 
vexatious  cu-cumstance  to  the  devil ;  then  takes  another 
good  hearty  laugh ;  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  affair  is  no 
more  heard  or  thought  of. 

John  Leggat  is  a  lad  about  fifteen,  a  chai'acter  of 
gi-eat  singularity,  whom  natm-e  seems  to  have  formed 
in  one  of  her  whims.  He  is  not  an  entire  idiot,  for  he 
can  perform  many  offices  about  his  master's  house — 
herd  the  cows,  and  run  errands  too,  provided  there  be 
no  dead  horses  on  the  road,  nor  any  thing  extremely 
ugly ;  for,  if  there  be,  the  time  of  his  return  is  very  un- 
certain. Among  other  anomalies  in  his  chai'acter,  the 
way  that  misfortunes  affect  him  is  not  the  least  striking. 
He  once  became  warmly  attached  to  a  young  hound, 
which  was  likewise  very  fond  of  him,  paying  him  all 
the  grateful  respect  so  often  exhibited  by  that  faithful 


1 16        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

animal.  John  loved  him  above  all  earthly  things- 
some  even  thought  that  he  loved  him  better  than  his 
own  flesh  and  blood.  The  hound  one  day  came  to  an 
untimely  end.  John  never  got  such  sport  in  his  life ; 
he  was  convulsed  with  laughter  when  he  contemplated 
the  features  of  his  dead  friend.  When  about  his  ordi- 
nary business,  he  was  extremely  melancholy ;  but  when- 
ever he  came  and  looked  at  the  carcass,  he  was  trans- 
ported with  delight,  and  expressed  it  by  the  most  ex- 
travagant raptures.  He  next  attached  himself  to  a  tur- 
key-cock, which  he  trained  to  come  at  his  call,  and  pur- 
sue and  attack  such  people  as  he  pointed  out  for  that 
purpose.  John  was  very  fond  of  this  amusement ;  but 
it  proved  fatal  to  his  favourite— an  irritated  passenger 
knocked  it  dead  at  a  stroke.  This  proved  another 
source  of  unbounded  meniment  to  John ;  the  stiff  half- 
spread  wing,  the  one  leg  stretched  forward,  and  the 
other  back,  were  infinitely  amusing;  but  the  abrupt 
crook  in  his  neck— his  tumed-up  eye  and  open  bill 
were  quite  irresistible — ^John  laughed  at  them  till  he 
was  quite  exhausted.  Few  ever  loved  their  friends 
better  than  John  did  while  they  were  alive ;  no  man 
was  ever  so  much  delighted  with  them  after  they  were 
dead. 

The  most  judicious  way  of  encountering  misfortunes 
of  every  kind,  is  to  take  up  a  firm  resolution  never  to 
shrink  from  them  when  they  cannot  be  avoided,  nor 


THE  SCHOOL  OF  MISFORTUNE.  117 

yet  be  tamely  overcome  by  them,  or  add  to  our  anguish 
by  useless  repining,  but,  by  a  steady  and  cheerful  per- 
severance, endeavour  to  make  the  best  of  whatever  un- 
toward event  occurs.  To  do  so,  still  remains  in  our 
power ;  and  it  is  a  grievous  loss  indeed,  with  regard  to 
fortune  or  favour,  that  perseverance  will  not,  sooner  or 
later,  overcome.  I  do  not  recommend  a  stupid  insen- 
sible apathy  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  life,  nor  yet 
that  listless  inactive  resignation  which  persuades  a  man 
to  put  his  hands  in  his  bosom,  and  saying,  It  is  the  will 
of  Heaven,  sink  under  embarrassments  without  a  strug- 
gle. The  contempt  which  is  his  due  will  infallibly 
overtake  such  a  man,  and  poverty  and  wretchedness 
will  press  hard  upon  his  declining  years. 

I  had  an  old  and  valued  friend  in  the  country,  who, 
on  any  cross  accident  happening  that  vexed  his  associ- 
ates, made  always  the  following  observations :  "  There 
are  just  two  kinds  of  misfortunes,  gentlemen,  at  which 
it  is  folly  either  to  be  grieved  or  angry ;  and  these  are, 
things  that  can  be  remedied,  and  things  that  cannot  be 
remedied."  He  then  proved,  by  plain  demonstration, 
that  the  case  under  consideration  belonged  to  one  or 
other  of  these  classes,  and  showed  how  vain  and  un- 
profitable it  was  to  be  grieved  or  angry  at  it.  This 
maxim  of  my  friend's  may  be  rather  too  comprehen- 
sive ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  a  good  one ;  for  a  resolu- 
tion to  that  effect  cannot  fail  of  leading  a  man  to  the 


118        THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

proper  mode  of  action.  It  indeed  comprehends  all 
things  whatsoever,  and  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  a  man 
should  never  suffer  liimself  to  grow  angry  at  all ;  and, 
upon  the  whole,  I  think,  if  the  matter  be  candidly 
weighed,  it  will  appear,  that  the  man  who  suffers  him- 
self to  be  transported  with  anger,  or  teased  by  regret, 
is  commonly,  if  not  always,  the  principal  sufferer  by  it, 
either  immediately,  or  in  future.  Rage  is  unlicensed, 
and  runs  without  a  curb.  It  lessens  a  man's  respecta- 
bility among  his  contemporaries ;  grieves  and  hurts  the 
feelings  of  those  connected  with  him ;  harrows  his  own 
soul ;  and  transforms  a  rational  and  accountable  crea- 
ture into  the  image  of  a  fiend. 

Impatience  under  misfortunes  is  certainly  one  of  the 
failings  of  our  nature,  which  contributes  more  than  any 
other  to  imbitter  the  cup  of  life,  and  has  been  the  im- 
mediate cause  of  more  acts  of  desperate  depravity  than 
any  passion  of  the  human  soul.  The  loss  of  fortune  or 
favour  is  particularly  apt  to  give  birth  to  this  torment- 
ing sensation ;  for,  as  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  oc- 
curs frequently  without  some  imprudence  or  neglect  of 
our  own  having  been  the  primary  cause,  so  the  reflec- 
tion on  that  always  furnishes  the  gloomy  retrospect 
with  its  principal  stmg. 

So  much  is  this  the  case  that  I  hold  it  to  be  a  posi- 
tion almost  incontrovertible,  that  out  of  every  twenty 
worldly  misfortunes,  nineteen  occur  in  consequence  of 


THE  SCHOOL  OF  MISFORTUNE.  119 

our  own  impnidence.  Many  will  tell  you,  it  was 
owing  to  such  and  such  a  friend's  imprudence  that 
they  sustained  all  their  losses.  No  such  thing.  Whose 
imprudence  or  want  of  foresight  was  it  that  trusted 
such  a  friend,  and  put  it  in  his  power  to  ruin  them, 
and  reduce  the  families  that  depended  on  them  for 
support,  from  a  state  of  affluence  to  one  of  penury  and 
bitter  regret  ?  If  the  above  position  is  admitted,  then 
there  is,  as  I  have  already  remarked,  but  one  right 
and  proper  way  in  which  misfortunes  ought  to  ajBFect 
us ;  namely,  by  stirring  us  up  to  greater  circumspec- 
tion and  perseverance.  Perseverance  is  a  noble  and 
inestimable  virtue  !  There  is  scarcely  any  difficulty  or 
danger  that  it  will  not  surmount.  Whoever  observes 
a  man  beaiing  up  under  worldly  misfortunes,  with  im- 
daunted  resolution,  will  rarely  fail  to  see  that  man  ul- 
timately successful.  And  it  may  be  depended  on, 
that  circumspection  in  business  is  a  quality  so  abso- 
lutely necessary,  that  without  it  the  success  of  any 
one  will  only  be  temporary. 

The  present  Laii'd  of  J — s — y,  better  known  by  the 
appellation  of  Old  Sandy  Singlebeard,  was  once  a 
common  hired  shepherd,  but  he  became  master  of  the 
virtues  above  recommended,  for  he  had  picked  them 
up  in  the  severe  school  of  misfortune.  I  have  heard 
him  relate  the  circumstances  myself,  oftener  than 
once.     "  My  father  had  bought  me  a  stock  of  sheep," 


120         THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

said  he,  "  and  fitted  me  out  as  a  shepherd  ;  and  from 
the  profits  of  these,  I  had  plenty  of  money  to  spend, 
and  lay  out  on  good  clothes ;  so  that  I  was  accounted 
a  thriving  lad,  and  rather  a  dashing  blade  among  the 
lasses.  Chancing  to  change  my  master  at  a  term,  I 
sold  my  sheep  to  the  man  who  came  in  my  place,  and 
bought  those  of  the  shepherd  that  went  from  the  flock 
to  which  I  was  engaged.  But  when  the  day  of  pay- 
ment came,  the  man  who  bought  my  sheep  could  not 
pay  them,  and  without  that  money,  I  had  not  where- 
with to  pay  mine  own.  He  put  me  off  from  week  to 
week,  until  the  matter  grew  quite  distressing ;  for,  as 
the  price  of  shepherds'  stock  goes  straight  onward 
from  one  hand  to  another,  probably  twenty,  or  perhaps 
forty  people,  were  all  kept  out  of  their  right  by  this 
backwardness  of  my  debtor.  I  craved  him  for  the 
money  every  two  or  three  days,  grumbled,  and  threat- 
ened a  prosecution,  till  at  last  my  own  stock  was 
poinded.  Thinking  I  should  be  disgi'aced  beyond  re- 
covery, I  exerted  what  little  credit  I  had,  and  borrow- 
ed as  much  as  relieved  my  stock ;  and  then,  being  a 
good  deal  exasperated,  resorted  immediately  to  legal 
measures,  as  they  are  called,  in  order  to  recover  the 
debt  due  to  me,  the  non-payment  of  which  had  alone 
occasioned  my  own  difficulties.  Notwithstanding  eve- 
ry exertion,  however,  I  could  never  draw  a  farthing 
from  my  debtor,  and  only  got  deeper  and  deeper  into 
8 


THE  SeHOOL  OT  MISFORTUNE.  121 

expe»ses  to  no  purpose.  Many  a  day  it  kept  me  bare 
and  busy  before  I  could  clear  my  feet,  and  make  my- 
self as  free  and  independent  as  I  was  before.  This 
was  the  beginning  of  my  misfortunes,  but  it  was  but 
the  beginning ;  year  after  year  I  lost  and  lost,  until 
my  little  all  was  as  good  as  thi-ee  times  sold  off  at  the 
ground  ;  and  at  last  I  was  so  reduced,  that  I  could  uot 
say  the  clothes  I  wore  were  my  own, 

"  This  will  never  do,  thought  I ;  they  shall  crack 
well  that  persuade  me  to  sell  at  random  again.- — Ac- 
cordingly, I  thenceforth  took  good  care  of  all  my  sales 
that  came  to  any  amount.  My  rule  was,  to  sell  my 
little  things,  such  as  wool,  lambs,  and  fat  sheep,  worth 
the  money ;  and  not  to  part  with  them  till  I  got  the 
price  in  my  hand.  This  plan  I  never  rued ;  and  people 
finding  how  the  case  stood,  I  had  always  plenty  of 
merchants;  so  that  I  would  recommend  it  to  every 
man  who  depends  for  procming  the  means  of  living  on 
business  such  as  mine.  What  does  it  signify  to  sell 
your  stock  at  a  great  price,  merely  for  a  boast,  if  you 
never  get  the  money  for  it  ?  It  will  be  long  ere  that 
make  any  one  rich  or  independent !  This  did  all  very 
well,  but  still  I  found,  on  looking  over  my  accounts  at 
the  end  of  the  year,  that  there  were  a  gieat  many  items 
in  which  I  was  regularly  taken  in.  My  shoemaker 
charged  me  half-a-crown  more  for  every  pair  of  shoes 
thm  I  cpuld  have  bpjight  them  for  in  a  market  for 

VOL.  I.  F 


122  THE  shepherd's  calendak. 

ready  money ;  the  smith,  thi-eepence  more  for  shoeing- 
them.  My  haberdasher's  and  tailor's  accounts  were 
scandalous.  In  shirts,  stockings,  knives,  razors,  and 
even  in  shirt-neck  buttons,  I  found  myself  taken  in  to 
a  certain  amount.  But  I  was  never  so  astonished,  as 
to  find  out,  by  the  plain  rules  of  addition  and  subtrac- 
tion, assisted  now  and  then  by  the  best  of  all  practical 
rules — (I  mean  the  one  that  says,  <  if  such  a  thing  will 
biing  such  a  thing,  what  will  such  and  such  a  number 
bring  ?') — to  find,  I  say,  that  the  losses  and  profits  in 
small  things  actually  come  to  more  at  the  long-run, 
than  any  casual  great  slump  loss,  or  profit,  that  usu- 
ally chances  to  a  man  in  the  course  of  business.  Wo 
to  the  man  who  is  not  aware  of  this !  He  is  labour- 
ing for  that  which  will  not  profit  him.  By  a  course  of 
strict  economy,  I  at  length  not  only  succeeded  in  clear- 
ing off  the  debt  I  had  incurred,  but  saved  as  much  money 
as  stocked  the  farm  of  Windlestrae-knowe.  That  proved 
a  fair  bargain;  so,  when  the  lease  was  out,  I  took  Dod- 
dysdamms  in  with  it ;  and  now  I  am,  as  you  see  me, 
the  Laud  of  J — s — y,  and  farmer  of  both  these  besides. 
My  success  has  been  wholly  owing  to  this : — misfor- 
tune made  me  cautious — caution  taught  me  a  lesson 
which  is  not  obvious  to  every  one,  namely  the  mighty 
importance  of  the  tivo  right-hand  columns  in  addition. 
The  two  left-hand  ones,  those  of  pounds  and  shillings, 
every  one  knows  the  value  of.    With  a  man  of  any  com- 


THE  SCHOOL  OF  MISFORTUNE.  123 

mon  abilities,  those  will  take  care  of  themselves  ;  but 
he  that  neglects  the  pence  and  farthings  is  a  goose  !" — 

Any  one  who  reads  this  will  set  down  old  Single- 
beard  as  a  miser  ;  but  I  scarcely  know  a  man  less  de- 
serving the  character.  If  one  is  present  to  hear  him 
settling  an  account  with  another,  he  cannot  help  think- 
ing him  niggardly,  owing  to  his  extraordinary  avidity 
in  small  matters  ;  but  there  is  no  man  whom  custom- 
ers like  better  to  deal  with,  owing  to  his  high  honour 
and  punctuality.  He  will  not  pocket  a  farthing  that  is 
the  right  of  any  man  living,  and  he  is  always  on  the  watch 
lest  some  designing  fellow  overreach  him  in  these  mi- 
nute particulars.  For  all  this,  he  has  assisted  many  of 
his  poor  relations  with  money  and  credit,  when  he 
thought  them  deserving  it,  or  judged  that  it  coidd  be 
of  any  benefit  to  them  ;  but  always  with  the  strictest 
injunctions  of  secrecy,  and  an  assurance,  that,  if  ever 
they  hinted  the  transaction  to  any  one,  they  forfeited 
all  chance  of  farther  assistance  from  him.  The  conse- 
quence of  this  has  always  been,  that  while  he  was  do- 
ing a  gi'eat  deal  of  good  to  otheis  by  his  credit,  he  was 
railing  against  the  system  of  giving  credit  all  the  while ; 
so  that  those  who  knew  him  not,  took  him  for  a  selfish, 
contracted,  churlish  old  rascal. 

He  was  once  applied  to  in  behalf  of  a  nephew,  who 
had  some  fair  prospects  of  setting  up  in  business.  He 
thought  the  stake  too  high,  and  declined  it ;  for  it  was 


124      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

a  rule  with  him,  never  to  credit  any  one  so  far  as  to 
put  it  in  his  power  to  distress  him,  or  drive  him  into 
any  embarrassment.  A  few  months  afterwards,  he  con- 
sented to  become  bound  for  one  half  of  the  sum  re- 
quired, and  the  other  half  was  made  up  by  some  less 
wealthy  relations  in  conjunction.  The  bonds  at  last 
became  due,  and  I  chanced  to  be  present  on  a  visit  to 
my  old  friend  Singlebeard,  when  the  young  man  came 
to  request  his  uncle's  quota  of  the  money  required.  I 
knew  nothing  of  the  matter,  but  I  could  not  help  no- 
ticing the  change  in  old  Sandy's  look,  the  moment  that 
his  nephew  made  his  appearance.  I  suppose  he  thought 
him  too  foppish  to  be  entirely  dependent  on  the  credit 
of  others,  and  perhaps  judged  his  success  in  business, 
on  that  account,  rather  doubtful.  At  all  events,  the 
old  Laud  had  a  certain  qidzzical,  dissatisfied  look,  that 
I  never  observed  before  ;  and  all  his  remarks  were  in 
conformity  with  it.  In  addressing  the  young  man,  too, 
he  used  a  degree  of  familiarity  which  might  be  war- 
ranted by  his  seniority  and  relationship,  and  the  cir- 
cumstances in  which  his  nephew  stood  to  him  as  an 
obliged  party ;  but  it  was  intended  to  be  as  provoking 
as  possible,  and  obviously  did  not  fail  to  excite  a  good 
deal  of  uneasy  feeling. 

*'  That's  surely  a  very  fine  horse  of  yours,  Jock  ?" 
fiaid  the  Laird.—"  Hech,  man,  but  he  is  a  sleek  aae ! 


THE  SCHOOL  OF  MISFORTUNE.  125 

How  much  com  does  he  eat  in  a  year,  this  hunter  of 
yours,  Jock  ?" 

"  Not  much,  sir,  not  much.  He  is  a  very  fine  horse 
that,  uncle.  Look  at  his  shoulder ;  and  see  what 
limbs  he  has  ;  and  what  a  pastern  ! — How  much  do 
you  suppose  such  a  horse  would  be  worth,  now, 
uncle  ?" 

*<  Why,  Jock,  I  cannot  help  thinking  he  is  some- 
thing like  Geordy  Dean's  daughter-in-law, — nought 
but  a  spindle-shankit  devil !  I  would  not  wonder  if  he 
had  cost  you  eighteen  pounds,  that  greyhound  of  a 
creature  ?" 

"  What  a  prime  judge  you  are  !  Why,  uncle,  that 
horse  cost  eighty-five  guineas  last  autumn.  He  is  a 
real  blood  horse  that ;  and  has  won  a  great  deal  of  va- 
luable plate." 

"  Oh  !  that,  indeed,  alters  the  case  !  And  have  you 
got  all  that  valuable  plate  ?" 

**  Nay,  nay;  it  was  before  he  came  to  my  hand.'* 

*<  That  was  rather  a  pity  now,  Jock — I  cannot  help 
thinking  that  was  a  great  pity  ;  because  if  you  had  got 
the  plate,  you  would  have  had  something  you  could 
have  called  your  own. — So,  you  don't  know  how  much 
com  that  fellow  eats  in  a  year  ?" 

"  Indeed  I  do  not ;  he  never  gets  above  three  feeds 
in  a  day,  unless  when  he  is  on  a  journey,  and  then  he 
takes  five  or  six." 


126      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  Then  take  an  average  of  four :  four  feeds  are 
worth  two  shillings  at  least,  as  com  is  selling.  There 
is  fourteen  shillings  a-week :  fourteen  times  fifty-two 
— why,  Jock,  there  is  L.36,  8s.  for  horse's  com  ;  and 
there  will  be  about  half  as  much,  or  more,  for  hay,  be- 
sides :  on  the  whole,  I  find  he  will  cost  you  about 
L.50  a-year  at  livery, — I  suppose  there  is  an  absolute 
necessity  that  a  manufacturer  should  keep  such  a 
horse  ?" 

"  O !  God  bless  you,  sir,  to  be  sure.  We  must  ga- 
ther in  money  and  orders,  you  know.  And  then,  con- 
sider the  ease  and  convenience  of  travelling  on  such  a 
creature  as  that,  compared  with  one  of  your  vile  low- 
bred hacks ;  one  goes  through  the  country  as  he  were 
flying,  on  that  animal." 

Old  Sandy  paddled  away  from  the  stable,  towards 
the  house,  chuckling  and  laughing  to  himself;  but 
again  turned  round,  before  he  got  half-way. — "  Right, 
Jock  !  quite  right.  Nothing  like  gathering  in  plenty 
of  money  and  orders.  But,  Jock,  hark  ye — I  do  not 
think  there  is  any  necessity  for  flying  when  one  is  on 
such  a  commission.  You  should  go  leisurely  and  slow- 
ly through  the  towns  and  villages,  keeping  all  your 
eyes  about  you,  and  using  every  honest  art  to  ob- 
tain good  customers.  How  can  you  do  this,  Jock,  if 
you  go  as  you  were  flying  through  the  country  ?  Peo- 
ple, instead  of  giving  you  a  good  order,  will  come  to 


THE  SCHOOL  OP  MISFORTUNE.  127 

their  shop-door,  and  say — There  goes  the  Flying  Ma- 
nufacturer ! — Jock,  they  say  a  rolling  stone  never  ga- 
thers any  moss.  How  do  you  think  a  flying  one  should 
gather  it  ?" 

The  dialogue  went  on  in  the  same  half-humorous, 
half-jeering  tone  all  the  forenoon,  as  well  as  during 
dinner,  while  a  great  number  of  queries  still  continued 
to  be  put  to  the  young  man  ;  as — How  much  his  lodg- 
ings cost  him  a-year  ?  The  answer  to  this  astounded 
old  Sandy.  His  comprehension  could  hardly  take  it 
in ;  he  opened  his  eyes  wide,  and  held  up  his  hands, 
exclaiming,  with  a  great  burst  of  breath,  "  What  enor- 
mous profits  there  must  be  in  your  business  !"  and 
then  the  Laird  proceeded  with  his  provoking  interro- 
gatories— How  much  did  his  nephew's  fine  boots  and 
spurs  cost  ?  what  was  his  tailor's  bill  yearly  ?  and 
every  thing  in  the  same  manner ;  as  if  the  young  gen- 
tleman had  come  from  a  foreign  countiy,  of  which 
Sandy  Singlebeard  wished  to  note  down  every  parti- 
cular. The  nephew  was  a  little  in  the  fidgets,  but 
knowing  the  ground  on  which  he  stood,  he  answered 
all  his  uncle's  queries  but  too  truly,  impressing  on  his 
fmgal  mind  a  far  greater  idea  of  his  own  expenditure 
than  was  necessary,  and  which  my  old  friend  could 
not  help  viewing  as  utterly  extravagant. 

Immediately  on  the  removal  of  the  cloth,  the  young 
gentleman  withdrew  into  another  room,  and  sending 


1 28        THE  SHEPHEkb  S  CALENDAR. 

for  his  uncle  to  speak  with  him,  hh  there  explained 
thfe  nature  of  his  errand,  and  how  ahsolutely  necessary 
it  was  for  him  to  have  the  jnohey,  for  the  relief  of  his 
bond.  Old  Sandy  was  off  in  a  twinkling.  He  had  nO 
money  for  him — not  one  copper ! — hot  the  value  of  a 
hair  of  his  thin  grey  bed,rd  should  he  have  from  him  I 
He  had  other  uses  for  his  money,  and  had  won  it  too 
hardly  to  give  it  to  any  one  to  throw  away  for  him  on 
grand  rooms  and  carpets,  upon  flying  horses,  and  four- 
guinea  boots  1[  Liiio:)  . 

They  returned  to  the  parlour,  and  we  drank  some 
whisky  toddy  together.  There  was  no  more  gibing 
and  snappishness.  The  old  man  was  civil  and  atten- 
tive, but  the  face  of  the  young  one  exhibited  marks  of 
anger  and  despair.  He  took  his  leave,  and  went  away 
abruptly  enough  ;  and  I  began  to  break  some  jests  on 
the  Flying  Manufacturer,  in  order  to  try  the  humoul- 
of  my  entertainer.  I  soon  found  it  out ;  old  Single- 
beard's  shaft  was  shotj  and  he  now  let  me  know  he 
had  a  different  opinion  of  his  nephew  from  what  had 
been  intimated  by  the  whole  course  of  his  conversa- 
tion with  the  young  man  himself.  He  said  he  was  a 
good  lad  ;  an  ingenious  and  honest  one  ;  that  he  scarce- 
ly knew  a  better  of  his  years  ;  but  he  wanted  to  curb 
a  little  that  upsetting  spirit  in  him,  to  which  every 
young  man  new  to  business  was  too  much  addicted. 

The  youiig  gentleman  went  to  his  other  friends  in 


THE  SCHOOL  OP  MISFORTUNE.  129 

a  sad  pickle,  and  represented  himself  to  them  as  rain- 
ed beyond  ail  redress  ;  reprobating  all  the  while  the 
inconsistency  of  his  uncle,  and  his  unaccoxintable  and 
ill-timed  penury. 

The  most  part  of  the  young  gentleman's  relations 
were  in  deep  dismay,  in  consequence  of  the  Laird's  re- 
fusal to  perform  his  engagement.  But  one  of  them, 
after  listening  seriously  to  the  narration,  instead  of  be- 
ing vexed,  only  laughed  immoderately  at  the  whole  af- 
fair, and  said  he  had  never  heard  any  thing  so  comic  and 
truly  ludicrous.  "  Go  your  ways  home,  and  mind  your 
business,"  said  he ;  "  you  do  not  know  any  thing  of  old 
uncle  Sandy :  leave  the  whole  matter  to  me,  and  I  shall 
answer  for  his  share  of  the  concern." 

"  You  will  be  answerable  at  your  own  cost,  then," 
said  the  nephew.  "  If  the  money  is  not  paid  till  he  ad- 
vance it,  the  sum  will  never  be  paid  on  this  side  of  time. 
— You  may  as  well  try  to  extract  it  from  the  rock  on 
the  side  of  the  moimtain." 

"  Go  your  ways,"  said  the  other.  "  It  is  evident 
that  you  can  do  nothing  in  the  business ;  but  were  the 
sum  three  times  the  amount  of  what  it  is,  I  shall  be 
answerable  for  it." 

It  turned  out  precisely  as  this  gentleman  predicted ; 
but  no  man  will  conceive  old  Sandy's  motive  for  refu- 
sing that  which  he  was  in  fact  bound  to  perform :  He 
could  not  bear  to  have  it  known  that  he  had  done  so 
F  2 


30        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

liberal  and  generous  an  action,  and  wished  to  manage 
matters  so,  that  his  nephew  might  believe  the  money 
to  have  been  raised  in  some  other  way  attended  with 
the  utmost  difficulty.  He  could  not  put  his  nephew  to 
the  same  school  in  which  he  himself  had  been  taught, 
namely,  the  School  of  Actual  Adversity ;  but  he  want- 
ed to  give  him  a  touch  of  Ideal  Misfortune ;  that  he 
might  leam  the  value  of  independence. 


GE0R6£  DOB'sONS  EXPEDITION  TQ  HELL.       131 


CHAPTER  V. 

GEORGE  DOBSON's  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL. 

There  is  no  phenomenon  in  nature  less  understood, 
and  about  which  greater  nonsense  is  written,  than 
dreaming.  It  is  a  strange  thing.  For  my  part,  I  do 
not  understand  it,  nor  have  I  any  desire  to  do  so ;  and 
I  firmly  believe  that  no  philosopher  that  ever  wrote 
knows  a  particle  more  about  it  than  I  do,  however 
elaborate  and  subtle  the  theories  he  may  advance  con- 
cerning it.  He  knows  not  even  what  sleep  is,  nor 
can  he  define  its  natiu-e,  so  as  to  enable  any  common 
mind  to  comprehend  him ;  and  how,  then,  can  he  define 
that  ethereal  part  of  it,  wherein  the  soul  holds  inter- 
course with  the  external  world? — how,  in  that  state 
of  abstraction,  some  ideas  force  themselves  upon  us, 
in  spite  of  all  our  efibrts  to  get  rid  of  them ;  while 
others,  which  we  have  resolved  to  bear  about  with  us 
by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  refuse  us  their  fellowship, 
even  at  periods  when  we  most  require  their  aid  ? 

No,  no ;  the  philosopher  knows  nothing  about  either ; 


132  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

and  if  he  says  he  does,  I  entreat  you  not  to  believe 
him.  He  does  not  know  what  mind  is  ;  even  his  own 
mind,  to  which  one  would  think  he  has  the  most  direct 
access :  far  less  can  he  estimate  the  operations  and 
powers  of  that  of  any  other  intelligent  being.  He 
does  not  even  know,  with  all  his  subtlety,  whether  it 
be  a  power  distinct  from  his  body,  or  essentially  the 
same,  and  only  incidentally  and  temporarily  endowed 
with  different  qualities.  He  sets  himself  to  discover 
at  what  period  of  his  existence  the  union  was  establish- 
ed. He  is  baffled ;  for  Consciousness  refuses  the  in- 
telligence, declaring,  that  she  cannot  carry  him  far 
enough  back  to  ascertain  it.  He  tries  to  discover  the 
precise  moment  when  it  is  dissolved,  but  <m  this  Con- 
sciousness is  altogether  silent ;  and  all  is  darkness  and 
mystery;  for  the  origin,  the  manner  of  continuance, 
and  the  time  and  mode  of  breaking  up  of  the  union  be- 
tween soul  and  body,  are  in  reality  undiscoverable  by 
our  natural  faculties — are  not  patent,  beyond  the  pos- 
sibility of  mistake :  but  whosoever  can  read  his  Bible, 
and  solve  a  dream,  can  do  either,  without  being  sub- 
jected to  any  material  error. 

It  is  on  this  ground  that  I  like  to  contemplate,  not 
the  theoiy  of  dreams,  but  the  dreams  themselves ;  be- 
cause they  prove  to  the  unlettered  man,  in  a  veiy  for- 
cible manner,  a  distinct  existence  of  the  soul,  and  its 
lively  and  rapid  intelligence  with  external  nature,  as 


GEORGE  DOBSON's  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.   13S 

vreW  as  with  a  world  of  spirits  with  which  it  has  no 
acquaintance,  when  the  body  is  lying  dormant,  and 
the  same  to  the  soul  as  if  sleeping  in  death. 

I  accoimt  nothing  of  any  dream  that  relates  to  the 
actions  of  the  day ;  the  person  is  not  sound  asleep  who 
dreams  about  these  things;  there  is  no  division  be- 
tween matter  and  mind,  but  they  are  mingled  together 
in  a  sort  of  chaos — what  a  farmer  would  call  compost 
— -fermenting  and  disturbing  one  another.  I  find  that 
in  all  dreams  of  that  kind,  men  of  every  profession 
have  dreams  peculiar  to  their  own  occupations ;  and, 
in  the  country,  at  least,  their  import  is  generally  un- 
derstood. Every  man's  body  is  a  barometer.  A  thing 
made  up  of  the  elements  must  be  affected  by  theii* 
various  changes  and  convTilsions ;  and  so  the  body  as- 
suredly is.  When  I  was  a  shepherd,  and  all  the  com- 
forts of  my  life  depended  so  much  on  good  or  bad 
weather,  the  first  thing  I  did  every  morning  was  strict- 
ly to  overhaul  the  dreams  of  the  night ;  and  I  found 
that  I  could  calculate  better  from  them  than  fiom  the 
appearance  and  changes  of  the  sky.  I  know  a  keen 
sportsman,  who  pretends  that  his  dreams  nevei*  deceive 
him.  If  he  dream  of  angling,  or  pursuing  salmon  in 
deep  waters,  he  is  sure  of  rain ;  but  if  fishing  on  dry 
ground,  or  in  waters  so  low  that  the  fish  camiot  get 
from  him,  it  forebodes  drought ;  hunting  or  shooting 
hares,  is  snow,  and  moorfowl,  wind,  &c.     But  the  most 


134)      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

extraordinaiy  professional  dream  on  record  is,  without 
all  doubt,  that  well-known  one  of  George  Dobson, 
coach-driver  in  Edinburgh,  which  I  shall  here  relate ; 
for  though  it  did  not  happen  in  the  shepherd's  cot,  it 
has  often  been  recited  there. 

George  was  part  proprietor  and  driver  of  a  hackney- 
coach  in  Edinburgh,  when  such  vehicles  were  scarce ; 
and  one  day  a  gentleman,  whom  he  knew,  came  to 
him  and  said : — "  George,  you  must  drive  me  and  my 

son  here  out  to ,"  a  certain  place  that  he  named, 

somewhere  in  the  vicinity  of  Edinburgh. 

"  Sir,"  said  George,  "  I  never  heard  tell  of  such  a 
place,  and  I  cannot  drive  you  to  it  unless  you  give  me 
very  particular  directions." 

"  It  is  false,"  returned  the  gentleman ;  "  there  is  no 
man  in  Scotland  who  knows  the  road  to  that  place  bet- 
ter than  you  do.  You  have  never  driven  on  any  other 
road  all  your  life ;  and  I  insist  on  your  taking  us." 

"  Very  well,  sir,"  said  George,  "  I'll  drive  you  to 
hell,  if  you  have  a  mind ;  only  you  are  to  diiect  me  on 
the  road." 

"  Mount  and  drive  on,  then,"  said  the  other ;  "  and 
no  fear  of  the  road." 

George  did  so,  and  never  in  his  life  did  he  see  his 
horses  go  at  such  a  noble  rate;  they  snorted,  they 
pranced,  and  they  flew  on ;  and  as  the  whole  road  ap- 
peared to  lie  down-hill,  he  deemed  that  he  should  soon 


GEORGE  DOBSON's  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.       135 

come  to  his  journey's  end.  Still  he  di'ove  on  at  the 
same  rate,  far,  far  down-hill, — and  so  fine  an  open  road 
he  never  travelled, — till  by  degrees  it  grew  so  dark 
that  he  could  not  see  to  drive  any  farther.  He  called 
to  the  gentleman,  inquiring  what  he  should  do ;  who 
answered,  that  this  was  the  place  they  were  bound  to, 
so  he  might  draw  up,  dismiss  them,  and  return.  He 
did  so,  alighted  from  the  dickie,  wondered  at  his  foam- 
ing horses,  and  forthwith  opened  the  coach-door,  held 
the  rim  of  his  hat  with  the  one  hand,  and  with  the 
other  demanded  his  fare. 

"  You  have  driven  us  in  fine  style,  George,"  said 
the  elder  gentleman,  "  and  deserve  to  be  remembered ; 
but  it  is  needless  for  us  to  settle  just  now,  as  you  must 
meet  us  here  again  to-moiTow  precisely  at  twelve 
o'clock." 

<*  Very  well,  sir,"  said  George ;  "  there  is  likewise 
an  old  account,  you  know,  and  some  toll-money;" 
which  indeed  there  was. 

"  It  shall  be  all  settled  to-morrow,  George,  and  more- 
over, I  fear  there  will  be  some  toll-money  to-day." 

"  I  perceived  no  tolls  to-day,  your  honour,"  said 
George. 

"  But  I  perceived  one,  and  not  very  far  back  neither, 
which  I  suspect  you  will  have  difiiculty  in  repassing 
without  a  regular  ticket.  What  a  pity  I  have  no 
change  on  me  1"      - 


136      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  I  never  saw  it  otherwise  with  yotir  honoiir,"  said 
George,  joculaily ;  "  what  a  pity  it  is  you  should  al- 
trays  suffer  yourself  to  run  short  of  change  I" 

"I  will  give  you  that  which  is  as  good,  George," 
«aid  the  gentleman ;  and  he  gave  him  a  ticket  written 
with  red  ink,  which  the  honest  coachman  could  not 
read.  He,  however,  put  it  into  his  sleeve,  and  inqui- 
red of  his  employer  where  that  same  toll  was  which  he 
Iliad  not  observed,  and  how  it  was  that  they  did  not 
ask  toll  from  him  as  he  came  through  ?  The  gentle- 
man replied,  by  informing  George  that  there  was  no 
road  out  of  that  domain,  and  that  whoever  entered  it 
must  either  remain  in  it,  or  return  by  the  same  path; 
so  thiey  never  asked  any  toll  till  the  person's  return, 
when  they  were  at  times  highly  capricious ;  but  that 
the  ticket  he  had  given  him  would  answer  his  turn. 
And  he  then  asked  George  if  he  did  not  perceive  a 
gate,  with  a  number  of  men  in  black  standing  about  it. 

"  Oho  !  Is  yon  the  spot  ?"  says  George ;  "  then,  I 
assure  your  honour,  yon  is  no  toll-gate,  but  a  private 
entrance  into  a  great  man's  mansion;  for  do  not  I 
know  two  or  three  of  the  persons  yonder  to  be  gentle- 
men of  the  law,  whom  I  have  driven  often  and  often  ? 
and  as  good  fellows  they  are,  too,  as  any  I  know — men 
who  never  let  themselves  run  short  of  change !  Good 
dayv— ^Twelve  o'clock  to-morrow  ?" 

"  Yes,  twelve  o'clock  noon,  precisely;"   and  with 


GEORGE  ©OBSON's  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.        137 

that,  George's  employer  vanished  in  the  gloom,  and 
left  him  to  wind  his  way  out  of  that  dreary  labyrinth 
the  best  way  he  could.  He  found  it  no  easy  matter, 
for  his  lamps  were  not  lighted,  and  he  could  not  see 
an  ell  before  him—he  could  not  even  perceive  his 
horses'  eai-s ;  and  what  was  worse,  there  was  a  rushing 
sound,  like  that  of  a  town  on  fire,  all  around  him,  that 
stunned  his  senses,  so  that  he  could  not  teU  whether 
his  horses  were  moving  or  standing  still.  George  was 
in  the  gi'eatest  distress  imaginable,  and  was  glad  when 
he  perceived  the  gate  before  him,  with  his  two  identi- 
cal friends,  men  of  the  law,  still  standing.  George 
drove  boldly  up,  accosted  them  by  theu'  names,  and 
asked  what  they  were  doing  there ;  they  made  him 
no  answer,  but  pointed  to  the  gate  and  the  keeper, 
George  was  ten-ified  to  look  at  this  latter  personage, 
who  now  came  up  and  seized  his  horses  by  the  reins, 
refusing  to  let  him  pass.  In  order  to  introduce  him- 
self, in  sOme  degree,  to  this  austere  toll-man,  George 
asked  him,  in  a  jocular  manner,  how  he  came  to  em- 
ploy his  two  eminent  friends  as  assistant  gate-keepers  ? 

"  Because  they  are  among  the  last  comers,"  replied 
the  ruffian,  churlishly.  "  You  will  be  an  assistant  here^ 
to-morrow." 

"  The  devil  I  will,  sir?" 

"  Yes,  the  devil  you  will,  sir." 

"  I'll  be  d— d  if  I  do  then-^that  I  will." 


138  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  Yes,  you'll  be  d — d  if  you  do — that  you  will." 

"  Let  my  horses  go  in  the  meantime,  then,  sir,  that 
I  may  proceed  on  my  journey." 

«  Nay." 

"  Nay  ? — Dare  you  say  nay  to  me,  sii-  ?  My  name 
is  George  Dobson,  of  the  Pleasance,  Edinbuigh,  coach- 
driver,  and  coach- proprietor  too ;  and  no  man  shall  say 
nay  to  me,  as  long  as  I  can  pay  my  way.  I  have  his 
Majesty's  license,  and  I'll  go  and  come  as  I  choose — 
and  that  I  will.  Let  go  my  horses  there,  and  tell  me 
what  is  your  demand." 

"  Well,  then,  I'll  let  your  horses  go,"  said  the  keep- 
er ;  "  but  I'll  keep  yourself  for  a  pledge."  And  with 
that  he  let  go  the  horses,  and  seized  honest  George  by 
the  throat,  who  struggled  in  vain  to  disengage  himself, 
and  swore,  and  threatened,  according  to  his  own  con- 
fession, most  bloodily.  His  horses  flew  off  like  the 
wind,  so  swift,  that  the  coach  seemed  flying  in  the  air, 
and  scarcely  bounding  on  the  earth  once  in  a  quarter  of 
a  mile.  George  was  in  furious  wrath,  for  he  saw  that 
his  grand  coach  and  harness  would  all  be  broken  to 
pieces,  and  his  gallant  pair  of  horses  maimed  or  de- 
stroyed ;  and  how  was  his  family's  bread  now  to  be 
won ! — He  struggled,  threatened,  and  prayed  in  vain ; 
— ^the  intolerable  toll-man  was  deaf  to  all  remon- 
strances. He  once  more  appealed  to  his  two  genteel 
acquaintances  of  the  law,  reminding  them  how  he  had 


GEORGE  DOBSON's  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.       139 

of  late  driven  them  to  Roslin  on  a  Sunday,  along  with 
two  ladies,  who,  he  supposed,  were  their  sisters,  from 
their  familiarity,  when  not  another  coachman  in  town 
would  engage  with  them.  But  the  gentlemen,  very  un- 
generously, only  shook  their  heads,  and  pointed  to  the 
gate.  George's  circumstances  now  became  desperate, 
and  again  he  asked  the  hideous  toll-man  what  right  he 
had  to  detain  him,  and  what  were  his  charges. 

"  What  right  have  I  to  detain  you,  sir,  say  you  ? 
Who  are  you  that  make  such  a  demand  here  ?  Do  you 
know  where  you  are,  sir?" 

"  No,  faith,  I  do  not,"  returned  George ;  "  I  wish  I 
did.  But  I  shall  know,  and  make  you  repent  yom*  in- 
solence too.  My  name,  I  told  you,  is  George  Dobson, 
licensed  coach-hirer  in  Pleasance,  Edinburgh ;  and  to 
get  full  redress  of  you  for  this  unlawful  interruption,  I 
only  desire  to  know  where  I  am." 

"  Then,  sir,  if  it  can  give  you  so  much  satisfaction 
to  know  where  you  are,"  said  the  keeper,  with  a  malici- 
ous grin,  "  you  shall  know,  and  you  may  take  instru- 
ments by  the  hands  of  your  two  friends  there,  institu- 
ting a  legal  prosecution.  Your  redress,  you  may  be  as- 
sured, will  be  most  ample,  when  I  inform  you  that  you 
are  in  Hell  !  and  out  at  this  gate  you  pass  no  more." 

This  was  rather  a  damper  to  George,  and  he  began 
to  perceive  that  nothing  would  be  gained  in  such  a  place 
by  the  strong  hand,  so  he  addressed  the  inexorable  toll- 


140        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

man,  whom  he  now  dreaded  more  than  ever,  in  the  fol- 
lowing terms :  "  But  I  must  go  home  at  all  events,  you 
know,  sir,  to  unyoke  my  two  horses,  and  put  them  up, 
and  to  inform  Chirsty  Halliday,  my  wife,  of  my  en- 
gagement. And,  bless  me  I  I  never  recollected  till  this 
moment,  that  I  am  engaged  to  be  back  here  to-morrow 
at  twelve  o'clock,  and  see^  here  is  a  free  ticket  for  my 
passage  this  way." 

The  keeper  took  the  ticket  with  one  hand,  but  still 
held  George  with  the  other.  "  Oho !  were  you  in  with 

our  honourable  friend,  Mr  R— —  of  L ^y  ?"  said  he. 

"  He  has  been  on  our  books  for  a  long  while ; — how- 
ever, this  will  do,  only  you  must  put  your  name  to  it 
likewise ;  and  the  engagement  is  this — You,  by  this  in- 
strument, engage  your  soul,  that  you  will  return  here 
by  to-morrow  at  noon." 

"  Catch  me  there,  billy  I"  says  George.  "  I'll  en- 
gage no  such  thing,  depend  on  it ; — ^that  I  will  not." 

"  Then  remain  where  you  are,"  said  the  keeper, 
"  for  there  is  no  other  alternative.  We  like  best  for 
people  to  come  here  in  their  own  way,^in  the  way  of 
their  business ;"  and  witli  that  he  flung  George  back- 
ward, heels-over-head  down  hill,  and  closed  the  gate. 

George,  finding  all  remonstrance  vain,  and  being  de- 
sirous once  more  to  see  the  open  day,  and  breathe  the 
fresh  air,  and  likewise  to  see  Chirsty  Halliday,  his  wife, 
and  set  his  house  and  stable  in  some  order,  came  up 


GEORGE  DOBSONS  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.       141 

again,  and  in  utter  desperation,  signed  the  bond,  and 
was  suffered  to  depart.  He  then  bounded  away  on  tlie 
track  of  his  horses,  with  more  than  ordinary  swiftness, 
in  hopes  to  overtake  them ;  and  always  now  and  then 
uttered  a  loud  Wo  !  in  hopes  they  might  hear  and  obey, 
though  he  could  not  come  in  sight  of  them.  But 
George's  giief  was  but  beginning ;  for  at  a  well-known 
and  dangerous  spot,  where  there  was  a  tan-yard  on  the 
one  hand,  and  a  quaiTy  on  the  other,  he  came  to  his 
gallant  steeds  overturned,  the  coach  smashed  to  pieces, 
Dawtie  with  two  of  her  legs  broken,  and  Duncan  dead. 
This  was  more  than  the  worthy  coachman  could  bear, 
and  many  degrees  worse  than  being  in  hell.  There,  his 
pride  and  manly  spirit  bore  him  up  against  the  worst  of 
treatment ;  but  here,  his  heart  entirely  failed  him,  and 
he  laid  himself  down,  with  his  face  on  his  two  hands, 
and  wept  bitterly,  bewailing,  in  the  most  deplorable 
terms,  his  two  gallant  horses,  Dawtie  and  Duncan. 

While  lying  in  this  inconsolable  state,  some  one 
took  hold  of  his  shoulder,  and  shook  it ;  and  a  well- 
known  voice  said  to  him,  "  Geordie  I  what  is  the  mat- 
ter wi'  ye,  Geordie  ?"  George  was  provoked  beyond 
measure  at  the  insolence  of  the  question,  for  he  knew 
the  voice  to  be  that  of  Chirsty  Halliday,  his  wife.  "  I 
think  you  needna  ask  that,  seeing  what  you  see,"  said 
George.  "  O,  my  poor  Dawtie,  where  are  a'  your  jink* 
iags  and  prancings  now,  your  moopings  and  your  win- 


142      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

cings  ?  I'll  ne'er  be  a  proud  man  again — ^bereaved  o' 
my  bonny  pair !" 

"  Get  up,  George ;  get  up,  and  bestir  yourself,"  said 
Chirsty  Halliday,  his  wife.  "  You  are  wanted  direct- 
ly, to  bring  in  the  Lord  President  to  the  Parliament 
House.  It  is  a  great  storm,  and  he  must  be  there  by 
nine  o'clock. — Get  up — rouse  yourself,  and  make  ready 
— his  servant  is  waiting  for  you." 

"  Woman,  you  are  demented!"  cried  George. 
<'  How  can  I  go  and  bring  in  the  Lord  President,  when 
my  coach  is  broken  in  pieces,  my  poor  Dawtie  lying 
with  twa  of  her  legs  broken,  and  Duncan  dead  ?  And, 
moreover,  I  have  a  previous  engagement,  for  I  am 
obliged  to  be  in  hell  before  twelve  o'clock." 

Chirsty  Halliday  now  laughed  outright,  and  con- 
tinued long  in  a  fit  of  laughter;  but  George  never 
moved  his  head  from  the  pillow,  but  lay  and  groaned, — 
for,  in  fact,  he  was  all  this  while  lying  snug  in  his  bed  ; 
while  the  tempest  without  was  roaring  with  great  vio- 
lence, and  which  circumstance  may  perhaps  account 
for  the  rushing  and  deafening  soimd  which  astounded 
him  so  much  in  hell.  But  so  deeply  was  he  impress- 
ed with  the  idea  of  the  reality  of  his  dream,  that  he 
would  do  nothing  but  lie  and  moan,  persisting  and  be- 
lieving in  the  truth  of  all  he  had  seen.  His  wife  now 
went  and  informed  her  neighbours  of  her  husband's 
plight,  and  of  his  singular  engagement  with  Mr  R— 


GEORGE  DOBSON's  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.       143 

of  L y  at  twelve  o'clock.  She  persuaded  one  friend 

to  harness  the  horses,  and  go  for  the  Lord  President ; 
but  all  the  rest  laughed  immoderately  at  poor  coachy's 
predicament.  It  was,  however,  no  laughing  to  him; 
he  never  raised  his  head,  and  his  wife ,  becoming  at 
last  uneasy  about  the  frenzied  state  of  his  mind,  made 
him  repeat  every  circumstance  of  his  adventure  to  her, 
(for  he  would  never  believe  or  admit  that  it  was  a 
dream,)  which  he  did  in  the  terms  above  narrated; 
and  she  perceived,  or  dreaded,  that  he  was  becoming 
somewhat  feverish.  She  went  out,  and  told  Dr  Wood 
of  her  husband's  malady,  and  of  his  solemn  engage- 
ment to  be  in  hell  at  twelve  o'clock. 

"  He  maunna  keep  it,  dearie.  He  maunna  keep 
that  engagement  at  no  rate,"  said  Dr  Wood.  "  Set 
back  the  clock  an  hour  or  twa,  to  drive  him  past  the 
time,  and  I'll  ca'  in  the  course  of  my  rounds.  Are  ye 
sure  he  hasna  been  drinking  hard  ?" — She  assm-ed  him 
he  had  not. — "  Weel,  weel,  ye  maun  tell  him  that  he 
maunna  keep  that  engagement  at  no  rate.  Set  back 
the  clock,  and  I'll  come  and  see  him.  It  is  a  frenzy 
that  maunna  be  trifled  with.  Ye  maunna  laugh  at  it, 
dearie, — maunna  laugh  at  it.  Maybe  a  nervish  fever, 
wha  kens." 

The  Doctor  and  Chirsty  left  the  house  together, 
and  as  their  road  lay  the  same  way  for  a  space,  she 
fell  a-telling  him  of  the  two  young  lawyers  whom 


144  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

George  saw  standing  at  the  gate  of  hell,  and  whom  the 
porter  had  described  as  two  of  the  last  comers.  When 
the  Doctor  heard  this,  he  stayed  his  hmTied,  stooping 
pace  in  one  moment,  turned  full  round  on  the  woman, 
and  fixing  his  eyes  on  her,  that  gleamed  with  a  deep, 
unstable  lustre,  he  said,  "  Wliat's  that  ye  were  saying, 
dearie?  Wliat's  that  ye  were  saying?  Repeat  it 
again  to  me,  every  word."  She  did  so.  On  which  the 
Doctor  held  up  his  hands,  as  if  palsied  with  astonish- 
ment, and  uttered  some  fervent  ejaculations.  "  I'll 
go  with  you  straight,"  said  he,  "  before  I  visit  another 
patient.  Tliis  is  wonderfu' !  it  is  tenible !  The  young 
gentlemen  are  both  at  rest — ^both  lying  corpses  at  this 
time  !  Fine  young  men — I  attended  them  both — died 
of  the  same  exterminating  disease— Oh,  this  is  wonder- 
ful ;  this  is  wonderful !" 

The  Doctor  kept  Chirsty  half  running  all  the  way 
do\^Ti  the  High  Street  and  St  Mary's  Wynd,  at  such 
a  pace  did  he  walk,  never  lifting  his  eyes  from  the 
pavement,  but  always  exclaiming  now  and  then,  "  It 
is  wonderfu' !  most  wonderfu' !"  At  length,  prompt- 
ed by  woman's  natural  cmiosity,  Chirsty  inquii'ed  at 
the  Doctor  if  he  knew  any  thing  of  their  friend  Mr 
R of  L y.  But  he  shook  his  head,  and  re- 
plied, "  Na,  na,  dearie, — ^ken  naething  about  him.  He 
and  his  son  are  baith  in  London,— ken  naething  about 
him ;  but  the  tither  is  awfu'-r-H  is  perfectly  awfu' !" 
5 


GEORGE  DOBSONS  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.         145 

When  Dr  Wood  reached  his  patient,  he  found  him 
very  low,  but  only  a  little  feverish;  so  he  made  all 
haste  to  wash  his  head  with  vinegar  and  cold  water, 
and  then  he  covered  the  crown  with  a  treacle  plaster, 
and  made  the  same  application  to  the  soles  of  his  feet, 
awaiting  the  issue.  George  revived  a  little,  when  the 
Doctor  tried  to  cheer  him  up  by  joking  him  about  his 
dream  ;  but  on  mention  of  that  he  groaned,  and  shook 
his  head.  "  So  you  are  convinced,  deaiie,  that  it  is 
nae  dream  ?"  said  the  Doctor. 

"  Dear  sir,  how  could  it  be  a  cEream?"  said  the 

patient.  "  I  was  there  in  person,  with  Mr  R and  his 

son ;  and  see,  here  are  the  marks  of  the  porter's  fingers 
on  my  throat." — Dr  Wood  looked,  and  distinctly  saw 
two  or  three  red  spots  on  one  side  of  his  thioat,  which 
confounded  him  not  a  little. — "  I  assure  you,  su-,"  con- 
tinued George,  "  it  was  no  dream,  which  I  loiow  to 
my  sad  experience.  I  have  lost  my  coach  and  horses, 
— and  what  more  have  I  ? — signed  the  bond  with  my 
own  hand,  and  in  person  entered  into  the  most  solemn 
and  terrible  engagement." 

"  But  ye're  no  to  keep  it,  I  tell  ye,"  said  Dr  Wood ; 
"  ye're  no  to  keep  it  at  no  rate.  It  is  a  sin  to  enter 
into  a  compact  wi'  the  deil,  but  it  is  a  far  greater  ane 

to  keep  it.     Sae  let  Mr  R and  his  son  bide  where 

they  are  yonder,  for  ye  sanna  stir  a  foot  to  bring  them 
out  the  day." 

VOL.  I.  G 


146      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  Oh,  oh,  Doctor !"  groaned  the  poor  fellow,  "  this 
is  not  a  thing  to  be  made  a  jest  o'  I  I  feel  that  it  is  an 
engagement  that  I  cannot  break.  Go  I  must,  and  that 
veiy  shortly.  Yes,  yes,  go  I  must,  and  go  I  will, 
although  I  should  boiTow  David  Barclay's  pair."  With 
that  he  tmned  his  face  towards  tlie  wall,  groaned  deep- 
ly, and  fell  into  a  lethargy,  while  Dr  Wood  caused 
them  to  let  him  alone,  thinking  if  he  would  sleep  out 
the  appointed  time,  which  was  at  hand,  he  would  be 
safe  ;  but  all  the  time  he  kept  feeling  his  pulse,  and  by 
degrees  showed  Symptoms  of  uneasiness.  His  wife 
ran  for  a  clergyman  of  famed  abilities,  to  pray  and 
converse  with  her  husband,  in  hopes  by  that  means  to 
bring  him  to  his  senses ;  but  after  his  arrival,  George 
never  spoke  more,  save  calling  to  his  horses,  as  if  en- 
couraging them  to  nm  with  great  speed ;  and  thus  in 
imagination  driving  at  full  career  to  keep  his  appoint- 
ment, he  went  off  in  a  paroxysm,  after  a  terrible  strug- 
gle, precisely  within  a  few  minutes  of  twelve  o'clock. 

A  circumstance  not  known  at  the  time  of  George's 
death  made  this  singular  professional  dream  the  more 
remarkable  and  unique  in  all  its  parts.  It  was  a  terri- 
ble storm  on  the  night  of  the  dream,  as  has  been  al- 
ready mentioned,  and  during  the  time  of  the  hurricane, 

London  smack  went  down  off  Weannouth  about 
three  in  the  morning.  Among  the  sufferers  were  the 
Hon.  Mr  R of  L y,  and  his  son !  George  could 


GEORGE  DOBSON's  EXPEDITION  TO  HELL.   147 

not  know  aught  of  this  at  break  of  day,  for  it  was  not 
known  in  Scotland  till  the  day  of  his  interment ;  and 
as  little  knew  he  of  the  deaths  of  the  two  young  law- 
yers, who  both  died  of  the  small-pox  the  evening  be- 
fore. 


148  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK. 

I  HAVE  heard  an  amusing  story  of  a  young  man 
whose  name  happened  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the 
hero  of  the  preceding  chapter — George  Dobson.  He 
was  a  shoemaker,  a  very  honest  man,  who  lived  at  the 
foot  of  an  old  street,  called  the  Back  Row,  in  the  town 
of  Selkirk.  He  was  upwards  of  thhty,  unmarried,  had 
an  industrious  old  stepmother,  who  kept  house  for 
him,  and  of  course  George  was  what  is  called  "  a  bein 
bachelor,"  or  "  a  chap  that  was  gayan  weel  to  leeve." 
He  was  a  cheerful  happy  fellow,  and  quite  sober,  ex- 
cept when  on  the  town-council,  when  he  sometimes 
took  a  glass  with  the  magistrates  of  his  native  old  bo- 
rough, of  whose  loyalty,  valour,  and  antiquity,  there 
was  no  man  more  proud. 

Well,  one  day,  as  George  was  sitting  in  his  shopy  as 
he  called  it,  (though  no  man  now-a-days  would  call 
that  a  shop  in  which  there  was  nothing  to  sell,)  sewing 
away  at  bocts  and  shoes  for  his  customers,  whom  he 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  149 

could  not  half  hold  in  whole  leather,  so  great  was  the 
demand  over  all  the  country  for  George  Dobson's  boots 
and  shoes — ^he  was  sitting,  I  say,  plying  away,  and 
singing  with  great  glee, — 

"  Up  wi'  the  Souters  o'  Selkirk, 

And  down  wi'  the  Earl  o'  Hume, 
And  up  wi'  a'  the  brave  billies 

That  sew  the  single-soled  shoon ! 
And  up  wi'  the  yeUow,  the  yellow ; 

The  yeUow  and  green  hae  doon  weel ; 
Then  up  wi'  the  lads  of  the  Forest," 

But  down  wi'  the  Merse  to  the  deil !" 

The  last  words  were  hardly  out  of  George's  mouth, 

when  he  heard  a  great  noise  enter  the  Back  Row,  and 

among  the  voices  one  making  loud   proclamation,  as 

follows : — 

"  Ho  yes  !— Ho  yes  !  ' 
Souters  ane,  Souters  a',     ' 
Souters  o'  the  Back  Raw, 
There's  a  gentleman  a-coming     ' 
Wha  will  ca'  ye  Souters  a'. " 

"  I  wish  he  durst,"  said  George.  "  That  will  be 
the  Earl  o'  Hume  wha's  coming.  He  has  had  us  at 
ill-will  for  several  generations.  Bring  my  aik  staff  in- 
to the  shop,  callant,  and  set  it  down  beside  me  here — 
and  ye  may  bring  ane  to  yom'sell  too. — I  say,  callant, 
stop.  Bring  my  grandfather's  auld  sword  wi'  ye.  I 
wad  like  to  see  the  Earl  o'  Hume,  or  ony  o'  his  cro- 
nies, come  and  cast  up  our  honest  calling  and  occupa- 
tion till  us!" 


150  THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

George  laid  his  oak  staff  on  the  cutting-board  be- 
fore him,  and  leaned  the  old  two-edged  sword  against  the 
wall,  at  his  right  hand.  The  noise  of  the  proclamation 
went  out  at  the  head  of  the  Back  Row,  and  died  in  the 
distance ;  and  then  George  began  again,  and  simg  the 
Souters  of  Selkirk  with  more  obstreperous  glee  than 
ever. — The  last  words  were  not  out  of  his  mouth,  when 
a  grand  gentleman  stepped  into  the  shop,  clothed  in 
light  armour,  with  a  sword  by  his  side  and  pistols  in 
his  breast.  He  had  a  livery-man  behind  him,  and  both 
the  master  and  man  were  all  shining  in  gold. — This  is 
the  Earl  o'  Hume  in  good  earnest,  thought  George  to 
himself;  but,  nevertheless,  he  shall  not  danton  me. 

"  Good  morrow  to  you,  Souter  Dobson,"  said  the 
gentleman.     "  What  song  is  that  you  were  singing  ?" 

George  would  have  resented  the  first  address  with  a 
vengeance,  but  the  latter  question  took  him  off  it  un- 
awares, and  he  only  answered,  "  It  is  a  very  good  sang, 
sir,  and  ane  of  the  auldest — ^What  objections  have  you 
to  it  ?" 

"  Nay,  but  what  is  it  about  ?"  returned  the  stranger ; 
"  I  want  to  hear  what  you  say  it  is  about." 

"  I'll  sing  you  it  over  again,  sir,"  said  George,  "  and 
then  you  may  judge  for  yoursell.  Our  sangs  up  here- 
awa  dinna  speak  in  riddles  and  parables ;  they're  gayan 
downright ;"  and  with  that  George  gave  it  him  over 
again  full  birr,  keeping  at  the  same  time  a  sharp  look- 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  151 

out  on  all  his  guest's  movements ;  for  he  had  no  doubt 
now  that  it  was  to  come  to  an  engagement  between 
them,  but  he  was  determined  not  to  yield  an  inch,  for 
the  honour  of  old  Selkirk. 

When  the  song  was  done,  however,  the  gentleman 
commended  it,  saying,  it  was  a  spirited  old  thing,  and, 
without  doubt,  related  to  some  of  the  early  Border 
feuds.  "  But  how  think  you  the  Earl  of  Hume  would 
like  to  hear  tliis  ?"  added  he.  George,  who  had  no 
doubt  all  this  while  that  the  Earl  of  Hume  was  speak- 
ing to  him,  said  good-naturedly,  "  We  dinna  care 
muckle,  su*,  whether  the  Earl  o'  Hume  take  the  sang 
ill  or  week  I'se  waiTant  he  has  heard  it  mony  a  time 
ere  now,  and,  if  he  were  here,  he  wad  hear  it  every  day 
whiBn  the  school  looses,  and  Wattie  Henderson  wad 
gie  him  it  every  night." 

"  Well,  well,  Souter  Dobson,  that  is  neither  here  nor 
there.  That  is  not  what  I  called  about.  Let  us  to 
business.  You  must  make  me  a  pair  of  boots  in  your 
very  best  style,"  said  the  gentleman,  standing  up,  and 
stretching  forth  his  leg  to  be  measured. 

"  I'll  make  you  no  boots,  sir,"  said  George,  nettled  at 
being  again  called  Souter.  "  I  have  as  many  regular 
customers  to  supply  as  hold  me  busy  from  one  year's 
end  to  the  other.  I  cannot  make  your  boots — you 
may  get  them  made  where  you  please." 

"  You5Aa//make  them,  Mr  Dobson,"  said  the  stranger ; 


152  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  I  am  determined  to  try  a  pair  of  boots  of  your  ma- 
king, cost  what  they  will.  Make  your  own  price,  but  let 
me  have  the  boots  by  all  means ;  and,  moreover,  I  want 
them  before  to-morrow  morning." 

This  was  so  conciliatory  and  so  friendly  of  the  Earl, 
that  George,  being  a  good-natured  fellow,  made  no 
farther  objection,  but  took  his  measure,  and  promised 
to  have' them  ready.  "  I  will  pay  them  now,"  said  the 
gentleman,  taking  out  a  purse  of  gold ;  but  George  re- 
fused to  accept  of  the  price  till  the  boots  were  pro- 
duced. "  Nay,  but  I  will  pay  them  now/'  said  the 
gentleman ;  "  for,  in  the  first  place,  it  will  ensure  me  of 
the  boots,  and,  in  the  next  place,  I  may  probably  leave 
town  to-night,  and  make  my  servant  wait  for  them. 
What  is  the  cost  ?" 

"  If  they  are  to  be  as  good  as  I  can  make  them,  sir, 
they  will  be  twelve  shillings." 

"  Twelve  shillings,  Mr  Dobson  !  I  paid  thirty-six  for 
these  I  wear  in  London,  and  I  expect  yours  will  be  a 
great  deal  better.  Here  are  two  guineas,  and  be  sure 
to  make  them  good." 

"  I  cannot,  for  my  life,  make  them  worth  the  half  of 
that  money,"  said  George.  "  We  have  no  materials 
in  Selkirk  that  will  amount  to  one-third  of  it  in  value." 
However,  the  gentleman  flung  down  the  gold,  and  went 
away,  singing  the  Souters  of  Selkhk. 

"He  is  a  most  noble  fellow  that  Earl  of  Hume," 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  153 

said  George  to  his  apprentice.  *'  I  thought  he  and  I 
should  have  had  a  bkttle,  but  we  have  parted  on  the 
best  possible  terms." 

"  I  wonder  how  you  could  bide  to  be  Souterd  yon 
gate !"  said  the  boy. 

George  scratched  his  head  with  the  awl,  bit  his  lip, 
and  looked  at  his  grandfather's  sword.  He  had  a  great 
desire  to  follow  the  insolent  gentleman ;  for  he  found 
that  he  had  inadvertently  suffered  a  great  insult  with- 
out resenting  it. 

After  George  had  shaped  the  boots  with  the  utmost 
care,  and  of  the  best  and  finest  Kendal  leather,  he  went 
up  the  Back  Row  to  seek  assistance,  so  that  he  might 
have  them  ready  at  the  stated  time ;  but  never  a  stitch 
of  assistance  could  George  obtain,  for  the  gentleman 
had  trysted  a  pair  of  boots  in  every  shop  in  the  Row, 
paid  for  them  all,  and  called  every  one  of  the  shoe- 
makers Souter  twice  over. 
.  Never  was  there  such  a  day  in  the  Back  Row  of 
Selkirk !  What  could  it  mean  ?  Had  the  gentleman 
a  whole  regiment  coming  up,  all  of  the  same  size,  and 
the  same  measiu-e  of  leg  ?  Or  was  he  not  rather  an 
army  agent,  come  to  take  specimens  of  the  best  work- 
men in  the  country  ?  This  last  being  the  prevailing 
belief,  every  Selkirk  Souter  threw  off  his  coat,  and  fell 
a-slashmg  and  cutting  of  Kendal  leather ;  and  such  a 
g2 


154  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

forenoon  of  cutting,  and  sewing,  and  puffing,  and  roset- 
ing,  never  was  in  Selkirk  since  the  battle  of  Flodden- 
field. 

George's  shop  was  the  nethermost  of  the  street,  so 
that  tlie  stranger  guests  came  all  to  him  first ;  so,  scarce- 
ly had  he  taken  a  hurried  dinner,  and  begun  to  sew 
again,  and,  of  course,  to  sing,  when  in  came  a  fat  gen- 
tleman, exceedingly  well  mounted  with  sword  and  pis- 
tols ;  he  had  fair  curled  hair,  red  cheeks  that  hung  over 
his  stock,  and  a  liveryman  behind  him.  "  MeiTy  be 
your  heart,  Mr  Dobson !  but  what  a  plague  of  a  song 
is  tliat  you  are  singing  ?"  said  he.  George  looked  very 
suspicious-like  at  him,  and  thought  to  himself,  Now  I 
could  bet  any  man  two  gold  guineas  that  this  is  the 
Duke  of  Northumberland,  another  enemy  to  our  town ; 
but  I'll  not  be  cowed  by  him  neither,  only  I  could  have 
wished  I  had  been  singing  another  song  when  his  Grace 
came  into  the  shop. — These  were  the  thoughts  that  ran 
through  George's  mind  in  a  moment,  and  at  length  he 
made  answer — "  We  reckon  it  a  good  sang,  my  lord, 
and  ane  o'  the  auldest." 

"  Would  it  suit  your  convenience  to  sing  that  last 
verse  over  again  ?"  said  the  fat  gentleman ;  and  at  the 
same  time  he  laid  hold  of  his  gold-handled  pistols. 

"  O  certainly,  sir,"  said  George ;  "  but  at  the  same 
time  I  must  take  a  lesson  in  manners  from  my  supe- 
riors ;"  and  with  that  he  seized  his  grandfather's  cut- 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  155 

and-thmst  sword,  and  cocking  that  up  by  his  ear,  he 
sang  out  with  fearless  glee — 

"  The  English  are  dolts,  to  a  man,  a  man — 
Fat  puddings  to  fiy  in  a  pan,  a  pan — 

Their  Percys  and  Howards 

We  reckon  but  cowards — 
But  turn  the  Blue  Bonnets  wha  can,  wha  can !" 

George  now  set  his  joints  in  such  a  manner,  that  the 
moment  the  Duke  of  Northumberland  presented  liis 
pistol,  he  might  be  ready  to  cleave  him,  or  cut  off  his 
right  hand,  with  his  grandfather's  cut-and-thrust  sword  ; 
but  the  fat  gentleman  dmst  not  ventm'e  the  issue — he 
took  his  hand  from  his  pistol,  and  laughed  till  his  big 
sides  shook.  "  You  are  a  great  original,  Dobson,"  said' 
he ;  "  but  you  are  nevertheless  a  brave  fellow — a  noble 
fellow — a  Souter  among  a  thousand,  and  I  am  glad  I 
have  met  with  you  in  this  mood  too.  Well,  then,  let 
us  proceed  to  business.  You  must  make  me  a  pair  of 
boots  in  your  very  best  style,  George,  and  that  without 
any  loss  of  time." 

"  O  Lord,  sir,  I  would  do  that  with  the  greatest  plea- 
sure, but  it  is  a  thing  entirely  out  of  my  power,"  said 
George,  with  a  serious  face. 

"  Pooh,  pooh  !  I  know  the  whole  story,"  said  the  fat 
gentleman.  "  You  are  all  hoaxed  and  made  fools  of 
this  morning ;  but  the  thing  concerns  me  very  muclj, 
and  ni  give  you  five  guineas,  Mr  Dobson,  if  you  will 


156      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

make  me  a  pair  of  good  boots  before  to-morrow  at  this 
time." 

<'  I  wad  do  it  cheerfully  for  the  fifth  part  o'  the  price, 
my  lord,"  said  George ;  "  but  it  is  needless  to  speak 
about  that,  it  being  out  o'  my  power.  But  what  way 
are  we  hoaxed  ?  I  dinna  account  ony  man  made  a  fool 
of  wha  has  the  cash  in  his  pocket  as  weel  as  the  goods 
in  his  hand." 

"  You  are  all  made  fools  of  together,  and  I  am  the 
most  made  a  fool  of,  of  any,"  said  the  fat  gentleman. 
"  I  betted  a  hundred  guineas  with  a  young  Scottish 
nobleman  last  night,  that  he  durst  not  go  up  the  Back 
Row  of  Selkirk,  calling  all  the  way, 

*  Souters  ane,  Souters  a', 
Souters  o'  the  Back  Raw ;' 

and  yet,  to  my  astonishment,  you  have  let  him  do  so, 
and  insult  you  all  with  impunity ;  and  he  has  won." 

"  Confound  the  rascal !"  exclaimed  George.  "  If 
we  had  but  taken  him  up !  But  we  took  him  for  our 
friend,  come  to  warn  us,  and  lay  all  in  wait  for  the  au- 
dacious fellow  who  was  to  come  up  behind." 

"  And  a  good  amends  you  took  of  hira  when  he 
came !"  said  the  fat  gentleman.  "  Well,  after  I  had 
taken  the  above  bet,  up  speaks  another  of  our  company, 
and  he  says — *  Why  make  such  account  of  a  few  poor 
cobblers,  or  Souters,  or  how  do  you  call  them  ?  I'll 
bet  a  hundred  guineas,  that  I'll  go  up  the  Back  Row 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  137 

after  that  gentleman  has  set  them  all  agog,  and  I'll  call 
every  one  of  them  Souter  twice  to  his  face.'  I  took 
the  bet  in  a  moment :  *  You  dare  not,  for  your  blood, 
sir,'  says  I.  '  You  do  not  know  the  spirit  and  bravery 
of  the  men  of  Selkirk.  They  will  knock  you  down  at 
once,  if  not  tear  you  to  pieces.'  But  I  trusted  too 
much  to  your  spirit,  and  have  lost  my  two  hundred 
guineas,  it  would  appear.  Tell  me,  in  truth,  Mr  Dob- 
son,  did  you  suffer  him  to  call  you  Souter  twice  to 
your  face  without  resenting  it  ?" 

George  bit  his  lip,  scratched  his  head  with  the  awl, 
and  gave  the  lingles  such  a  yerk,  that  he  made  them 
both  crack  in  two.  "  D — n  it !  we're  a*  affrontit  the- 
gither!"  said  he,  in  a  half  whisper,  while  the  apprentice- 
boy  was  like  to  burst  with  laughter  at  his  master's  mor- 
tification. 

"  Well,  I  have  lost  my  money,"  continued  the  gen- 
tleman ;  "  but  I  assure  you,  George,  the  gentleman 
wants  no  boots.  He  has  accomplished  his  purpose, 
and  has  the  money  in  his  pocket ;  but  as  it  will  avail 
me,  I  may  not  say  how  much,  I  entreat  that  you  will 
make  me  a  pair.  Here  is  the  money, — here  are  five 
guineas,  which  I  leave  in  pledge  ;  only  let  me  have  the 
boots.  Or  suppose  you  make  these  a  little  wider, 
and  transfer  them  to  me  ;  that  is  very  excellent  leather, 
and  will  do  exceedingly  well ;  I  think  I  never  saw 
better ;"  and  he  stood  leaning  over  George,  handling 


158        THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

the  leather.  "  Now,  do  you  consent  to  let  me  have 
them  r 

"  I  can  never  do  that,  my  lord,"  says  George,  "  ha- 
ving the  other  gentleman's  money  in  my  pocket.  If 
you  should  offer  me  ten  guineas,  it  would  be  the  same 
thing." 

"  Very  well,  I  will  find  those  who  will,"  said  he, 
and  off  he  went,  singing, 

"  Turn  the  Blue  Bonnets  wha  can,  wha  can." 

"  This  is  the  queerest  day  about  Selkuk  that  I  ever 
saw,"  said  George  ;  "  but  really  this  Duke  of  North- 
umberland, to  be  the  old  hereditary  enemy  of  our  town, 
is  a  real  fine,  frank  fellow." 

"  Ay,  but  he  Soiiterd  ye,  too,"  said  the  boy. 

"  It's  a  lee,  ye  little  blackguard." 

"  I  heard  him  ca'  you  a  Souter  amang  a  thousand, 
master ;  and  that  taunt  will  be  heard  tell  o'  yet." 

"  I  fancy,  callant,  we  maun  let  that  flee  stick  to  the 
wa',"  said  George  ;  and  sewed  away,  and  sewed  away, 
and  got  the  boots  finished  next  day  at  twelve  o'clock. 
Now,  thought  he  to  himself,  I  have  thirty  shillings  by 
this  bargain,  and  so  I'll  treat  our  magistrates  to  a  hear- 
ty glass  this  afternoon  ;  I  hae  muckle  need  o'  a  slock- 
ening,  and  the  Selku'k  bailies  never  fail  a  friend. — 
George  put  his  hand  into  his  pocket  to  clink  his  two 
gold  guineas;  but  never  a  guinea  was  in  George's  pocket. 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  159 

nor  plack  either  I  His  countenance  changed,  and  fell 
80  much,  that  the  apprentice  noticed  it,  and  suspected 
the  cause ;  but  George  would  confess  nothing,  though, 
in  his  own  mind,  he  strongly  suspected  the  Duke  of 
Northumberland  of  the  theft,  alias^  the  fat  gentleman 
with  the  fair  curled  hair,  and  the  red  cheeks  hanging 
over  his  stock. 

George  went  away  up  among  his  bretliren  of  the 
awl  in  the  Back  Row,  and  called  on  them  every  one ; 
but  he  soon  perceived,  from  their  blank  looks,  and  their 
disinclination  to  drink  that  night,  that  they  were  all  in 
the  same  predicament  with  himself.  The  fat  gentleman 
with  the  curled  hau*  had  visited  every  one  of  them,  and 
got  measure  for  a  pair  of  ten-guinea  boots,  but  had  not 
paid  any  of  them  ;  and,  somehow  or  other,  every  man 
had  lost  the  price  of  the  boots  which  he  had  received  in 
the  morning.  Whom  to  blame  for  this,  nobody  knew  ; 
for  the  whole  day  over,  and  a  good  part  of  the  night, 
from  the  time  the  proclamation  was  made,  the  Back 
Row  of  Selkirk  was  like  a  cried  fair  ;  all  the  idle  people 
in  the  town  and  the  country  about  were  there,  wonder- 
ing after  the  man  who  had  raised  such  a  demand  for 
boots.  After  all,  the  Souters  of  Selkirk  were  left  nei- 
ther richer  nor  poorer  than  they  were  at  the  beginning, 
but  every  one  of  them  had  been  four  times  called  a  Sou- 
ter  to  his  face, — a  title  of  great  obloquy  in  that  town, 
although  the  one  of  all  others  that  the  townsmen  ought 


160        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

to  be  proud  of.  And  it  is  cuiious  that  they  are  proud 
of  it  when  used  collectively ;  but  apply  it  to  any  of 
them  as  a  term  of  reproach,  and  you  had  better  call  him 
the  worst  name  under  heaven. 

This  was  the  truth  of  the  story ;  and  the  feat  was 
performed  by  the  late  Duke  of  Queensberry,  when  Earl 
of  March,  and  two  English  noblemen  then  on  a  tour 
through  this  country.  Every  one  of  them  gained  his 
bet,  through  the  simplicity  of  the  honest  Souters  ;  but 
certainly  the  last  had  a  difficult  part  to  play,  having 
staked  two  hundred  guineas  that  he  would  take  all  the 
money  from  the  Souters  that  they  had  received  from 
the  gentleman  in  the  morning,  and  call  every  one  of 
them  Souter  to  his  face.  He  got  the  price  entire  from 
every  one,  save  Thomas  Inglis,  who  had  drunk  the 
half  of  his  before  he  got  to  him  ;  but  this  being  proved, 
the  English  gentleman  won. 

George  Dobson  took  the  thing  most  amiss.  He 
had  been  the  first  taken  in  all  along,  and  he  thought  a 
good  deal  about  it.  He  was,  moreover,  a  very  honest 
man,  and  in  order  to  make  up  the  boots  to  the  full 
value  of  the  money  he  had  received,  he  had  shod  them 
with  silver,  which  took  two  Spanish  dollars,  and  he  had 
likewise  put  four  silver  tassels  to  the  tops,  so  that  they 
were  splendid  boots,  and  likely  to  remain  on  his  hand. 
In  short,  though  he  did  not  care  about  the  loss,  he 
took  the  hoax  very  sore  to  heart. 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  161 

Shortly  after  this,  he  was  sitting  in  his  shop,  work- 
ing away,  and  not  singing  a  word,  when  in  comes  a  fat 
gentleman,  with  fair  curled  hair,  and  red  cheeks,  but 
they  were  not  hanging  over  his  cravat ;  and  he  says, 
"  Good  morning,  Dobson.  You  are  very  quiet  and 
contemplative  this  morning." 

"  Ay,  sir ;  folk  canna  be  aye  alike  merry." 

"  Have  you  any  stomach  for  taking  measure  of  a 
pair  of  boots  this  morning  ?" 

"  Nah  !  I'll  take  measure  o'  nae  mae  boots  to  stran- 
gers ;  I'll  stick  by  my  auld  customers." — He  is  very  like 
my  late  customer,  thought  George,  but  his  tonguG  is 
not  the  same.  If  I  thought  it  were  he,  I  would  nick 
him ! 

"  I  have  heard  the  story  of  the  boots,  George,"  said 
the  visitor,  "  and  never  heai'd  a  better  one.  I  have 
laughed  very  heartily  at  it ;  and  I  called  principally  to 
inform  you,  that  if  you  will  call  at  Widow  Wilson  s, 
in  Hawick,  you  will  get  the  piice  of  your  boots." 

"  Thank  you,  su-,"  said  George ;  and  the  gentle- 
man went  away ;  Dobson  being  now  persuaded  he  was 
not  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  though  astonishing- 
ly like  him.  George  had  not  sewed  a  single  yerking, 
ei*e  the  gentleman  came  again  into  the  shop,  and  said, 
"  You  had  better  measure  me  for  these  boots,  Dobson. 
I  intend  to  be  your  customer  in  future." 

"  Thank  you,  sir,  but  I  would  rather  not,  just  now," 


162      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  Very  well ;  call  then  at  Widow  Wilson's,  in  Ha- 
wick, and  you  shall  get  double  payment  for  the  boots 
you  have  made." — George  thanked  him  again,  and 
away  he  went ;  but  in  a  very  short  space  he  entered 
the  shop  again,  and  again  requested  George  to  measure 
him  for  a  pair  of  boots.  George  became  suspicious  of 
the  gentleman,  and  rather  uneasy,  as  he  continued  to 
haunt  him  like  a  ghost ;  and  so,  merely  to  be  quit  of 
him,  he  took  the  measure  of  his  leg  and  foot.  "  It  is 
very  near  the  measure  of  these  fine  silver-mounted  ones, 
sir,"  said  George ;  "  you  had  better  just  take  them." 

"  Weii,  so  be  it,"  said  the  stfangei*.  "  Call  at  Wi- 
dow Wilson's,  in  Hawick,  and  you  shall  have  triple 
payment  for  your  boots.     Good  day." 

"  O,  this  gentleman  is  undoubtedly  -vvi-ong  in  his 
mind,"  said  George  to  himself.  "  This  beats  all  the 
customers  I  ever  met  with  !  Ha — ^ha — ha  !  Come  to 
Widow  Wilson's,  and  you  shall  have  payment  for  your 
boots, — double  payment  for  yom-  boots, — triple  pay- 
ment for  your  boots  I  Oh !  the  man's  as  mad  as  a  March 
hare  !  He — he — he — he  !" 

"  Hilloa,  George,"  cried  a  voice  close  at  his  ear, 
"  what's  the  matter  wi'  ye  ?  Are  ye  gane  daft  ?  Are 
ye  no  gaun  to  rise  to  your  wark  the  day  ?" 

"  Aich !  Gudeness  guide  us,  mother,  am  I  no  up 
yet  ?"  cried  George,  springing  out  of  his  bed  ;  for  he 
had  been  all  the  while  in  a  sound  sleep,  and  dreaming. 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  163 

"  What  gart  ye  let  me  lie  sae  lang  ?  I  thought  I  had 
been  i'  the  shop  !" 

"  Shop  I"  exclaimed  she ;  "  I  daresay,  then,  you 
thought  you  had  found  a  fiddle  in't.  What  were  ye 
guffawing  and  laughing  at  ?" 

"  O  !  I  was  laughing  at  a  fat  man,  and  the  pay- 
ment of  a  pah"  o'  hoots  at  Widow  Wilson's,  in  Ha- 
wick." 

"  Widow  Wilson's,  i'  Hawick  !"  exclaimed  his  mo- 
ther, holding  up  both  her  hand»3 ;  "  Gude  forgie  me 
for  a  great  leear,  if  I  hae  dreamed  about  ony  body  else, 
frae  the  tae  end  o'  the  night  to  the  tither !" 

"  Houts,  mother,  baud  your  tongue  ;  it  is  needless 
to  heed  your  dreams,  for  ye  never  gie  ower  dreaming 
about  somebody." 

"  And  what  for  no,  lad  ?  Hasna  an  auld  body  as 
good  a  right  to  dream  as  a  young  ane  ?  Mrs  Wilson's 
a  throughgaun  quean,  and  clears  mair  than  a  bunder 
a-year  by  the  Tannage.  I'se  waiTant  there  sail  some- 
thing follow  thir  dreams  ;  I  get  the  maist  o'  my  dreams 
redd." 

George  was  greatly  tickled  with  his  dream  about  the 
fat  gentleman  and  the  boots,  and  so  well  convinced  was 
he  that  there  was  some  sort  of  meaning  in  it,  that  he 
resolved  to  go  to  Hawick  the  next  market  day,  and  call 
on  Mrs  Wilson,  and  settle  with  her ;  although  it  was 
a  week  or  two  before  his  usual  term  of  payment,  he 


164      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

thought  the  money  would  scarcely  come  wi'ong.  So 
that  day  he  plied  and  wrought  as  usual ;  but  instead  of 
his  favourite  ditties  relating  to  the  Forest,  he  chanted, 
the  whole  day  over,  one  as  old  as  any  of  them  ;  but  I 
am  sorry  I  recollect  only  the  chorus  and  a  few  odd 
stanzas  of  it. 

ROUND  ABOUT  HAWICK. 


Well  round  about  Hawick,  Hawick, 
Round  about  Hawick  thegither ; 

We'll  round  about  Hawick,  Hawick, 
And  In  by  tlie  bride's  gudemither. 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c. 

And  as  we  gang  by  we  will  rap. 

And  drink  to  the  luck  o'  the  bigging ; 

For  the  bride  has  her  tap  in  her  lap, 
And  the  bridegroom  his  tail  in  his  rigging. 
Sing,  Rovmd  about  Hawick,  &c 

There's  been  little  luck  i'  the  deed ; 

We're  a'  in  the  dumps  thegither ; 
Let's  gie  the  bridegroom  a  sheep's  head, 

But  gie  the  bride  brose  and  butter. 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c. 

Then  a'  the  gudewives  i'  the  land 
Came  flocking  in  droves  thegither, 

A'  bringing  their  bountith  in  hand. 
To  please  the  young  bride's  gudemither. 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c. 

The  black  gudewife  o'  the  Braes 
Ga«  baby-clouts  no  Avorth  a  button  ; 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  W55 

But  the  auld  gudewife  o'  Penchrice 
Cam  in  wi'  a  shouder  o'  mutton. 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c 

Wee  Jean  o'  the  Coate  gae  a  pun', 

A  penny,  a  plack,  and  a  boddle ; 
But  the  wife  at  the  head  o'  the  town 

Gae  nought  but  a  lang  pin-todle.* 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c 

The  mistress  o'  Bortugh  cam  ben, 

Aye  blinking  sae  couthy  and  canny ; 
But  some  said  she  had  in  her  han* 

A  kipple  o'  bottles  o'  branny. 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c. 

And  some  brought  dumpies  o'  woo, 

And  some  brought  flitches  o'  bacon, 
And  kebbucks  and  cnippocks  enow  ; 

But  Jenny  Muirhead  brought  a  capon. 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c. 

Then  up  cam  the  wife  o'  the  Mill, 
Wi'  the  cog,  and  the  meal,  and  the  water ; 

For  she  likit  the  joke  sae  weel 
To  gie  the  bi-ide  brose  and  butter. 
Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  &c. 

And  first  she  pat  in  a  bit  bread. 

And  then  she  pat  in  a  bit  butter, 
And  then  she  pat  in  a  sheep's  head, 
Horns  and  a'  thegither  ! 

Sing,  Round  about  Hawick,  Hawick, 

Round  about  Hawick  thegither; 
Roimd  about  Hawick,  Hawick, 
Round  about  Hawick  for  ever 


A  pin-CMshion. 


166     THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

On  the  Thursday  following,  George,  instead  of  go- 
ing to  the  shop,  dressed  himself  in  his  best  Sunday- 
clothes,  and,  with  rather  a  curious  face,  went  ben  to 
his  stepmother,  and  inquu*ed  "  what  feck  o'  siller  she 
had  about  her  ?" 

"  Siller  I  Gudeness  forgie  you,  Geordie,  for  an  even- 
down waster  and  a  profligate  !  What  are  ye  gaun  to  do 
wi'  siller  the  day  ?" 

"  I  have  something  ado  ower  at  Hawick,  and  I  was 
thinking  it  wad  be  as  weel  to  pay  her  account  when  I 
was  there." 

"  Oho,  lad  !  are  ye  there  wi'  your  dreams  and  your 
visions  o'  the  night,  Geordie  ?  Ye're  aye  keen  o'  sangs, 
man ;  I  can  pit  a  vera  gude  ane  i'  yom-  head.  There's 
an  unco  gude  auld  thing  they  ca',  Wap  at  the  widow, 
my  laddie.  D'ye  ken  it,  Geordie  ?  Siller  !  quo  he  I 
Hae  ye  ony  feck  o*  siller,  mother !  Whew  !  I  hae  as 
muckle  as  will  pay  the  widow's  account  sax  times 
ower  I  Ye  may  tell  her  that  frae  me.  Siller !  lack-a- 
day  I — But,  Geordie,  my  man — Auld  wives'  dreams 
are  no  to  be  regardit,  ye  ken.     Eh  ?" 

After  putting  half  a  dozen  pairs  of  trysted  shoes, 
and  the  identical  silver-mounted  boots,  into  the  cad- 
ger's creels — then  the  only  regular  carriers — off  set 
George  Dobson  to  Hawick  market,  a  distance  of  near- 
ly eleven  new-fashioned  miles,  but  then  accounted  only 
eight  and  three  quarters ;  and  after  parading  the  Sand- 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  167 

bed,  Slitterick  Bridge,  and  the  Tower  Knowe,  for  the 
space  of  an  hour,  and  shaking  hands  with  some  four 
or  five  acquaintances,  he  ventured  east-the-gate  to  pay 
Mrs  Wilson  her  account.  He  was  kindly  welcomed, 
as  eveiy  good  and  regular  customer  was,  by  Mrs  Wil- 
son. They  settled  amicably,  and  in  the  course  of 
business  George  ventured  several  sly,  jocular  hints,  to 
see  how  they  would  be  taken,  vexed  that  his  grand  and 
singular  dream  should  go  for  nothing.  No,  nothing 
would  pass  there  but  sterling  cent  per  cent.  The  lady 
was  deaf  and  blind  to  every  effort  of  gallantr)'-,  valuing 
her  own  abilities  too  highly  ever  to  set  a  man  a  second 
time  at  the  head  of  her  flourishing  business.  Never- 
theless, she  could  not  be  blind  to  George's  qualifica- 
tions— he  knew  that  was  impossible, — for  in  the  fii'st 
place  he  was  a  goodly  person,  with  handsome  limbs  and 
broad  square  shoulders ;  of  a  very  dark  complexion, 
true,  but  with  fine,  shrewd,  manly  features  ;  was  a  bur- 
gess and  councillor  of  the  town  of  Selkirk,  and  as  in- 
dependent in  circumstances  as  she  was. 

Very  well;  Mrs  Wilson  knew  all  this — valued 
George  Dobson  accordingly,  and  would  not  have  de- 
nied him  any  of  those  good  points  more  than  Gideon 
Scott  would  to  a  favourite  Cheviot  tup,  in  any  society 
whatever ;  but  she  had  such  a  shai-p,  cold,  business 
manner,  that  George  could  discover  no  symptoms 
where  the  price  of  the  boots  was  to  come  from.     In 


168  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

order  to  conciliate  matters  as  far  as  convenient,  if  not 
even  to  stretch  a  point,  lie  gave  her  a  farther  order, 
larger  than  the  one  just  settled  ;  hut  all  that  he  elicit- 
ed was  thanks  for  his  custom,  and  one  very  small  glass 
of  brandy ;  so  he  drank  her  health,  and  a  good  hus- 
band to  her.  Mrs  Wilson  only  courtseyed,  and  thanked 
him  coldly,  and  away  George  set  west-the-street,  with 
a  quick  and  stately  step,  saying  to  himself  that  the  ex- 
pedition of  the  silver-mounted  boots  was  all  up. 

As  he  was  posting  up  the  street,  an  acquaintance  of 
his,  a  flesher,  likewise  of  the  name  of  Wilson,  eyed 
him,  and  called  him  aside.  "  Hey,  George,  come  this 
way  a  bit.  How  are  ye  ?  •  How  d'ye  do,  sir  ?  What 
news  about  Selkirk?  Grand  demand  for  boots  there 
just  now,  I  hear — eh  ?  Needing  any  thing  in  my  way 
the  day? — Nae  beef  like  that  about  your  town.  Come 
away  in,  and  taste  the  gudewife's  bottle.  I  want  to 
hae  a  crack  wi'  ye,  and  get  measure  of  a  pair  o'  boots. 
The  grandest  story  yon,  sir,  I  ever  heard — eh  ? — Need- 
ing a  leg  o'  beef? — Better?  Never  mind,  come  away 
in." 

George  was  following  Mr  Wilson  into  the  house, 
having  as  yet  scarcely  got  a  word  said, — and  he  liked 
the  man  exceedingly, — when  one  pulled  his  coat,  and  a 
pretty  servant  girl  smirked  in  his  face  and  said,  "  Mais- 
ter  Dabsen,  thou  maun  cum  awa  yest-the-gate  and 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  109 

speak  till  Mistress  Wulsin  ;  there's  sumtheyng  forgot 
atween  ye.     Thou  maun  cum  directly." 

"  Haste  ye,  gae  away,  rin !"  says  Wilson,  pushing 
him  out  at  the  door,  "  that's  a  better  bait  than  a  poor 
flesher's  dram.  There's  some  comings  and  gangings 
yonder.  A  bien  birth  and  a  thrifty  dame.  Grip  to, 
giip  to,  lad !  I'se  take  her  at  a  hunder  pund  the  quar- 
ter.    Let  us  see  you  as  ye  come  back  again." 

George  went  back,  and  there  was  Mrs  Wilson  stand- 
ing in  the  door  to  receive  him. 

"  I  quite  forgot,  Mr  Dobson — I  beg  pardon.  But 
I  hope,  as  usual,  you  will  take  a  family-dinner  with  me 
to-day  ?" 

"  Indeed,  Mrs  Wilson,  I  was  just  thinking  to  my- 
sell  that  you  were  fey,  and  that  we  two  would  never 
bargain  again,  for  I  never  paid  you  an  account  before 
that  I  did  not  get  the  offer  of  my  dinner." 

"  A  very  stupid  neglect !  But,  indeed,  I  have  so 
many  things  to  mind",  and  so  hard  set  with  the  world, 
Mr  Dobson ;  you  cannot  conceive,  when  there's  only  a 
woman  at  the  head  of  affairs " 

"Ay,  but  sic  a  woman,"  said  George^  and  shook  his 
head. 

"  Well,  well,  come  at  two.  I  dine  early.  No  cere, 
mony,  you  know.  Just  a  homely  dinner,  and  no  drink- 
ing." So  saying,  she  turned  and  sailed  into  the  house 
very  gracefully ;  and  then  tm-ning  aside,  she  looked  out 

VOL.  I,  H 


170        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

at  the  window  after  him,  apostrophizing  him  thus — 
"  Ay,  ye  may  strut  away  west-the-street,  as  if  I  were 
looking  after  you.  Shame  fa'  the  souter-like  face  o' 
ye ;  I  wish  you  had  been  fifty  miles  off  the  day  !  If 
it  hadna  been  fear  for  affronting  a  good  steady  customer, 
you  shoudna  hae  been  here.  For  there's  my  brother 
coming  to  dinner,  and  maybe  some  o'  his  cronies ;  and 
he'll  be  sae  ta'en  wi'  this  merry  souter  chield,  that  I  ken 
weel  they'll  drink  mair  than  twice  the  profits  o'  this  bit 
order.  My  brother  maun  hae  a'  his  ain  will  too ! 
Folk  maun  aye  bow  to  the  bush  they  get  bield  frae, 
else  I  should  take  a  staup  out  o'  theu*  punch  cogs  the 
night." 

George  attended  at  ten  minutes  past  two,  to  be  as 
fashionable  as  the  risk  of  losing  his  kale  would  permit 
— gave  a  sharp  wooer-like  rap  at  the  door,  and  was 
shown  by  the  dimpling  Border  maid  into  The  Room, 
— which,  in  those  days,  meant  the  only  sitting  apart- 
ment of  a  house.  Mrs  Wilson  being  absent  to  super- 
intend the  preparations  for  dinner,  and  no  one  to  intro- 
duce the  parties  to  each  other,  think  of  George's  utter 
amazement,  when  he  saw  the  identical  fat  gentleman, 
who  came  to  him  thrice  in  his  dream,  and  ordered  him 
to  come  to  Widow  Wilson's  and  get  payment  of  his 
boots !  He  was  the  very  gentleman  in  every  respect, 
every  inch  of  him,  and  George  could  have  known  him 
among  a  thousand.    It  was  not  the  Duke  of  Northum- 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK. 


171 


berland,  but  he  that  was  so  very  like  him,  with  fair 
curled  hair,  and  red  cheeks,  which  did  not  hang  over 
his  cravat.  George  felt  as  if  he  had  been  di'opped  into 
another  state  of  existence,  and  hardly  knew  what  to 
think  or  say.  He  had  at  first  very  nigh  run  up  and 
taken  the  gentleman's  hand,  and  addressed  him  as  an 
old  acquaintance,  but  luckily  he  recollected  the  equi- 
vocal circumstances  in  which  they  met,  which  was  not 
actually  in  the  shop,  but  in  George's  little  bed-closet  in 
the  night,  or  early  in  the  morning. 

In  short,  the  two  sat  awkward  enough,  till,  at  last, 
Mrs  Wilson  entered,  in  most  brilliant  attire,  and  really 
a  handsome  fine  woman  ;  and  with  her  a  country  lady, 
with  something  in  her  face  extremely  engaging.  Mrs 
Wilson  immediately  introduced  the  parties  to  each 
other  thus : — "  Brother,  this  is  Mr  Dobson,  boot  and 
shoemaker  in  Selkirk ; — as  honest  a  young  man,  and  as 
good  a  payer,  as  I  know. — Mr  Dobson,  this  is  Mr  Turn- 
bull,  my  brother,  the  best  friend  I  ever  had;  and  this  is 
his  daughter  Margaret." 

The  parties  were  acquainted  in  one  minute,  for  Mr 
TurnbuU  was  a  frank  kind-hearted  gentleman ;  ay,  they 
were  more  than  acquainted,  for  the  very  second  or 
third  look  that  George  got  of  Margaret  Tumbull,  he 
loved  her.  And  during  the  whole  afternoon,  every 
word  that  she  spoke,  every  smile  that  she  smiled,  and 
every  happy  look  that  she  tmiied  on  another,  added  to 


172      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

his  flame ;  so  that  long  ere  the  sun  leaned  his  elbow  on 
Skelfhill  Pen,  he  was  deeper  in  love  than,  perhaps,  any 
other  souter  in  this  world  ever  was.  It  is  needless  to 
describe  Miss  TumbuU ;  she  was  just  what  a  woman 
should  be,  and  not  exceeding  twenty-five  years  of  age. 
Wliat  a  mense  she  would  be  to  the  town  of  Selkirk, 
and  to  a  boot  and  shoemaker's  parlour,  as  well  as  to 
the  top  of  the  councillors'  seat  every  Sunday  ! 

When  the  dinner  was  over,  the  brandy  bottle  went 
round,  accompanied  with  the  wee  wee  glass,  in  shape 
of  the  burr  of  a  Scots  Thistle.  When  it  came  to  Mr 
Tunibull,  he  held  it  up  between  him  and  the  light, — 
"  Keatie,  whaten  a  nifF-naff  of  a  glass  is  this  ?  let  us 
see  a  feasible  ane." 

"  If  it  be  over  little,  you  can  fill  it  the  oftener, 
brother.     I  think  a  big  dram  is  so  vulgar  I" 

"  That's  no  the  thing,  Keatie.  The  tmth  is,  that 
ye're  a  perfect  she  Nabal,  and  ilka  thing  that  takes  the 
value  of  a  plack  out  o'  your  pocket,  is  vulgar,  or  im- 
proper, or  something  that  way.  But  I'll  tell  you, 
Keatie,  my  woman,  what  you  shall  do  :  Set  down  a 
black  bottle  on  this  hand  o'  me,  and  twa  clear  anes  on 
this,  and  the  cheeny  bowl  atween  them,  and  I'll  let  you 
see  what  I'll  do.  I  ken  o'  nane  within  the  ports  o' 
Hawick  can  afibrd  a  bowl  better  than  you.  Nane  o' 
your  half  bottles  and  quarter  bottles  at  a  time ;  now 
Keatie,  ye  ken,  ye  ha&  a  confoundit  trick  o'  that ;  but 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  173 

I  hae  some  hopes  that  I'll  learn  ye  good  manners  by 
and  by." 

"  Dear  brother,  I'm  sure  you  are  not  going  to  drink 
your  bottles  here  ?  Think  what  the  town  would  say, 
if  I  were  to  keep  cabals  o'  drinkers  in  my  sober  house." 

"  Do  as  I  bid  you  now,  Keatie,  and  lippen  the  rest  to 
me. — Ah,  she  is  a  niggard,  Mr  Dobson,  and  has  muckle 
need  of  a  little  schooling  to  open  her  heart." 

The  materials  were  produced,  and  Mr  Tmnbull,  aa 
had  been  predicted,  did  not  spare  them.  Other  two 
Wilsons  joined  them  immediately  after  dinner,  the  one 
a  shoemaker,  and  the  other  our  friend  the  flesher,  and 
a  merrier  afternoon  has  seldom  been  in  Hawick.  Mr 
TumbuU  was  perfectly  delighted  with  George; — he 
made  him  sing  "  The  Souters  o'  Selkirk,"  "  Turn  the 
Blue  Bonnets,"  and  all  his  best  things ;  but  when  he 
came  to  "  Round  about  Hawick,"  he  made  him  sing  it 
six  times  over,  and  was  never  weary  of  laughing  at  it, 
and  identifying  the  characters  with  those  then  living. 
Then  the  story  of  the  boots  was  an  mexhaustible  joke, 
and  the  likeness  between  Mr  Turnbull  and  the  Duke 
of  Northumberland  an  acceptable  item.  At  length  Mr 
TumbuU  got  so  elevated,  that  he  said,  "  Ay,  man  !  and 
they  are  shod  wi'  silver,  and  silver  tassels  round  the 
top  ?  I  wad  gie  a  bottle  o'  wine  for  a  sight  o'  them." 

"  It  shall  cost  you  nae  man-,"  said  George,  and  in 
three  minutes  he  set  them  on  the  table.   Mr  TumbuU 


174  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

tried  them  on,  and  walked  through  and  through  the 
room  with  them,  singing — 

"  With  silver  he  was  shod  before — 
With  burning  gold  behind." 

They  fitted  exactly ;  and  before  sitting  down,  he  offered 
George  the  original  price,  and  got  them. 

It  became  late  rather  too  soon  for  our  group,  but  the 
young  lady  grew  impatient  to  get  home,  and  Mr  Turn- 
bull  was  obliged  to  prepare  for  going ;  nothing,  how- 
ever, would  please  him,  save  that  George  should  go 
with  him  all  night ;  and  George  being,  long  before  this 
time,  over  head  and  ears  in  love,  accepted  of  the  invi- 
tation, and  the  loan  of  the  flesher's  bay  mare,  and  went 
with  them.  Miss  Margaret  had  soon,  by  some  kind  of 
natural  inspiration,  discovered  our  jovial  Souter's  par- 
tiality for  her ;  and  in  order  to  open  the  way  for  a  ban- 
ter, (the  best  mode  of  beginning  a  courtship,)  she  fell  on 
and  rallied  him  most  severely  about  the  boots  and  the 
Soutering,  and  particularly  about  letting  himself  be 
robbed  of  the  two  guineas.  This  gave  George  an  op- 
portunity of  retaliating  so  happily,  that  he  wondered 
at  himself,  for  he  acknowledged  that  he  said  things  that 
he  never  believed  he  could  have  had  the  face  to  say  to 
a  lady  before. 

The  year  after  that,  the  two  were  manied  in  the 
house  of  Mrs  Wilson,  and  Mr  Turnbull  paid  down  a 
Inmdred  pounds  to  George  on  the  day  he  brought  her 


THE  SOUTERS  OF  SELKIRK.  175 

from  that  house  a  bride.  Now,  thought  George  to 
himself,  I  have  been  twice  most  liberally  paid  for  my 
boots  in  that  house.  My  wife,  perhaps,  will  stand  for 
the  third  payment,  which  I  hope  will  be  the  best  of  all ; 
but  I  still  think  there  is  to  be  another  one  beside. — He 
was  not  wrong,  for  after  the  death  of  his  worthy  father- 
in-law,  he  found  himself  entitled  to  the  tliird  of  his 
whole  effects ;  the  transfer  of  which,  nine  years  after 
his  marriage,  was  made  over  to  him  in  the  house  of  his 
friend,  Mrs  Wilson. 


176        TME  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY. 


There  is  an  old  story  which  I  have  often  heard  re- 
lated, about  a  great  Lau'd  of  Cass  way,  in  an  outer 
comer  of  Dumfries-shiie,  of  the  name  of  Beattie,  and 
his  two  sons.  The  incidents  of  the  story  are  of  a  very 
extraordinaiy  nature.  This  Beattie  had  occasion  to 
be  almost  constantly  in  England,  because,  as  my  in- 
formant said,  he  took  a  gi'eat  hand  in  government  af- 
fairs, from  which  I  conclude  that  the  tradition  had  its 
rise  about  the  time  of  the  Civil  Wars  ;  for  about  the 
close  of  that  time,  the  Scotts  took  the  advantage  of  the 
times  to  put  the  Beatties  down,  who,  for  some  previ- 
ous ages,  had  maintained  the  superiority  of  that  dis- 
trict. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  Laird  of  Cassway's  second 
son,  Francis,  fell  desperately  in  love  with  a  remarkably 
beautiful  girl,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Henry  Scott  of 
Dmmfielding,  a  gentleman,  but  still  only  a  retainer, 
and  far  beneath  Beattie  of  Cassway,  both  in  point  of 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  177 

wealth  and  influence.  Francis  was  a  scholar  newly 
returned  from  the  University — was  tall,  handsome,  of 
a  paie  complexion,  and  gentlemanly  appeai'ance,  wliile 
Thomas,  the  eldest  son,  was  fair,  ruddy,  and  stout- 
made,  a  perfect  pictm-e  of  health  and  good-humour, — 
a  sportsman,  a  warrior,  and  a  jovial  blade ;  one  who 
would  not  suffer  a  fox  to  get  rest  in  the  whole  moor 
district.  He  rode  the  best  horse,  kept  the  best  hounds, 
played  the  best  fiddle,  danced  the  best  country  bump- 
kin, and  took  the  stoutest  draught  of  mountain  dew,  of 
any  man  between  Erick  Brae  and  Teviot  Stone,  and 
was  altogether  that  sort  of  a  young  man,  that  when- 
ever he  cast  his  eyes  on  a  pretty  girl,  either  at  chapel 
or  weapon-shaw,  she  would  hide  her  face,  and  giggle 
as  if  tickled  by  some  unseen  hand. 

Now,  though  Thomas,  or  the  Young  Lau'd,  as  he 
was  called,  had  only  spoke  once  to  Ellen  Scott  m  his 
life,  at  which  time  he  chucked  her  below  the  chin,  and 
bid  the  devil  take  him  if  ever  he  saw  as  bonny  a  face  in 
his  whole  bom  days  ;  yet,  for  all  that,  Ellen  loved  him. 
It  could  not  be  said  that  she  was  in  love  with  him,  for 
a  maiden's  heart  must  be  won  before  it  is  given  abso- 
lutely away  ;  but  hers  gave  him  the  preference  to  any 
other  young  man.  She  loved  to  see  him,  to  heai'  of 
him,  and  to  laugh  at  him ;  and  it  was  even  observed 
by  the  domestics,  that  Tam  Beattie  o'  the  Cassway's 
H  2 


178      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

name  came  oftener  into  her  conyersation  than  there 
was  any  good  reason  for. 

Such  was  the  state  of  aflfairs  when  Francis  came 
home,  and  fell  desperately  in  love  with  Ellen  Scott ; 
and  his  father  being  in  England,  and  he  under  no  re- 
straint, he  went  frequently  to  visit  her.  She  received 
him  with  a  kindness  and  affability  that  pleased  him  to 
the  heart ;  but  he  little  wist  that  this  was  only  a  spon- 
taneous and  natm'al  glow  of  kindness  towards  him  be- 
cause of  his  connexions,  and  rather  because  he  was  the 
Young  Laird  of  Cassway's  only  brother,  than  the  poor 
but  accomplished  Francis  Beattie,  the  scholar  from  Ox- 
ford. 

He  was,  however,  so  much  delighted  with  her,  that 
he  asked  her  father's  permission  to  pay  his  addresses 
to  her.  Her  father,  who  was  a  prudent  and  sensible 
man,  answered  him  in  this  wise — "  That  nothing  would 
give  him  greater  delight  than  to  see  his  beloved  Ellen 
joined  with  so  accomplished  and  amiable  a  young  gen- 
tleman in  the  bonds  of  holy  wedlock,  provided  his  fa- 
ther's assent  was  previously  obtained.  But  as  he  him- 
self was  subordinate  to  another  house,  not  on  the  best 
terms  with  the  house  of  Cass  way,  he  would  not  take 
it  on  him  to  sanction  any  such  connexion  without  the 
Old  Laird's  full  consent.  That,  moreover,  as  he,  Fran- 
cis Beattie,  was  just  setting  out  in  life,  as  a  lawyer^ 
there  was  but  too  much  reason  to  doubt  that  a  matri- 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  179 

monial  connexion  with  Ellen  at  that  time  would  be 
highly  imprudent ;  therefore  it  was  not  to  be  thought 
further  of  till  the  Old  Laird  was  consulted.  In  the 
meantime,  he  should  always  be  welcome  to  his  house, 
and  to  his  daughter's  company,  as  he  had  the  same  de- 
pendence on  his  honour  and  integrity,  as  if  he  had  been 
a  son  of  his  own." 

The  young  man  thanked  him  affectionately,  and 
could  not  help  acquiescing  in  the  truth  of  his  remarks, 
promised  not  to  mention  matrimony  farther,  till  he  had 
consulted  his  father,  and  added — "  But  indeed  you 
must  excuse  me,  if  I  avail  myself  of  your  permission 
to  visit  here  often,  as  I  am  sensible  that  it  will  be  im- 
possible for  me  to  live  for  any  space  of  time  out  of  my 
dear  Ellen's  sight."  He  was  again  assured  of  welcome, 
and  the  two  parted  mutually  pleased. 

Henry  Scott  of  Dmmfielding  was  a  widower,  with 
six  daughters,  over  whom  presided  Mrs  Jane  Jerdan, 
their  maternal  aunt,  an  old  maid,  with  fashions  and 
ideas  even  more  antiquated  than  herself.  No  sooner 
had  the  young  wooer  taken  his  leave,  than  she  bounced 
into  the  room,  the  only  sitting  apartment  in  the  house, 
and  said,  in  a  loud  important  whisper,  "  What's  that 
young  swankey  of  a  lawyer  wanting,  that  he's  aye 
hankering  sae  muckle  about  our  town  ?  I'll  tell  you 
what,  brother  Hairy,  it  strikes  me  that  he  wants  to 
make  a  wheelwright  o'  your  daughter  NelL   Now,  gin- 


180  THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

he  axes  your  consent  to  ony  siccan  thing,  dinna  ye 
grant  it.  That's  a'.  Take  an  auld  fool's  advice  gin  ye 
wad  prosper.  Folk  are  a'  wise  ahint  the  hand,  and  sae 
will  ye  be." 

"  Dear,  Mrs  Jane,  what  objections  can  you  have  to 
Mr  Francis  Beattie,  the  most  accomplished  young  gen- 
tleman of  the  whole  country  ?" 

"  'Complished  gentleman  I  '.Complished  kirn-milk  ! 
I'll  tell  you  what,  brother  Hany, — afore  I  were  a  land- 
less lady,  I  wad  rather  be  a  tailor's  layboard.  What 
has  he  to  maintain  a  lady  spouse  with  ?  The  wind  o' 
his  Imigs,  forsooth  I — thinks  to  sell  that  for  goud  in 
goupings.  Hech  me  !  Crazy  wad  they  be  wha  wad 
buy  it ;  and  they  wha  trust  to  crazy  people  for  their 
living  will  live  but  crazily.  Take  an  auld  fool's  ad- 
"vice  gin  ye  wad  prosper,  else  ye'll  be  wise  ahint  the 
hand.  Have  nae  mair  to  do  with  him — Nell's  bread 
for  his  betters  ;  tell  him  that.  Or,  by  my  certy,  gin  I 
meet  wi'  him  face  to  face,  /'//  tell  him." 

"  It  would  be  unfriendly  in  me  to  keep  aught  a  se- 
cret from  you,  sister,  consideiing  the  interest  you  have 
taken  in  my  family.  I  have  given  him  my  consent  to 
visit  my  daughter,  but  at  the  same  time  have  restrict- 
ed him  from  mentioning  matrimony  until  he  have  con- 
sulted his  father." 

"  And  what  is  the  visiting  to  gang  for,  then  ?  Away 
wi'  him  !  Our  Nell's  food  for  his  betters.     What  wad 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  181 

you  think  an  she  could  get  the  Young  Laird,  his  bro- 
ther, wi'  a  blink  o'  her  ee  ?" 

"  Never  speak  to  me  of  that,  Mrs  Jane.  I  wad  ra- 
ther see  the  poorest  of  his  shepherd  lads  coming  to 
coui-t  my  child  than  see  him  ;"  and  with  these  words 
Henry  left  the  room. 

Mrs  Jane  stood  long,  making  faces,  shaking  her  apron 
with  both  hands,  nodding  her  head,  and  sometimes  gi- 
ving a  stamp  with  her  foot.  "  I  have  set  my  face  against 
that  connexion,"  said  she  ;  "  our  Nell's  no  made  for  a 
lady  to  a  London  lawyer.  It  wad  set  her  rather  bet- 
ter to  be  Lady  of  Cassway.  The  Young  Laird,  for 
me  !  I'll  hae  the  branks  of  love  thrown  over  the  heads 
o'  the  twasome,  tie  the  tangs  thegither,  and  then  let 
them  gallop  like  twa  kippled  grews.  My  brother  Har- 
ly's  a  simple  man  ;  he  disna  ken  the  credit  tliat  he  has 
by  his  daughters — thanks  to  some  other  body  than  him ! 
Niece  Nell  has  a  shape,  an  ee,  and  a  lady-manner  that 
wad  kilhab  the  best  lord  o'  the  kingdom,  were  he  to 
come  under  their  influence  and  my  manoovi'es.  She's 
a  Jerdan  a'  through  ;  and  that  I'll  let  them  ken  !  Folk 
are  a'  wise  ahint  the  hand  ;  credit  only  comes  by  catch 
and  keep.  Goodnight  to  a'  younger  brothers,  puffings 
o'  love  vows,  and  sabs  o'  wind  !  Gie  me  the  good 
green  hills,  the  gTuff  wedders,  and  bob-tail'd  yowes  ; 
and  let  the  Law  and  the  Gospel-men  sell  the  wind  o' 
their  lungs  as  dear  as  they  can." 


182      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

In  a  few  days,  Henry  of  Drumfielding  was  called 
out  to  attend  his  Chief  on  some  expedition ;  on  which 
Mrs  Jane,  not  caring  to  trust  her  message  to  any  other 
person,  went  over  to  Cassway,  and  invited  the  Young 
Laird  to  Drumfielding  to  see  her  niece,  quite  convin- 
ced that  her  charms  and  endowments  would  at  once 
enslave  the  elder  brother  as  they  had  done  the  younger. 
Tam  Beattie  was  delighted  at  finding  such  a  good  back 
friend  as  Mrs  Jane,  for  he  had  not  failed  to  observe, 
for  a  twelvemonth  back,  that  Ellen  Scott  was  very 
pretty,  and,  either  through  chance  or  design,  he  asked 
Mrs  Jane  if  the  young  lady  was  privy  to  this  invita- 
tion. 

"  She  privy  to  it !"  exclaimed  Mrs  Jane,  shaking 
her  apron.  "  Ha,  weel  I  wat,  no !  She  wad  soon  hae 
flown  in  my  face  wi'  her  gibery  and  her  jaukery,  had 
I  tauld  her  my  errand ;  but  the  gowk  kens  what  the 
tittling  wants,  although  it  is  not  aye  crying,  Give,  give, 
like  the  horse  loch-leech." 

"  Does  the  horse-leech  really  cry  that,  Mrs  Jane  ? 
I  should  think,  from  a  view  of  its  mouth,  that  it  could 
scarcely  cry  any  thing,"  said  Tom. 

"  Are  ye  sic  a  reprobate  as  to  deny  the  words  o'  the 
Scripture,  su*  ?  Hech,  wae's  me !  what  some  folk  hae 
to  answer  for!  We're  a'  wise  ahint  the  hand.  But 
hark  ye, — come  ye  ower  in  time,  else  I  am  feared  she 
may  be  settled  for  ever  out  o'  your  reach.     Now,  I 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASS  WAY.  183 

canna  bide  to  think  on  that,  for  I  have  always  thought 
yOu  twa  made  for  ane  anither.  Let  me  take  a  look  o* 
you  frae  tap  to  tae — O  yes — made  for  ane  anither. 
Come  ower  in  time,  before  billy  Harry  come  hame 
again ;  and  let  your  visit  be  in  timeous  hours,  else  I'll 
gie  you  the  back  of  the  door  to  keep. — Wild  reprobate  I" 
she  exclaimed  to  herself,  on  taking  her  leave ;  "  to  de- 
ny that  the  horse  loch-leech  can  speak!  Ha — he — 
The  Young  Laird  is  the  man  for  me !" 

Thomas  Beattie  was  true  to  his  appointment,  as  may 
be  supposed,  and  Mrs  Jane  having  her  niece  dressed 
in  style,  he  was  perfectly  charmed  with  her ;  and  real- 
ly it  cannot  be  denied  that  Ellen  was  as  much  delight- 
ed with  him.  She  was  young,  gay,  and  frolicsome, 
and  Ellen  never  spent  a  more  joyous  and  happy  after- 
noon, or  knew  before  what  it  was  to  be  in  a  presence 
that  delighted  her  so  much.  While  they  sat  conver- 
sing, and  apparently  better  satisfied  with  the  company  of 
each  other  than  was  likely  to  be  regarded  with  indif- 
ference by  any  other  individual  aspiring  to  the  favour 
of  the  young  lady,  the  door  was  opened,  and  there  en- 
tered no  other  than  Francis  Beattie  I  When  Ellen  saw 
her  devoted  lover  appear  thus  suddenly,  she  blushed 
deeply,  and  her  glee  was  damped  in  a  moment.  She 
looked  rather  like  a  condemned  criminal,  or  at  least  a 
guilty  creature,  than  what  she  really  was, — a  being  over 


184      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

whose  mind  the  cloud  of  guilt  had  never  cast  its  sha- 
dow. 

Francis  loved  her  above  all  things  on  earth  or  in  hea- 
ven, and  the  moment  he  saw  her  so  much  abashed  at 
being  surprised  in  the  company  of  his  brother,  his  spirit 
was  moved  to  jealousy — to  maddening  and  uncontrol- 
able  jealousy.  His  ears  rang,  his  hair  stood  on  end, 
and  the  contour  of  his  face  became  like  a  bent  bow. 
He  walked  up  to  his  brother  with  his  hand  on  his  hilt, 
and,  in  a  state  t)f  excitement  which  rendered  his  words 
inarticulate,  addressed  him  thus,  while  his  teeth  ground 
together  lilie  a  horse-rattle  : 

''  Pray,  sir,  may  I  ask  you  of  your  intentions,  and  of 
what  you  are  seeking  here?" 

"  I  know  not,  Frank,  what  right  you  have  to  ask  any 
such  questions ;  but  you  will  allow  that  I  have  a  right 
to  ask  at  you  what  you  are  seeking  here  at  present,  see- 
ing you  come  so  very  inopportunely  ?" 

"  Sir,"  said  Francis,  whose  passion  could  stay  no 
farther  parley,  "  dare  you  put  it  to  the  issue  of  the 
sword  this  moment  ?" 

"  Come  now,  dear  Francis,  do  not  act  the  fool  and 
the  madman  both  at  a  time.  Rather  than  bring  such 
a  dispute  to  the  issue  of  the  sword  between  two  bro- 
thers who  never  had  a  quaiTel  in  their  lives,  I  propose 
that  we  bring  it  to  a  much  more  temperate  and  deci- 
sive issue  here  where  we  stand,  by  giving  the  maiden 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  183 

her  choice.  Stand  you  there  at  that  comer  of  the 
room,  I  at  this,  and  Ellen  Scott  in  the  middle ;  let  us 
both  ask  her,  and  to  whomsoever  she  comes,  the  prize 
be  his.  Why  should  we  try  to  decide,  by  the  loss  of 
one  of  our  lives,  what  we  cannot  decide,  and  what  may 
be  decided  in  a  friendly  and  rational  way  in  one  mi- 
nute?" 

"  It  is  easy  for  you,  sii*,  to  talk  temperately  and  with 
indifference  of  such  a  trial,  but  not  so  with  me.  This 
young  lady  is  dear  to  my  heart." 

"  Well,  but  so  is  she  to  mine.  Let  us,  therefore, 
appeal  to  the  lady  at  once,  whose  claim  is  the  best ; 
and  as  your  pretensions  are  the  highest,  do  you  ask  her 
first." 

"  My  dearest  Ellen,"  said  Francis,  humbly  and  af- 
fectionately, "  you  know  that  my  whole  soul  is  devo- 
ted to  yoiu'  love,  and  that  I  aspire  to  it  only  in  the 
most  honourable  way ;  put  an  end  to  this  dispute  there- 
fore by  honouring  me  with  the  preference  which  the 
unequivocal  offer  of  my  hand  merits." 

Ellen  stood  dumb  and  motionless,  looking  steadfast- 
ly down  at  the  hem  of  ha-  green  jerkin,  wliich  she  was 
nibbling  with  both  her  hands.  She  dared  not  lift  an 
eye  to  either  of  the  brothers,  though  apparently  con- 
scious that  she  ought  to  have  recognised  the  claims  of 
Francis. 

"  Ellen,  I  need  not  tell  you  that  I  love  you,"  said 


186 


THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 


Thomas,  in  a  light  and  careless  manner,  as  if  certain  that 
his  appeal  would  be  successful ;  "  nor  need  I  attempt 
to  tell  how  dearly  and  how  long  I  will  love  you,  for  in 
faith  I  cannot.  Will  you  make  the  discovery  for  your- 
self by  deciding  in  my  favom-  ?" 

Ellen  looked  up.  There  was  a  smile  on  her  lovely 
face;  an  arch,  mischievous,  and  happy  smile,  but  it 
turned  not  on  Thomas.  Her  face  turned  to  the  con- 
trary side,  but  yet  the  beam  of  that  smile  fell  not  on 
Francis,  who  stood  in  a  state  of  as  tenible  suspense  be- 
tween hope  and  fear,  as  a  Roman  Catholic  sinner  at 
the  gate  of  heaven,  who  has  implored  of  St  Peter  to 
open  the  gate,  and  awaits  a  final  answer.  The  die  of 
his  fate  was  soon  cast,  for  Ellen,  looking  one  way,  yet 
moving  another,  straightway  threw  herself  into  Thomas 
Seattle's  arms,  exclaiming,  "  Ah,  Tom !  I  fear  I  am 
doing  that  which  I  shall  rue,  but  I  must  tnist  to  your 
generosity;  for,  bad  as  you  are,  I  like  you  the  best!" 

Thomas  took  her  in  his  arms,  and  kissed  her ;  but 
before  he  could  say  a  word  in  return,  the  despair  and 
rage  of  his  brother,  breaking  forth  over  every  barrier  of 
reason,  interrupted  him.  "  This  is  the  trick  of  a 
coward,  to  screen  himself  from  the  chastisement  he  de- 
serves. But  you  escape  me  not  thus  !  Follow  me  if 
you  dare !"  And  as  lie  said  this,  Francis  rushed  from 
the  house,  shaking  his  naked  sword  at  his  brother. 

Ellen  trembled  with  agitation  at  the  young  man's 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  187 

rage ;  and  while  Thomas  still  continued  to  assure  her 
of  his  unalterable  affection,  Mrs  Jane  Jerdan  entered, 
plucking  her  apron  so  as  to  make  it  twang  like  a  bow- 
string. 

"  What's  a'  this,  Squu-e  Tummas?  Are  we  to  be 
babbled  out  o'  house  and  hadding  by  this  rapturous* 
young  lawyer  o'  yours  ?  By  the  souls  o'  the  Jerdans, 
I'll  kick  up  sic  a  stoure  about  his  lugs  as  shall  blind  the 
juridical  een  o'  him  !  It's  queer  that  men  should  study 
the  law  only  to  learn  to  break  it.  Sure  am  I,  nae  gen- 
tleman, that  hasna  been  bred  a  lawyer,  wad  come  into 
a  neighbour's  house  bullyragging  that  gate  wi'  sword 
in  hand,  malice  prepense  in  his  eye,  and  venom  on  his 
tongue.  Just  as  a  lassie  hadna  her  ain  freedom  o' 
choice,  because  a  fool  has  been  pleased  to  ask  her  t 
Haud  the  grip  you  hae,  Niece  Nell ;  ye  hae  made  a 
wise  choice  for  aince.  Tarn's  the  man  for  my  money ! 
Folk  are  a'  wise  ahint  the  hand,  but  real  wisdom  lies 
in  taking  time  by  the  forelock.  But,  Squire  Tarn,  the 
thing  that  I  want  to  ken  is  this — Are  you  going  to  put 
up  wi'  a*  that  bullying  and  threatening,  or  do  ye 
propose  to  chastise  the  fool  according  to  his  folly  ?" 

"  In  truth,  Mrs  Jane,  I  am  very  sorry  for  my  bro- 
ther's behaviour,  and  could  not  with  honour  yield  any 
more  than  I  did  to  pacify  him.   But  he  must  be  hum- 

*  Rapturous,  i.  e.  outrageous. 


188      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

bled.  It  will  not  do  to  suffer  him  to  carry  matters  with 
so  high  a  hand." 

"  Now,  wad  ye  be  but  advised  and  leave  him  to  me, 
I  would  play  him  sic  a  plisky  as  he  shouldna  forget  till 
his  dying  day.  By  the  souls  o'  the  Jerdans,  I  would ! 
Now  promise  to  me  that  ye  winna  fight  him." 

"  O  promise,  promise !"  cried  Ellen  vehemently, 
"  for  the  sake  of  heaven's  love,  promise  my  aimt  that." 

Thomas  smiled  and  shook  his  head,  as  much  as  if  he 
had  said,  "  You  do  not  know  what  you  are  asking." 
Mrs  Jane  went  on. 

"  Do  it  then — do  it  with  a  vengeance,  and  remem- 
ber this,  that  wherever  ye  set  the  place  o'  combat,  be 
it  in  hill  or  dale,  deep  linn  or  moss  hagg,  I  shall  have 
a  thirdsman  there  to  encourage  you  on.  I  shall  give 
you  a  meeting  you  little  wot  of." 

Thomas  Beattie  took  all  this  for  words  of  course,  as 
Mrs  Jane  was  well  known  for  a  raving,  ranting  old 
maid,  whose  vehemence  few  regarded,  though  a  great 
many  respected  her  for  the  care  she  had  taken  of  her 
sister's  family,  and  a  greater  number  still  regarded  her 
with  terror,  as  a  being  possessed  of  superhuman 
powers ;  so  after  many  expressions  of  the  fondest  love 
for  Ellen,  he  took  his  leave,  his  mind  being  made  up 
how  it  behoved  him  to  deal  with  his  brother. 

I  forgot  to  mention  before,  that  old  Beattie  lived  at 
Nether  Cassway  with  his  family ;  and  his  eldest  son 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  189 

Thomas  at  Over  Cassway,  having,  on  his  father's  enter- 
ing into  a  second  marriage,  been  put  in  possession  of 
that  castle,  and  these  lands.  Francis,  of  com*se,  lived 
in  his  father's  house  when  in  Scotland ;  and  it  was  thus 
that  his  brother  knew  nothing  of  his  frequent  visits  to 
Ellen  Scott. 

That  night,  as  soon  as  Thomas  went  home,  he  dis- 
patched a  note  to  his  brother  to  the  following  purport : 
That  he  was  sony  for  the  rudeness  and  unreasonable- 
ness of  his  behaviour.  But  if,  on  coming  to  himself, 
he  was  willing  to  make  an  apology  before  his  mistress, 
then  he  (Thomas)  would  gladly  extend  to  him  the 
right  hand  of  love  and  brotherhood ;  but  if  he  refused 
this,  he  would  please  to  meet  him  on  the  Crook  of 
Glen-dearg  next  moming  by  the  sun-rising.  Francis 
returned  for  answer  that  he  would  meet  him  at  the 
time  and  place  appointed.  There  was  then  no  farther 
door  of  reconciliation  left  open,  but  Thomas  still  had 
hopes  of  managing  him  even  on  the  combat  field. 

Francis  slept  little  that  night,  being  wholly  set  on 
revenge  for  the  loss  of  his  beloved  mistress;  and  a 
little  after  day-break  he  arose,  and  putting  himself  in 
light  ai-mour,  proceeded  to  the  place  of  rendezvous. 
He  had  farther  to  go  than  liis  elder  brother,  and  on 
coming  in  sight  of  the  Crook  of  Glen-dearg,  he  per- 
ceived the  latter  there  before  him.  He  was  wrapt  in 
his  cavalier's  cloak,  and  walking  up  and  down  the  Crook 


190        THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

with  impassioned  strides,  on  which  Francis  soliloquized 
as  follows,  as  he  hasted  on : — "  Ah  ha  I  so  Tom  is  here 
before  me !  This  is  what  I  did  not  expect,  for  I  did 
not  think  the  flagitious  dog  had  so  much  spirit  or  cour- 
age in  him  as  to  meet  me.  I  am  glad  he  has  I  for  how 
I  long  to  chastise  him,  and  draw  some  of  the  pampered 
blood  from  that  vain  and  insolent  heart,  which  has  be- 
reaved me  of  all  I  held  dear  on  earth !" 

In  this  way  did  he  cherish  his  wrath  till  close  at  his 
brother's  side,  and  then,  addressing  him  in  the  same  in- 
solent terms,  he  desired  him  to  cease  his  cowardly  co- 
gitations and  draw.  His  opponent  instantly  wheeled 
about,  threw  off  his  horseman's  cloak,  and  presented 
his  sword ;  and  behold  the  young  man's  father  stood  be- 
fore him,  armed  and  ready  for  action !  The  sword  fell 
from  Francis's  hand,  and  he  stood  appalled  as  if  he  had 
been  a  statue,  unable  either  to  utter  a  word  or  move  a 
muscle. 

''  Take  up  thy  sword,  caitiff,  and  let  it  work  thy 
ruthless  work  of  vengeance  here.  Is  it  not  better  that 
thou  shouldst  pierce  this  old  heart,  worn  out  with  care 
and  sorrow,  and  chilled  by  the  ingratitude  of  my  race, 
than  that  of  thy  gallant  and  generous  brother,  the  re- 
presentative of  our  house,  and  the  Chief  of  our  name  ? 
Take  up  thy  sword,  I  say,  and  if  I  do  not  chastise  thee 
as  thou  deservest,  may  Heaven  reft  the  sword  of  jus- 
tice from  the  hand  of  the  avenger !" 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASS  WAY.  191 

"  The  God  of  Heaven  forbid  that  I  should  ever  lift 
my  sword  against  my  honoured  father  I"  said  Francis. 

"  Thou  darest  not,  thou  traitor  and  coward  I"  re- 
turned the  father. — "  I  throw  back  the  disgraceful 
terms  in  thy  teeth  which  thou  used'st  to  thy  brother. 
Thou  camest  here  boiling  with  rancour,  to  shed  his 
blood;  and  when  I  appear  in  person  for  him,  thou 
darest  not  accept  the  challenge." 

"  You  never  did  me  wrong,  my  dear  father ;  but  my 
brother  has  wronged  me  in  the  tenderest  part." 

"  Thy  brother  never  wronged  thee  intentionally, 
thou  deceitful  and  sanguinary  fratricide.  It  was  thou 
alone  who  forced  this  quao'el  upon  him ;  and  I  have 
great  reason  to  suspect  thee  of  a  design  to  cut  him  off, 
that  the  inheritance  and  the  maid  might  both  be  thine 
own.  But  here  I  swear  by  the  arm  that  made  me,  and 
the  Redeemer  that  saved  me,  if  thou  wilt  not  go  straight 
and  kneel  to  thy  brother  for  forgiveness,  confessing  thy 
injurious  treatment,  and  swearing  submission  to  thy 
natural  Chief,  I  will  banish  thee  from  my  house  and 
presence  for  ever,  and  load  thee  with  a  parent's  curse, 
which  shall  never  be  removed  from  thy  soul  till  thou 
art  crushed  to  the  lowest  hell." 

The  young  scholar,  being  utterly  astounded  at  his 
father  s  words,  and  at  the  awful  and  stem  manner  in 
which  he  addressed  him,  whom  he  had  never  before  re- 
primanded, was  wholly  overcome.    He  kneeled  to  his 


192      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

parent,  and  implored  his  forgiveness,  promising,  with 
tears,  to  fulfil  every  injunction  which  it  woidd  please 
him  to  enjoin ;  and  on  this  understanding,  the  two  part- 
ed on  amicable  and  gracious  terms. 

Francis  went  straight  to  the  tower  of  Over  Cassway, 
and  inquired  for  his  brother,  resolved  to  fulfil  his  father's 
stem  injunctions  to  the  very  letter.  He  was  informed 
his  brother  was  in  his  chamber  in  bed,  and  indisposed. 
He  asked  the  porter  farther,  if  he  had  not  been  forth 
that  day,  and  was  answered,  that  he  had  gone  forth 
early  in  the  morning  in  armour,  but  had  quickly  re- 
turned, apparently  in  great  agitation,  and  betaken  him- 
self to  his  bed.  Francis  then  requested  to  be  taken  to  his 
brother,  to  which  the  servant  instantly  assented,  and  led 
him  up  to  the  chamber,  never  suspecting  that  there 
could  be  any  animosity  between  the  two  only  brothers ; 
but  on  John  Burgess  opening  the  door,  and  announ- 
cing the  Tutor,  Thomas,  being  in  a  nervous  state,  was 
a  little  alaniied.  "  Remaui  in  the  room  there,  Bur- 
gess," said  he. — "  What,  brother  Frank,  are  you  seek- 
ing here  at  this  hour,  armed  capapee  ?  I  hope  you  are 
not  come  to  assassinate  me  in  my  bed  ?" 

"  God  forbid,  brother,"  said  the  other;  "  here 
John,  take  my  sword  down  with  you,  I  want  some 
private  conversation  with  Thomas."  John  did  so,  and 
the  following  conversation  ensued  ;  for  as  soon  as  the 
door  closed,  Francis  dropt  on  his  knees,  and  said,  "  O, 
8 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  193 

my  deal'  brother,  I  have  erred  grievously,  and  am  come 
to  confess  my  crime,  and  implore  your  pardon." 

"  We  have  both  erred,  Francis,  in  suffering  any 
earthly  concern  to  incite  us  against  each  other's  lives. 
We  have  both  eiTed,  but  you  have  my  forgiveness 
cheerfully ;  here  is  my  hand  on  it,  and  gi'ant  me  thine 
in  return.  Oh,  Francis,  I  have  got  an  admonition  this 
morning,  that  never  will  be  erased  from  my  memory, 
and  which  has  caused  me  to  see  my  life  in  a  new  light. 
What  or  whom  think  you  I  met  an  hour  ago  on  my 
way  to  the  Crook  of  Glen-dearg  to  encounter  you  ?" 
.     "  Our  father,  perhaps." 

"  You  have  seen  him,  then  ?" 
"  Indeed  I  have,  and  he  has  given  me  such  a  repri- 
mand for  severity,  as  son  never  before  received  from 
a  parent." 

"  Brother  Franl<:,  I  must  tell  you,  and  when  I  do, 
you  will  not  believe  me — It  ivas  not  our  father  whom 
we  both  saw  this  morning." 

"  It  was  no  other  whom  I  saw.  What  do  you 
mean  ?  Do  you  suppose  that  I  do  not  know  my  own 
father  ?" 

"  I  tell  you  it  was  not,  and  could  not  be.  I  had  an 
express  from  him  yesterday.  He  is  two  hundred  miles 
from  this,  and  cannot  be  in  Scotland  sooner  than  tliree 
weeks  hence." 

VOL.  I.  I 


194  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  You  astonish  me,  Thomas.  This  is  beyond  human 
comprehension  !" 

^'  It  is  true — that  I  avouch,  and  the  certainty  of  it 
has  sickened  me  at  heart.  You  must  be  aware  that  he 
came  not  home  last  night,  and  that  his  horse  and  re- 
tinue have  not  amved." 

"  He  was  not  at  home,  it  is  true,  nor  have  his  horse 
and  retinue  arrived  in  Scotland.  Still  there  is  no  deny- 
ing that  our  father  is  here,  and  that  it  was  he  who  spoke 
to  and  admonished  me/' 

"  I  tell  you  it  is  impossible.  A  spirit  hath  spoke 
to  us  in  our  father's  likeness,  for  he  is  not,  and  cannot 
be,  in  Scotland  at  this  time.  My  faculties  are  altoge- 
ther confounded  by  the  event,  not  being  able  to  calcu- 
late on  the  qualities  or  condition  of  our  monitor.  An 
evil  spii'it  it  certainly  could  not  be,  for  all  its  admo- 
nitions pointed  to  good.  I  sorely  dread,  Francis,  that 
our  father  is  no  more — that  there  has  been  another 
engagement,  that  he  has  lost  his  life,  and  that  his  soul 
has  been  lingering  around  his  family  before  taking  its 
final  leave  of  this  sphere.  I  believe  that  om-  father  is 
dead  ;  and  for  my  part  I  am  so  sick  at  heart,  that  my 
nerves  are  all  unstrung.  Pray,  do  you  take  horse  and 
post  off  for  Salop,  from  whence  his  commission  to  me 
yesterday  was  dated,  and  see  what  hath  happened  to 
our  revered  father." 

"  I  cannot,  for  my  life,  give  credit  to  this,  brother, 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  195 

or  that  it  was  any  other  bemg  but  my  father  himself 
who  rebuked  me.  Pray  allow  me  to  taiTy  another 
day  at  least,  before  I  set  out.  Perhaps  our  father  may 
appear  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  may  be  concealing 
himself  for  some  secret  purpose. — Did  you  tell  him  of 
our  quarrel  ?" 

"  No.  He  never  asked  me  concerning  it,  but  char- 
ged me  shai-ply  with  my  intent  on  the  first  word,  and 
adjured  me,  by  my  regard  for  his  blessing,  and  my  hope 
in  heaven,  to  desist  from  my  purpose." 

"  Then  he  knew  it  all  intuitively ;  for  when  I  first 
went  in  view  of  the  spot  appointed  for  our  meeting,  I 
perceived  him  walking  shai'ply  to  and  fro,  wrapped  in 
his  military  cloak.  He  never  so  much  as  deigned  to 
look  at  me,  till  I  came  close  to  his  side,  and  thinking 
it  was  yourself,  I  fell  to  upbraiding  him,  and  desired  him 
to  draw.  He  then  threw  off  his  cloak,  drew  his  sword, 
and,  telling  me  he  came  in  your  place,  dared  me  to  the 
encounter.  But  he  knew  all  the  grounds  of  our  quar- 
rel minutely,  and  laid  the  blame  on  me.  I  own  I  am 
a  little  puzzled  to  reconcile  circumstances,  but  am  con- 
vinced my  father  is  near  at  hand.  I  heard  his  words, 
and  saw  his  eyes  flashing  anger  and  indignation.  Un- 
fortunately I  did  not  touch  him,  which  would  have  put 
an  end  to  all  doubts  ;  for  he  did  not  present  the  hand 
of  reconciliation  to  me,  as  I  expected  he  would  have 


196      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

(lone,  on  my  yielding  implicitly  to  all  his  injunc- 
tions." 

The  two  brothers  then  parted,  with  protestations  of 
mutual  forbearance  in  all  time  coming,  and  with  an 
imderstanding,  as  that  was  the  morning  of  Saturday, 
that  if  their  father,  or  some  word  of  him,  did  not  reach 
home  before  the  next  evening,  the  Tutor  of  Cassway 
was  to  take  horse  for  the  county  of  Salop,  early  on 
Monday  morning. 

Thomas,  being  thus  once  more  left  to  himself,  could 
do  nothing  but  toss  and  tumble  in  his  bed,  and  reflect 
on  the  extraordinaiy  occurrence  of  that  morning  ;  and, 
after  many  troubled  cogitations,  it  at  length  occurred 
to  his  recollection  what  Mrs  Jane  Jerdan  had  said  to 
Ijim : — "  Do  it  then.  Do  it  with  a  vengeance  ! — But 
remember  this,  that  wherever  ye  set  the  place  of  com- 
bat, be  it  in  hill  or  dale,  deep  linn,  or  moss  hagg,  I 
shall  have  a  thirdsman  there  to  encom-age  you  on.  I 
shall  give  you  a  meeting  you  little  wot  of." 

If  he  was  confounded  before,  he  was  ten  times  more 
so  at  the  remembrance  of  these  words,  of  most  ominous 
import. 

At  the  time  he  totally  disregarded  them,  taking 
them  for  mere  rodomontade  ;  but  now  the  idea  was  to 
him  terrible,  that  his  father's  spirit,  like  the  prophet's 
of  old,  should  have  been  conjured  up  by  witchcraft ; 
and  then  again  he  bethought  himself  that  no  witch 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  197 

would  have  employed  her  power  to  prevent  evil.  In 
the  end,  he  knew  not  what  to  think,  and  so,  taking  the 
hammer  from  its  rest,  he  gave  three  raps  on  the  pipe 
drum,  for  there  were  no  bells  in  the  towers  of  those 
days,  and  up  came  old  John  Burgess,  Thomas  Beat- 
tie's  henchman,  huntsman,  and  groom  of  the  chambers, 
one  who  had  been  attached  to  the  family  for  fifty 
years,  and  he  says,  in  his  slow  West-Border  tongue, 
"  How's  tou  now,  callan'  ? — Is  tou  ony  betterlins  ? 
There  has  been  tway  stags  seen  in  the  Bloodhope-Linns 
tis  mwoming  akeady." 

"  Ay,  and  there  has  been  something  else  seen,  John, 
that  lies  nearer  to  my  heart,  to-day."  John  looked  at 
his  master  with  an  inquisitive  eye  and  quivering  lip, 
but  said  nothing.  The  latter  went  on,  "  I  am  very 
unwell  to-day,  John,  and  cannot  tell  what  is  tlie  mat- 
ter with  me.     I  think  I  am  bewitched." 

"  It's  very  like  tou  is,  callan.  I  pits  nae  doubt  on't 
at  a'." 

"  Is  there  any  body  in  this  moor  district  whom  you 
ever  heard  blamed  for  the  honible  crime  of  witch- 
craft?" 

"  Ay,  that  there  is  ;  mair  than  ane  or  tway.  There's 
our  neighbour,  Lucky  Jerdan,  for  instance,  and  her 
niece  Nell, — the  warst  o'  the  pair,  I  doubt."  John  said 
this  mtli  a  sly  stupid  leer,  for  he  had  admitted  the  old 
lady  to  an  audience  with  his  niaster  the  day  before,  and 


198      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

had  eyed  him  afterwards  handing  his  course  towards 
Dmrnfielding-. 

"  John,  I  am  not  disposed  to  jest  at  this  time  ;  for 
I  am  disturhed  in  mind,  and  very  ill.  Tell  me,  in  re- 
ality, did  you  ever  hear  Mrs  Jane  Jerdan  accused  of 
being  a  witch  ?" 

'*  Why,  look  thee,  master,  I  dares  nae  say  she's  a 
wotch  ;  for  Lucky  has  mony  good  points  in  her  cha- 
racter. But  it's  weel  kenned  she  has  mair  power  nor 
her  ain,  for  she  can  stwop  a'  the  plews  in  Eskdale  wi' 
a  wave  o'  her  hand,  and  can  raise  the  dead  out  o'  their 
graves,  just  as  a  matter  o'  cwoorse." 

"  That,  John,  is  an  extraordinary  power  indeed. 
But  did  you  never  hear  of  her  sending  any  living  men 
to  their  graves  ?  For  as  that  is  rather  the  danger  that 
hangs  over  me,  I  wish  you  would  take  a  ride  over  and 
desire  Mrs  Jane  to  come  and  see  me.  Tell  her  I  am 
ill,  and  request  of  her  to  come  and  see  me." 

"  I  shall  do  that,  callan'.  But  are  tou  sure  it  is  the 
auld  wotch  I'm  to  bring  ?  For  it  strikes  me  the  young 
ane  maybe  has  done  the  deed ;  and  if  sae,  she  is  the 
fittest  to  effect  the  cure.  But  I  sail  bring  the  auld  ane — 
Dinna  flee  intil  a  rage,  for  I  sail  bring  the  auld  ane ; 
though,  gude  forgie  me,  it  is  unco  like  bringing  the 
houdy." 

Away  went  John  Burgess  to  Drumfielding ;  but  Mrs 
Jane  would. not  move  for  all  his  entreaties.     She  sent 


THE  LAIRD  OP  CASSWAY.  199 

back  word  to  his  master,  to  "  rise  out  o'  his  bed,  for 
he  wad  be  waur  if  ony  thing  ailed  him ;  and  if  he  had 
aught  to  say  to  auld  Jane  Jerdan,  she  would  be  ready 
tQ  hear  it  at  hame,  though  he  behoved  to  remember 
that  it  wasna  ilka  subject  under  the  sun  that  she  could 
thole  to  be  questioned  anent." 

With  this  answer  John  was  forced  to  retm-n,  and 
there  being  no  accounts  of  old  Beattie  having  been  seen 
in  Scotland,  the  young  men  remained  all  the  Sabbath- 
day  in  the  utmost  consternation  at  the  apparition  of 
their  father  they  had  seen,  and  the  appalling  rebuke  they 
had  received  from  it.  The  most  incredulous  mind  could 
scarce  doubt  that  they  had  had  communion  with  a  su- 
pernatural being  ;  and  not  being  able  to  draw  any  other 
conclusion  themselves,  they  became  persuaded  that  their 
father  was  dead ;  and  accordingly,  both  prepared  for 
setting  out  early  on  Monday  morning  towards  the  coun- 
ty of  Salop,  from  whence  they  had  last  heard  of  him. 

But  just  as  they  were  ready  to  set  out,  when  their 
spurs  were  buckled  on  and  their  horses  bridled,  Andrew 
Johnston,  their  father's  confidential  servant,  arrived 
from  the  place  to  which  they  were  bound.  He  had 
rode  night  and  day,  never  once  stinting  the  light  gal- 
lop, as  he  said,  and  had  changed  liis  horse  seven  times. 
He  appeared  as  if  his  ideas  were  in  a  state  of  derange- 
ment and  confusion ;  and  when  he  saw  his  young  mas- 
ters standing  together,  and  ready-mounted  for  a  jour- 


200      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

ney,  he  stared  at  them  as  if  he  scarcely  believed  his 
own  senses.  They  of  course  asked  immediately  about 
the  cause  of  his  express ;  but  his  answers  were  equivo- 
cal, and  he  appeared  not  to  be  able  to  assign  any  mo- 
tive. They  asked  him  concerning  their  father,  and  if 
any  thing  extraordinary  had  happened  to  him.  He 
would  not  say  either  that  there  had,  or  that  there  had 
not ;  but  inquired,  in  his  turn,  if  nothing  extraordinary 
had  happened  with  them  at  home.  They  looked  to  one 
another,  and  returned  him  no  answer;  but  at  length 
the  youngest  said,  "  Why,  Andrew,  you  profess  to  have 
ridden  express  for  the  distance  of  two  hundred  miles  ; 
now,  you  surely  must  have  some  guess  for  what  pur- 
pose you  have  done  this  ?  Say,  then,  at  once,  what 
your  message  is :    Is  our  father  alive  ?" 

"  Ye — es ;  I  think  he  is." 

"  You  think  he  is  ?     Are  you  uncertain,  then  ?" 

"  I  am  certain  he  is  not  dead, — at  least  was  not  when 
I  left  him.  But — hum — certainly  there  has  a  change 
taken  place.  Hark  ye,  masters — can  a  man  be  said  to 
be  in  life  when  he  is  out  of  himself?" 

"  Why,  man,  keep  us  not  in  this  thrilling  suspense. 
— Is  our  father  well  ?" 

"  No — not  quite  well.  I  am  sony  to  say,  honest 
gentleman,  that  he  is  not.  But  the  truth  is,  my  mas- 
ters, now  that  I  see  you  well  and  hearty,  and  about  to 
take  a  journey  in  company,  I  begin  to  suspect  that  I 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  201 

have  been  posted  all  this  way  on  a  fool's  errand ;  and 
not  another  syllable  will  I  speak  on  the  subject,  till  I 
have  had  some  refreshment,  and  if  you  still  insist  on 
hearing  a  ridiculous  story,  you  shall  hear  it  then." 

When  the  matter  of  the  refreshment  had  been  got 
over  to  Andrew's  full  satisfaction,  he  began  as  follows : 

"  Why,  faith,  you  see,  my  masters,  it  is  not  easy  to 
say  my  errand  to  you,  for  in  fact  I  have  none.  There- 
fore, all  that  I  can  do  is  to  tell  you  a  story, — a  most 
ridiculous  one  it  is,  as  ever  sent  a  poor  fellow  out  on 
the  gallop  for  the  matter  of  two  hundred  miles  or  so. 
On  the  morning  before  last,  right  early,  little  Isaac,  the 
page,  comes  to  me,  and  he  says, — '  Johnston,  thou  must 
go  and  visit  measter.     He's  bad.' 

"  '  Bad !'  says  I.     '  ^Vhaten  way  is  he  bad?' 

"  «  Why,'  says  he,  '  he's  so  far  ill  as  he's  not  well, 
and  desires  to  see  you  without  one  moment's  delay. 
He's  in  fine  taking,  and  that  you'll  find  ;  but  whatfor 
do  I  stand  here  ?  Lword,  I  never  got  such  a  fright. 
Why,  Johnston,  does  thou  know  that  measter  hath 
Iwost  himself?' 

"  '  How  lost  himself?  rabbit,'  says  I,  *  speak  plain 
out,  else  I'll  have  thee  lug-hauled,  thou  dwarf !'  for  my 
blood  rose  at  the  imp,  for  fooling  at  any  mishap  of 
my  master's.  But  my  choler  only  made  him  worse, 
for  there  is  not  a  gieater  deil's-buckie  in  all  the  Five 
Dales. 

I  2 


202      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

a  ( Why,  man,  it  is  true  that  I  said,'  quoth  he,  laugh- 
ing ;  '  the  old  gurly  squoir  hath  Iwost  himself ;  and  it 
will  be  grand  sport  to  see  thee  going  calling  him  at  all 
the  steane-crosses  in  the  kingdom,  in  this  here  way — 
Ho  yes  !  and  a  two  times  ho  yes  !  and  a  three  times 
ho  yes!  Did  any  body  no  see  the  better  half  of  my 
measter,  Laird  of  the  twa  Cassways,  Bloodhope,  and 
Pantland,  which  was  amissing  overnight,  and  is  suppo- 
sed to  have  gone  a-wool-gathering  ?  If  any  body  hath 
seen  that  better  part  of  my  measter,  whilk  contains  as 
mooch  wit  as  a  man  could  drive  on  a  hurlbaiTow,  let 
them  restore  it  to  me,  Andrew  Johnston,  piper,  trum- 
peter, whacker,  and  wheedler,  to  the  same  great  and 
noble  squoir ;  and  high  shall  be  his  reward — Ho  yes  !' 

"  '  The  devil  restore  thee  to  thy  right  mind  !'  said  I, 
knocking  him  down,  and  leaving  him  sprawling  in  the 
kennel,  and  then  hasted  to  my  master,  whom  I  found 
feverish,  restless,  and  raving,  and  yet  with  an  earnest- 
ness in  his  demeanour  that  stunned  and  terrified  me. 
He  seized  my  hand  in  both  his,  which  were  burning 
like  fire,  and  gave  me  such  a  look  of  despair  as  I  shall 
never  forget.  '  Johnston,  I  am  ill,'  said  he, '  gi-ievous- 
ly  ill,  and  know  not  what  is  to  become  of  me.  Every 
nerve  in  my  body  is  in  a  burning  heat,  and  my  soul  is 
as  it  were  torn  to  fritters  with  amazement,  Johnston, 
as  sure  as  you  are  in  the  body,  something  most  deplo- 
rable hath  happened  to  em.' 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  203 

"  *  Yes,  as  sure  as  I  am  in  the  body,  there  has,  mas- 
ter,' says  I.  '  But  I'll  have  you  bled  and  doctored  in 
style  ;  and  you  shall  soon  be  as  sound  as  a  roach,'  says 
I ;  *  for  a  gentleman  must  not  lose  heart  altogether  for 
a  little  fire-raising  in  his  outworks,  if  it  does  not  reacli 
the  citadel,'  says  I  to  him.  But  he  cut  me  short  by 
shaking  his  head  and  flinging  my  hand  from  him. 

"  '  A  truce  with  youi*  talking,'  says  he.  '  That  which 
hath  befallen  me  is  as  much  above  your  comprehension 
as  the  sun  is  above  the  earth,  and  never  will  be  com- 
prehended by  mortal  man  ;  but  I  must  inform  you  of 
it,  as  I  have  no  other  means  of  gaining  the  intelligence 
I  yearn  for,  and  which  I  am  incapable  of  gaining  per- 
sonally. Johnston,  there  never  was  a  mortal  man  suf- 
fered what  I  have  suffered  since  midnight.  I  believe 
I  have  had  doings  with  hell ;  for  I  have  been  disem- 
bodied, and  embodied  again,  and  the  intensity  of  my  tor- 
tm*es  has  been  unparalleled. — I  was  at  home  this  morn- 
ing at  day-break.' 

"  *  At  home  at  Cass  way  !'  says  I.  '  I  am  sorry  to 
heai*  you  say  so,  master,  because  you  know,  or  should 
know,  that  the  thing  is  impossible,  you  being  in  the  an- 
cient town  of  Shrewsbury  on  the  King's  business.' 

"  '  I  was  at  home  in  very  deed,  Andrew,'  returned 
he  ;  '  but  whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body,  I 
cannot  tell-^the  Lord  only  knoweth.  But  there  1  was 
in  this  guise,  and  with  this  heart  and  all  its  feehngs 


204        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

within  me,  where  I  saw  scenes,  heard  words,  and  spoke 
others,  which  I  will  here  relate  to  you.  I  had  finish- 
ed my  dispatches  last  night  by  midnight,  and  was  sit- 
ting mnsing  on  the  hard  fate  and  improvidence  of  my 
sovereign  master,  wlien,  ere  ever  I  was  aware,  a  neigh- 
hour  of  ours,  Mrs  Jane  Jerdan,  of  Drumfielding,  a 
mysterious  character,  with  whom  I  have  had  some 
strange  doings  in  my  time,  came  suddenly  into  the 
chamber,  and  stood  before  me.  I  accosted  her  with 
doubt  and  teiTor,  asking  what  had  brought  her  so  far 
fi'om  home.' 

"  •=  You  are  not  so  far  from  home  as  you  imagine,* 
said  she ;  '  and  it  is  fortunate  for  some  that  it  is  so. 
Your  two  sons  have  quaiTelled  about  the  possession  of 
niece  Ellen,  and  though  the  eldest  is  blameless  of  the 
quan-el,  yet  has  he  been  forced  into  it,  and  they  are  en- 
gaged to  fight  at  day-break  at  the  Crook  of  Glen-dearg. 
There  they  will  assuredly  fall  by  each  other's  hands, 
if  you  interpose  not ;  for  there  is  no  other  authority  now 
on  eai'th  that  can  prevent  this  woful  calamity.' 

"  '  Alas  I  how  can  I  interfere,'  said  I,  '  at  this  dis- 
tance? It  is  already. within  a  few  hours  of  the  meet- 
ing, and  before  I  get  from  among  the  windings  of  the 
Severn,  then-  swords  will  be  bathed  in  each  other's 
blood  I     I  must  trust  to  the  interference  of  Heaven.' 

"  '  Is  your  name  and  influence,  then,  to  perish  for 
ever  ?'  said  she.   Is  it  so  soon  to  follow  your  master's. 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  205 

the  great  Maxwell  of  the  Dales,  into  utter  oblivion  ? 
Why  not  rather  rouse  into  requisition  the  energies  of 
the  spirits  that  watch  over  human  destinies  ?  At  least 
step  aside  with  me,  that  I  may  disclose  the  scene  to 
your  eyes.  You  know  I  can  do  it ;  and  you  may  then 
act  according  to  your  natural  impulse.' 

"  '  Such  were  the  import  of  the  words  she  spoke  to 
me,  if  not  the  very  words  themselves.  I  understood 
them  not  at  the  time ;  nor  do  I  yet.  But  when  she  had 
done  speaking,  she  took  me  by  the  hand,  and  hurried 
me  towards  the  door  of  the  apartment,  which  she  open- 
ed, and  the  first  step  we  took  over  the  threshold,  we 
stepped  into  a  void  space,  and  fell  downward.  I  was 
going  to  call  out,  but  felt  my  descent  so  rapid,  that  my 
voice  was  stifled,  and  I  could  not  so  much  as  draw  my 
breath.  I  expected  every  moment  to  fall  against  some- 
thing, and  be  dashed  to  pieces ;  and  I  shut  my  eyes, 
clenched  my  teeth,  and  held  by  the  dame's  hand  with  a 
frenzied  gi*asp,  in  expectation  of  the  catastrophe.  But 
down  we  went — down  and  down,  with  a  celerity  which 
tongue  cannot  describe,  without  light,  breath,  or  any 
sort  of  impediment.  I  now  felt  assured  that  we  had 
both  at  once  stepped  from  oiF  the  earth,  and  were  hurled 
into  the  immeasurable  void.  The  airs  of  dai'kness  simg 
in  my  ears  -with  a  booming  din  as  I  rolled  down  the 
steeps  of  everlasting  night,  an  outcast  from  nature  and 
all  its  harmonies,  and  a  journey er  into  the  deptlis  of  hell. 


206        THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

.0  '  I  Still  held  my  companion's  hand,  and  felt  the  pres- 
sure of  hers ;  and  so  long  did  this  our  alarming  descent 
continue,  that  I  at  length  caught  myself  breathing  once 
more,  hut  as  quick  as  if  I  had  been  in  the  height  of  a 
fever.  I  then  tried  every  effort  to  speak,  but  they  were 
all  unavailing ;  for  I  could  not  emit  one  sound,  although 
my  lips  and  tongue  fashioned  the  words.  Think,  then, 
of  my  astonishmeut,  when  my  companion  sung  out  the 
following  stanza  with  the  greatest  glee : — 

*  Here  we  roll, 

Body  and  soul, 
Down  to  the  deeps  of  the  Paynim's  goal —  , 

With  speed  and  with  spell, 

With  yo  and  with  yell, 
This  is  the  way  to  the  palace  of  heU — 

Sing  Yo !  Ho ! 

Level  and  low, 
Down  to  the  Valley  of  Vision  we  go  !' 

"  <  Ha,  ha,  ha !  Tarn  Beattie,'  added  she,  ^  where  is 
a'  your  courage  now  ?  Cannot  ye  lift  up  your  voice  and 
sing  a  stave  wi'  your  auld  crony  ?  And  cannot  ye  lift 
up  your  een,  and  see  what  region  you  are  in  now  ?' 

"  <  I  did  force  open  my  eyelids,  and  beheld  light, 
and  apparently  worlds,  or  huge  lurid  substances,  gliding 
by  me  with  speed  beyond  that  of  the  lightning  of  hea- 
ven. I  certainly  perceived  light,  though  of  a  dim  im- 
certain  nature ;  but  so  precipitate  was  my  descent,  I 
could  not  distinguish  from  whence  it  proceeded,  or  of 
what  it  consisted,  whether  of  the  vapours  of  chaotic 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  207 

wastes,  or  the  streamers  of  hell.  So  I  again  shut  tl^ 
eyes  closer  than  ever,  and  waited  the  event  in  terror 
unutterable. 

"  '  We  at  length  came  upon  something  which  inter- 
rupted our  farther  progress.  I  had  no  feeling  as  we  fell 
against  it,  but  merely  as  if  we  came  in  contact  with 
some  soft  substance  that  impeded  our  descent ;  and 
immediately  afterwards  I  perceived  that  our  motion 
had  ceased. 

"  <  What  a  terrible  tumble  we  hae  gotten,  Laird  !' 
said  my  companion.  *  But  ye  are  now  in  the  place 
where  you  should  be ;  and  deil  speed  the  coward  !' 

"  '  So  saying,  she  quitted  my  hand,  and  I  felt  as  if 
she  were  wrested  from  me  by  a  third  object ;  but  still 
I  durst  not  open  my  eyes,  being  convinced  that  I  was 
lying  in  the  depths  of  hell,  or  some  hideous  place  not 
to  be  dreamt  of ;  so  I  lay  still  in  despair,  not  even  da- 
ring to  address  a  prayer  to  my  Maker.  At  length  I 
lifted  my  eyes  slowly  and  fearfully ;  but  they  had  no 
power  of  distinguishing  objects.  All  that  I  perceived 
was  a  vision  of  something  in  nature,  with  which  I  had 
in  life  been  too  well  acquainted.  It  was  a  glimpse  of 
green  glens,  long  withdrawing  ridges,  and  one  high  hill, 
with  a  cairn  on  its  summit.  I  rubbed  my  eyes  to  di- 
vest them  of  the  enchantment,  but  when  I  opened  them 
again,  the  illusion  was  still  brighter  and  more  magnifi- 
cent.    Then  springing  to  my  feet,  I  perceived  that  I 


208      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

v^  lying  in  a  little  fairy  ring,  not  one  hundred  yards 
from  the  door  of  my  own  hall  I 

"  '  I  was,  as  you  may  well  conceive,  dazzled  with  ad- 
miration ;  still  I  felt  that  something  was  not  right  with 
me,  and  that  I  was  stiniggling  with  an  enchantment ; 
but  recollecting  the  hideous  story  told  me  by  the  bel- 
dame, of  the  deadly  discord  between  my  two  sons,  I 
hasted  to  watch  their  motions,  for  the  morning  was  yet 
but  dawning.  In  a  few  seconds  after  recovering  my 
senses,  I  perceived  my  eldest  son  Thomas  leave  his 
tower  armed,  and  pass  on  towards  the  place  of  appoint- 
ment. I  waylaid  him,  and  remarked  to  him  that  he  was 
very  early  astir,  and  I  feared  on  no  good  intent.  He 
made  no  answer,  but  stood  like  one  in  a  stupor,  and 
gazed  at  me.  *  I  know  your  purpose,  son  Thomas,' 
said  I ;  '  so  it  is  in  vain  for  you  to  equivocate.  You 
have  challenged  your  brother,  and  are  going  to  meet 
him  in  deadly  combat ;  but  as  you  value  your  father's 
blessing,  and  would  deprecate  his  curse — as  you  value 
your  hope  in  heaven,  and  would  escape  the  punishment 
of  hell — abandon  the  hideous  and  cursed  intent,  and  be 
reconciled  to  your  only  brother.' 

"  <  On  this,  my  dutiful  son  Thomas  kneeled  to  me, 
and  presented  his  sword,  disclaiming,  at  the  same  time, 
all  intentions  of  taking  away  his  brother's  life,  and  all 
animosity  for  the  vengeance  sought  against  himself,  and 
thanked  me  in  a  flood  of  tears  for  my  interference.    I 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  209 

then  commanded  him  back  to  his  couch,  and  taking  his 
cloak  and  sword,  hasted  away  to  the  Crook  of  Glen- 
dearg,  to  wait  the  amval  of  his  brother.'  " 

Here  Andrew  Johnston's  narrative  detailed  the  self- 
same circumstances  recorded  in  a  former  part  of  this 
tale,  as  having-  passed  between  the  father  and  his  young- 
er son,  so  that  it  is  needless  to  recapitulate  them ;  but 
begimiing  where  that  broke  off,  he  added,  in  the  words 
of  the  Old  Laird,  "  '  As  soon  as  my  son  Francis  had 
left  me,  in  order  to  be  reconciled  to  his  brother,  I  re- 
turned to  the  fairy  knowe  and  ring  where  I  first  found 
myself  seated  at  daybreak.  I  know  not  why  I  went 
there,  for  though  I  considered  with  myself,  I  could  dis- 
cover no  motive  that  I  had  for  doing  so,  but  was  led 
thither  by  a  sort  of  impulse  which  I  could  not  resist, 
and  from  the  same  feeling  spread  my  son's  mantle  on 
the  spot,  laid  his  sword  down  beside  it,  and  stretched  me 
down  to  sleep.  I  remember  nothing  farther  with  any 
degi"ee  of  accmacy,  for  I  instantly  fell  into  a  chaos  of 
suffering,  confusion,  and  racking  dismay,  from  which  I 
was  only  of  late  released  by  awaking  from  a  trance,  on 
the  very  seat,  and  in  the  same  guise  in  which  I  was  the 
evening  before.  I  am  certain  I  was  at  home  in  body 
or  in  spirit — saw  my  sons — spake  these  words  to  them, 
and  heard  theirs  in  retm-n.  How  I  retiu-ned  I  know  even 
less,  if  that  is  possible,  than  how  I  went ;  for  it  seem- 
ed to  me  that  the  mysterious  force  that  presses  us  to 


210  THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

this  sphere,  and  supports  us  on  it,  was  in  my  case  with- 
drawn or  subverted,  and  that  I  merely  fell  from  one 
part  of  the  earth's  surface  and  alighted  on  another. 
Now  I  am  so  ill  that  I  cannot  move  from  this  couch ; 
therefore,  Andrew,  do  you  mount  and  ride  straight 
home.  Spare  no  horse-flesh,  by  night  or  by  day,  to 
bring  me  word  of  my  family,  for  I  dread  that  some  evil 
hath  befallen  them.  If  you  find  them  in  life,  give  them 
many  charges  from  me  of  brotherly  love  and  affection ; 
if  not — what  can  I  say,  but,  in  the  words  of  the  patri- 
arch, If  I  am  bereaved  of  my  children,  I  am  berea- 
ved.' " 

The  two  brothers,  in  utter  amazement,  went  together 
to  the  gi'een  ring  on  the  top  of  the  knoll  above  the  Cas- 
tle of  Cassway,  and  there  found  the  mantle  lying  spread, 
and  the  sword  beside  it.  They  then,  without  letting 
Johnston  into  the  awful  secret,  mounted  straight,  and 
rode  off  with  him  to  their  father.  They  found  him  still 
in  bed,  and  very  ill ;  and  though  rejoiced  at  seeing  them, 
they  soon  lost  hope  of  his  recovery,  his  spirits  being 
broken  and  deranged  in  a  wonderful  manner.  Their 
conversations  together  were  of  the  most  solemn  nature, 
the  visitation  deigned  to  them  having  been  above  their 
capacity.  On  the  third  or  fourth  day,  theu*  father  was 
removed  by  death  from  this  terrestrial  scene,  and  the 
minds  of  the  young  men  were  so  much  impressed  by 
the  whole  of  the  circumstances,  that  it  made  a  great  aU 


THE  LAIRD  OF  CASSWAY.  21  1 

teration  in  their  after  life.  Thomas,  as  solemnly  char- 
ged by  his  father,  mamed  Ellen  Scott,  and  Francis  was 
well  known  afterward  as  the  celebrated  Dr  Beattie  of 
Amherst.  Ellen  was  mother  to  twelve  sons,  and  on 
the  night  that  her  seventh  son  was  born,  her  aunt  Jer- 
dan  was  lost,  and  never  more  heard  of,  either  living  or 
dead. 

This  will  be  viewed  as  a  most  romantic  and  unna- 
tural story,  as  without  doubt  it  is  ;  but  I  have  the  strong- 
est reasons  for  believing  that  it  is  founded  on  a  literal 
fact,  of  which  all  the  three  were  sensibly  and  positive- 
ly convinced.  It  was  published  in  England  in  Dr  Beat- 
tie's  lifetime,  and  by  his  acquiescence,  and  owing  to  the 
respectable  source  from  whence  it  came,  it  was  never 
disputed  in  that  day  that  it  had  its  origin  in  truth.  It 
was  again  republished,  with  some  miserable  alterations, 
in  a  London  collection  of  1770,  by  J.  Smith,  at  No.  15, 
Paternoster-Row ;  and  though  1  have  seen  none  of  these 
accounts,  but  relate  the  story  wholly  from  tradition,  yet 
the  assurance  attained  from  a  friend  of  then-  existence, 
is  a  curious  corroborative  circumstance,  and  proves  that, 
if  the  story  was  not  true,  the  parties  at  least  believed 
it  to  be  so. 


212      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


TIBBY  HYSLOP  S  DREAM. 


In  the  year  1807,  when  on  a  jaunt  through  the  val- 
leys of  Nitli  and  Annan,  I  learned  the  following  story 
on  the  spot  where  the  incidents  occurred,  and  even  went 
and  visited  all  those  connected  with  it,  so  that  there  is 
no  doubt  with  regard  to  its  authenticity. 

In  a  cottage  called  Knowe-back,  on  the  large  farm  of 
Dnimlochie,  lived  Tibby  Hyslop,  a  respectable  spin- 
ster, about  the  age  of  forty  I  thought  when  I  saw  her, 
but,  of  course,  not  so  old  when  the  first  incidents  oc- 
curred which  this  singular  tale  relates.  Tibby  was  re- 
presented to  me  as  being  a  good  Christian,  not  in  name 
and  profession  only,  but  in  word  and  in  deed ;  and  I  be- 
lieve I  may  add,  in  heart  and  in  soul.  Nevertheless, 
there  was  something  in  her  manner  and  deportment 
different  from  other  people — a  sort  of  innocent  sim- 
plicity, bordering  on  silliness,  together  with  an  insta- 
bility of  thought,  that,  in  the  eyes  of  many,  approached 
to  abstraction. 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  213 

But  then  Tibby  could  repeat  the  book  of  the  Evan- 
gelist Luke  by  heart,  and  many  favourite  chapters  both 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments;  while  there  was  scarce- 
ly one  in  the  whole  countiy  so  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  those  Books  from  beginning  to  end ;  for,  though 
she  had  read  a  portion  every  day  for  forty  years,  she 
had  never  perused  any  other  books  but  the  Scriptures. 
They  were  her  week-day  books,  and  her  Sunday  books, 
her  books  of  amusement,  and  books  of  devotion.  Would 
to  God  that  all  our  brethren  and  sisters  of  the  human 
race — the  poor  and  comfortless,  as  well  as  the  great 
and  wise — ^knew  as  well  how  to  estimate  these  books 
as  Tibby  Hyslop  did  ! 

Tibby's  history  is  shortly  this :  Her  mother  mar- 
ried a  sergeant  of  a  recruiting  party.  The  year  follow- 
ing he  was  obliged  to  go  to  Ireland,  and  from  thence 
nobody  Iviiew  whither  ;  but  neither  he  nor  his  wife  ap- 
peared again  in  Scotland.  On  then*  departure,  they 
left  Tibby,  then  a  helpless  babe,  with  her  grandmother, 
who  lived  in  a  hamlet  somewhere  about  Tinwald ;  and 
with  that  grandmother  was  she  brought  up,  and  taught 
to  read  her  Bible,  to  card,  spin,  and  work  at  all  kinds 
of  country  labour  to  which  women  are  accustomed. 
Jane  Hervey  was  her  grandmother's  name,  a  woman 
then  scarcely  past  her  prime,  certainly  within  forty 
years  of  age ;  with  whom  lived  her  elder  sister,  named 
Douglas :  and  with  these  two  were  the  early  years  of 


214      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

Tibby  Hyslop  spent,  in  poverty,  contentment,  and  de- 
votion. 

At  the  age  of  eighteen,  Tibby  was  hired  at  the  Candle- 
mas fair,  for  a  gi-eat  wage,  to  be  a  byi'e-woman  to  Mr 
Gilbert  Forret,  then  farmer  at  Di-umlochie.  Tibby  ha 
then  acquired  a  great  deal  of  her  mother's  dangerous 
bloom — dangerous,  when  attached  to  poverty  and  so 
much  simplicity  of  heart ;  and  when  she  came  home 
and  told  what  she  had  done,  her  mother  and  aunt,  as 
she  always  denominated  the  two,  marvelled  much  at 
the  extravagant  conditions,  and  began  to  express  some 
fears  regarding  her  new  master's  designs,  till  Tibby  put 
them  all  to  rest  by  the  following  piece  of  simple  infor- 
mation : 

"  Dear,  ye  ken,  ye  needna  be  feared  that  Mr  Forret 
lias  ony  design  o'  comting  me,  for  dear,  ye  ken,  he  has 
a  wife  already,  and  five  bonny  bairns ;  and  he'll  never 
be  sae  daft  as  fa'  on  and  court  anither  ane.  I'se  war- 
rant he  finds  ane  enow  for  him,  honest  man  I" 

"  Oh,  then,  you  are  safe  enough,  since  he  is  a  mar- 
ried man,  my  bairn,"  said  Jane. 

The  truth  was,  that  Mr  Forret  was  notorious  for  de- 
bauching young  and  pretty  girls,  and  was  known  in 
Dumfries  market  by  the  name  of  Gibby  Gledger,  from 
the  circumstance  of  his  being  always  looking  slyly  after 
them.     Perceiving  Tibby  so  comely,  and  at  the  same 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  215 

time  so  simple,  he  hired  her  at  nearly  double  wages,  and 
moreover  gave  her  a  crowai  as  arle-money. 

Tibby  went  home  to  her  service,  and  being  a  pliable, 
diligent  creature,  she  was  beloved  by  all.  Her  master 
commended  her  for  her  neatness,  and  whenever  a  quiet 
opportunity  offered,  would  pat  her  rosy  cheek,  and  say 
kind  things.  Tibby  took  all  these  in  good  part,  judg- 
ing them  tokens  of  approbation  of  her  good  services, 
and  was  proud  of  them  ;  and  if  he  once  or  twice  whis- 
pered a  place  and  an  hour  of  assignation,  she  took  it 
for  a  joke,  and  paid  no  farther  attention  to  it.  A  whole 
year  passed  over  without  the  worthy  farmer  having  ac- 
complished his  cherished  purpose  regarding  poor  Tibby. 
He  hired  her  to  remain  with  him,  still  on  the  former 
high  conditions,  and  moreover  he  said  to  her :  "  I  wish 
your  grandmother  and  giand-aunt  would  take  my  plea- 
sant cottage  of  Knowe-back,  They  should  have  it  for 
a  mere  trifle — a  week's  shearing  or  so- — so  long  as  you 
remain  in  my  service ;  and  as  it  is  likely  to  be  a  long 
while  before  you  and  I  part,  it  would  be  better  to  have 
them  near  you,  that  you  might  see  them  often,  and  at- 
tend to  their  wants.  I  could  give  them  plenty  of  work 
through  the  whole  year,  on  the  best  conditions.  What 
think  you  of  this  proposal,  Rosy?" — a  familiar  name 
he  often  called  her  by, 

"  O,  I'm  sure,  sir,  I  think  ye  are  the  kindest  man 
that  ever  existed.     What  a  blessing  is  it  when  riches 


216        THE  SHEPHERD'S  CALENDAR. 

open  up  tlie  heart  to  acts  of  charity  and  benevolence  I 
My  poor  auld  mother  and  aunty  will  be  blythe  to  grip 
at  the  kind  offer ;  for  they  sit  undet  a  hard  master  yon- 
der. The  Almighty  will  bestow  a  blessing  on  you  for 
this,  sir !" 

Tibby  went  immediately  with  the  joyful  news  to  her 
poor  mother  and  aunt.  Now,  they  had  of  late  found 
themselves  quite  easy  in  their  cu'cumstances,  owing  to 
the  large  wages  Tibby  received,  every  farthing  of  which 
was  added  to  the  common  stock ;  and  though  Tibby 
displayed  a  little  more  finery  at  the  meeting-house,  it 
was  her  gi-andmother  who  purchased  it  for  her,  without 
any  consent  on  her  part.  "  I  am  sure,"  said  her  grand- 
mother, when  Tibby  told  the  story  of  her  master's  Idnd- 
ness  and  attention,  "  I  am  sure  it  was  the  kindest  in- 
tervention o'  Providence  that  ever  happened  to  poor 
things  afore,  when  ye  fell  in  wi'  that  kind  worthy  man, 
i'  the  mids  o'  a  gi-eat  hiring  market,  where  ye  might 
just  as  easily  hae  met  wi'  a  knave,  or  a  niggai'd,  as  wi' 
'  this  man  o'  siccan  charity  an'  mercy." 

"  Ay ;  the  wulcat  maun  hae  his  collop, 

And  the  raven  maun  hae  his  part, 
And  the  tod  will  creep  through  the  heather, 

For  the  honny  moor-hen's  heart," 

said  old  Douglas  Hervey,  poking  the  fire  all  the  while 
with  the  tongs,  and  speaking  only  as  if  speaking  to  her- 
self— "  Hech-wow,  and  lack-a-day!  but  the  times  are 
3 


TIBBY  HYSLOPS  DREAM.  217 

altered  sair  since  I  first  saw  the  sun  !  Poor,  poor  Re- 
ligion, wae's  me  for  her !  She  was  first  driven  out  o' 
the  lord's  castle  into  the  baron's  ha' ;  out  o'  the  baron's 
ha'  into  the  faimer's  bien  dwelling ;  and  at  last  out  o' 
that  into  the  poor  rauldrife  shiel,  where  there's  nae 
ither  comfort  but  what  she  brings  wi'  her." 

"  What  has  set  ye  onna  thae  reflections  the  day, 
aunty?"  cried  Tibby  aloud  at  her  ear;  for  she  was 
half  deaf,  and  had  so  many  flannel  mutches  on,  besides 
a  blue  napkin,  which  she  always  wore  over  them  all, 
that  her  deafness  was  nearly  completed  altogether. 

"  Oogh !  what's  the  lassie  saying?"  said  she,  after 
listening  a  good  while,  till  the  sounds  penetrated  to  the 
interior  of  her  ear,  "  what's  the  young  light-head  say- 
ing about  the  defections  o'  the  day?  what  kens  she 
about  them  ? — oogh !  Let  me  see  your  face,  dame,  and 
find  your  hand,  for  I  hae  neither  seen  the  ane,  nor  felt 
the  tither,  this  lang  and  mony  a  day."  Then  taking 
her  giand-niece  by  the  hand,  and  looking  close  into  her 
face  through  the  spectacles,  she  added, — "  Ay,  it  is  a 
weel-faured  sonsy  face,  veiy  like  the  mother's  that  bore 
ye ;  and  hers  was  as  like  her  mother's ;  and  there  was 
never  as  muckle  common  sense  amang  a'  the  three  as 
to  keep  a  brock  out  o'  the  kail-yard.  Ye  hae  an  unco 
good  master,  I  hear — oogh !  I'm  glad  to  heart — hoh- 
oh-oh-oh ! — verra  glad.     I  hope  it  will  lang  continue, 

VOL.  I.  K 


218      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

this  kindness.  Poor  Tibby  ! — as  lang  as  tlie  heart  disna 
gang  wrang,  we  maiin  excuse  the  head,  for  itll  never 
aince  gang  right.  I  hope  they  were  baith  made  for  a 
better  warld,  for  nane  o'  them  were  made  for  this." 

When  she  got  this  length,  she  sat  hastily  down,  and 
began  her  daily  and  hourly  task  of  carding  wool  for  her 
sister's  spinning,  abstracting  herself  from  all  external 
considerations, 

"I  think  aunty's  unco  parabolical  the  day,"  said 
Tibby  to  her  grandmother;  "  what  makes  her  that 
gate?" 

"  O  dear,  hinny,  she's  aye  that  gate  now.  She  speaks 
to  naebody  but  hersell,"  said  Jane.  "  But — lownly  be 
it  spoken — I  think  whiles  there's  ane  speaks  till  her 
again  that  my  een  canna  see." 

"  The  angels  often  conversed  wi'  good  folks  lang- 
syne.  I  ken  o'  naething  that  can  hinder  them  to  do  sae 
still,  if  they're  sae  disposed,"  said  Tibby ;  and  so  the 
dialogue  closed  for  the  present. 

Mr  Forret  sent  his  carts  at  the  term,  and  removed 
the  old  people  to  the  cottage  of  Knowe-back,  free  of  all 
charge,  like  a  gentleman  as  he  was  ;  and  things  went  on 
exceedingly  well.  Tibby  had  a  sincere  regard  for  her 
master ;  and  as  he  continued  to  speak  to  her,  when 
alone,  in  a  kind  and  playful  manner,  she  had  several 
times  ventured  to  broach  religion  to  him,  trying  to  dis- 
cover the  state  of  his  soul.     Then  he  would  shake  his 


TfBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  219 

head,  and  look  demure  in  mockery,  and  repeat  some 
grave,  becoming  words.  Poor  Tibby  thought  he  was 
a  righteous  man. 

But  in  a  short  time  his  pm*poses  were  divulged  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  be  no  more  equivocal.  That  morn- 
ing immediately  preceding  the  developement  of  thi« 
long-cherished  atrocity,  Jane  Hervey  was  awaked  at  an 
early  hour  by  the  following  unintelligible  dialogue  in 
her  elder  sister's  bed. 

"  Have  ye  seen  the  news  o'  the  day,  kerlin  ?" 

"  Oogh?" 

"  Have  ye  seen  the  news  o'  the  day?" 

"  Ay,  that  I  hae,  on  a  braid  open  book,  without  clasp 
or  seal.    Whether  will  you  or  the  deil  win  ?" 

"  That  depends  on  the  citadel.  If  it  stand  out,  a' 
the  powers  o'  hell  winna  shake  the  fortress,  nor  sap  a 
fetane  o'  its  foundation." 

"  Ah,  the  fortress  is  a  good  ane,  and  a  sound  ane  ; 
but  the  poor  head  captain  ! — ye  ken  what  a  sweet-lip- 
ped, turnip-headit  brosey  he  is.  O,  lack-a-day,  my  poor 
Tibby  Hyslop  ! — my  innocent,  kind,  thowless  Tibby 
Hyslop  1" 

Jane  was  frightened  at  hearing  such  a  colloquy,  but 
particularly  at  that  part  of  it  where  her  darling  child 
was  mentioned.  She  sprung  from  her  own  bed  to  that 
of  her  sister,  and  cried  in  her  ear  with  a  loud  voice, — 


220      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  Sister,  sister  Douglas,  what  is  that  you  are  saying 
about  our  dear  bairn  ?" 

"  Oogh  ?  I  was  saying  naething  about  your  bairn. 
She  lies  in  great  jeopardy  yonder ;  but  nane  as  yet. 
Gang  away  to  your  bed — wow,  but  I  was  sound 
asleep." 

"  There's  naebody  can  make  aught  out  o'  her  but 
nonsense,"  said  Jane. 

After  the  two  had  risen  from  their  scanty  breakfast, 
which  Douglas  had  blessed  with  more  fervency  than 
ordinary,  she  could  not  settle  at  her  carding,  but  al- 
ways stopped  short,  and  began  mumbling  and  spealdng 
to  herself.  At  length,  after  a  long  pause,  she  looked 
over  her  shoulder,  and  said, — "  Jeanie,  warna  ye  speak- 
ing o'  ganging  ower  to  see  our  bairn  the  day  ?  Haste 
thee  and  gang  away,  then ;  and  stay  nouther  to  put  on 
clean  bussing,  kirtle,  nor  barrie,  else  ye  may  be  an  an- 
trin  meenut  or  twa  ower  lang." 

Jane  made  no  reply,  but,  drawing  the  skirt  of  her 
gown  over  her  shoulders,  she  set  out  for  Drumlochie, 
a  distance  of  nearly  a  mile  ;  and  as  she  went  by  the 
c^iTier  of  the  byre,  she  imagined  she  heard  her  grand- 
child's voice,  in  great  passion  or  distress,  and  ran  straight 
into  the  byi'e,  crying,  "  What's  the  matter  wi'  you,  Tib- 
by  ?  what  ails  you,  my  baim  ?"  but,  receiving  no  an- 
swer, she  thought  the  voice  must  have  been  somewhere 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAJVI.  221 

without,  and  slid  quietly  away,  looking  everywhere, 
and  at  length  went  down  to  the  kitchen. 

Mr  Forret,  alias  Gledging  Gibby,  had  borne  the 
brunt  of  incensed  kirk-sessions  before  that  time,  and 
also  the  unlicensed  tongues  of  mothers,  roused  into  ve- 
hemence by  the  degradation  of  beloved  daughters  ;  but 
never  in  his  life  did  he  bear  such  a  rebuke  as  he  did 
that  day  from  the  tongue  of  one  he  had  always  viewed 
as  a  mere  simpleton.  It  was  a  lesson — a  warning  of 
the  most  sublime  and  tenible  description,  couched  in 
the  pure  and  emphatic  language  of  Scripture.  Gibby 
cared  not  a  doit  for  these  things,  but  found  himself  foil- 
ed, and  exposed  to  his  family,  and  the  whole  world,  if 
this  fool  chose  to  do  it.  He  was,  therefore,  glad  to  act 
a  part  of  deep  hypocrisy,  pretending  the  sincerest  con- 
trition, regretting,  with  tears,  his  momentary  derange- 
ment. Poor  Tibby  readily  believed  and  forgave  him  ; 
and  thinking  it  hard  to  iiiin  a  repentant  sinner  in  his 
worldly  and  family  concerns,  she  promised  never  to  di- 
vulge what  had  passed  ;  and  he,  knowing  well  the  va- 
lue of  her  word,  was  glad  at  having  so  escaped. 

Jane  found  her  grand-daughter  apparently  much  dis- 
turbed ;  but  having  asked  if  she  was  well  enough,  and 
receiving  an  answer  in  the  affirmative,  she  was  satisfied, 
and  only  added,  "  Your  crazed  aunty  wad  gar  me  be- 
lieve ye  war  in  some  jeopardy,  and  hurried  me  away 
to  see  you,  without  giving  me  leave  to  change  a  steek,'* 


'2XZ  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

One  may  easily  conceive  Tibby's  astonishment  at  heav' 
ing  this,  considering  the  moment  at  which  her  grancU 
mother  arrived.  As  soon  as  the  latter  was  gone,  she 
kneeled  before  her  Maker,  and  poured  out  her  soul  in 
grateful  thanksgiving  for  her  deliverance  ;  and,  in  par- 
ticular, for  such  a  manifest  interference  of  some  supe- 
rior intelligence  in  her  behalf. 

"  How  did  ye  find  our  poor  bairn  the  day,  titty  Jean  B 
Did  she  no  tell  ye  ony  thing  ?"  asked  Douglas,  on  Jane'^ 
retm-n. 

"  She  tauld  me  naething,  but  said  she  was  week" 

"  She's  ae  fool,  and  ye're  another  1  If  I  had  been  her, 
I  wad  bae  blazed  it  baith  to  kirk  and  council ; — to  hia 
wife's  eai",  and  to  his  minister's  !.  She's  very  weel,  is 
»he  ? — Oogh  !  Ay.  Hob — oh — oh — oh  I — silly  wo^ 
man — silly  woman — Hoh — oh — oh  !" 

In  a  few  weeks,  Mr  Forret's  behaviour  to  his  simple 
dairymaid  altered  very  materially.  He  called  her  no 
more  by  the  endearing  name  of  Rosy  ;  poor  idiot  was 
oftener  the  terra  ;  and  finding  he  was  now  safe  from 
accusation,  his  malevolence  towards  her  had  scarcely 
any  bounds.  She  made  out  her  term  with  difficulty, 
but  he  refused  to  pay  the  stipulated  wage,  on  pretence 
of  her  incapacity  ;  and  as  she  had  by  that  time  profit- 
ed well  at  his  hand,  she  took  what  he  offered,  thanked 
him,  and  said  no  more  about  it.  She  was  no  more  liired 
jjs  a  servant,  but  having  at;  the  first  taJcen  a  long  leasp 


TIBBY  HYSLOP  S  DREAM.  223 

of  the  cottage,  she  continued,  from  year  to  year,  work- 
ing on  the  farm  by  the  day,  at  a  very  scanty  allowance. 
Old  Douglas  in  a  few  years  gi-ew  incapable  of  any  work, 
through  frailty  of  person,  being  constantly  confined  to 
bed,  though  in  mind  as  energetic  and  mysterious  as  ever. 
Jane  wrought  long,  till  at  length  a  severe  illness  in  1 799 
rendered  her  unfit  to  do  any  thing  further  than  occa- 
sionally knit  a  stocking  ;  and  Tibby's  handywork  was 
all  that  herself  and  the  two  old  women  had  to  depend 
upon.  They  had  brought  her  up  with  care  and  kind- 
ness amid  the  most  pinchmg  poverty,  and  now,  indeed, 
her  filial  affection  was  severely  put  to  the  proof ;  but  it 
was  genuine,  and  knew  no  boimds.  Night  and  day  she 
toiled  for  her  aged  and  feeble  relatives,  and  a  murmur 
or  complaint  never  was  heard  from  her  lips.  Many  a 
blessing  was  bestowed  on  her  as  they  raised  their  pal- 
sied heads  to  pai'take  of  her  hard-earned  pittance  ;  and 
many  a  fervent  prayer  was  poured  out,  when  no  mor- 
tal heard  it. 

Times  grew  harder  and  harder.  Thousands  yet 
living  remember  what  a  period  that  was  for  the  poor, 
while  meal,  for  seasons,  was  from  fom*  to  five  shillings 
a-stone,  and  even  sometimes  as  high  as  seven.  Tibby 
grew  fairly  incapable  of  supporting  herself  and  her  aged 
friends.  She  stinted  herself  for  their  sakes,  and  that 
made  her  still  more  incapable;  yet  often  with  tears  in 
her  eyes  did  she  feed  these  frail  beings,  her  heart  like 


2'24  THE  siibpiierd's  calendar. 

to  melt  because  she  bad  no  more  to  give  them.  There 
are  no  poor-rates  in  that  country.  Knowe-back  is  quite 
retii-ed — nobody  went  near  it,  and  Tibby  complained 
to  none,  but  wrought  on,  night  and  day,  in  son*ow  and 
anxiety,  but  still  with  a  humble  and  thankful  heart. 

In  this  gi'eat  strait,  Mrs  Forret  was  the  first  who  be- 
gan, unsolicited,  to  take  compassion  on  the  destitute 
group.  She  could  not  conceive  how  they  existed  on 
the  poor  creature's  earnings.  So  she  went  privately  to 
see  tnem,  and  when  she  saw  their  wi'etched  state,  and 
heard  their  blessings  on  their  dear  child,  her  heart  was 
moviBd  to  pity,  and  she  determined  to  assist  them  in 
secret ;  for  her  husband  was  such  a  churl,  that  she  durst 
not  venture  to  do  it  publicly.  Accordingly,  whenever 
she  had  an  opportunity,  she  made  Tibby  come  into  the 
kitchen,  and  get  a  meal  for  herself;  and  often  the  con- 
siderate lady  slid  a  small  loaf,  or  a  little  tea  and  sugar, 
into  her  lap,  for  the  two  aged  invalids  ; — for  gentle 
woman  is  always  the  first  to  pity,  and  the  first  to  re- 
lieve. 

Poor  Tibby  !  how  her  heart  expanded  with  gratitude 
on  receiving  these  little  presents !  for  her  love  for  the 
two  old  dependent  creatures  was  of  so  pure  and  sacred 
a  sort,  as  scarcely  to  retain  in  it  any  thing  of  the  com- 
mon feelings  of  humanity.  There  was  no  selfish  prin- 
ciple there — they  were  to  her  as  a  part  of  her  own  na- 
ture. 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  225 

Tibby  never  went  into  the  kitchen  unless  her  mis- 
tress desired  her,  or  sent  her  word  by  some  of  the  other 
day-labourers  to  come  in  as  she  went  home.  One  even- 
ing, having  got  word  in  this  last  way,  she  went  in,  and 
the  lady  of  the  house,  with  her  own  hand,  presented 
her  with  a  little  bowl  of  beat  potatoes,  and  some  milk. 
This  was  all ;  and  one  would  have  thought  it  was  an 
aliment  so  humble  and  plain,  that  scarcely  any  person 
Would  have  grudged  it  to  a  hungiy  dog.  It  so  happen- 
ed, however,  that  as  Tibby  was  sitting  behind  backs  en- 
joying the  meal,  Mr  Forret  chanced  to  come  into  the 
kitchen  to  give  some  orders ;  and  perceiving  Tibby  so 
comfortably  engaged,  he,  without  speaking  a  word,  sei- 
zed her  by  the  neck  with  one  hand,  and  by  the  shoul- 
der with  the  other,  and  hunying  her  out  at  the  back- 
door into  the  yard,  flung  her,  with  all  his  might,  on  a 
dunghill.  "  Wha  the  devil  bade  you  come  into  my 
house,  and  eat  up  the  meat  that  was  made  for  others  ?" 
cried  he,  in  a  demoniac  voice,  choking  with  rage ;  and 
then  he  swore  a  teiiible  oath,  which  I  do  not  choose  to 
set  down,  that,  "  if  he  foimd  her  again  at  such  employ- 
ment, he  would  cut  her  throat,  and  fling  her  to  the 
dogs." 

Poor  Tibby  was  astounded  beyond  the  power  of  ut- 
terance, or  even  of  rising  from  the  place  where  he  had 
thrown  her  down,  until  lifted  by  two  of  the  maid-ser- 
vants, who  tried  to  comfort  her  as  they  supported  her 
k2 


•226  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

part  of  the  way  home ;  and  bitterly  did  they  blame 
theii-  master,  saying  it  would  have  been  a  shame  to  any 
one,  who  had  the  feelings  of  a  man,  to  do  such  an  act ; 
but  as  for  their  master,  he  scarcely  had  the  feelings  of 
a  beast.  Tibby  never  opened  her  mouth,  neither  to 
blame,  nor  complain,  but  went  on  her  way  crying  till 
her  heart  was  like  to  break. 

She  had  no  supper  for  the  old  famishing  pair  that 
night.  They  had  tasted  nothing  from  the  time  that 
she  left  them  in  the  morning ;  and  as  she  had  account- 
ed herself  sure  of  receiving  something  from  Mrs  FoiTet 
that  night,  she  had  not  asked  her  day's  wages  from  the 
grieve,  glad  to  let  a  day  run  up  now  and  then,  when 
able  to  procure  a  meal  in  any  other  honest  way.  She 
had  nothing  to  give  them  that  night,  so  what  could  she 
do  ?  She  was  obliged,  with  a  sore  heart,  to  kiss  them 
and  tell  them  so ;  and  then,  as  was  her  custom,  she 
said  a  prayer  over  their  couch,  and  laid  herself  down 
to  sleep,  drowned  in  tears. 

She  had  never  so  much  as  mentioned  Mr  Forret's 
name  either  to  her  giand mother  or  grand-aimt  that 
night,  or  by  the  least  insinuation  given  them  to  under- 
stand that  he  had  used  her  ill ;  but  no  sooner  were  they 
composed  to  rest,  and  all  the  cottage  quiet,  than  old 
Douglas  began  abusing  him  with  gi'eat  vehemence.  Tib- 
by, to  her  astonishment,  heai'd  some  of  his  deeds  spoken 
of  with  great  familiarity,  which  she  was  sure  never  had 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  227 

been  whispered  to  the  ear  of  flesh.  But  what  shocked 
her  most  of  all,  was  the  following  terrible  prognostica- 
tion, which  she  heard  repeated  three  several  times: — 
"  Na,  na,  I'll  no  see  it,  for  I'll  never  see  aught  earthly 
again  beyond  the  was  o'  this  cottage ;  but  Tibby  will 
live  to  see  it ; — ay,  ay,  she'll  see  it."  Then  a  different 
voice  asked — "  What  will  she  see,  kerlin  ?" — "  She'll 
see  the  craws  picking  his  banes  at  the  back  o'  the  dyke." 

Hbby's  heart  grew  cold  within  her  when  she  heard 
this  tenible  announcement,  because,  for  many  years 
bygone,  she  had  been  convinced,  from  sensible  demon- 
stration, that  old  Douglas  Hervey  had  commerce  with 
some  superior  intelligence  ;  and  after  she  had  heard  the 
above  sentence  repeated  again  and  again,  she  shut  her 
ears,  that  she  might  hear  no  more  ;  committed  herself 
t)nce  more  to  the  hands  of  a  watchful  Creator,  and  fell 
into  a  troubled  sleep. 

The  elemental  spirits  that  weave  the  shadowy  tape- 
stry of  di-eams,  were  busy  at  their  aerial  looms  that 
night  in  the  cottage  of  Knowe-back,  bodying  forth  the 
destinies  of  men  and  women  in  brilliant  and  quick  suc- 
cession. One  only  of  these  delineations  I  shall  here 
set  down,  precisely  as  it  was  related  to  me,  by  my 
friend  the  worthy  clergyman  of  that  parish,  to  whom 
Tibby  told  it  the  very  next  day.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
her  grand-aunt's  disjointed  prophecy  formed  the  ground- 
work of  the  picture ;  but  be  that  as  it  may,  this  was  her 


228     THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

dream ;  and  it  was  for  the  sake  of  telling  it,  and  tracing 
it  to  its  fulfilment,  that  I  began  this  story : 

Tibby  Hyslop  dreamed,  that  on  a  certain  spot  which 
she  had  never  seen  before,  between  a  stone-dyke  and 
the  verge  of  a  woody  precipice,  a  little,  sequestered, 
inaccessible  comer,  of  a  triangular  shape, — or,  as  she 
called  it  to  the  minister,  "  a  three-neukit  crook  o'  the 
linn,"  she  saw  Mr  Forret  lying  without  his  hat,  with 
his  tliroat  slightly  wounded,  and  blood  running  from 
it ;  but  he  neither  appeared  to  be  dead,  nor  yet  dying, 
but  in  excellent  spirits.  He  was  clothed  in  a  fine  new 
black  suit,  had  full  boots  on,  which  appeared  likewise 
to  be  new,  and  gilt  spurs.  A  great  number  of  rooks 
and  hooded  crows  were  making  free  with  his  person ; 
— some  picking  out  his  eyes,  some  his  tongue,  and  some 
tearing  out  his  bowels.  In  place  of  being  distressed  by 
their  voracity,  he  appeared  much  delighted,  encoura- 
ging them  all  that  he  could,  and  there  was  a  perfectly 
good  imderstanding  between  the  parties.  In  the  midst 
of  this  horrible  feast,  a  large  raven  dashed  down  from 
a  dark  cloud,  and,  driving  away  all  the  meaner  birds, 
fell  a-feasting  himself; — opened  the  breast  of  his  victim, 
who  was  still  alive,  and  encouraging  him  on ;  and  after 
preying  on  his  vitals  for  some  time,  at  last  picked  out 
his  heart,  and  devoured  it ;  and  then  the  mangled  wi'etch, 
after  writhing  for  a  short  time  in  convulsive  agonies, 
groaned  his  last. 


TIBBY  HYSLOP  S  DREAM.  229 

This  was  precisely  Tibby's  dream  as  it  was  told  to 
me,  first  by  my  friend  Mi-  Cunningham  of  Dalswinton, 
and  afterwards  by  the  clergyman  to  whom  she  herself  had 
related  it  next  day.  But  there  was  something  in  it  not 
so  distinctly  defined;  for  though  the  birds  which  she  saw 
devouring  her  master,  were  rooks,  blood-crows,  and  a 
raven,  still  each  individual  of  the  number  had  a  likeness, 
by  itself,  distinguishing  it  from  all  the  rest ;  a  certain 
character,  as  it  were,  to  support ;  and  these  particular 
likenesses  were  so  engraven  on  the  dreamer's  mind,  that 
she  never  forgot  them,  and  she  could  not  help  looking 
for  them  both  among  "  birds  and  bodies,"  as  she  ex- 
pressed it,  but  never  could  distinguish  any  of  them 
again ;  and  the  di-eam,  like  many  other  distempered 
visions,  was  forgotten,  or  only  remembered  now  and 
then  with  a  certain  tremor  of  antecedent  knowledge. 

Days  and  seasons  passed  over,  and  with  them  the 
changes  incident  to  humanity.  The  virtuous  and  inde- 
fatigable Tibby  Hyslop  was  assisted  by  the  benevolent, 
who  had  heard  of  her  exertions  and  patient  sufferings ; 
and  the  venerable  Douglas  Hervey  had  gone  in  peace 
to  the  house  appointed  for  all  living,  when  one  evening 
in  June,  John  Jardine,  the  cooper,  chanced  to  come  to 
Knowe-back,  in  the  course  of  his  girding  and  hooping 
peregrinations.  John  was  a  living  and  walking  chroni- 
cle of  the  events  of  the  day,  all  the  way  from  the  head 
of  Glen-Breck  to  the  bridge  of  Stony-Lee.    He  knew 


230        THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

every  man,  and  every  man's  affairs — every  woman,  and 
every  woman's  failings ;  and  his  intelligence  was  not 
like  that  of  many  others,  for  it  was  generally  to  be  de- 
pended on.  How  he  got  his  information  so  conectly, 
was  a  mystery  to  many,  but  whatever  John  the  cooper 
told  as  a  fact,  was  never  disputed,  and  any  woman,  at 
least,  might  have  ventmed  to  tell  it  over  again. 

"  These  are  hard  times  for  poor  folks,  Tibby.  How 
are  you  and  auld  granny  coming  on  ?" 

<<  Just  fighting  on  as  we  hae  done  for  mony  a  year. 
She  is  aye  contentit,  poor  body,  and  thankfu',  whether 
I  hae  little  to  gie  her,  or  muckle.  This  life's  naething 
but  a  fight,  Johnnie,  frae  beginning  to  end." 

"  It's  a'  tme  ye  say,  Tibby,"  said  the  cooper,  inter- 
rupting her,  for  he  was  afraid  she  was  about  to  enter 
upon  religious  topics,  a  species  of  conversation  that  did 
not  accord  with  John's  talents  or  dispositions ;  "  It's  a' 
true  ye  say,  Tibby ;  but  your  master  will  feoon  be  sic 
a  rich  man  now,  that  we'll  a'  be  made  up,  and  you 
amang  the  lave  will  be  made  a  lady." 

"  If  he  get  his  riches  honestly,  and  the  blessing  o'  the 
Almighty  wi'  them,  John,  I  shall  rejoice  in  his  prosperi- 
ty ;  but  neither  me  nor  ony  ither  poor  body  will  ever 
be  muckle  the  better  o'  them.  What  way  is  he  gaun 
to  get  siccan  great  riches  ?  If  a'  be  true  that  I  hear, 
he  is  gaun  to  the  wrang  part  to  seek  them." 

"  Aha,  lass,  that's  a'  that  ye  ken  about  it.     Did  ye 


TIBBY  HYSLOP^S  DREAM.  231 

no  hear  that  he  had  won  the  law-pka  on  his  laird,  whilk 
has  been  afore  the  Lords  for  mair  than  seven  years  ? 
And  did  ye  no  hear  that  he  had  won  ten  pleas  afore  the 
courts  o'  Dumfries,  a  rising  out  o'  ane  anither,  like  ash 
girderings  out  o'  ae  root,  and  that  he's  to  get,  on  the 
haill,  about  twenty  thousand  punds  worth  o'  damages  ?" 

"  That's  an  unco  sight  o'  siller,  John.  How  muckle 
is  that  ?" 

"  Aha,  lass,  ye  hae  fixed  me  now ;  but  they  say  it 
will  come  to  as  muckle  gowd  as  six  men  can  carry  on 
their  backs.  And  we're  a'  to  get  twenties,  and  thuties, 
and  forties  o'  punds  for  bribes,  to  gar  us  gie  faithfu'  and 
true  evidence  at  the  great  concluding  trial  afore  the 
Lords  ;  and  you  are  to  be  bribit  amang  the  rest,  to  gar 
ye  tell  the  haill  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth." 

"  There  needs  nae  waste  o'  siller  to  gar  me  do  that. 
But,  Johnnie,  I  wad  like  to  ken  whether  that  mode  o' 
taking  oaths, — solemn  and  saucred  oaths, — about  the 
miserable  trash  o'  tliis  warld,  be  according  to  the  tenor 
o'  Gospel  revelation,  and  the  third  o'  the  Commands  ?" 

"  Aha,  lass,  ye  hae  fixed  me  now !  That's  rather 
a  kittle  point ;  but  I  believe  it's  a'  ti-ue  that  ye  say. 
However,  ye'U  get  the  offer  of  a  great  bribe  in  a  few 
days  ;  and  take  ye  my  advice,  Tibby — Get  baud  o'  the 
bribe  afore  hand ;  for  if  ye  lippen  to  your  master's  pro- 
mises, you  will  never  finger  a  bodle  after  the  job's  done." 
«  I'm  but  a  poor  simple  body,  Johnnie,  and  canna 


232        THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

manage  oriy  siccan  things.  But  I  shall  need  nae  fee  to 
gar  me  tell  the  truth,  and  I  winna  tell  an  untruth  for  a' 
my  master's  estate,  and  his  sax  backfu's  o'  gowd  into  the 
bargain.     If  the  sin  o'  the  soul,  Johnnie " 

"  Ay,  ay,  that's  very  true,  Tibby,  very  true,  indeed, 
about  the  sin  o'  the  soul !  But  as  ye  were  saying  about 
being  a  simple  body — What  wad  ye  think  if  I  were  to 
cast  up  that  day  Gledging  Gibby  came  here  to  gie  you 
your  lesson — I  could  maybe  help  you  on  a  wee  bit — 
What  wad  you  gie  me  if  I  did  ?" 

"  Alack,  I  hae  naething  to  gie  you  but  my  blessing ; 
but  I  shall  pray  for  the  blessing  o'  God  on  ye." 

"  Ay,  ay,  as  ye  say.  I  daresay  there  might  be  waur 
things.  But  could  you  think  o'  naething  else  to  gie  a 
body  wha  likes  as  weel  to  be  paid  aff-hand  as  to  gie 
credit?  That's  the  very  thing  I'm  cautioning  you 
against." 

"  I  dimia  expect  ony  siller  frae  that  fountain-head, 
Johnnie  :  It  is  a  dry  ane  to  the  puir  and  the  needy,  and 
an  unco  sma*  matter  wad  gar  me  make  over  my  rights 
to  a  pose  that  I  bae  neither  faith  nor  hope  in.  But  ye're 
kenn'd  for  an  auld-farrant  man ;  if  ye  can  bring^a  little 
honestly  my  way,  I  sail  gie  you  the  half  o't ;  for  weel 
I  ken  it  will  never  come  by  ony  ait  or  shift  o'  mine." 

"  Ay,  ay,  that's  spoken  like  a  sensible  and  reasonable 
woman,  Tibby  Hyslop,  as  ye  are  and  hae  always  been. 
But  think  you  that  nae  way  could  be  contrived" — and 


TIBBY  HYSLOr's  DREAM.  233 

here  the  cooper  gave  two  winks  with  his  left  eye — "  by 
the  whilk  ye  could  gie  me  it  a',  and  yet  no  rob  yoursell 
of  a  farthing  ?" 

"  Na,  na,  Johnnie  Jardine,  that's  clean  aboon  my 
comprehension:  But  ye're  a  cunning  draughty  man^ 
and  I  leave  the  haili  matter  to  your  guidance." 

"  Very  weel,  Tibby,  very  weeL  I'll  try  to  ca'  a  gayan 
substantial  gu*d  round  your  success,  if  I  can  hit  the 
width  o'  the  chance,  and  the  girth  o'  the  gear.  Gude 
day  to  you  the  day ;  and  think  about  the  plan  o'  equal- 
aqual  that  I  spake  o'." 

Old  maids  are  in  general  veiy  easily  courted,  and 
very  apt  to  take  a  hint.  I  have,  indeed,  known  a  great 
many  instances  in  which  they  took  hints  very  seriously, 
before  ever  they  were  given.  Not  so  with  Tibby  Hys- 
lop.  So  heavy  a  charge  had  lain  upon  her  the  greater 
part  of  her  life,  that  she  had  never  turned  her  thoughts 
to  any  earthly  thing  beside,  and  she  knew  no  more  what 
the  cooper  aimed  at,  than  if  the  words  had  not  been 
spoken.  WTien  he  went  away,  her  grandmother  called 
her  to  the  bedside,  and  asked  if  the  cooper  had  gone 
away.  Tibby  answered  in  the  affirmative ;  on  which 
granny  said,  "  What  has  he  been  havering  about  sae 
lang  the  day  ?     I  thought  I  heard  him  courting  ye." 

"  Courting  me !  Dear  granny,  he  was  courting  nane 
o'  me ;  he  was  telling  me  how  Mr  Forret  had  won  as 


234        THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

muckle  siller  at  the  law  as  sax  men  can  carry  on  their 
backs,  and  how  we  are  a'  to  get  a  part  of  it." 

"  Dinna  believe  him,  hinny ;  the  man  that  can  win 
siller  at  the  law,  will  lose  it  naewhere.  But,  Tibby,  I 
heard  the  cooper  courting  you,  and  I  thought  I  heaid 
you  gie  him  your  consent  to  manage  the  matter  as  he 
likit.  Now  you  hae  been  a  gieat  blessing  to  me.  I 
thought  you  sent  to  me  in  wrath,  as  a  punishment  of 
my  sins,  but  I  have  found  that  you  were  indeed  sent  to 
me  in  love  and  in  kindness.  You  have  been  the  sole 
support  of  my  old  age,  and  of  hers  wha  is  now  in  the 
grave,  and  it  is  natural  that  I  should  like  to  see  you  put 
up  afore  I  leave  you.  But,  Tibby  Hyslop,  John  Jar- 
dine  is  not  the  man  to  lead  a  Christian  life  with.  He 
has  nae  mair  religion  than  the  beasts  that  perish — he 
shuns  it  as  a  body  would  do  a  loathsome  or  poisonous 
draught :  And  besides,  it  is  weel  kenn'd  how  sair  he 
neglected  his  first  wife.  Hae  naething  to  do  wi'  him, 
my  deal-  bairn,  but  rather  live  as  you  are.  There  is 
neither  sin  nor  shame  in  being  unwedded ;  but  there 
may  be  baith  in  joining  yourself  to  an  unbeliever." 

Tibby  was  somewhat  astonished  at  this  piece  of  in^ 
formation.  She  had  not  conceived  that  the  cooper 
meant  any  thing  in  the  way  of  courtship ;  but  found 
that  she  rather  thought  the  better  of  him  for  what  it  ap- 
peared he  had  done.  Accordingly  she  made  no  pro- 
mises to  her  grandmother,  but  only  remarked,  that  "  it 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  235 

was  a  pity  no  to  gie  the  cooper  a  chance  o'  conversion, 
honest  man." 

The  cooper  kept  watch  about  Dmmlochie  and  the 
hinds'  houses,  and  easily  found  out  all  the  farmer's 
movements,  and  even  the  exact  remuneration  he  could 
be  prevailed  on  to  give  to  such  as  were  pleased  to  re- 
member according  to  his  wishes.  Indeed  it  was  be- 
lieved that  the  most  pait  of  the  hinds  and  labouring 
people  recollected  nothing  of  the  matter  in  dispute  far- 
ther than  he  was  pleased  to  inform  them,  and  that  in 
fact  they  gave  evidence  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge 
or  remembrance,  although  that  evidence  might  be  de- 
cidedly wrong. 

One  day  Gibby  took  his  gun,  and  went  out  towards 
Knowe-back.  The  cooper  also,  guessing  what  his  pur- 
pose was,  went  thither  by  a  circuitous  route,  in  order 
to  come  in  as  it  were  by  chance.  Ere  he  amved,  Mr 
Fon*et  had  begun  his  queries  and  instmctions  to  Tibby. 
•^— The  two  could  not  agree  by  any  means ;  Tibby  either 
could  not  recollect  the  yearly  crops  on  each  field  on  the 
farm  of  Drumlochie,  or  recollected  wrong.  At  length, 
when  the  calculations  were  at  the  keenest,  the  cooper 
came  in,  and  at  every  turn  he  took  Mr  Fon-et's  side, 
with  the  most  strenuous  asseverations,  abusing  Tibby 
for  her  stupidity  and  want  of  recollection. 

"  Hear  me  speak,  Johnnie  Jardine,  afore  ye  condemn 
me  aflf-loof:  Mr  Fonet  says  that  the  Crooked  Holm 


23G      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

was  pease  in  the  96,  and  com  in  the  97 ;  I  say  it  was 
corn  baith  the  years.     How  do  ye  say  about  that  ?" 

"  Mr  Forret's  right — ^perfectly  right.  It  giew  pease 
in  the  96,  and  aits,  good  Angus  aits,  in  the  97.  Poor 
gowk !  dinna  ye  think  that  he  has  a'  thae  things  merkit 
down  in  black  and  white  ?  and  what  good  could  it  do 
to  him  to  mislead  you  ?  Depend  on't,  he  is  right  there." 
"  Could  ye  tak  your  oath  on  that,  Johnnie  Jardine  ?" 
"  Ay,  this  meenint, — sax  times  repeated,  if  it  were 
necessary." 

-"  Then  I  yield — I  am  but  a  poor  silly  woman,  liable 
to  mony  en'ors  and  shortcomings — I  maun  be  wi'ang, 
and  I  yield  that  it  is  sae.  But  I  am  sure,  John,  you 
cannot  but  remember  this  sae  short  while  syne, — for  ye 
shure  wi'  us  that  har'st, — Was  the  lang  field  niest  Robie 
Johnston  s  farm  growing  com  in  the  dear  year,  or  no  ? 
I  say  it  was." 

"  It  was  the  next  year,  Tibby,"  said  Mr  Forret ;  "  you 
are  confounding  one  year  with  another  again ;  and  I  see 
what  is  the  reason.  It  was  oats  in  99,  grass  in  1800, 
and  oats  again  in  1801 ;  now  you  never  remember  any 
of  the  intermediate  years,  but  only  those  that  you  shore 
on  these  fields.  I  cannot  be  mistaken  in  a  rule  I  never 
break." 

The  cooper  had  now  got  his  cue.  He  perceived  that 
the  plea  ultimately  depended  on  proof  relating  to  the 
proper  cropping  of  the  land  throughout  the  lease ;  and 


TTBBY  HYSLOPS  DREAM.  237 

he  supported  the  farmer  so  strenuously,  that  Tibby,  in 
her  simplicity,  fairly  yielded,  although  not  convinced ; 
but  the  cooper  assured  the  farmer  that  he  would  put  all 
to  rights,  provided  she  received  a  handsome  acknow- 
ledgment ;  for  there  was  not  the  least  doubt  that  Mr 
Forret  was  right  in  every  particular. 

This  speech  of  the  cooper's  gratified  the  farmer  ex- 
ceedingly, as  his  whole  fortune  now  depended  upon  the 
evidence  to  be  elicited  in  the  court  at  Dumfries,  on  a 
day  that  was  fast  approaching,  and  he  was  willing  to 
give  any  thing  to  secure  the  evidence  on  his  side ;  so 
he  made  a  long  set  speech  to  Tibby,  telling  her  how 
necessary  it  was  that  she  should  adhere  strictly  to  the 
truth — that,  as  it  would  be  an  awful  thing  to  make  oath 
to  that  which  was  false,  he  had  merely  paid  her  that 
visit  to  instruct  her  remembrance  a  little  in  that  which 
was  the  truth,  it  being  impossible,  on  account  of  his  jot- 
tings, that  he  could  be  mistaken ;  and  finally  it  was  set- 
tled, that  for  thus  telling  the  truth,  and  nothing  but  the 
truth,  Tibby  Hyslop,  a  most  deserving  woman,  was  to 
receive  a  present  of  £13,  as  wages  for  time  bygone. 
This  was  all  managed  in  a  very  sly  manner  by  the 
cooper,  who  assm*ed  FoiTet  that  all  should  go  right,  as 
far  as  related  to  Tibby  Hyslop  and  himself. 

The  day  of  the  trial  arrived,  and  counsel  attended 
from  Edinburgh  for  both  parties,  to  take  full  evidence 
before  the  two  Circuit  Lords  and  Sheriff.  The  evidence 


238      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

was  said  to  have  been  unsatisfactory  to  the  Judges,  but 
upon  the  whole  in  Mr  Forret's  favour.  The  cooper's 
was  decidedly  so,  and  the  farmer's  counsel  were  crow- 
ing and  bustling  immoderately,  when  at  length  Tibby 
Hyslop  was  called  to  the  witnesses'  box.  At  the  first 
sight  of  her  master's  counsel,  and  the  Dumfries  writers 
and  notaries  that  were  hanging  about  him,  Tibby  was 
stnick  dumb  with  amazement,  and  almost  bereaved  of 
sense.  She  at  once  recognised  them,  all  and  severally, 
as  the  birds  that  she  saw,  in  her  dream,  devouring  her 
master,  and  picking  the  flesh  from  his  bones  ;  while 
the  great  lawyer  from  Edinburgh  was,  in  feature,  eye, 
and  beak,  the  identical  raven  which  at  last  devoured 
liis  vitals  and  heart. 

This  singular  coincidence  brought  reminiscences  of 
such  a  nature  over  her  spirit,  that,  on  the  first  questions 
being  put,  she  could  not  answer  a  word.  She  knew 
from  thenceforward  that  her  master  was  a  ruined  man, 
and  her  heart  failed,  on  thinking  of  her  kind  mistress 
and  his  family.  The  counsel  then  went,  and  whisper- 
ing Mr  Forret,  inquired  what  sort  of  a  woman  she  was, 
and  if  her  evidence  was  likely  to  be  of  any  avail.  As 
the  cooper  had  behaved  in  a  very  satisfactory  way,  and 
had  answered  for  Tibby,  the  farmer  was  intent  on  not 
losing  her  evidence,  and  answered  his  counsel  that  she 
was  a  worthy  honest  woman,  who  would  not  swear  to 
a  lie  for  the  king's  dominions,  and  that  her  evidence 


TIBBY  HYSLOPS  DREAM.  239 

was  of  mucb  consequence.  This  intelligence  the  law- 
yer announced  to  the  bench  with  great  pomposity,  and 
the  witness  was  allowed  a  little  time  to  recover  her 
spirits. 

Isabella  Hyslop,  spinster,  was  again  called,  answer- 
ed to  her  name,  and  took  the  oath  distinctly,  and  with- 
out hesitation,  until  the  official  querist  came  to  the 
usual  question,  "  Now,  has  anyone  instructed  you  what 
to  say,  or  what  you  are  to  answer  ?"  when  Tibby  re- 
plied, with  a  steady  countenance,  "  Nobody,  except  my 
master."  The  counsel  and  client  stared  at  one  another, 
while  the  Court  could  hardly  maintain  their  gravity  of 
deportment;     The  querist  went  on — 

"  What  ?  Do  you  say  your  master  instructed  you 
what  to  say  ?" 

«  Yes." 

"  And  did  he  give,  or  promise  to  give  you,  any  re- 
ward for  what  you  were  to  say  ?" 

«  Yes." 

"  How  much  did  he  give,  or  promise  you,  for  answer- 
ing as  he  directed  you  ?" 

"  He  gave  me  fifteen  pound-notes." 

Here  Mr  Forret  and  his  counsel,  losing  all  patience 
at  seeing  the  case  take  this  unexpected  turn,  interrupt- 
ed the  proceedings,  the  latter  addressing  the  Judges, 
with  vehemence,  to  the  following  purport : — 

"  My  Lords,  in  my  client's  name,  and  in  the  names 


240        THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

of  justice  and  reason,  I  protest  against  proceeding  with 
this  woman's,  evidence,  it  being  manifest  that  she  is 
talking  through  a  total  derangement  of  intellect.  At 
first  she  is  diimb,  and  cannot  answer  nor  speak  a  word, 
and  now  she  is  answering  in  total  disregard  of  all  truth 
and  propriety.  I  appeal  to  your  Lordships  if  such  a 
farrago  as  this  can  be  at  all  inferential  or  relevant  ?" 

"  Sir,  it  was  but  the  other  minute,"  said  the  junior 
Judge,  "  that  you  announced  to  us  with  great  import- 
ance, that  this  woman  was  a  person  noted  for  honesty 
and  worth,  and  one  who  would  not  tell  a  lie  for  the 
king's  dominions.  Why  not  then  hear  her  evidence  to 
the  end  ?  For  my  own  part,  I  perceive  no  tokens  of 
discrepancy  in  it,  but  rather  a  scrupulous  conscientious- 
ness. Of  that,  however,  we  shall  be  better  able  to  judge 
when  we  have  heard  her  out.  I  conceive  that,  for  the 
sake  of  both  parties,  this  woman  ought  to  be  strictly 
examined." 

"  Proceed  with  the  evidence,  Mr  Wood,"  said  the 
senior  Lord,  bowing  to  his  assistant. 

Tibby  was  reminded  that  she  was  on  her  great  oath, 
and  examined  over  again  ;  but  she  adhered  strictly  to 
her  former  answers. 

"  Can  you  repeat  any  thing  to  the  Court  that  he  de- 
sired you  to  say  ?" 

"  Yes  ;  he  desired  me,  over  and  over  again,  to  tell 
the  whole  tnith,  and  nothing  but  the  truth." 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  241 

"  And,  in  order  that  you  should  do  this,  he  paid  you 
down  fifteen  pounds  sterling  ?" 

«  Yes." 

"  This  is  a  very  singular  transaction  :  I  cannot  per- 
ceive the  meaning  of  it.  You  certainly  must  be  sensi- 
ble that  you  made  an  advantageous  bargain  ?" 

"  Yes." 

"  But  you  depone  that  he  charged  you  to  tell  only 
the  truth  ?" 

"  Yes,  he  did,  and  before  witnesses,  too." 

Here  Mr  Ferret's  counsel  began  to  crow  amain,  as 
if  the  victory  had  been  his  own  ;  but  the  junior  Judge 
again  took  him  short  by  saying,  "  Have  patience,  sir. — 
My  good  woman,  I  esteem  your  principles  and  plain 
simplicity  very  highly.  We  want  only  to  ascertain  the 
truth,  and  you  say  your  master  charged  you  to  tell 
that  only.  Tell  me  this,  then— did  he  not  inform  you 
what  the  truth  was  ?" 

"  Yes.  It  was  for  that  purpose  he  came  over  to  see 
me,  to  help  my  memory  to  what  was  the  truth,  for  fear 
I  should  hae  sworn  wrang ;  which  wad  hae  been  a  great 
sin,  ye  ken." 

"  Yes,  it  would  so.  I  thought  that  would  be  the 
way. — You  may  now  proceed  with  your  questions  re- 
gularly, Mr  Wood." 

"  Are  you  quite  conscious,  now,  that  those  things 

VOL.  I.  L 


242      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

he  brought  to  your  remembrance  were  actually  the 

truth  r 

«  No." 

"  Are  you  conscious  they  were  not  the  tnith  ?" 

"  Yes  ;  at  least  some  of  them,  I  am  sure,  were  not." 

"  Please  to  condescend  on  one  instance." 

"  He  says  he  has  it  maikit  in  his  bulk,  that  the 
Crookit  Houm,  that  lies  at  the  back  o'  the  wood,  ye 
ken,  grew  pease  in  the  ninety-sax,  and  com  in  the 
ninety-se'en  ;  now,  it  is  unco  queer  that  he  should  hae 
settin't  down  wrang,  for  the  Houm  was  really  and  truly 
aits  baith  the  years." 

"  It  is  a  long  time  since  ;  perhaps  your  memory  may 
be  at  fault." 

"  If  my  master  had  not  chanced  to  mention  it,  I  could 
not  have  been  sure,  but  he  set  me  a-calculating  and  com- 
paring ;  and  my  mother  and  me  have  been  consulting 
about  it,  and  have  fairly  settled  it." 

"  And  are  you  absolutely  positive  it  was  oats  both 
years  ?" 

"  Yes." 

"  Can  you  mention  any  circumstance  on  which  you 
rest  your  conclusions  ?" 

"  Yes  ;  there  came  a  great  wind  ae  Sabbath  day,  in 
the  ninety-sax,  and  that  raised  the  shearers'  wages,  at 
Dumfries,  to  three  shillings  the  day.  We  began  to  the 
Crookit  Houm  on  a  Monanday's  morning,  at  three 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  243 

shillings  a-day,  and  that  very  day  twalmonth,  we  be- 
gan till't  again  at  tenpence.  We  had  a  gude  deal  o' 
speaking  about  it,  and  I  said  to  John  Edie,  '  What  need 
we  grumble  ?  I  made  sae  muckle  at  shearing,  the  last 
year,  that  it's  no  a'  done  yet.'  And  he  said, '  Ah,  Tibby, 
Tibby,  but  wha  can  hain  like  you  ?'  " 

"  Were  there  any  others  that  you  think  your  master 
had  marked  down  wrong  ?" 

"  There  was  ane,  at  ony  rate — ^the  lang  field  niest 
Robie  Johnston's  march  :  He  says  it  was  clover  in  the 
drouthy  dear  year,  and  aits  the  neist ;  but  that's  a  year 
I  canna  forget ;  it  was  aits  baith  years.  I  lost  a  week's 
shearing  on  it  the  first  year,  waiting  on  my  aunty,  and 
the  niest  year  she  was  dead  ;  and  I  shore  the  lang  field 
niest  Robie  Johnston's  wi'  her  sickle-heuk,  and  black 
ribbons  on  my  mutch." 

The  whole  of  Tibby's  evidence  went  against  Mr 
Forret's  interest  most  conclusively,  and  the  Judges  at 
last  dismissed  her,  with  high  compliments  on  her  truth 
and  integrity.  The  cause  was  again  remitted  to  the 
Court  of  Session  for  revisal  after  this  evidence  taken  ; 
and  the  word  spread  over  all  the  country  that  Mr  For- 
ret  had  won.  Tibby  never  contradicted  this,  nor  dis- 
puted it ;  but  she  was  thoroughly  convinced,  that  in 
place  of  winning,  he  would  be  a  ruined  man. 

About  a  month  after  the  examination  at  Dumfries, 
he  received  a  letter  from  his  agents  in  Edinburgh,  buoy- 


244      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

ing  him  up  with  hopes  of  great  and  instant  success,  and 
urging  the  utility  of  his  presence  in  town  at  the  final 
decision  of  the  cause  on  which  all  the  minor  ones  rest- 
ed. Accordingly  he  equipped  himself,  and  rode  into 
Dumfries  in  the  evening,  to  be  ready  to  proceed  by  the 
mail  the  following  morning,  saying  to  his  wife,  as  he 
went  away,  that  he  would  send  home  his  mare  with  the 
caiTier,  and  that  as  he  could  not  possibly  name  the  day 
on  which  he  would  be  home,  she  was  to  give  herself  no 
uneasiness.  The  mare  was  returned  the  following  night, 
and  put  up  in  her  o^n  stall,  nobody  knew  by  whom  ; 
but  servants  are  such  sleepy,  careless  fellows,  that  few 
regarded  the  circumstance.  This  was  on  a  Tuesday 
night.  A  whole  week  passed  over,  and  still  Mrs  For- 
ret  received  no  news  of  her  husband,  which  kept  her 
very  uneasy,  as  their  whole  fortune,  being,  and  subsist- 
ence, now  depended  on  the  issue  of  this  great  law-suit, 
and  she  suspected  that  the  case  still  continued  dubious, 
or  was  found  to  be  going  against  him. 

A  more  unhappy  result  followed  than  that  she  anti- 
cipated. On  the  arrival  of  the  Edinburgh  papers  next 
week,  the  whole  case,  so  important  to  farmers,  was  de- 
tailed ;  and  it  was  there  stated,  that  the  great  farmer 
and  improver,  Mr  FoiTet  of  Dnimlochie,  had  not  only 
forfeited  his  whole  fortune  by  improper  husbandry,  and 
manifest  breaches  of  the  conditions  on  which  he  held 
his  lease,  but  that  criminal  letters  had  been  issued 


TIBBY  HYSLOP'S  DREAM.  245 

against  him  for  attempts  to  pervert  justice,  and  rewards 
offered  for  his  detention  or  seizure.  This  was  terrible 
news  for  the  family  at  Drumlochie ;  but  there  were  still 
sanguine  hopes  entertained  that  the  circumstances  were 
misstated,  or,  if  the  worst  should  prove  true,  that  per- 
haps the  husband  and  father  might  make  his  escape ; 
and  as  there  was  no  word  from  him  day  after  day,  this 
latter  sentiment  began  to  be  cherished  by  the  whole 
family  as  their  only  remaining  and  forlorn  hope. 

But  one  day,  as  poor  Tibby  Hyslop  was  going  over 
to  the  Cat  Linn,  to  gather  a  burden  of  sticks  for  fire- 
wood, she  was  surprised,  on  looking  over  the  dilie,  to 
see  a  great  body  of  crows  collected,  all  of  which  were 
so  intent  on  their  prey,  that  they  seemed  scarcely  to 
,regai"d  her  presence  as  a  sufficient  cause  for  their  de- 
sisting ;  she  waved  her  burden-rope  at  them  over  the 
dike,  but  they  refused  to  move.  Her  heart  nearly  fail- 
ed her,  for  she  remembered  of  having  before  seen  the 
same  scene,  with  some  fearful  concomitants.  But  pure 
and  unfeigned  religion,  the  first  principle  of  which  teach- 
es a  firm  reliance  on  divine  protection,  can  give  cou- 
rage to  the  weakest  of  human  beings.  Tibby  climbed 
over  the  dike,  drove  the  vermin  away,  and  there  lay  the 
corpse  of  her  late  unfortunate  master,  wofuUy  mangled 
by  these  voracious  birds  of  prey.  He  had  bled  himself 
to  death  in  the  jugular  vein,  was  lying  without  the  hat, 
and  clothed  in  a  fine  new  black  suit  of  clothes,  top-boots, 


246      THE  shepherd's  calendar^ 

which  appeared  Hkewise  to  be  new,  and  gilt  spurs ; 
and  the  place  where  he  lay  was  a  little  three-cornered 
sequestered  spot,  between  the  dike  and  the  precipice, 
and  inaccessible  by  any  other  way  than  through  the 
field.  It  was  a  spot  that  Tibby  had  never  seen  before. 

A  letter  was  found  in  Mr  Forret's  pocket,  which 
had  blasted  all  his  hopes,  and  driven  him  to  utter  dis- 
traction ;  he  had  received  it  at  Dumfries,  returned 
home,  and  put  up  his  mare  carefully  in  the  stable,  but 
not  having  courage  to  face  his  ruined  family,  he  had 
hurried  to  that  sequestered  spot,  and  perpetrated  the 
deed  of  self-destruction. 

The  only  thing  more  I  have  to  add  is,  that  the  Lord 
President,  having  made  the  remark  that  he  paid  more 
regard  to  that  poor  woman,  Isabella  Hyslop's  evidence, 
than  to  all  the  rest  elicited  at  Dumfries,  the  gainers  of 
the  great  plea  became  sensible  that  it  was  principally 
in  consequence  of  her  candour  and  invincible  veracity 
that  they  were  successful,  and  sent  her  a  present  of 
twenty  pounds.  She  was  living  comfortably  at  Knowe- 
back  when  I  saw  her,  a  contented  and  happy  old  maid- 
en. 


MARY  BURNET.  247 


CHAPTER  IX. 


MARY  BURNET. 


The  following  incidents  are  related  as  having  oc- 
curred at  a  shepherd's  house,  not  a  hundred  miles  from 
St  Mary's  Loch  ;  but,  as  the  descendants  of  one  of  the 
families  still  reside  in  the  vicinity,  I  deem  it  requisite 
to  use  names  which  cannot  be  recognised,  save  by  those 
who  have  heaid  the  story. 

John  AUanson,  the  farmer's  son  of  Inverlawn,  was 
a  handsome,  roving,  and  incautious  young  man,  enthu- 
siastic, amorous,  and  fond  of  adventure,  and  one  who 
could  hardly  be  said  to  fear  the  face  of  either  man,  wo- 
man, or  spirit.  Among  other  love  adventures,  he  fell 
a-courting  Mary  Burnet,  of  Kirkstyle,  a  most  beautiful 
and  innocent  maiden,  and  one  who  had  been  bred  up 
in  rural  simplicity.  She  loved  him,  but  yet  she  was 
afraid  of  him  ;  and  though  she  had  no  objection  to  meet- 
ing with  him  among  others,  yet  she  carefully  avoided 
meeting  him  alone,  though  often  and  earnestly  urged 
to  it.   One  day,  the  young  man,  finding  an  opportimi- 


248  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

ty,  at  Our  Lady's  Chapel,  after  mass,  urged  his  suit 
for  a  private  meeting  so  ardently,  and  with  so  many 
vows  of  love  and  sacred  esteem,  that  Mary  was  so  far 
won,  as  to  promise,  that  perhaps  she  would  come  and 
meet  him. 

The  trysting  place  was  a  little  gi-een  sequestered 
spot,  on  the  very  verge  of  the  lake,  well  known  to  many 
an  angler,  and  to  none  better  than  the  writer  of  this  old 
tale  ;  and  the  hour  appointed,  the  time  when  the  King's 
Elwand  (now  foolishly  termed  the  Belt  of  Orion)  set 
his  first  golden  knob  above  the  hill.  Allanson  came  too 
eai'ly ;  and  he  watched  the  sky  with  such  eagerness 
and  devotion,  that  he  thought  every  little  star  that  arose 
in  the  south-east  the  top  knob  of  the  King's  Elwand, 
At  last  the  Elwand  did  arise  in  good  earnest,  and  then 
the  youth,  with  a  heart  palpitating  with  agitation,  had 
nothing  for  it  but  to  watch  the  heathery  brow  by  which 
bonny  Mary  Burnet  was  to  descend.  No  Mary  Bur- 
net made  her  appearance,  even  although  the  King's  El- 
wand had  now  measured  its  own  equivocal  length  five 
or  six  times  up  the  lift. 

Young  Allanson  now  felt  all  the  most  poignant  mi- 
series of  disappointment ;  and,  as  the  story  goes,  utter- 
ed in  his  heart  an  unhallowed  wish — he  wished  that 
some  witch  or  fairy  would  influence  his  Mary  to  come 
to  him  in  spite  of  her  maidenly  sci-uples.'  This  wish 
was  thrice  repeated  with  all  the  energy  of  disappointed 


MARY  BURNET.  249 

love.  It  was  thrice  repeated,  and  no  more,  when,  be- 
hold, Mary  appeared  on  the  brae,  with  wild  and  eccen- 
tric motions,  speeding  to  the  appointed  place.  Allan- 
son's  excitement  seems  to  have  been  more  than  he  was 
able  to  bear,  as  he  instantly  became  delirious  with  joy, 
and  always  professed  that  he  could  remember  nothing 
of  their  first  meeting,  save  that  Mary  remained  silent, 
and  spoke  not  a  word,  neither  good  nor  bad.  In  a 
short  time  she  fell  a-sobbing  and  weeping,  refusing  to 
be  comforted,  and  then,  uttering  a  piercing  shriek, 
sprung  up,  and  ran  from  him  with  amazing  speed. 

At  this  part  of  the  loch,  which,  as  I  said,  is  well 
known  to  many,  the  shore  is  overhimg  by  a  precipit- 
ous cliiF,  of  no  great  height,  but  still  inaccessible,  either 
from  above  or  below.  Save  in  a  great  drought,  the 
water  comes  to  within  a  yard  of  the  bottom  of  this 
cliflP,  and  the  intermediate  space  is  filled  with  rough  un- 
shapely pieces  of  rock  fallen  from  above.  Along  this 
narrow  and  nide  space,  hardly  passable  by  the  angler 
at  noon,  did  Mary  bound  with  the  swiftness  of  a  kid, 
although  surrounded  with  darlvness.  Her  lover,  pur- 
suing with  all  his  energy,  called  out,  "  Mary  !  Mary ! 
ray  dear  Maiy,  stop  and  speak  with  me.  I'll  conduct 
you  home,  or  anywhere  you  please,  but  do  not  run  from 
me.     Stop,  my  dearest  Mary — stop  !" 

Mary  would  not  stop  ;  but  ran  on,  till,  coming  to  a 
little  cliiF  that  jutted  into  the  lake,  round  which  there 
l2 


250     THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

was  no  passage,  and,  perceiving  that  her  lover  wouW 
there  overtake  her,  she  uttered  another  shriek,  and 
plunged  into  the  lake.  The  loud  sound  of  her  fall  in- 
to the  still  water  ning  in  the  young  man's  ears  like  the 
knell  of  death ;  and  if  before  he  was  crazed  with  love, 
he  was  now  as  much  so  with  despair.  He  saw  her 
floating  lightly  away  from  the  shore  towards  the  deep- 
est part  of  the  loch ;  but,  in  a  short  time,  she  began  to 
sink,  and  gradually  disappeared,  without  uttering  a 
throb  or  a  cry.  A  good  while  previous  to  this,  Allan- 
son  had  flung  off  his  bonnet,  shoes,  and  coat,  and  plun- 
ged in.  He  swam  to  the  place  where  Mary  disappear- 
ed ;  but  there  was  neither  boil  nor  gurgle  on  the  water, 
nor  even  a  bell  of  departing  breath,  to  mark  the  place 
where  his  beloved  had  sunk.  Being  strangely  impressed, 
at  that  trying  moment,  with  a  determination  to  live  or  die 
with  her,  he  tried  to  dive,  in  hopes  either  to  bring  her  up 
or  to  die  in  her  arms  ;  and  he  thought  of  their  being  so 
found  on  the  shore  of  the  lake,  with  a  melancholy  sa- 
tisfaction ;  but  by  no  effort  of  his  could  he  reach  the 
bottom,  nor  knew  he  what  distance  he  was  still  from 
it.  With  an  exhausted  frame,  and  a  despairing  heart, 
he  was  obliged  again  to  seek  the  shore,  and,  dripping 
wet  as  he  was,  and  half  naked,  he  ran  to  her  father's 
house  with  the  woful  tidings.  Every  thmg  there  was 
quiet.  The  old  shepherd's  family,  of  whom  Mary  was 
the  youngest,  and  sole  daughter,  were  all  sunk  in  silent 


MARY  BURNET.  251 

repose ;  and  oh  how  the  distracted  lover  wept  at  the 
thoughts  of  wakening  them  to  hear  the  dolefiU  tidings  I 
But  waken  them  he  must ;  so,  going  to  the  little  win- 
dow close  by  the  goodman's  bed,  he  called,  in  a  me- 
lancholy tone,  •'  Andrew !  Andrew  Burnet,  are  you 
waking  ?" 

"  Troth,  man,  I  think  I  be :  or,  at  least,  I'm  half- 
and-half.  What  hast  thou  to  say  to  aidd  Andrew  Bur- 
net at  this  time  o'  night  ?" 

"  Are  you  waking,  I  say  ?" 

"  Gudewife,  am  I  waking?  Because  if  I  be,  tell  that 
stravaiger  sae.  He'll  maybe  tak  your  word  for  it,  for 
mine  he  winna  tak." 

"  O  Andrew,  none  of  your  humour  to-night; — I 
bring  you  tidings  the  most  woful,  the  most  dismal,  the 
most  heart-rending,  that  ever  were  brought  to  an  honest 
man's  door." 

"  To  his  window,  you  mean,"  cried  Andrew,  bolting 
out  of  bed,  and  proceeding  to  the  door.  "  Gude  sauff 
us,  man,  come  in,  whaever  you  be,  and  tell  us  your 
tidings  face  to  face ;  and  then  we'll  can  better  judge 
of  the  truth  of  them.  If  they  be  in  concord  wi'  your 
voice,  they  are  melancholy  indeed.  Have  the  reavers 
come,  and  are  om*  kye  driven  ?" 

"  Oh,  alas !  waur  than  that — a  thousand  times  waur 
than  that !  Your  daughter — your  dear  beloved  and  on- 
ly daughter,  Mary — " 


252     THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  What  of  Mary  ?"  cried  the  goodman.  "  What  of 
Mary?"  cried  her  mother,  shuddering  and  groaning 
with  teiTor ;  and  at  the  same  time  she  kindled  a  light. 

The  sight  of  their  neighbour,  half-naked,  and  drip- 
ping with  wet,  and  madness  and  despair  in  his  looks, 
sent  a  chillness  to  their  hearts,  that  held  them  in  silence, 
and  they  were  unable  to  utter  a  word,  till  he  went  on 
thus — "  Mary  is  gone  ;  your  darling  and  mine  is  lost, 
and  sleeps  this  night  in  a  watery  grave, — and  I  have 
been  her  destroyer !" 

"  Thou  art  mad,  John  Allanson,"  said  the  old  man, 
vehemently,  "  raving  mad ;  at  least  I  hope  so.  Wicked 
as  thou  art,  thou  hadst  not  the  heart  to  kill  my  dear  child, 
O  yes,  you  are  mad — God  be  thanked,  you  are  mad.  I 
see  it  in  your  looks  and  demeanour.  Heaven  be  praised, 
you  are  mad !  You  are  mad  ;  but  you'll  get  better  again. 
But  what  do  I  say  ?"  continued  he,  as  recollecting  liim- 
self, — "  We  can  soon  convince  our  own  senses.  Wife 
lead  the  way  to  om-  daughter's  bed." 

With  a  heart  throbbing  with  teiTor  and  dismay,  old 
Jean  Linton  led  the  way  to  Mary's  chamber,  followed 
by  the  two  men,  who  were  eagerly  gazing,  one  over 
each  of  her  shoulders.  Mary's  little  apartment  was  in 
the  farther  end  of  the  long  narrow  cottage  ;  and  as  soon 
as  they  entered  it,  they  perceived  a  form  lying  on  the 
l)ed,  with  the  bed-clothes  drawn  over  its  head ;  and 
on  the  lid  of  Mary's  little  chest,  that  stood  at  the 


MARY  BURNET.  253 

bedside,  her  clothes  were  lying  neatly  folded,  as  they 
wont  to  be.  Hope  seemed  to  dawn  on  the  faces  of 
the  two  old  people  when  they  beheld  this,  but  the 
lover's  heart  sunk  still  deeper  in  despair.  The  father 
called  her  name,  but  the  form  on  the  bed  retm-ned  no 
answer;  however,  they  all  heard  distinctly  sobs,  as 
of  one  weeping.  The  old  man  then  ventured  to  pull 
down  the  clothes  from  her  face ;  and,  strange  to  say, 
there  indeed  lay  Mary  Burnet,  drowned  in  tears,  yet 
apparently  nowise  sui*prised  at  the  ghastly  appearance 
of  the  tlu-ee  naked  figures.  Allanson  gasped  for  breatli, 
for  he  remamed  still  incredulous.  He  touched  her 
clothes — he  lifted  her  robes  one  by  one, — and  all  of 
them  were  dry,  neat,  and  clean,  and  had  no  appearance 
of  having  sunk  in  the  lake. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Allanson  was  confound- 
ed by  the  strange  event  that  had  befallen  him,  and  felt 
like  one  sti-uggling  with  a  frightful  vision,  or  some 
energy  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  comprehend.  Ne- 
vertheless, the  assurance  that  Mary  was  there  in  life, 
weeping  although  she  was,  put  him  once  more  beside 
himself  with  joy ;  and  he  kneeled  at  her  bedside,  be- 
seeching permission  but  to  kiss  her  hand.  She,  how- 
ever, repulsed  him  with  disdain,  saying,  with  great  em- 
phasis— "  You  are  a  bad  man,  John  Allanson,  and  I 
entreat  you  to  go  out  of  my  sight.  The  sufferings  that 
I  have  undergone  this  night,  have  been  beyond  the 


254      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

power  of  flesh  and  blood  to  endure ;  and  by  some  cursed 
agency  of  yours  have  these  suffermgs  been  brought 
about.  I  therefore  pray  you,  in  His  name,  whose  law 
you  have  transgi*essed,  to  depart  out  of  my  sight." 

Wholly  overcome  by  conflicting  passions,  by  circum- 
stances so  contraiy  to  one  another,  and  so  discordant 
with  every  thing  either  in  the  works  of  Nature  or  Pro- 
vidence, the  young  man  could  do  nothing  but  stand 
like  a  rigid  statue,  with  his  hands  lifted  up,  and  his  vi- 
sage like  that  of  a  corpse,  imtil  led  away  by  the  two 
old  people  from  their  daughter's  apartment.  They  then 
lighted  up  a  lire  to  dry  him,  and  began  to  question  him 
with  the  most  intense  curiosity ;  but  they  could  elicit 
nothing  from  him,  but  the  most  disjointed  exclamations 
— such  as,  "  Lord  in  Heaven,  what  can  be  the  mean- 
ing of  this  !"  And  at  other  times — "  It  is  all  the  en- 
chantment of  the  devil ;  the  evil  spirits  have  got  do- 
minion over  me !" 

Finding  they  could  make  nothing  of  him,  they  began 
to  form  conjectures  of  then-  own.  Jean  affinned  that 
it  had  been  the  Mermaid  of  the  loch  that  had  come  to 
him  in  Mary's  shape,  to  allm-e  him  to  his  destruction ; 
but  Andrew  Burnet,  setting  his  bonnet  to  one  side,  and 
raising  his  left  hand  to  a  level  with  it,  so  that  he  might 
have  full  scope  to  motion  and  flourish,  suiting  his  action 
to  his  words,  thus  began,  with  a  face  of  sapience  never 
to  be  excelled : — 


MARY  BURNET.  255 

"  Gudewife,  it  doth  strike  me  that  thou  art  very  wide 
of  the  mark.  It  must  have  been  a  spirit  of  a  great  deal 
higher  quality  than  a  meer-maiden,  who  played  this  ex- 
tra-ordinary prank.  The  meer-maiden  is  not  a  spirit, 
but  a  beastly  sensitive  creature,  with  a  malicious  spirit 
within  it.  Now,  what  influence  could  a  cauld  clatch  of 
a  creature  like  that,  wi'  a  tail  like  a  gieat  saumont-fish, 
hae  ower  our  bairn,  either  to  make  her  happy  or  un- 
happy ?  Or  where  could  it  borrow  her  claes,  Jean  ? 
Tell  me  that.  Na,  na,  Jean  Linton,  depend  on  it,  the 
spirit  that  corn-tit  wi'  poor  sinfu'  Jock  there,  has  been  a 
fairy ;  but  whether  a  good  ane  or  an  ill  ane,  it  is  hard 
to  determine." 

Andrew's  disquisition  was  inteiTupted  by  the  young 
man  falling  into  a  fit  of  trembling  that  was  fearful  to 
look  at,  and  threatened  soon  to  terminate  his  existence. 
Jean  ran  for  the  family  cordial,  observing,  by  the  way, 
that  "  though  he  was  a  wicked  person,  he  was  still  a 
fellow-creature,  and  might  live  to  repent ;"  and  influ- 
enced by  this  spark  of  genuine  humanity,  she  made  him 
swallow  two  hom-spoonfuls  of  strong  aquavitse.  An- 
drew then  put  a  piece  of  scarlet  thread  round  each  wrist, 
and  taking  a  strong  rowan-tree  staff*  in  his  hand,  he  con- 
veyed his  trembling  and  astonished  guest  home,  giving 
him  at  parting  this  sage  advice : — 

"  I'll  tell  you  what  it  is,  Jock  AUanson, — ye  hae  mn 
a  near  risk  o'  perdition,  and,  escaping  that  for  the  pre- 


236      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

sent,  o'  losing  your  right  reason.  But  tak  an  auld  man's 
advice — never  gang  again  out  by  night  to  beguile  ony 
honest  man's  daughter,  lest  a  worse  thing  befall  thee." 

Next  morning  Mary  dressed  herself  more  neatly  than 
usual,  but  there  was  manifestly  a  deep  melancholy  set- 
tled on  her  lovely  face,  and  at  times  the  unbidden  tear 
would  start  into  her  eye.  She  spoke  no  word,  either 
good  or  bad,  that  ever  her  mother  could  recollect,  that 
whole  morning ;  but  she  once  or  twice  observed  her 
daughter  gazing  at  her,  as  with  an  intense  and  melan- 
choly hiterest.  About  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  she 
took  a  hay-raik  over  her  shoulder,  and  went  down  to  a 
meadow  at  the  east  end  of  the  loch,  to  coil  a  part  of  her 
father's  hay,  her  father  and  brother  engaging  to  join  her 
about  noon,  when  they  came  from  the  sheep-fold.  As 
soon  as  old  Andrew  came  home,  his  wife  and  he,  as  was 
natural,  instantly  began  to  converse  on  the  events  of  the 
preceding  night ;  and  in  the  course  of  their  conversation, 
Andrew  said,  "  Gudeness  be  about  us,  Jean,  was  not 
yon  an  awfu  speech  o'  oiu-  bairn's  to  young  Jock  Allan- 
son  last  night  ?" 

"  Ay,  it  was  a  downsetter,  gudeman,  and  spoken  like 
a  good  Clmstian  lass." 

"  I'm  no  sae  sure  o'  that,  Jean  Linton.     My  good 

woman,  Jean  Linton,  I'm  no  sae  sure  o'  that.     Yon 

speech  has  gi'en  me  a  great  deal  o'  trouble  o'  heart ;  for 

'ye  ken,  an  take  my  life, — ay,  an  take  your  life,  Jean, 


MARY  BURNET.  257 

— nane  o'  us  can  tell  whether  it  was  in  the  Almighty's 
name,  or  the  devil's,  that  she  discharged  her  lover." 

"  O  fy,  Andrew,  how  can  ye  say  sae  ?  How  can  ye 
doubt  that  it  was  in  the  Almighty's  name  ?" 

"  Couldna  she  have  said  sae  then,  and  that  wad  hae 
put  it  beyond  a'  doubt  ?  And  that  wad  hae  been  the 
natural  way  too ;  but  instead  of  that,  she  says,  '  I  pray 
you,  in  the  name  of  him  whose  law  you  have  transgress- 
ed, to  depart  out  o'  my  sight.'  I  confess  I'm  terrified 
when  I  think  about  yon  speech,  Jean  Linton.  Didna 
she  say,  too,  that  *  her  sufferings  had  been  beyond  what 
flesh  and  blood  could  have  endured?'  What  was  she 
but  flesh  and  blood  ?  Didna  that  remark  infer  that  she 
was  something  mair  than  a  mortal  creature  ?  Jean  Lin- 
ton, Jean  Linton !  what  will  you  say,  if  it  should  turn 
out  that  our  daughter  is  drowned,  and  that  yon  was  the 
fairy  we  had  in  the  house  a'  the  night  and  this  morn- 
ing?" 

"  O  baud  your  tongue,  Andrew  Burnet,  and  dinna 
make  my  heart  cauld  within  me.  We  hae  aye  trusted 
in  the  Lord  yet,  and  he  has  never  forsaken  us,  nor  will 
he  yet  gie  the  Wicked  One  power  ower  us  or  ours." 

"  Ye  say  very  weel,  Jean,  and  we  maun  e'en  hope  for 
the  best,"  quoth  old  Andrew ;  and  away  he  went,  ac- 
companied by  his  son  Alexander,  to  assist  then*  beloved 
Mary  on  the  meadow. 

No  sooner  had  Andrew  set  his  head  over  the  bents, 


258        THE  SHEPHERD*S  CALENDAR. 

and  come  in  view  of  the  meadow,  than  he  said  to  his  son, 
"  I  wish  Jock  Allanson  maunna  hae  been  east-the-loch 
fishing  for  geds  the  day,  for  I  think  my  Maiy  has  made 
very  little  progress  in  the  meadow." 

"  She's  ower  muckle  ta'en  up  about  other  things  this 
while,  to  mind  her  wark,"  said  Alexander :  "  I  wadna 
wonder,  father,  if  that  lassie  gangs  a  black  gate  yet." 

Andrew  uttered  a  longand  a  deep  sigh,  that  seemed  to 
raffle  the  very  fountains  of  life,  and,  without  speaking 
another  word,  walked  on  to  the  hay  field.  It  was  three 
hours  since  Mary  had  left  home,  and  she  ought  at  least 
to  have  put  up  a  dozen  coils  of  hay  each  hour.  But, 
in  place  of  that,  she  had  put  up  only  seven  altogether, 
and  the  last  was  unfinished.  Her  own  hay-raik,  that 
had  an  M  and  a  B  neatly  cut  on  the  head  of  it,  was 
leaning  on  the  unfinished  coil,  and  Mary  was  wanting. 
Her  brother,  thinking  she  had  hid  herself  from  them  in 
sport,  ran  from  one  coil  to  another,  calling  her  many 
bad  names,  playfully ;  but,  after  he  had  turned  them  all 
up,  and  several  deep  swathes  besides,  she  was  not  to  be 
found.  This  young  man,  who  slept  in  the  byi*e,  knew 
nothing  of  the  events  of  the  foregoing  night,  the  old 
people  and  Allanson  having  mutually  engaged  to  keep 
them  a  profound  secret,  and  he  had  therefore  less  rea» 
son  than  his  father  to  be  seriously  alarmed.  When  they 
began  to  work  at  the  hay,  Andrew  could  work  none ; 
he  looked  this  way  and  that  way,  but  in  no  way  could 


MARY  BURNET.  259 

he  see  Mary  approaching :  so  he  put  on  his  coat,  and 
went  away  home,  to  pour  his  soitows  into  the  bosom 
of  his  wife  ;  and  in  the  meantime,  he  desired  his  son  to 
run  to  all  the  neighbouiing  farming-houses  and  cots, 
every  one,  and  make  inquiries  if  any  body  had  seen 
Mary. 

When  Andrew  went  home  and  informed  his  wife  that 
their  dailing  was  missing,  the  giief  and  astonishment  of 
the  aged  couple  knew  no  bounds.  They  sat  down,  and 
wept  together,  and  declared,  over  and  over,  that  this  act 
of  Providence  was  too  strange  for  them,  and  too  high 
to  be  understood.  Jean  besought  her  husband  to  kneel 
instantly,  and  pray  urgently  to  God  to  restore  their 
child  to  them ;  but  he  declined  it,  on  account  of  the 
wrong  frame  of  his  mind,  for  he  declaied,  that  his  rage 
against  John  Allanson  was  so  extreme,  as  to  unfit  him 
for  approaching  the  throne  of  his  Maker.  "  But  if  the 
profligate  refuses  to  listen  to  the  entreaties  of  an  injured 
parent,"  added  he,  "  he  shall  feel  the  weight  of  an  in- 
jured father's  arm." 

Andrew  went  sU'aight  away  to  Inverlawn,  though 
without  the  least  hope  of  finding  young  Allanson  at 
home ;  but,  on  reaching  the  place,  to  his  amazement,  he 
found  the  young  man  lying  ill  of  a  burning  fever,  ra- 
ving incessantly  of  witches,  spirits,  and  Mary  Burnet, 
To  such  a  height  had  his  frenzy  arrived,  that  when  An- 
drew went  there,  it  required  three  men  to  hold  him  in 


260      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

the  bed.  Both  his  parents  testified  their  opinions  open- 
ly, that  their  son  was  bewitched,  or  possessed  of  a  de- 
mon, and  the  whole  family  was  thrown  into  the  gi'eat- 
est  consternation.  The  good  old  shepherd,  finding 
enough  of  giief  there  already,  was  obliged  to  confine 
his  to  his  own  bosom,  and  return  disconsolate  to  his 
little  family  circle,  in  which  there  was  a  woful  blank 
that  night. 

His  son  returned  also  from  a  fruitless  search.  No 
one  had  seen  any  traces  of  his  sister,  but  an  old  crazy 
woman,  at  a  place  called  Oxcleuch,  said  that  she  had 
seen  her  go  by  in  a  giand  chariot  with  young  Jock  Al- 
lanson,  toward  the  Birkhill  Path,  and  by  that  time  they 
were  at  the  Cross  of  Dumgree.  The  young  man  said, 
he  asked  her  what  sort  of  a  chariot  it  was,  as  there  was 
never  such  a  thing  in  that  country  as  a  chaiiot,  nor  yet 
a  road  for  one.  But  she  replied  that  he  was  widely 
mistaken,  for  that  a  great  number  of  chariots  sometimes 
passed  that  way,  though  never  any  of  them  returned. 
These  words  appearing  to  be  merely  the  ravings  of 
superannuation,  they  were  not  regarded  ;  but  when  no 
other  traces  of  Maiy  could  be  found,  old  Andrew  went 
up  to  consult  this  crazy  dame  once  more,  but  he  was 
not  able  to  bring  any  such  thing  to  her  recollection. 
She  spoke  only  in  parables,  which  to  him  were  incom- 
prehensible. 

Bonny  Mary  Burnet  was  lost.   She  left  her  father's 


MARY  BURNET.  26 1 

house  at  nine  o'clock  on  a  Wednesday  morning,  the  17th 
of  September,  neatly  dressed  in  a  white  jerkin  and 
green  bonnet,  with  her  hay-raik  over  her  shoulder ;  and 
that  was  the  last  sight  she  was  doomed  ever  to  see  of 
her  native  cottage.  She  seemed  to  have  had  some  pre- 
sentiment of  this,  as  appeared  from  her  demeanour  that 
morning  before  she  left  it.  Mary  Bm-net  of  Kirkstyle 
was  lost,  and  great  was  the  sensation  produced  over 
the  whole  country  by  the  mysterious  event.  There  was 
a  long  ballad  extant  at  one  period  on  the  melancholy 
catastrophe,  which  was  supposed  to  have  been  com- 
posed by  the  chaplain  of  St  Mary's  ;  but  I  have  only 
heard  tell  of  it,  without  ever  hearing  it  sung  or  recited. 
Many  of  the  verses  concluded  thus  : — 

"But  Bonny  Mary  Burnet 
We  will  never  see  again. " 

The  story  soon  got  abroad,  with  all  its  homd  cir- 
cumstances, (and  there  is  little  doubt  that  it  was  grie- 
vously exaggerated,)  and  there  was  no  obloquy  that  was 
not  thrown  on  the  survivor,  who  certainly  in  some  de- 
gree deserved  it,  for,  instead  of  gi'owing  better,  he  gi'ew 
ten  times  more  wicked  than  he  was  before.  In  one 
thing  the  whole  country  agieed,  that  it  had  been  the 
real  Mary  Bmnet  who  was  drowned  in  the  loch,  and 
that  the  being  which  was  found  in  her  bed,  lying  weep- 
ing and  complaining  of  suffering,  and  which  vanished 


262      THK  shepherd's  calendar. 

the  next  day,  had  been  a  fairy,  an  evil  spirit,  or  a  change- 
iing  of  some  sort,  for  that  it  never  spoke  save  once,  and 
that  in  a  mysterious  manner  ;  nor  did  it  partake  of  any 
food  with  the  rest  of  the  family.  Her  father  and  mo- 
ther knew  not  what  to  say  or  what  to  think,  but  they 
wandered  through  this  weary  world  like  people  wan- 
dering in  a  dream.  Every  thing  that  belonged  to  Maiy 
Burnet  was  kept  by  her  parents  as  the  most  sacred  re- 
lics, and  many  a  tear  did  her  aged  mother  shed  over 
them.  Every  article  of  her  dress  brought  the  once 
comely  wearer  to  mind.  Andrew  often  said,  "  That 
to  have  lost  the  darling  child  of  their  old  age  in  any 
way  would  have  been  a  gi'eat  trial,  but  to  lose  her  in 
the  way  that  they  had  done,  was  really  mair  than  hu- 
man frailty  could  endure." 

Many  a  weary  day  did  he  walk  by  the  shores  of  the 
loch,  looking  eagerly  for  some  vestige  of  her  garments, 
and  though  he  trembled  at  every  appearance,  yet  did 
he  continue  to  search  on.  He  had  a  number  of  small 
bones  collected,  that  had  belonged  to  lambs  and  other 
minor  animals,  and,  haply,  some  of  them  to  fishes,  from 
a  fond  supposition  that  they  might  once  have  formed 
joints  of  her  toes  or  fingers.  These  he  kept  concealed 
in  a  little  bag,  in  order,  as  he  said,  "  to  let  the  doctors 
see  them."  But  no  relic,  besides  these,  could  he  ever 
discover  of  Mary's  body. 

Young  Allanson  recovered  from  his  raging  fever 


MARY  Bl'RXET.  263 

scarcely  in  the  manner  of  other  men,  for  he  recovered 
all  at  once,  after  a  few  days  raving  and  madness.  Mary 
Burnet,  it  appeared,  was  by  him  no  more  remembered. 
He  grew  ten  times  more  wicked  than  before,  and  he- 
sitated at  no  means  of  accomplishing  liis  unhallowed 
purposes.  The  devout  shepherds  and  cottagers  around 
detested  him ;  and,  both  in  their  families  and  in  the 
wild,  when  there  was  no  ear  to  hear  but  that  of  Heaven, 
they  prayed  protection  from  his  devices,  as  if  he  had 
been  the  Wicked  One  ;  and  they  all  prophesied  that 
he  would  make  a  bad  end. 

One  fine  day  about  the  middle  of  October,  when  the 
days  begin  to  get  very  short,  and  the  nights  long  and 
dark,  on  a  Friday  morning,  the  next  year  but  one  after 
Mary  Burnet  was  lost,  a  memorable  day  in  the  fairy 
annals,  John  Allanson,  younger  of  Inverlawn,  went  to 
a  great  hiring  fair  at  a  village  called  Moffat  in  Annan- 
dale,  in  order  to  hire  a  housemaid.  His  character  was 
so  notorious,  that  not  one  young  woman  in  the  district 
would  serve  in  his  father's  house  ;  so  away  he  went  to 
the  fair  at  Moflfat,  to  hii-e  the  prettiest  and  loveliest 
girl  he  could  there  find,  with  the  intention  of  ruining 
her  as  soon  as  she  came  home.  This  is  no  suppositi- 
tious accusation,  for  he  acknowledged  his  plan  to  Mr 
David  Welch  of  Cariferan,  who  rode  down  to  the  mar- 
ket with  him,  and  seemed  to  boast  of  it,  and  dwell  on 
it  with  delight.     But  the  maidens  of  Annandale  had 


264      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

a  guardian  angel  in  the  fair  that  day,  of  which  neithei: 
he  nor  they  were  aware. 

Allanson  looked  throngh  the  hning  market,  and 
through  the  hiring  market,  and  at  length  fixed  on  one 
young  woman,  which  indeed  was  not  difficult  to  do,  for 
there  was  no  such  form  there  for  elegance  and  beauty. 
Mr  Welch  stood  still  and  eyed  him.  He  took  the 
beauty  aside.  She  was  clothed  in  green,  and  as  lovely 
as  a  new-blown  rose. 

"  Are  you  to  hire,  pretty  maiden  ?" 

"  Yes,  sir." 

"  Will  you  hire  with  me  ?" 

"  I  care  not  though  I  do.  But  if  I  hu*e  with  you,  it 
must  be  for  the  long  term." 

"  Certainly.  The  longer  the  better.  What  are  your 
wages  to  be  ?" 

"  You  know,  if  I  hue,  I  must  be  paid  in  kind.  I 
must  have  the  first  living  creature  that  I  see  about  In- 
verlawn  to  myself." 

"  I  wish  it  may  be  me,  then.  But  what  do  you  know 
about  Inverlawn  ?" 

"  I  think  I  should  know  about  it." 

"  Bless  me !  I  know  the  face  as  well  as  I  know  my 
own,  and  better.  But  the  name  has  somehow  escaped 
me.     Pray,  may  I  ask  your  name  ?" 

"  Hush  !  hush  I"  said  she  solemnly,  and  holding  up 


6 


MARY  BUIINET.  265 

her  hand  at  the  same  time  ;  "  Hush,  hush,  you  had  bet- 
ter say  nothing  about  that  here." 

"  I  am  in  utter  amazement !"  he  exclaimed.  "  What 
is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  I  conjure  you  to  tell  me  your 
name  ?" 

<<  It  is  Mary  Burnet,"  said  she,  in  a  soft  whisper ;  and 
at  the  same  time  she  let  down  a  green  veil  over  her  face. 
If  AUanson's  death-wan-ant  had  been  announced  to 
him  at  that  moment,  it  could  not  have  deprived  him  so 
completely  of  sense  and  motion.  His  visage  changed 
into  that  of  a  corpse,  his  jaws  fell  down,  and  his  eyes 
became  glazed,  so  as  apparently  to  throw  no  reflection 
inwardly.  Mr  Welch,  who  had  kept  his  eye  steadily 
on  them  all  the  while,  perceived  his  comrade's  dilemma, 
and  went  up  to  him.  "  Allanson  ?— Mr  Allanson  ? 
What  is  the  matter  with  you,  man?"  said  he.  "  Why, 
the  girl  has  bewitched  you,  and  tm-ned  you  into  a 
statue !" 

Allanson  made  some  sbimd  in  his  throat,  as  if  at- 
tempting to  speak,  but  his  tongue  refused  its  office,  and 
he  only  jabbered.  Mr  Welch,  conceiving  that  he  was 
seized  with  some  fit,  or  about  to  faint,  supported  him 
into  the  Johnston  Arms ;  but  he  either  could  not,  or 
would  not,  gi*ant  him  any  explanation.  Welch  being, 
however,  resolved  to  see  the  maiden  in  gi-een  once  more, 
persuaded  Allanson,  after  causing  him  to  drink  a  good 
deal,  to  go  out  into  the  hiring-market  again,  in  search 

VOL.  I.  M 


266  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

of  her.  They  ranged  the  market  through  and  through, 
but  the  maiden  in  green  was  gone,  and  not  to  be  fomid. 
She  had  vanished  in  the  crowd  the  moment  she  divul- 
ged her  name,  and  even  though  Welch  had  his  eye  fixed 
on  her,  he  could  not  discover  which  way  she  went. 
Allanson  appeared  to  be  in  a  kind  of  stupor  as  well  as 
terror,  but  when  he  found  that  she  had  left  the  market, 
he  began  to  recover  himself,  and  to  look  out  again  for 
the  top  of  the  maiket. 

He  soon  found  one  more  beautiful  than  the  last. 
She  was  like  a  sylph,  clothed  in  robes  of  pure  snowy 
white,  with  green  ribbons.  Again  he  pointed  this  new 
flower  out  to  Mr  David  Welch,  who  declared  that  such 
a  perfect  model  of  beauty  he  had  never  in  his  life  seen. 
Allanson,  being  resolved  to  have  this  one  at  any  wages, 
took  her  aside,  and  put  the  usual  question :  "  Do  you 
wish  to  hire,  pretty  maiden  ?" 

«  Yes,  sir." 

"  Will  you  hire  with  me  ?" 

"  I  care  not  though  I  do." 

"  What,  then,  are  your  wages  to  be?  Come — say? 
And  be  reasonable ;  I  am  determined  not  to  part  with 
you  for  a  trifle." 

*'  My  wages  must  be  in  kind  ;  I  work  on  no  other 
conditions. — Pray,  how  are  all  the  good  people  about 
Inverlawn  ?" 

AUanson's  breath  began  to  cut,  and  a  chillness  to 


MARY  BURNET.  267 

creep  through  his  whole  frame,  and  he  answered,  with 
a  faltering  tongue, — "  I  thank  you, — much  in  then*  or- 
dinary way." 

"  And  your  aged  neighbours,"  rejoined  she,  "  are 
they  still  alive  and  well  ?" 

"  I — I — I  think  they  are,"  said  he,  panting  for  breath. 
"  But  I  am  at  a  loss  to  Imow  whom  I  am  indebted  to 
for  these  kind  recollections." 

"  What,"  said  she,  "  have  you  so  soon  forgot  Mary 
Burnet  of  Kirkstyle  ?" 

Allanson  started  as  if  a  bullet  had  gone  through  his 
heart.  The  lovely  sylph-like  form  glided  into  the  crowd, 
and  left  the  astounded  libertine  once  more  standing 
like  a  rigid  statue,  until  aroused  by  his  friend,  Mr 
Welch.  He  tried  a  thkd  fair  one,  and  got  the  same 
answers,  and  the  same  name  given.  Indeed,  the  first 
time  ever  I  heard  the  tale,  it  bore  that  he  tried  seve7i, 
who  all  turned  out  to  be  Mary  Bumets  of  Kirkstyle ; 
but  I  think  it  unlikely  that  he  would  try  so  many,  as 
he  must  long  ere  that  time  have  been  sensible  that  he 
labom'ed  under  some  power  of  enchantment.  How- 
ever, when  nothing  else  would  do,  he  helped  himself 
to  a  good  proportion  of  strong  drink.  WTiile  he  was 
thus  engaged,  a  phenomenon  of  beauty  and  gi'andeur 
came  into  the  fair,  that  caught  the  sole  attention  of  all 
present.  This  was  a  lovely  dame,  riding  in  a  gilded 
chariot,  with  two  liverymen  before,  and  two  behind, 


268     THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

clothed  in  green  and  gold ;  and  never  sure  was  there 
so  splendid  a  meteor  seen  in  a  Moffat  fair.  The  word 
instantly  circulated  in  the  market,  that  this  was  the 
Lady  Elizabeth  Douglas,  eldest  daughter  to  the  Earl 
of  Morton,  who  then  sojourned  at  Auchincastle,  in  the 
vicinity  of  Moffat,  and  which  'lady  at  that  time  was 
celebrated  as  a  great  beauty  all  over  Scotland.  She 
was  aftei-wards  Lady  Keith  ;  and  the  mention  of  this 
name  in  the  tale,  as  it  were  by  mere  accident,  fixes 
the  era  of  it  in  the  reign  of  James  the  Fourth,  at  the 
very  time  that  fairies,  brownies,  and  witches,  were  at 
the  rifest  in  Scotland. 

Every  one  in  the  market  believed  the  lady  to  be  the 
daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Morton ;  and  when  she  came 
to  the  Johnston  Arms,  a  gentleman  in  green  came  out 
bareheaded,  and  received  her  out  of  the  carnage.  All 
the  crowd  gazed  at  such  unparalleled  beauty  and  gran- 
deur, but  none  was  half  so  much  overcome  as  Allan- 
son.  He  had  never  conceived  aught  half  so  lovely 
either  in  earth,  or  heaven,  or  fau-yland  ;  and  while  he 
stood  in  a  bm*ning  fever  of  admiration,  think  of  his 
astonishment,  and  the  astonishment  of  the  countless 
crowd  that  looked  on,  when  this  brilliant  and  match- 
less beauty  beckoned  him  towards  her  I  He  could  not 
believe  his  senses,  but  looked  this  way  and  that  to  see 
how  others  regarded  the  affair ;  but  she  beckoned  him 
a  second  time,  with  such  a  winning  courtesy  and  smile> 


MARY  BURNET.  269 

that  immediately  he  pulled  off  his  beaver  cap  and  hasted 
up  to  her ;  and  without  more  ado  she  gave  him  her  arm, 
and  the  two  walked  into  the  hostel, 

Allanson  conceived  that  he  was  thus  distinguished 
by  Lady  Elizabeth  Douglas,  the  flower  of  the  land, 
and  so  did  all  the  people  of  the  market ;  and  greatly 
they  wondered  who  the  young  farmer  could  be  that 
was  thus  particularly  favoured ;  for  it  ought  to  have 
been  mentioned  that  he  had  not  one  personal  acquaint- 
ance in  the  fair  save  Mr  David  Welch  of  Cariferan. 
The  first  thing  the  lady  did  was  to  inquire  kindly  after 
his  health.  Allanson  thanked  her  ladyship  with  all 
the  courtesy  he  was  master  of ;  and  being  by  this  time 
persuaded  that  she  was  in  love  with  him,  he  became 
as  light  as  if  treading  on  the  air.  She  next  inquired 
after  his  father  and  mother. — Oho  I  thought  he  to  him- 
self, poor  creature,  she  is  tembly  in  for  it !  but  her  love 
shall  not  be  thrown  away  upon  a  backward  or  ungrate- 
ful object. — He  answered  her  with  great  politeness,  and 
at  length  began  to  talk  of  her  noble  father  and  yoimg 
Lord  William,  but  she  cut  him  short  by  asking  if  he  did 
not  recognise  her. 

"  Oh,  yes  !  He  knew  who  her  ladyship  was,  and  re- 
membered that  he  had  seen  her  comely  face  often  be- 
fore, although  he  could  not,  at  that  particular  moment, 
recall  to  his  memory  the  precise  time  or  places  of  their 
meeting:." 


270      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

She  next  asked  for  his  old  neighboui's  of  Khkstyle, 
and  if  they  were  still  in  life  and  health  ! 

Allanson  felt  as  if  his  heart  were  a  piece  of  ice.  A 
chillness  spread  over  his  whole  frame  ;  he  sank  back 
on  a  seat,  and  remained  motionless ;  but  the  beautiful 
and  adorable  creature  soothed  liim  with  kind  words, 
till  he  again  gathered  courage  to  speak. 

"  What !"  said  he  ;  "  and  has  it  been  your  own  love- 
ly self  who  has  been  playing  tricks  on  nie  this  whole 
day?" 

"A  first  love  is  not  easily  extinguished,  Mr  Allan- 
son,"  said  she.  "  You  may  guess  from  my  appeai-ance, 
that  I  have  been  fortunate  in  life ;  but,  for  all  that,  my 
first  love  for  you  has  continued  the  same,  unaltered 
and  unchanged,  and  you  must  forgive  the  little  free- 
doms I  used  to-day  to  try  your  affections,  and  the  ef- 
fects my  appearance  would  have  on  you." 

"  It  argues  something  for  my  good  taste,  however, 
that  I  never  pitched  on  any  face  for  beauty  to-day  but 
yom-  own,"  said  he.  "  But  now  that  we  have  met 
once  more,  we  shall  not  so  easily  part  again.  I  will 
devote  the  rest  of  my  life  to  you,  only  let  me  know 
the  place  of  your  abode." 

"  It  is  hard  by,"  said  she,  "  only  a  very  little  space 
from  this  ;  and  happy,  happy,  would  I  be  to  see  you 
there  to-night,  were  it  proper  or  convenient.  But  my 
lord  is  at  present  from  home,  and  in  a  distant  country." 


^      MARY  BURNET.  271 

"  I  should  not  conceive  that  any  pai'ticular  hmder- 
ance  to  my  visit,"  said  he. 

With  great  appai'ent  reluctance  she  at  length  con- 
sented to  admit  of  his  visit,  and  offered  to  leave  one  of 
her  gentlemen,  whom  she  could  trust,  to  be  his  conduct- 
or ;  but  this  he  positively  refused.  It  was  his  desire, 
he  said,  that  no  eye  of  man  should  see  him  enter  or  leave 
her  happy  dwelling.  She  said  he  was  a  self-willed  man, 
but  should  have  his  own  way ;  and  after  giving  him  such 
directions  as  would  infallibly  lead  him  to  her  mansion, 
she  mounted  her  chariot  and  was  driven  away. 

AUanson  was  uplifted  above  every  sublunary  con- 
cern. Seeking  out  his  friend,  David  Welch,  he  impart- 
ed to  him  his  extraordinary  good  fortune,  but  he  did  not 
tell  him  that  she  was  not  the  Lady  Elizabeth  Douglas. 
Welch  insisted  on  accompanying  him  on  the  way,  and 
refused  to  turn  back  till  he  came  to  the  very  point  of 
the  road  next  to  the  lady's  splendid  mansion ;  and  in 
spite  of  all  that  Allanson  could  say,  Welch  remained 
there  till  he  saw  his  comrade  enter  the  court  gate,  which 
glowed  with  lights  as  innumerable  as  the  stars  of  the 
firmament. 

Allanson  had  promised  to  his  father  and  mother  to 
be  home  on  the  morning  after  the  fair  to  breakfast.  He 
came  not  either  that  day  or  the  next ;  and  the  third  day 
the  old  man  mounted  his  white  pony,  and  rode  away 
towards  Moffat  in  search  of  his  son.   He  called  at  Ca- 


272      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

riferan  on  his  way,  and  made  inquiries  at  Mr  Welch. 
The  latter  manifested  some  astonishment  that  the 
young  man  had  not  returned ;  nevertheless  he  assured 
his  father  of  his  safety,  and  desu-ed  him  to  retm-n  home  5 
and  then  wdth  reluctance  confessed  that  the  young  man 
was  engaged  in  an  amour  with  the  Earl  of  Morton's 
beautiful  daughter ;  that  he  had  gone  to  the  castle  by 
appointment,  and  that  he,  David  Welch,  had  accom- 
panied him  to  the  gate,  and  seen  him  enter,  and  it  was 
apparent  that  his  reception  had  been  a  kind  one,  since 
he  had  tarried  so  long. 

Mr  Welch,  seeing  the  old  man  greatly  distressed,  was 
persuaded  to  accompany  him  on  his  journey,  as  the  last 
who  had  seen  his  son,  and  seen  him  enter  the  castle.  On 
reaching  Mofifat  they  found  his  steed  standing  at  the 
hostel,  whither  it  had  returned  on  the  night  of  the  fair, 
before  the  company  broke  up ;  but  the  owner  had  not 
been  heard  of  since  seen  in  company  with  Lady  Eliza- 
beth Douglas.  The  old  man  set  out  for  Auchincastle, 
taking  Mr  David  Welch  along  with  him  ;  but  long  ere 
they  reached  the  place,  Mr  Welch  assured  him  he 
would  not  find  his  son  there,  as  it  was  nearly  in  a  dif- 
ferent direction  that  they  rode  on  the  evening  of  the  fair. 
However,  to  the  castle  they  went,  and  were  admitted 
to  the  Earl,  who,  after  hearmg  the  old  man's  tale,  seem- 
ed to  consider  him  in  a  state  of  derangement.  He  sent 
for  his  daughter  Elizabeth,  and  questioned  her  concern- 


MARY  BURNET.  21S 

ing  her  meeting  with  the  son  of  the  old  respectable 
countryman — of  her  appointment  with  him  on  the  night 
of  the  preceding  Friday,  and  concluded  by  saying  he 
hoped  she  had  him  still  in  some  safe  concealment  about 
the  castle. 

The  lady,  hearing  her  father  talk  in  this  manner,  and 
seeing  the  serious  and  dejected  looks  of  the  old  man, 
knew  not  what  to  say,  and  asked  an  explanation.  But 
Mr  Welch  put  a  stop  to  it  by  declaring  to  old  Allan- 
son  that  the  Lady  Elizabeth  was  not  the  lady  with 
whom  his  son  made  the  appointment,  for  he  had  seen 
her,  and  would  engage  to  know  her  again  among  ten 
thousand;  nor  was  that  the  castle  towards  which  he  had 
accompanied  his  son,  nor  any  thing  like  it.  "  But  go  mth 
me,"  continued  he,  "  and,  though  I  am  a  stranger  in  this 
district,  I  think  I  can  take  you  to  the  very  place." 

They  set  out  again ;  and  Mr  Welch  traced  the  road 
from  Moflfat,  by  which  young  Allanson  and  he  had 
gone,  until,  after  travelling  several  miles,  they  came  to 
a  place  where  a  road  struck  off  to  the  right  at  an  angle. 
"  Now  I  know  we  are  right,"  said  Welch ;  "  for  here 
we  stopped,  and  your  son  intreated  me  to  return,  which 
I  refused,  and  accompanied  him  to  yon  large  tree,  and 
a  little  way  beyond  it,  from  whence  I  saw  him  received 
in  at  the  splendid  gate.  We  shall  be  in  sight  of  the 
mansion  in  three  minutes." 

They  passed  on  to  the  tree,  and  a  space  beyond  it ; 
M  2 


274      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

but  then  Mr  Welch  lost  the  use  of  his  speech,  as  he 
perceived  that  there  was  neither  palace  nor  gate  there, 
but  a  tremendous  gulf,  fifty  fathoms  deep,  and  a  dark 
stream  foammg  and  boiling  below. 

"  How  is  this  ?"  said  old  AUanson.  "  There  is 
neither  mansion  nor  habitation  of  man  here  !" 

Welch's  tongue  for  a  long  time  refused  its  office,  and 
he  stood  like  a  statue,  gazmg  on  the  altered  and  awful 
scene.  "  He  only,  who  made  the  spirits  of  men,"  said 
he,  at  last,  "  and  all  the  spirits  that  sojourn  in  the  earth 
and  air,  can  tell  how  this  is.  We  ai'e  wandering  in  a 
world  of  enchantment,  and  have  been  influenced  by 
some  agencies  above  human  nature,  or  without  its  pale ; 
for  here  of  a  certainty  did  I  take  leave  of  yom*  son — 
and  there,  in  that  direction,  and  apparently  either  on  the 
verge  of  that  gulf,  or  the  space  above  it,  did  I  see  him 
received  in  at  the  comt  gate  of  a  mansion,  splendid  be- 
yond all  conception.  How  can  human  comprehension 
make  any  thing  of  this  ?" 

They  went  forward  to  the  verge,  Mr  Welch  leading 
the  way  to  the  very  spot  on  which  he  saw  the  gate 
opened,  and  there  they  found  marks  where  a  horse  liad 
been  plunging.  Its  feet  had  been  over  the  brink,  but 
it  seemed  to  have  recovered  itself,  and  deep,  deep  down, 
and  far  within,  lay  the  mangled  corpse  of  Jolin  Allan- 
son  ;  and  in  this  manner,  mysterious  beyond  all  exam- 
ple, terminated  the  career  of  that  wicked  and  flagitious 


MARY  BURNET.  275 

young  man. — What  a  beautiful  moral  may  be  extracted 
from  this  fairy  tale  1 

But  among  all  these  turnings  and  windings,  there  is 
no  account  given,  you  will  say,  of  the  fate  of  Mary  Bur- 
net ;  for  this  last  appearance  of  hers  at  Moffat  seems  to 
have  been  altogether  a  phantom  or  illusion.  Gentle  and 
kind  reader,  I  can  give  you  no  account  of  tlie  fate  of  that 
maiden ;  for  though  the  ancient  fairy  tale  proceeds,  it 
seems  to  me  to  involve  her  fate  in  ten  times  more  mys- 
tery than  what  we  have  hitherto  seen  of  it. 

The  yearly  return  of  the  day  on  which  Mary  was  lost, 
was  observed  as  a  day  of  mourning  by  her  aged  and  dis- 
consolate parents, — a  day  of  sorrow,  of  fasting,  and  hu- 
miliation. Seven  yeai-s  came  and  passed  away,  and  the 
seventh  returning  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  was  at  hand. 
On  the  evening  previous  to  it,  old  Andrew  was  moving 
along  the  sands  of  the  loch,  still  looking  for  some  relic 
of  his  beloved  Mary,  when  he  was  aware  of  a  little 
shrivelled  old  man,  who  came  posting  towards  him. 
The  creature  was  not  above  five  spans  in  height,  and 
had  a  face  scarcely  lilie  that  of  a  human  creature ;  but 
he  was,  nevertheless,  civil  in  his  deportment,  and  sen- 
sible in  speech.  He  bade  Andrew  a  good  evening,  and 
asked  him  what  he  was  looking  for.  Andrew  answer- 
ed, that  he  was  looking  for  that  which  he  should  never 
find. 

"  Pray,  what  is  your  name,  ancient  shepherd  ?"  said 


276      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

the  stranger ;  "  for  methinks  I  should  know  something 
of  you,  and  perhaps  have  a  commission  to  you." 

"  Alas  !  why  should  you  ask  after  my  name  ?"  said 
Andrew.     "  My  name  is  now  nothing  to  any  one." 

"  Had  not  you  once  a  beautiful  daughter,  named 
Mary?"  said  the  stranger. 

"  It  is  a  heart-rending  question,  man,"  said  Andrew ; 
"  but  certes,  I  had  once  a  beloved  daughter  named 
Mary." 

"  What  became  of  her  ?"  asked  the  stranger. 

Andrew  shook  his  head,  turned  round,  and  began  to 
move  away ;  it  was  a  theme  that  his  heart  could  not 
brook.  He  sauntered  along  the  loch  sands,  his  dim 
eye  scaiming  every  white  pebble  as  he  passed  along. 
There  was  a  hopelessness  in  his  stooping  form,  his  gait, 
his  eye,  his  features, — in  every  step  that  he  took  there 
was  a  hopeless  apathy.  The  dwarf  followed  him,  and 
began  to  expostulate  with  him.  "  Old  man,  I  see  you 
are  pining  under  some  real  or  fancied  affliction,"  said 
he.  "  But  in  continuing  to  do  so,  you  are  neither  act- 
ing according  to  the  dictates  of  reason  nor  true  religion. 
What  is  man  that  he  should  fret,  or  the  son  of  man 
that  he  should  repine,  under  the  chastening  hand  of  his 
Maker  ?" 

"  I  am  far  frae  justifying  mysell,"  returned  Andrew, 
surveying  his  shrivelled  monitor  with  some  degree  of 
astonishment.    "  But  there  are  some  feelings  that  nei- 


MARY  BURNET.  2/7 

ther  reason  nor  religion  can  o'eraiaster ;  atid  there  are 
some  that  a  parent  may  cherish  without  sin." 

"  I  deny  the  position,"  said  the  stranger,  "  taken  ei- 
ther absolutely  or  relatively.  All  repining  under  the 
Supreme  decree  is  leavened  with  unrighteousness.  But, 
subtleties  aside,  I  ask  you,  as  I  did  before,  What  be- 
came of  your  daughter  ?" 

"  Ask  the  Father  of  her  spirit,  and  the  framer  of  her 
body,"  said  Andrew,  solemnly ;  "  ask  Him  into  whose 
hands  I  committed  her  from  childhood.  He  alone 
knows  what  became  of  her,  but  I  do  not." 

"  How  long  is  it  since  you  lost  her  ?" 

"  It  is  seven  years  tomoiTOw." 

"  Ay !  you  remember  the  time  well.  And  have  yoli 
mourned  for  her  all  that  while  ?" 

"  Yes ;  and  I  will  go  down  to  the  grave  mourning  for 
my  only  daughter,  the  child  of  my  age,  and  of  all  my 
affection.  O,  thou  unearthly-looking  monitor,  knowest 
thou  aught  of  my  darling  child  ?  for  if  thou  dost,  thou 
wilt  know  that  she  was  not  like  other  women.  There 
was  a  simplicity  and  a  purity  about  my  Mary,  that  was 
hardly  consistent  with  our  frail  nature." 

"  Wouldst  thou  like  to  see  her  again  ?"  said  the 
dwarf. 

Andrew  tmned  round,  his  whole  frame  shaking  as 
with  a  palsy,  and  gazed  on  the  audacious  imp.    "  See 


278      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

her  again,  creature  ! "  cried  he  vehemently— »-"  Would  I 
like  to  see  her  again,  say'st  thou  ?" 

"  I  said  so,"  said  the  dwarf,  "  and  I  say  farther,  Dost 
thou  know  this  token?    Look,  and  see  if  thou  dost?" 

Andrew  took  the  token,  and  looked  at  it,  then  at  the 
shrivelled  stranger,  and  then  at  the  token  again ;  and  at 
length  he  burst  into  tears,  and  wept  aloud ;  but  they 
were  tears  of  joy,  and  his  weeping  seemed  to  have  some 
breathings  of  laughter  intermingled  in  it.  And  still  as 
he  kissed  the  token,  he  called  out  in  broken  and  convul- 
sive sentences, — "  Yes,  auld  body,  I  do  know  it ! — I  do 
know  it  I — I  do  know  it !  It  is  indeed  the  same  golden 
Edward,  with  three  holes  in  it,  with  which  I  presented 
my  Mary  on  her  birth-day,  in  her  eighteenth  year,  to 
buy  a  new  suit  for  the  holidays.  But  when  she  took  it 
she  said — ay,  I  mind  weel  what  my  bonny  woman  said, 
— '  It  is  sae  bonny  and  sae  kenspeckle,'  said  she,  '  that 
I  think  I'll  keep  it  for  the  sake  of  the  giver.'  O  dear, 
dear  I — Blessed  little  creature,  tell  me  how  she  is,  and 
where  she  is  ?  Is  she  living,  or  is  she  dead  ?" 

"  She  is  living,  and  in  good  health,"  said  the  dwarf ; 
"  and  better,  and  braver,  and  happier,  and  lovelier  than 
ever ;  and  if  you  make  haste,  you  will  see  her  and  her 
family  at  Moffat  to-moiTow  afternoon.  They  are  to 
pass  there  on  a  journey,  but  it  is  an  express  one,  and  I 
am  sent  to  you  with  that  token,  to  inform  you  of  the 
circumstance,  that  you  may  have  it  in  your  power  to 


jrARY  BURNET.  279 

see  and  embrace  your  beloved  daughter  once  before 
you  die." 

"  And  am  I  to  meet  my  Mar)'  at  Moffat  ?  Come 
away,  little,  dear,  welcome  body,  thou  blessed  of  hea- 
ven, come  away,  and  taste  of  an  auld  shepherd's  best 
cheer,  and  I'll  gang  foot  for  foot  with  you  to  MofTat, 
and  my  auld  wife  shall  gang  foot  for  foot  with  us  too. 
1  tell  you,  little,  blessed,  and  welcome  crile,  come  along 
with  me." 

"  I  may  not  taiTy  to  enter  yom*  house,  or  taste  of 
your  cheer,  good  shepherd,"  said  the  being.  "  May 
plenty  still  be  within  your  walls,  and  a  thankful  heart 
to  enjoy  it !  But  my  du'ections  are  neither  to  taste 
meat  nor  drink  in  this  country,  but  to  haste  back  to  her 
that  sent  me.  Go — haste,  and  make  ready,  for  you 
have  no  time  to  lose." 

"  At  what  time  will  she  be  there  ?"  cried  Andrew, 
flinging  the  plaid  from  him  to  run  home  with  the  ti- 
dings, 

"  Precisely  when  the  shadow  of  the  Holy  Cross  falls 
due  east,"  cried  the  dwarf;  and  turning  round,  he  has- 
ted on  his  way. 

When  old  Jean  Linton  saw  her  husband  coming  hob- 
bling and  i-unning  home  without  his  plaid,  and  having 
his  doublet  flying  wide  open,  she  had  no  doubt  that  he 
had  lost  his  wits ;  and,  full  of  anxiety,  she  met  him  at 
the  side  of  the  kail-yard.     "  Gudeness  preserve  us  a* 


280      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

in  our  right  senses,  Andrew  Burnet,  what's  the  matter 
wi'  you,  Andrew  Burnet  ?" 

"  Stand  out  o'  my  gate,  wife,  for,  d'ye  see,  I'm  ra- 
ther in  a  haste,  Jean  Linton." 

"  I  see  that  indeed,  gudeman ;  but  stand  still,  and 
tell  me  what  has  putten  you  in  sic  a  haste.  Ir  ye  de- 
mentit  ?" 

^*  Na,  na ;  giidewife,  Jean  Linton,  I'm  no  dementit 
— I'm  only  gaun  away  till  Moffat." 

«  O,  gudeness  pity  the  poor  auld  body !  How  can 
ye  gang  to  Moffat,  man  ?  Or  what  have  ye  to  do  at 
Moffat  ?  Dinna  ye  mind  that  the  mom  is  the  day  o' 
our  solemnity  ?" 

"  Hand  out  o'  my  gate,  auld  wife,  and  dinna  speak 
o'  solemnities  to  me.  I'll  keep  it  at  Moffat  the  morn. 
Ay,  gudewife,  and  ye  shall  keep  it  at  Moffat,  too.  What 
d'ye  think  o'  that,  woman  ?  Too-whoo !  ye  dinna  ken 
the  metal  that's  in  an  auld  body  till  it  be  tried." 

"  Andrew — Andrew  Burnet !" 

"  Get  away  wi'  your  frightened  looks,  woman ;  and 
haste  ye,  gang  and  fling  me  out  my  Sabbath-day  claes. 
And,  Jean  Linton,  my  woman,  d'ye  hear,  gang  and  pit 
on  your  bridal  gown,  and  your  silk  hood,  for  ye  maun 
be  at  Moffat  the  morn  too ;  and  it  is  mair  nor  time  we 
were  away.  Dinna  look  sae  surprised,  woman,  till  I 
tell  ye,  that  our  ain  Mary  is  to  meet  us  at  Moffat  the 
morn." 


MARY  BURNET.  281 

«  0,  Andrew !  dinna  sport  wi'  the  feelings  of  an  auld 
forsaken  heart  I" 

"  Gude  forbid,  my  auld  wife,  that  I  should  ever  sport 
wi'  feeling  o'  yours,"  cried  Andrew,  bursting  into  tears ; 
"  they  are  a'  as  saacred  to  me  as  breathings  frae  the 
Throne  o'  Grace.  But  it  is  true  that  I  tell  ye ;  our 
dear  bairn  is  to  meet  us  at  Moifat  the  morn,  wi'  a  son 
in  every  hand ;  and  we  maun  e'en  gang  and  see  her 
aince  again,  and  kiss  her  and  bless  her  afore  we  dee." 

The  tears  now  rushed  from  the  old  woman's  eyes 
like  fountains,  and  dropped  from  her  soiTOw-worn 
cheeks  to  the  earth,  and  then,  as  with  a  spontaneous 
movement,  she  threw  her  skirt  over  her  head,  kneel- 
ed down  at  her  husband's  feet,  and  poured  out  her 
soul  in  thanksgiving  to  her  Maker.  She  then  rose  up, 
quite  deprived  of  her  senses  through  joy,  and  ran 
crouching  away  on  the  road  towards  Moffat,  as  if  has- 
ting beyond  her  power  to  be  at  it.  But  Andrew  brought 
her  back ;  and  they  prepared  themselves  for  their  jour- 
ney. 

Kirkstyle  being  twenty  miles  from  Moffat,  they  set 
out  on  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday,  the  16th  of  Septem- 
ber ;  slept  that  night  at  a  place  called  Tumberry  Shell, 
and  were  in  Moffat  next  day  by  noon.  Wearisome 
was  the  remainder  of  the  day  to  that  aged  couple  ;  they 
wandered  about  conjecturing  by  what  road  their  daugh- 
ter would  come,  and  how  she  would  come  attended. 


282      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  I  have  made  up  my  mind  on  baitli  these  matters," 
said  Andrew  ;  "  at  first  I  thought  it  was  hkely  that  she 
would  come  out  of  the  east,  because  a'  our  blessings 
come  frae  that  airt ;  but  finding  now  that  would  be  o'er 
near  to  the  very  road  we  hae  come  oursells,  I  now  take 
it  for  granted  she'll  come  frae  the  south ;  and  I  just 
think  I  see  her  leading  a  bonny  boy  in  every  hand,  and 
a  servant  lass  caiTying  a  bit  bundle  ahinther." 

The  two  now  walked  out  on  all  the  southern  roads, 
in  hopes  to  meet  their  Mary,  but  always  returned  to 
watch  the  shadow  of  the  Holy  Cross  ;  and,  by  the  time 
it  fell  due  east,  they  could  do  nothing  but  stand  in  the 
middle  of  the  street,  and  look  round  them  in  all  direc- 
tions. At  length,  about  half  a  mile  out  on  the  Dum- 
fries road,  they  perceived  a  poor  beggar  woman  ap- 
proaching with  two  children  following  close  to  her, 
and  another  beggar  a  good  way  behind.  Their  eyes 
were  instantly  riveted  on  these  objects ;  for  Andrew 
thought  he  perceived  his  friend  the  dwaif  in  the  one 
that  was  behind ;  and  now  all  other  earthly  objects 
were  to  them  notliing,  save  these  approaching  beggars. 
At  that  moment  a  gilded  chariot  entered  the  village 
from  the  south,  and  drove  by  them  at  full  speed,  ha- 
ving two  livery-men  before,  and  two  behind,  clothed  in 
green  and  gold.  "  Ach-wow  !  the  vanity  of  worldly 
graandeur !"  ejaculated  Andrew,  as  the  splendid  vehicle 
went  thundering  by  ;    but  neither  he  nor  his   wife 


MARY  BURNET.  283 

deigned  to  look  at  it  farther,  theii-  whole  attention 
being  fixed  on  the  group  of  beggars.  "  Ay,  it  is  just 
my  woman,"  said  Andrew,  "  it  is  just  hersell ;  I  ken 
her  gang  yet,  sair  pressed  down  wi'  poortith  although 
she  be.  But  I  dinna  care  how  poor  she  be,  for  baith 
her  and  hers  sail  be  welcome  to  my  fireside  as  lang  as 
I  hae  ane." 

While  their  eyes  were  thus  strained,  and  their  hearts 
melting  with  tenderness  and  pity,  Andrew  felt  some- 
thing embracing  his  knees,  and,  on  looking  down,  there 
was  his  Mary,  blooming  in  splendour  and  beauty, 
kneelmg  at  his  feet.  Andrew  uttered  a  loud  hysteri- 
cal scream  of  joy,  and  clasped  her  to  liis  bosom ;  and 
old  Jean  Linton  stood  trembling,  with  her  arms  spread, 
but  dm'st  not  close  them  on  so  splendid  a  creature, 
till  her  daughter  first  enfolded  her  in  a  fond  embrace, 
and  then  she  hung  upon  her  and  wept.  It  was  a  won- 
derful event — a  restoration  without  a  parallel.  They 
indeed  beheld  their  Mary,  their  long-lost  dai'ling  ; 
they  held  her  in  their  embraces,  believed  in  her  iden- 
tity, and  were  satisfied.  Satisfied,  did  I  say?  They 
were  happy  beyond  the  lot  of  mortals.  She  had  just 
alighted  from  her  chariot;  and,  perceiving  her  aged 
parents  standing  together,  she  ran  and  kneeled  at  their 
feet.  They  now  retired  into  the  hostel,  where  Mary 
presented  her  two  sons  to  her  father  and  mother.  They 
spent  the  evening  in  every  social  endearment  ;  and 


284      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

Mary  loaded  the  good  old  couple  with  rich  presents, 
watched  over  them  till  midnight,  when  they  both  fell 
into  a  deep  and  happy  sleep,  and  then  she  remounted 
her  chariot,  and  was  diiven  away.  If  she  was  any 
more  seen  in  Scotland,  I  never  heard  of  it ;  but  her 
parents  rejoiced  in  the  thoughts  of  her  happiness  till 
the  day  of  their  death. 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BI.ACK  HAGGS.         285 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS. 

When  the  Sprots  were  Lairds  of  Wheelhope,  which 
is  now  a  long  time  ago,  there  was  one  of  the  ladies  who 
was  very  badly  spoken  of  in  the  country.  People  did 
not  just  openly  assert  that  Lady  ^Vlleelhope  (for  every 
landward  laird's  wife  was  then  styled  Lady)  was  a 
witch,  but  every  one  had  an  aversion  even  at  hearing 
her  named ;  and  when  by  chance  she  happened  to  be 
mentioned,  old  men  would  shake  then*  heads  and  say, 
"  Ah  I  let  us  alane  o'  her !  The  less  ye  meddle  wi'  her 
the  better."  Old  wives  would  give  over  spinning,  and, 
as  a  pretence  for  hearing  what  might  be  said  about  her, 
poke  in  the  fire  with  the  tongs,  cocking  up  their  ears  all 
the  while ;  and  then,  after  some  meaning  coughs,  hems, 
and  haws,  would  haply  say,  "  Hech-wow,  sirs  I  An 
a'  be  tme  that's  said !"  or  something  equally  wise  and 
decisive. 

In  short.  Lady  Wheelhope  was  accounted  a  very  bad 
woman.     She  was  an  inexorable  tyrant  in  her  family. 


286        THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

quan-elled  with  her  servants,  often  cursing  them,  stri- 
king them,  and  tm*ning  them  away ;  especially  if  they 
were  religious,  for  she  could  not  endure  people  of  that 
character,  hut  charged  them  with  every  thing  bad. 
Whenever  she  fomid  out  that  any  of  the  servant  men 
of  the  Laird's  establishment  were  religious,  she  gave 
them  up  to  the  military,  and  got  them  shot ;  and  seve- 
ral girls  that  were  regular  in  their  devotions,  she  was 
supposed  to  have  got  rid  of  by  poison.  She  was  cer- 
tainly a  wicked  woman,  else  many  good  people  were 
mistaken  in  her  character ;  and  the  poor  persecuted  Co- 
venanters were  obliged  to  unite  in  their  prayers  against 
her. 

As  for  the  Laird,  he  was  a  big,  dun-faced,  pluffy 
body,  that  cared  neither  for  good  nor  evil,  and  did  not 
well  know  the  one  from  the  other.  He  laughed  at  his 
lady's  tantmms  and  barley-hoods ;  and  the  gi-eater  the 
rage  that  she  got  into,  the  Laird  thought  it  the  better 
sport.  One  day,  when  two  maid-servants  came  ninning 
to  him,  in  great  agitation,  and  told  him  that  his  lady 
had  felled  one  of  their  companions,  the  Laird  laughed 
heartily,  and  said  he  did  not  doubt  it. 

"  Why,  sir,  how  can  you  laugh  ?"  said  they.  "  The 
poor  girl  is  killed." 

"  Very  likely,  very  likely,"  said  the  Laird.  "  Well, 
it  will  teach  her  to  take  care  who  she  angers  again." 
"  And,  sir,  your  lady  will  be  hanged." 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  287 

"  Very  likely ;  well,  it  will  teach  her  how  to  strike 
so  rashly  again — Ha,  ha,  ha !  Will  it  not,  Jessy  ?" 

But  when  this  same  Jessy  died  suddenly  one  morn- 
ing, the  Laird  was  gi-eatly  confounded,  and  seemed 
dimly  to  comprehend  that  there  had  been  unfair  play 
going.  There  was  little  doubt  that  she  was  taken  off 
by  poison ;  but  whether  the  Lady  did  it  through  jea- 
lousy or  not,  was  never  divulged ;  but  it  gi'eatly  bam- 
boozled and  astonished  the  poor  Laird,  for  his  nerves 
failed  him,  and  his  whole  frame  became  paralytic.  He 
seems  to  have  been  exactly  in  the  same  state  of  mind 
with  a  colley  that  I  once  had.  He  was  extremely  fond 
of  the  gun  as  long  as  I  did  not  kill  any  thing  with  it, 
(there  being  no  game  laws  in  Ettrick  Forest  in  those 
days,)  and  he  got  a  grand  chase  after  the  hares  when  I 
missed  them.  But  there  was  one  day  that  I  chanced 
for  a  marvel  to  shoot  one  dead,  a  few  paces  before  his 
nose.  I'll  never  forget  the  astonishment  that  the  poor 
beast  manifested.  He  stared  one  while  at  the  gun,  and 
another  while  at  the  dead  hare,  and  seemed  to  be  draw- 
ing the  conclusion,  that  if  the  case  stood  thus,  there  was 
no  creature  sure  of  its  life.  Finally,  he  took  his  tail 
between  his  legs,  and  ran  away  home,  and  never  would 
face  a  gun  all  his  life  again. 

So  was  it  precisely  with  Laird  Sprot  of  Wheelhope. 
As  long  as  his  lady's  wiath  produced  only  noise  and  up- 
roar among  the  servants,  lie  thought  it  fine  sport ;  but 


288      THE  shepherd's  calendar, 

when  he  saw  what  he  believed  the  dreadful  effects  of 
it,  he  became  like  a  baiTel  organ  out  of  tune,  and  could 
only  discourse  one  note,  which  he  did  to  every  one  he 
met.  "  I  wish  she  mayna  hae  gotten  something  she 
had  been  the  waur  of."  This  note  he  repeated  early 
and  late,  night  and  day,  sleeping  and  waking,  alone  and 
in  company,  from  the  moment  that  Jessy  died  till  she 
was  buried ;  and  on  going  to  the  churchyard  as  chief 
mourner,  he  whispered  it  to  her  relatives  by  the  way. 
When  they  came  to  the  grave,  he  took  his  stand  at  the 
head,  nor  would  he  give  place  to  the  girl's  father ;  but 
there  he  stood,  like  a  huge  post,  as  though  he  neither 
saw  nor  heard ;  and  when  he  had  lowered  her  head  into 
the  grave,  and  dropped  the  cord,  he  slowly  lifted  his  hat 
with  one  hand,  wiped  his  dim  eyes  with  the  back  of  the 
other,  and  said,  in  a  deep  tremulous  tone,  "  Poor  lassie ! 
I  wish  she  didna  get  something  she  had  been  the  waur 
of." 

This  death  made  a  great  noise  among  the  common 
people ;  but  there  was  little  protection  for  the  life  of 
the  subject  in  those  days ;  and  provided  a  man  or  wo- 
man was  a  real  Anti-Covenanter,  they  might  kill  a  good 
many  without  being  quarrelled  for  it.  So  there  was  no 
one  to  take  cognizance  of  the  cii'cumstances  relating  to 
the  death  of  poor  Jessy. 

After  this,  the  Lady  walked  softly  for  the  space  of 
two  or  three  years.  She  saw  that  she  had  rendered  her- 
7 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  289 

self  odious,  and  had  entii-ely  lost  her  husband's  counte- 
nance, which  she  liked  worst  of  all.  But  the  evil  pro- 
pensity could  not  be  overcome ;  and  a  poor  boy,  whom 
the  Laird,  out  of  sheer  compassion,  had  taken  into  his 
service,  being  found  dead  one  morning,  the  country 
people  could  no  longer  be  restrained ;  so  they  went  in 
a  body  to  the  Slieriff,  and  insisted  on  an  investigation. 
It  was  proved  that  she  detested  the  boy,  had  often 
threatened  him,  and  had  given  him  brose  and  butter 
the  afternoon  before  he  died ;  but  notwithstanding  of 
all  this,  the  cause  was  ultimately  dismissed,  and  the 
pursuers  fined. 

No  one  can  tell  to  what  height  of  wickedness  she 
might  now  have  proceeded,  had  not  a  check  of  a  very 
singTilar  kind  been  laid  upon  her.  Among  the  servants 
that  came  home  at  the  next  term,  was  one  who  called 
himself  Merodach ;  and  a  strange  person  he  was.  He 
had  the  form  of  a  boy,  but  the  features  of  one  a  hun- 
dred years  old,  save  that  his  eyes  had  a  brilliancy  and 
restlessness,  which  were  very  extraordinary,  bearing  a 
strong  resemblance  to  the  eyes  of  a  well-known  species 
of  monkey.  He  was  froward  and  perverse,  and  disre- 
garded the  pleasure  or  displeasure  of  any  person ;  but 
he  performed  his  work  well,  and  with  apparent  ease. 
From  the  moment  he  entered  the  house,  the  Lady  con- 
ceived a  mortal  antipathy  against  him,  and  besought  the 
Laird  to  turn  him  away.  But  the  Laird  would  not  con- 

VOL.  I.  N 


290      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

sent ;  he  never  turned  away  any  servant,  and  moreover 
he  had  hired  this  fellow  for  a  trivial  wage,  and  he  nei- 
ther wanted  activity  nor  perseverance.  The  natural 
consequence  of  this  refusal  was,  that  the  Lady  instant- 
ly set  herself  to  embitter  Merodach's  life  as  much  as 
possible,  in  order  to  get  early  quit  of  a  domestic  every 
way  so  disagreeable.  Her  hatred  of  him  was  not  like  a 
common  antipathy  entertained  by  one  human  being 
against  another, — she  hated  him  as  one  might  hate  a 
toad  or  an  adder ;  and  his  occupation  of  jotterj^nan  (as 
the  Laird  termed  his  servant  of  all  work)  keeping  him 
always  about  her  hand,  it  must  have  proved  highly  an- 
noying. 

She  scolded  him,  she  raged  at  him;  but  he. only 
mocked  her  wrath,  and  giggled  and  laughed  at  her,  with 
the  most  provoking  derision.  She  tried  to  fell  him  again 
and  again,  but  never,  with  all  her  address,  could  she  hit 
him ;  and  never  did  she  make  a  blow  at  him,  that  she 
did  not  repent  it.  She  was  heavy  and  unwieldy,  and 
he  as  quick  in  his  motions  as  a  monkey ;  besides,  he  ge- 
nerally contrived  that  she  should  be  in  such  an  ungo- 
vernable rage,  that  when  she  flew  at  him,  she  hardly 
knew  what  she  was  doing.  At  one  time  she  guided 
her  blow  towards  him,  and  he  at  the  same  instant  avoid- 
ed it  with  such  dexterity,  that  she  knocked  down  the 
chief  hind,  or  foresman ;  and  then  Merodach  giggled  so 
heartily,  that,  lifting  the  kitchen  poker,  she  threw  it  at 


THE  BRO^yNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS'         291 

him  with  a  full  design  of  knocking  out  his  brains ;  but 
tlie  missile  only  broke  every  article  of  crockery  on  the 
kitchen  dresser. 

She  then  hasted  to  the  Laird,  crying  bitterly,  and 
telling  him  she  would  not  suffer  that  wretch  Merodach, 
as  she  called  him,  to  stay  another  night  in  the  family. 

"  Why,  then,  put  him  away,  and  trouble  me  no  more 
about  him,"  said  the  Laud. 

"  Put  him  away !"  exclaimed  she ;  "  I  have  already 
ordered  him  away  a  hundred  times,  and  charged  him 
never  to  let  me  see  his  horrible  face  again ;  but  he  only 
giins,  and  answers  with  some  intolerable  piece  of  im- 
pertinence." 

The  pertinacity  of  the  fellow  amused  the  Laird ;  his 
dim  eyes  turned  upwards  into  his  head  with  delight ;  he 
then  looked  two  ways  at  once,  turned  round  his  back, 
and  laughed  till  the  tears  ran  down  his  dun  cheeks ;  but 
he  could  only  articulate,  "  You're  fitted  now." 

The  Lady's  agony  of  rage  still  increasing  from  this 
derision,  she  upbraided  the  Laiid  bitterly,  and  said  he 
was  not  worthy  the  name  of  man,  if  he  did  not  turn 
away  that  pestilence,  after  the  way  he  had  abused  her. 

"  Why,  Shusy,  my  dear,  what  has  he  done  to  you?" 

"  What  done  to  me !  has  he  not  caused  me  to  knock 
down  John  Thomson  ?  and  I  do  not  know  if  ever  he 
will  come  to  life  again !" 

"  Have  you  felled  your  favourite  John  Thomson  ?" 


292      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

said  the  Laird,  laugliing  more  heartily  than  before; 
"  you  might  have  done  a  worse  deed  than  that." 

"  And  has  he  not  broke  every  plate  and  dish  on  the 
whole  dresser  ?"  continued  the  Lady ;  "  and  for  all  this 
devastation,  he  only  mocks  at  my  displeasure, — abso- 
lutely mocks  me, — and  if  you  do  not  have  him  tmned 
away,  and  hanged  or  shot  for  his  deeds,  you  are  not 
worthy  the  name  of  man." 

"  O  alack !  What  a  devastation  among  the  cheena 
metal !"  said  the  Laird ;  and  calling  on  Merodach,  he 
said,  "  Tell  me,  thou  evil  Merodach  of  Babylon,  how 
thou  dared'st  knock  down  thy  Lady's  favourite  servant, 
John  Thomson  ?" 

"  Not  I,  your  honour.  It  was  my  Lady  herself,  who 
got  into  such  a  furious  rage  at  me,  that  she  mistook 
her  man,  and  felled  Mr  Thomson ;  and  the  good  man's 
skull  is  fractured." 

"  That  was  very  odd,"  said  the  Laird,  chuckling ; 
"  I  do  not  comprehend  it.  But  then,  what  set  you  on 
smashing  all  my  Lady's  delft  and  cheena  ware  ? — That 
was  a  most  infamous  and  provoking  action." 

"  It  was  she  herself,  your  honour.  Sony  would  I 
be  to  break  one  dish  belonging  to  the  house.  I  take 
all  the  house  servants  to  witness,  that  my  Lady  smash- 
ed all  the  dishes  with  a  poker ;  and  now  lays  the  blame 
on  me !" 

The  Laird  turned  his  dim  eyes  on  his  lady,  who  was 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  299 

crying  with  vexation  and  rage,  and  seemed  meditating 
another  personal  attack  on  tlie  culprit,  wliicli  he  did 
not  at  all  appear  to  shun,  but  rather  to  court.  She, 
however,  vented  her  wrath  in  threatenings  of  the  most 
deep  and  desperate  revenge,  the  creatui'e  all  the  while 
assuring  her  tliat  she  would  be  foiled,  and  that  in  all' 
her  encounters  and  contests  with  him,  she  would  uni- 
formly come  to  the  worst ;  he  was  resolved  to  do  his 
duty,  and  there  before  his  master  he  defied  her. 

The  Laird  thought  more  than  he  considered  it  pni- 
dent  to  reveal ;  he  had  little  doubt  that  his  wife  would 
find  some  means  of  wreaking  her  vengeance  on  the  ob- 
ject of  her  displeasure ;  and  he  shuddered  when  he  re- 
collected one  who  had  taken  "  something  that  she  had 
been  the  waur  of.' 

In  a  word,  the  Lady  of  Wheelhope's  inveterate  ma- 
lignity against  this  one  object,  was  like  the  rod  of  Mo- 
ses, that  swallowed  up  the  rest  of  the  serpents.  All 
her  wicked  and  evil  propensities  seemed  to  be  super- 
seded, if  not  utterly  absorbed  by  it.  The  rest  of  the 
family  now  lived  in  comparative  peace  and  quietness ; 
for  early  and  late  her  malevolence  was  venting  itself 
against  the  jotteryman,  and  against  him  alone.  It  was 
a  delu-ium  of  hatred  and  vengeance,  on  which  the  whole 
bent  and  bias  of  her  inclination  was  set.  She  could 
not  stay  from  the  creature's  presence,  or,  in  tlie  inter- 
vals when  absent  from  him,  she  spent  her  breath  in 


294      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

curses  and  execrations ;  and  then,  not  able  to  rest,,  she 
ran  again  to  seek  liim,  her  eyes  gleaming  with  the  an* 
ticipated  delights  of  vengeance,  while,  ever  and  anon, 
all  the  ridicule  and  the  harm  redounded  on  herself. 

Was  it  not  strange  that  she  could  not  get  quit  of 
*this  sole  annoyance  of  her  life?  One  would  have 
thought  she  easily  might.  But  by  this  time  there  was 
nothing  farther  from  her  wishes ;  she  wanted  vengeance, 
full,  adequate,  and  delicious  vengeance,  on  her  auda- 
cious opponent.  But  he  was  a  strange  and  terrible 
creature,  and  the  means  of  retaliation  constantly  came, 
as  it  were,  to  his  hand. 

Bread  and  sweet  milk  was  the  only  fare  that  Mero- 
dach  cared  for,  and  having  bargained  for  that,  he  would 
not  want  it,  though  he  often  got  it  with  a  curse  and 
with  ill  will.  The  Lady  having,  upon  one  occasion, 
intentionally  kept  back  his  wonted  allowance  for  some 
days,  on  the  Sabbath  morning  following,  she  set  him 
down  a  bowl  of  rich  sweet  milk,  v/ell  drugged  with  a 
deadly  poison ;  and  then  she  lingered  in  a  little  ante- 
room to  watch  the  success  of  her  grand  plot,  and  pre- 
vent any  other  creature  from  tasting  of  the  potion.  Me- 
rodach  came  in,  and  the  house-maid  said  to  him,  "  There 
is  your  breakfast,  creature." 

"  Oho  !  my  Ladyhas  been  liberal  this  morning,"  said 
he ;  "  but  I  am  beforehand  with  her. — Here,  little  Mis- 
sie,  you  seem  very  hungiy  to-day — take  you  my  break- 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  295 

fast."  And  with  that  he  set  the  beverage  down  to  tlie 
Lady's  little  favourite  spaniel.  It  so  happened  tliat 
the  Lady's  only  son  came  at  that  instant  into  the  ante- 
room seeking  her,  and  teasing  his  mamma  about  some- 
thing, which  withdrew  her  attention  from  the  hall-table 
for  a  space.  When  she  looked  again,  and  saw  Missie  lap- 
ping up  the  sweet  milk,  she  burst  from  her  hiding-place 
like  a  fury,  screaming  as  if  her  head  had  been  on  fire, 
kicked  the  remainder  of  its  contents  against  the  wall, 
and  lifting  Missie  in  her  bosom,  retreated  hastily,  cry- 
ing all  the  way. 

"  Ha,  ha,  ha — I  have  you  now  I"  cried  Merodach, 
as  she  vanished  from  the  hall. 

Poor  Missie  died  immediately,  and  very  privately ; 
indeed,  she  would  have  died  and  been  buried,  and  ne- 
ver one  have  seen  her,  save  her  mistress,  had  not  Me- 
rodach, by  a  luck  that  never  failed  him,  looked  over 
the  wall  of  the  flower  garden,  just  as  his  lady  was  lay- 
ing her  favourite  in  a  grave  of  her  own  digging.  She, 
not  perceiving  her  tormentor,  plied  on  at  her  task, 
apostrophizing  the  insensate  little  carcass, — "  Ah!  poor 
dear  little  creature,  thou  hast  had  a  hard  fortune,  and 
hast  drank  of  the  bitter  potion  that  was  not  intended 
for  thee ;  but  he  shall  drink  it  three  times  double  for 
thy  sake !" 

"  Is  that  little  Missie  ?"  said  the  eldrich  voice  of  the 
jotteryman,  close  at  the  Lady's  ear.   She  uttered  a  loud 


296      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

scream,  and  sunk  down  on  the  bank.  "  Alack  for  poor 
Missie !"  continued  the  creature  in  a  tone  of  mockery, 
"  my  heart  is  sorry  for  Missie.  What  has  befallen 
her — whose  breakfast  cup  did  she  drink?" 

"  Hence  with  thee,  fiend !"  cried  the  Lady ;  "  what 
right  hast  thou  to  intrude  on  thy  mistress's  privacy  ? 
Thy  turn  is  coming  yet ;  or  may  the  nature  of  woman 
change  within  me !" 

"  It  is  changed  already,"  said  the  creature,  giinning 
with  delight ;  "  I  have  thee  now,  I  have  thee  now ! 
And  were  it  not  to  show  my  superiority  over  thee, 
which  I  do  every  hour,  I  should  soon  see  thee  strapped 
like  a  mad  cat,  or  a  wonying  bratch.  What  wilt  thou 
try  next  ?" 

"  I  will  cut  thy  throat,  and  if  I  die  for  it,  will  re- 
joice in  the  deed ;  a  deed  of  charity  to  all  that  dwell 
on  the  face  of  the  earth." 

"  I  have  warned  thee  before,  dame,  and  I  now  warn 
thee  again,  that  all  thy  mischief  meditated  against  me 
will  fall  double  on  thine  own  head." 

"  I  want  none  of  your  warning,  fiendish  cur.  Hence 
with  yom*  elvish  face,  and  take  care  of  yourself." 

It  would  be  too  disgusting  and  horrible  to  relate  or 
read  all  the  incidents  that  fell  out  between  this  unac- 
countable couple.  Their  enmity  against  each  other 
had  no  end,  and  no  mitigation ;  and  scarcely  a  single 
day  passed  over  on  which  the  Lady's  acts  of  mfilevo- 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  297 

lent  ingenuity  did  not  terminate  fatally  for  some  fa- 
vourite thing  of  her  own.    Scarcely  was  there  a  thing, 
animate  or  inanimate,  on  which  she  set  a  value,  left  to 
her,  that  was  not  destroyed ;  and  yet  scarcely  one  hour 
or  minute  could  she  remain  absent  from  her  tormentor, 
and  all  the  while,  it  seems,  solely  for  the  pui-pose  of 
tormenting  him.     While  all  the  rest  of  the  establish- 
ment enjoyed  peace  and  quietness  from  the  fury  of  their 
termagant  dame,  matters  still  gi'ew  worse  and  worse 
between  the  fascinated  pair.     The  Lady  haunted  the 
menial,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  raven  haunts  the  ea* 
gle, — for  a  perpetual  quan-el,  though  the  former  knows 
that  in  every  encounter  she  is  to  come  off  the  loser. 
Noises  were  heard  on  the  stairs  by  night,  and  it  was 
whispered  among  the  servants,  that  the  Lady  had  been 
seeking  Merodach's  chamber,  on  some  honible  intent. 
Several  of  them  would  have  sworn  that  they  had  seen 
her  passing  and  repassing  on  the  stair  after  midnight, 
when  all  was  quiet;  but  then  it  was  likewise  well 
known,  that  Merodach  slept  with  well-fastened  doors, 
and  a  companion  in  another  bed  in  the  same  room, 
whose  bed,  too,  was  nearest  the  door.    Nobody  cared 
much  what  became  of  the  jotteryman,  for  he  was  an 
unsocial  and  disagi'eeable  person ;  but  some  one  told 
him  what  they  had  seen,  and  hinted  a  suspicion  of  the 
Lady's  intent.  But  the  creature  only  bit  his  upper  lip, 
n2 


298     THE  shepherd's  calendar, 

winked  with  his  eyes,  and  said,  "  She  had  better  let  that 
alone;  she  will  be  the  first  to  rue  that." 

Not  long  after  this,  to  the  horror  of  the  family  and 
tlie  whole  country  side,  the  Laird's  only  son  was  found 
murdered  in  his  bed  one  morning,  under  circumstances 
that  manifested  the  most  fiendish  cruelty  and  inveteracy 
on  the  part  of  his  destroyer.  As  soon  as  the  atrocious 
act  was  divulged,  the  Lady  fell  into  convulsions,  and 
lost  her  reason ;  and  happy  had  it  been  for  her  had 
she  never  recovered  the  use  of  it,  for  there  was  blood 
upon  her  hand,  which  she  took  no  care  to  conceal,  and 
there  was  little  doubt  that  it  was  the  blood  of  lier  own 
innocent  and  beloved  boy,  the  sole  heir  and  hope  of  the 
family. 

This  blow  deprived  the  Laird  of  all  power  of  ac- 
tion ;  but  the  Lady  had  a  brother,  a  man  of  the  law, 
wlio  came  and  instantly  proceeded  to  an  investigation 
of  this  unaccountable  murder.  Before  the  Sheriff 
anived,  the  housekeeper  took  the  Lady's  brother  aside, 
and  told  him  he  had  better  not  go  on  with  the  scru- 
tiny, for  she  was  sme  the  crime  would  be  brought 
Jiome  to  her  unfortunate  mistress  ;  and  after  examining 
into  several  coiToborative  circumstances,  and  viewing 
the  state  of  the  raving  maniac,  with  the  blood  on  her 
hand  and  arm,  he  made  the  investigation  a  very  short 
one,  declaring  the  domestics  all  exculpated. 

The  Laiid  attended  his  boy's  funeral,  and  laid  his 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  299 

head  in  the  grave,  but  appeared  exactly  like  a  man 
walking  in  a  trance,  an  automaton,  without  feelings  or 
sensations,  oftentimes  gazing  at  the  funeral  procession, 
as  on  sometliing  he  could  not  comprehend.  And  when 
the  death-bell  of  the  parish  church  fell  a-tolling,  as  the 
corpse  approached  the  kirk-stile,  he  cast  a  dim  eye  up 
towards  the  belfry,  and  said  hastily,  "  What,  Avhat's 
that  ?  Och  ay,  we're  just  in  time,  just  in  time."  And 
often  was  he  hammering  over  the  name  of  "  Evil 
Merodach,  King  of  Babylon,"  to  himself.  He  seemed 
to  have  some  far-fetched  conception  that  his  unac- 
countable j otter y man  was  in  some  way  connected  with 
the  death  of  his  only  son,  and  other  lesser  calamities, 
although  the  evidence  in  favour  of  INIerodach's  inno- 
cence was  as  usual  quite  decisive. 

This  gi-ievous  mistake  of  Lady  Wheelhope  can  on- 
ly be  accounted' for,  by  supposing  her  in  a  state  of  de- 
rangement, or  rather  under  some  evil  influence,  over 
which  she  liad  no  control ;  and  to  a  person  in  such  a 
state,  the  mistake  was  not  so  very  unnatural.  The 
mansion-house  of  Wheelhope  was  old  and  irregular. 
The  stair  had  four  acute  turns,  and  four  landing-places, 
all  the  same.  In  the  uppermost  chamber  slept  the  two 
domestics, — Merodach  in  the  bed  farthest  in,  and  in 
the  chamber  immediately  below  that,  which  was  ex- 
actly similar,  slept  the  Young  Laird  and  his  tutor,  tlie 
former  in  the  bed  farthest  in  ;  and  thus,  in  the  turmoil 


300      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

of  her  wild  and  raging  passions,  her  own  hand  made 
herself  childless. 

Merodach  was  expelled  the  family  forthwith,  but 
refused  to  accept  of  his  wages,  which  the  man  of  law 
pressed  upon  him,  for  fear  of  farther  mischief ;  but  he 
went  away  in  apparent  sullenness  and  discontent,  no 
one  knowing  whither. 

When  his  dismissal  was  announced  to  the  Lady, 
who  was  watched  day  and  night  in  her  chamber,  the 
news  had  such  an  effect  on  her,  that  her  whole  frame 
seemed  electrified ;  the  horrors  of  remorse  vanished, 
and  another  passion,  which  I  neither  can  comprehend 
nor  define,  took  the  sole  possession  of  her  distempered 
spuit.  "  He  must  not  go  ! — He  shall  not  go  !"  she 
exclaimed.  "  No,  no,  no — he  shall  not — he  shall  not 
— he  shall  not  I"  and  then  she  instantly  set  herself 
about  making  ready  to  follow  him,  uttering  all  the 
while  the  most  diabolical  expressions,  indicative  of  an- 
ticipated vengeance. — "  Oh,  could  I  but  snap  his  nerves 
one  by  one,  and  birl  among  his  vitals !  Could  I  but 
slice  his  heart  off  piecemeal  in  small  messes,  and  see 
his  blood  lopper,  and  bubble,  and  spin  away  in  purple 
slays ;  and  then  to  see  him  grin,  and  grin,  and  grin,  and 
grin  !  Oh — oh — oh — How  beautiful  and  gi-and  a  sight 
it  would  be  to  see  him  gi*in,  and  grin,  and  grin  !"  And 
in  such  a  style  would  she  run  on  for  hours  together. 

She  thought  of  nothing,  she  spake  of  nothing,  but 


THE  BROAVNIE  OF  THE  BLACK   HAGGS.         301 

the  discarded  jotteiyman,  whom  most  people  now  be- 
gan to  regard  as  a  creatm-e  that  was  "not  canny." 
They  had  seen  him  eat,  and  drink,  and  work,  like  otlier 
people ;  still  he  had  that  about  him  that  was  not  like 
other  men.  He  was  a  boy  in  form,  and  an  antedilu- 
vian in  feature.  Some  thought  he  was  a  mongrel,  be- 
tween a  Jew  and  an  ape  ;  some  a  wizard,  some  a  kel- 
pie, or  a  fairy,  but  most  of  all,  that  he  was  really  and 
truly  a  Brownie.  What  he  was  I  do  not  know,  and 
therefore  will  not  pretend  to  say ;  but  be  that  as  it 
may,  in  spite  of  locks  and  keys,  watching  and  waking, 
the  Lady  of  Wheelhope  soon  made  her  escape,  and 
eloped  after  him.  The  attendants,  indeed,  would  have 
made  oath  that  she  was  earned  away  by  some  invisible 
hand,  for  it  was  impossible,  they  said,  that  she  could 
have  escaped  on  foot  like  other  people ;  and  this  edi- 
tion of  the  story  took  in  the  country;  but  sensible 
people  viewed  the  matter  in  another  light. 

As  for  instance,  when  Wattie  Blythe,  the  Laird's 
old  shepherd,  came  in  from  the  hill  one  morning,  his 
wife  Bessie  thus  accosted  him. — "  His  presence  be 
about  us,  Wattie  Blythe  !  have  ye  heard  what  has 
happened  at  the  ha'  ?  Things  are  aye  turning  waur 
and  waur  there,  and  it  looks  like  as  if  Providence  had 
gi'en  up  our  Laird's  house  to  destruction.  This  giand 
estate  maun  now  gang  frae  the  Sprots ;  for  it  has  finish- 
ed them." 


302  THE  SHEPHERD  S  CALENDAR. 

"  Na,  na,  Bessie,  it  isna  the  estate  that  has  finished 
the  Sprots,  but  the  Sprots  that  hae  finished  the  estate, 
and  themsells  into  the  boot.  They  hae  been  a  wicked 
and  degenerate  race,  and  aye  the  langer  the  waur,  till 
they  hae  reached  the  utmost  bounds  o'  earthly  wicked- 
ness; and  it's  time  the  deil  were  looking  after  his  ain." 

"Ah,  Wattie  Blythe,  ye  never  said  a  truer  say. 
And  that's  just  the  very  point  where  your  story  ends, 
and  mine  begins  ;  for  hasna  the  deil,  or  the  faiiies,  or 
the  brownies,  ta'en  away  our  Leddy  bodily  !  and  the 
haill  country  is  running  and  riding  in  search  o'  her ; 
and  there  is  twenty  hunder  merles  offered  to  the  first 
that  can  find  her,  and  bring  her  safe  back.  They  hae 
ta'en  her  away,  skin  and  bane,  body  and  soul,  and  a'? 
Wattie  !" 

"  Hech-wow !  but  that  is  awsome  !  And  where  is  it 
tliought  they  have  ta'en  her  to,  Bessie  ?"' 

"  O,  they  hae  some  guess  at  that  frae  her  ain  hints 
afore.  It  is  thought  they  liae  earned  her  after  that 
Satan  of  a  creature,  wha  wrought  sae  muckle  wae 
about  the  house.  It  is  for  him  they  are  a'  looking,  for 
they  ken  weel,  that  where  they  get  the  tane  they  will 
get  the  tithei'." 

"  Whew  I  Is  that  the  gate  o't,  Bessie  ?  Why,  then, 
the  awfu'  story  is  nouther  man-  nor  less  than  this,  that 
the  Leddy  has  made  a  'lopement,  as  they  cat,  and  run 
away  after  a  blackguard  jotteryman.  Hech-wow!  wae's 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  303 

me  for  human  frailty  !  But  that's  just  the  gate !  When 
aince  the  deil  gets  in  the  point  o'  his  finger,  he  will 
soon  have  in  his  haill  hand.  Ay,  he  wants  but  a  hair 
to  make  a  tether  of,  ony  day !  I  hae  seen  her  a  braw 
sonsy  lass  ;  but  even  then  I  feared  she  was  devoted  to 
destruction,  for  she  aye  mockit  at  religion,  Bessie,  and 
that's  no  a  good  mark  of  a  young  body.  And  she 
made  a'  its  servants  her  enemies ;  and  think  you  these 
good  men's  prayers  were  a'  to  blaw  away  i'  the  wind, 
and  be  nae  mair  regarded  ?  Na,  na,  Bessie,  my  wo- 
man, take  ye  this  mark  baith  o'  our  ain  bainis  and 
ither  folk's — If  ever  ye  see  a  young  body  that  disre- 
gards the  Sabbath,  and  makes  a  mock  at  the  ordinances 
o'  religion,  ye  will  never  see  that  body  come  to  muckle 
good. — A  braw  hand  our  Leddy  has  made  o'  her  gibes 
and  jeers  at  religion,  and  her  mockeries  o'  the  poor  per- 
secuted hill-folk ! — sunk  down  by  degrees  into  the  very 
dregs  o'  sin  and  misery  I  nin  away  after  a  scullion  !" 

"  Fy,  fy,  Wattie,  how  can  ye  say  sae  ?  It  was  weel 
kenn'd  that  she  hatit  him  wi'  a  perfect  and  mortal 
hatred,  and  tried  to  make  away  wi'  him  mae  ways  nor 
ane." 

"  Aha,  Bessie ;  but  nipping  and  scarting  is  Scots 
folk's  wooing ;  and  though  it  is  but  right  that  we  sus- 
pend our  judgments,  there  will  naebody  persuade  me 
if  she  be  found  alang  wi'  the  creatui'e,  but  that  she  has 


304        THE  SHEPHERD'S  CALENDAR. 

i*un  away  after  him  in  the  natural  way,  on  her  twa 
shanks,  without  help  either  frae  faiiy  or  brownie." 

"  I'll  never  believe  sic  a  tiling  of  ony  woman  born, 
let  be  a  leddy  weel  up  in  years." 

"  Od  help  ye,  Bessie  !  ye  dinna  ken  the  stretch  o' 
coiTupt  natm-e.  The  best  o'  us,  when  left  to  oursells, 
ai'e  nae  better  than  strayed  sheep,  that  will  never  find 
the  way  back  to  their  ain  pastures ;  and  of  a'  things 
made  o'  mortal  flesh,  a  wicked  woman  is  the  warst." 

"  Alack-a-day !  we  get  the  blame  o'  muckle  that 
we  little  deserve.  But,  Wattie,  keep  ye  a  geyan  sharp 
look-out  about  the  cleuchs  and  the  caves  o'  our  hope ; 
for  the  Leddy  kens  them  a'  geyan  weel ;  and  gin  the 
twenty  hunder  merks  wad  come  our  way,  it  might 
gang  a  waur  gate.    It  wad  tocher  a'  our  bonny  lasses." 

"  Ay,  weel  I  wat,  Bessie,  that's  nae  lee.  And  now, 
when  ye  bring  me  amind  o't,  I'm  sair  mista'en  if  I  didna 
hear  a  creature  up  in  the  Brockholes  this  morning, 
skirling  as  if  something  war  cutting  its  throat.  It  gars 
a'  the  hairs  stand  on  my  head  when  I  think  it  may  hae 
been  our  Leddy,  and  the  droich  of  a  creature  murder- 
ing her.  I  took  it  for  a  battle  of  wulcats,  and  wished 
they  might  pu'  out  ane  anither's  thrapples  ;  but  when 
I  think  on  it  again,  they  war  unco  like  some  o'  our 
Leddy's  unearthly  screams." 

"  His  presence  be  about  us,  Wattie  I  Haste  ye — pit 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  IIAGGS.  305 

on  your  bonnet — tak'  your  staff  in  your  liand,  and  gang 
and  see  what  it  is." 

"  Shame  fa'  me,  if  I  daur  gang,  Bessie." 

"  Hout,  Wattie,  trust  in  the  Lord." 

"  Aweel,  sae  I  do.  But  ane's  no  to  throw  himsell 
ower  a  linn,  and  tmst  that  the  Lord  will  kep  him  in  a 
blanket.  And  it's  nae  muckle  safer  for  an  auld  stiff 
man  like  me  to  gang  away  out  to  a  wild  remote  place, 
where  there  is  ae  body  murdering  another. — What  is 
that  I  hear,  Bessie  ?  Hand  the  lang  tongue  o'  you,  and 
rin  to  the  door,  and  see  what  noise  that  is." 

Bessie  ran  to  the  door,  but  soon  returned,  with  her 
mouth  wide  open,  and  her  eyes  set  in  her  head. 

"  It  is  them,  Wattie  I  it  is  them  !  His  presence  be 
about  us  !  What  will  we  do  ?" 

"  Them  ?  whaten  them  ?" 

"  Why,  that  blackguard  creature,  coming  here,  lead- 
ing our  Leddy  by  the  hair  o'  the  head,  and  yerking  her 
wi'a  stick.  I  am  terrified  out  o'  my  wits.  What  will 
we  do  ?" 

"  W^e'll  see  what  they  5«y,"  said  Wattie,  manifestly 
in  as  gi-eat  terror  as  his  wife  ;  and  by  a  natural  impulse, 
or  as  a  last  resource,  he  opened  the  Bible,  not  know- 
ing what  he  did,  and  then  hurried  on  his  spectacles ; 
but  before  he  got  two  leaves  turned  over,  the  two 
entered, — a  frightful-looking  couple  indeed.  Mero- 
dach,  with  his  old  withered  face,  and  feiTet  eyes,  lead- 


306      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

ing  the  Lady  of  Wheelhope  by  the  long  hah*,  which 
was  mixed  with  grey,  and  whose  face  was  all  bloated 
with  wounds  and  bruises,  and  having  stripes  of  blood 
on  her  garments. 

"  How's  this ! — How's  this,  sirs  ?"  said  Wattie 
Blythe. 

"  Close  that  book,  and  I  will  tell  you,  goodman," 
said  Merodach, 

"  I  can  hear  what  you  hae  to  say  wi'  the  beuk  open, 
sir,"  said  Wattie,  turning  over  the  leaves,  pretendmg  to 
look  for  some  particular  passage,  but  apparently  not 
knowing  what  he  was  doing.  "  It  is  a  shamefu'  business 
this  ;  but  some  will  hae  to  answer  for't.  My  Leddy, 
I  am  unco  giieved  to  see  you  in  sic  a  plight.  Ye  hae 
surely  been  dooms  sair  left  to  yoursell." 

The  Lady  shook  her  head,  uttered  a  feeble  hollow 
laugh,  and  fixed  her  eyes  on  Merodach,  But  such  a 
look  !  It  almost  frightened  the  simple  aged  couple  out 
of  their  senses.  It  was  not  a  look  of  love  nor  of  hatred 
exclusively ;  neither  was  it  of  desire  or  disgust,  but  it 
was  a  combination  of  them  all.  It  was  such  a  look  as 
one  fiend  would  cast  on  another,  in  whose  everlasting 
destruction  he  rejoiced.  Wattie  was  glad  to  take  his 
eyes  from  such  countenances,  and  look  into  the  Bible, 
that  firm  foundation  of  all  his  hopes  and  all  his  joy. 

"  I  request  that  you  will  shut  that  book,  sii',"  said 
the  honible  creature  ;  "  or  if  you  do  not,  I  will  shut 


THE  BROV/NIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.         307 

it  for  you  with  a  vengeance  ;"  and  with  that  he  seized 
it,  and  flung  it  against  the  wall.  Bessie  uttered  a 
scream,  and  Wattie  was  quite  paralysed ;  and  although 
he  seemed  disposed  to  nin  after  his  best  friend,  as  he 
called  it,  the  hellish  looks  of  the  Brownie  interposed, 
and  glued  him  to  his  seat. 

"  Hear  what  I  have  to  say  first,"  said  the  creatm*e, 
"  and  then  pore  your  fill  on  that  precious  book  of 
yours.  One  concern  at  a  time  is  enough.  I  came  to 
do  you  a  service.  Here,  take  this  cursed,  wretched 
woman,  whom  you  style  your  Lady,  and  deliver  her 
up  to  the  lawful  authorities,  to  be  restored  to  her  hus- 
band and  her  place  in  society.  She  has  followed  one 
that  hates  her,  and  never  said  one  kind  word  to  her  in 
his  life  ;  and  though  I  have  beat  her  like  a  dog,  still  she 
clings  to  me,  and  will  not  depart,  so  enchanted  is  she 
with  the  laudable  purpose  of  cutting  my  throat.  Tell 
your  master  and  her  brother,  that  I  am  not  to  be  bur- 
dened with  their  maniac.  I  have  scourged — I  have 
spurned  and  kicked  her,  afflicting  her  night  and  day, 
and  yet  from  my  side  she  will  not  depart.  Take  her. 
Claim  the  reward  in  full,  and  your  fortune  is  made ; 
and  so  farewell !" 

The  creature  went  away,  and  the  moment  his  back 
was  turned,  the  Lady  fell  a-screaming  and  struggling, 
like  one  in  an  agony,  and,  in  spite  of  all  the  old  couple's 
exertions,  she  forced  herself  out  of  their  hands,  and  ran 


308      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

after  the  retreating  Merodach.  When  he  saw  better 
would  not  be,  he  turned  upon  her,  and,  by  one  blow 
with  his  stick,  stnick  her  down ;  and,  not  content  with 
that,  continued  to  maltreat  her  in  such  a  manner,  as 
to  all  appearance  would  have  killed  twenty  ordinary 
persons.  The  poor  devoted  dame  could  do  nothing, 
but  now  and  then  utter  a  squeak  like  a  half-wonied 
cat,  and  wi'ithe  and  gi-ovel  on  the  sward,  till  Wattie 
and  his  wife  came  up,  and  withheld  her  tormentor  from 
further  violence.  He  then  bound  her  hands  behind 
her  back  with  a  strong  cord,  and  delivered  her  once 
more  to  the  charge  of  the  old  couple,  who  contrived 
to  hold  her  by  that  means,  and  take  her  home. 

Wattie  was  ashamed  to  take  her  into  the  hall,  but 
led  her  into  one  of  the  out-houses,  whither  he  brought 
her  brother  to  receive  her.  The  man  of  the  law  was 
manifestly  vexed  at  her  reappearance,  and  scrupled  iiot 
to  testify  his  dissatisfaction  ;  for  when  Wattie  told  him 
how  the  wretch  had  abused  his  sister,  and  that,  had  it 
not  been  for  Bessie's  interference  and  his  own,  the  Lady 
would  have  been  killed  outright,  he  said,  "  Why,  W^al- 
ter,  it  is  a  great  pity  that  he  did  not  kill  her  outright. 
What  good  can  her  life  now  do  to  her,  or  of  what  value 
is  her  life  to  any  creature  living  ?  After  one  has  lived 
to  disgi'ace  all  connected  with  them,  the  sooner  they  are 
taken  off  the  better." 

The  man,  however,  paid  old  Walter  down  his  two 


THE  BROWNIE  OF  THE  BLACK  HAGGS.  309 

thousand  merks,  a  gi'eat  fortune  for  one  like  him  in 
those  days  ;  and  not  to  dwell  longer  on  this  unnatural 
story,  I  shall  only  add,  very  shortly,  that  the  Lady  of 
Wheelhope  soon  made  her  escape  once  more,  and  flew, 
as  if  drawn  by  an  irresistible  charm,  to  her  tormentor. 
Her  friends  looked  no  more  after  her  ;  and  the  last  time 
she  was  seen  alive,  it  was  following  the  uncouth  crea- 
ture up  the  water  of  Daur,  weary,  wounded,  and  lame, 
while  lie  was  all  the  way  beating  her,  as  a  piece  of  ex- 
cellent amusement.  A  few  days  after  that,  her  body 
was  found  among  some  wild  haggs,  in  a  place  called 
Crook-burn,  by  a  party  of  the  persecuted  Covenanters 
that  were  in  hiding  there,  some  of  the  very  men  whom 
she  had  exerted  herself  to  destroy,  and  who  had  been 
driven,  like  David  of  old,  to  pray  for  a  curse  and  earth- 
ly punishment  upon  her.  They  buried  her  like  a  dog 
at  the  Yetts  of  Keppel,  and  rolled  three  huge  stones 
upon  her  grave,  which  are  lying  there  to  this  day. 
When  they  foimd  her  coi-pse,  it  was  mangled  and 
w^ounded  in  a  most  shocking  manner,  the  fiendish  crea- 
ture having  manifestly  tormented  her  to  death.  He 
was  never  more  seen  or  heard  of  in  this  kingdom, 
though  all  that  country-side  was  kept  in  teiTor  for  him 
many  years  afterwards  ;  and  to  this  day,  they  will  tell 
you  of  The  Brownie  of  the  Black  Haggs,  which 
title  he  seems  to  have  acquired  after  his  disappearance. 
This  story  was  told  to  me  by  an  old  man  named 


310        THE  shepherd's  CALENDAR. 

Adam  Halliday,  whose  gi*eat-grandfather,  Thomas  Hal- 
liday,  was  one  of  those  that  found  the  body  and  buried 
it.  It  is  many  years  since  I  heard  it ;  but,  however 
ridiculous  it  may  appear,  I  remember  it  made  a  dread- 
ful impression  on  my  young  mind.  I  never  heard  any 
story  like  it,  save  one  of  an  old  fox-hound  that  pur- 
sued a  fox  through  the  Grampians  for  a  fortnight,  and 
when  at  last  discovered  by  the  Duke  of  Athole's  people, 
neither  of  them  could  run,  but  the  hound  was  still  con- 
tinuing to  walk  after  the  fox,  and  when  the  latter  lay 
downii,  the  other  lay  down  beside  him,  and  looked  at 
him  steadily  all  the  while,  though  unable  to  do  him 
the  least  harm.  The  passion  of  inveterate  malice  seems 
to  have  influenced  these  two  exactly  alike.  But,  up- 
on the  whole,  I  scarcely  believe  the  tale  can  be  true. 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  311 


CHAPTER  XL 

THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM. 

"  Have  you  heard  any  thing  of  the  apparition  which 
has  been  seen  about  Wineholm  Place  ?"  said  the  Do- 
mmie. 

"  Na,  I  never  heard  o'  sic  a  thing  as  yet,"  quoth  the 
smith ;  "  but  I  wadna  wonder  muckle  that  the  news 
should  turn  out  to  be  tme." 

The  Dominie  shook  his  head,  and  uttered  a  long 
"  h'm-h'm-h'm,"  as  if  he  knew  more  than  he  was  at 
liberty  to  tell. 

"  Weel,  that  beats  the  world,"  said  the  smith,  as  he 
gave  over  blowing  the  bellows,  and  looked  anxiously 
in  the  Dominie's  face. 

The  Dominie  shook  his  head  again. 

The  smith  was  now  in  the  most  ticklish  quandary ; 
eager  to  learn  particulars,  that  he  might  spread  the  as- 
tounding news  through  the  whole  village,  and  the  rest 
of  the  parish  to  boot,  but  yet  afraid  to  press  the  in- 
quiry, for  fear  the  cautious  Dominie  should  take  the 


312      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

alarm  of  being  reported  as  a  tattler,  and  keep  all  to 
himself.  So  the  smith,  after  waiting  till  the  wind-pipe 
of  the  great  bellows  ceased  its  rushing  noise,  covered 
the  gloss  neatly  up  with  a  mixture  of  small  coals,  culm, 
and  cinders ;  and  then,  perceiving  that  nothing  more 
was  forthcoming  from  the  Dominie,  he  began  blowing 
again  with  more  energy  than  before — changed  his  hand 

put  the  other  sooty  one  in  his  breeches-pocket — 

leaned  to  the  horn — looked  in  a  careless  manner  to  the 
window,  or  rather  gazed  on  vacancy,  and  always  now 
and  then  stole  a  sly  look  at  the  Dominie's  face.  It  was 
quite  immovable.  His  cheek  was  leaned  on  his  c^en 
hand,  and  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  glowing  fire.  It  was 
very  teasing  this  for  poor  Clinkum  the  smith.  But 
what  could  he  do  ?  He  took  out  his  glowing  iron,  and 
made  a  shower  of  fire  sweep  through  the  whole  smithy, 
whereof  a  good  part,  as  intended,  sputtered  upon  the 
Dominie  ;  but  that  imperturbable  person  only  shielded 
his  face  with  his  elbow,  turned  his  shoulder  half  round, 
and  held  his  peace.  Thump,  thump  !  clink,  clink  \ 
went  the  hammer  for  a  space ;  and  then  when  the  iron 
was  retm-ned  to  the  fire,  "  Weel,  that  beats  the  world !" 
quoth  the  smith. 

"  What  is  this  that  beats  the  world,  Mr  Clinkum  ?" 
asked  the  Dominie,  with  the  most  cool  and  provoking 
indifference. 

"  This  story  about  the  apparition,"  quoth  the  smith. 
4 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  313 

"  What  stoiy  ?"  said  the  Dominie. 

Now  really  this  perversity  was  hardly  to  be  endu- 
red, even  in  a  learned  Dominie,  who,  with  all  his  cold 
indifference  of  feeling,  was  sitting  toasting  himself  at 
a  good  smithy  fire.  The  smith  felt  this,  (for  he  was  a 
man  of  acute  feeling,)  and  therefore  he  spit  upon  his 
hand  and  fell  a-clinking  and  pelting  at  the  stithy  with 
both  spirit  and  resignation,  saying  within  himself, 
"  These  dominie  bodies  just  beat  the  world  I" 

^'  What  story  ?"  reiterated  the  Dominie.  "  For  my 
part,  I  related  no  story,  nor  have  ever  given  assent  to 
a  belief  in  such  a  story  that  any  man  has  heard.  Never- 
theless, from  the  results  of  ratiocination,  conclusions 
may  be  formed,  though  not  algebraically,  yet  corpor- 
ately,  by  constituting  a  quantity,  which  shall  be  equi- 
valent to  the  difference,  subtracting  the  less  from  the 
greater,  and  strikkig  a  balance  in  order  to  get  rid  of 
any  ambiguity  or  paradox." 

At  the  long  adverb,  nevert/ieless,  the  smith  gave  over 
blowing,  and  pricked  up  his  ears ;  but  the  definition 
went  beyond  his  comprehension. 

"  Ye  ken,  that  just  beats  the  whole  world  for  deep- 
ness," said  the  smith;  and  again  began  blowing  the 
bellows. 

*•  You  know,  Mr  Clinkum,"  continued  the  Dominie, 
"  that  a  proposition  is  an  assertion  of  some  distinct 
truth,  which  only  becomes  manifest  by  demonstration. 
VOL.  I.  o 


314      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

A  corollary  is  an  obvious,  or  easily  inferred  conse- 
quence of  a  proposition ;  while  an  hypothesis  is  a  sup- 
position, or  concession  made,  during  the  process  of  de- 
monstration. Now,  do  you  take  me  along  with  you? 
Because,  if  you  do  not,  it  is  needless  to  proceed." 

"  Yes,  yes,  I  imderstand  you  middling  wecl ;  but  I 
wad  like  better  to  hear  what  other  folks  say  about  it 
than  you." 

"  And  why  so  ?  Wherefore  would  you  rather  hear 
another  man's  demonstration  than  mine  ?"  said  the 
Dominie,  sternly. 

"  Because,  ye  ken,  ye  just  beat  the  whole  world  for 
words,"  quoth  the  smith. 

"  Ay,  ay  !  that  is  to  say,  words  without  wisdom," 
said  the  Dominie,  rising  and  stepping  away.  "  Well, 
well,  every  man  to  his  sphere,  and  the  smith  to  the  bel- 
lows." 

"  Ye're  quite  mistaen,  master,"  cried  the  smith  after 
him ;  "  it  isna  the  want  o'  wisdom  in  you  that  plagues 
me,  it  is  the  owerplush  o't." 

This  soothed  the  Dominie,  who  returned,  and  said, 
mildly — "  By  the  by.  Clink um,  I  want  a  leister  of 
your  making ;  for  I  see  there  is  no  other  tradesman 
makes  them  so  well.  A  five-grained  one  make  it ;  at 
your  own  price." 

"  Very  weel,  sir.     When  will  you  be  needing  it  ?" 

"  Not  till  the  end  of  close-time." 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  315 

"  Ay,  ye  may  gar  the  three  auld  anes  do  till  then." 

"  What  do  you  wish  to  insinuate,  sir  ?  Would  you 
infer,  because  I  have  three  leisters,  that  therefore  I  am 
a  breaker  of  the  laws  ?  That  I,  who  am  placed  here  as 
a  pattern  and  monitor  of  the  young  and  rising  genera- 
tion, should  be  the  first  to  set  them  an  example  of 
insubordination  ?" 

"  Na,  but,  ye  ken,  that  just  beats  the  world  for 
words  I  but  we  ken  what  we  ken,  for  a  that,  master." 

"  You  had  better  take  a  little  care  what  you  say, 
Mr  Clinkum ;  just  a  little  care.  I  do  not  request  you 
to  take  particular  care,  for  of  that  your  tongue  is  in- 
capable, but  a  very  little  is  necessary.  And  mark 
you — don't  go  to  say  that  I  said  this  or  that  about 
a  ghost,  or  mentioned  such  a  ridiculous  story." 

"  The  crabbitness  o'  that  body  beats  the  world  !" 
said  the  smith  to  himself,  as  the  Dominie  went  halting 
homeward. 

The  very  next  man  that  entered  the  smithy  door 
was  no  other  than  John  Broadcast,  the  new  Laird's 
hind,  who  had  also  been  hind  to  the  late  laird  for  many 
years,  and  who  had  no  sooner  said  his  en-and  than  the 
smith  addressed  him  thus  : — "  Have  you  ever  seen  this 
ghost  that  there  is  such  a  noise  about  ?" 

"  Ghost !  Na,  goodness  be  thankit,  I  never  saw  a 
ghost  in  my  life,  save  aince  a  wraith.  What  ghost  do 
you  mean  ?" 


316  THE  shepherd's  calendar, 

"  So  you  never  saw  nor  heard  tell  of  any  apparition 
about  Wineholm  Place,  lately  ?" 

''  No,  I  hae  reason  to  be  tbankfu  1  have  not." 

"  Weel,  that  beats  the  world  !  Whow,  man,  but  ye 
are  sair  in  the  dark !  Do  you  no  think  there  are  sic- 
can  tilings  in  nature,  as  folk  no  coming  fairly  to  their 
ends,  John  ?" 

"  Goodness  be  T^-i'  us  I  Ye  gar  a  the  hairs  o'  my 
head  creep,  man.     What's  that  you're  saying  ?" 

**  Had  ye  never  ony  suspicions  o'  that  kind,  Jolm?" 

'»  No ;  I  cauna  say  that  I  had.' 

"  None  in  the  least  ?  Weel,  that  beats  the  world  !" 

'<  O,  baud  your  tongue,  baud  your  tongue  !  W^e 
bae  great  reason  to  be  tbankfu'  that  we  are  as  we  are  I" 

"  How  as  we  are  ?" 

''  That  we  arena  stocks  or  stones,  or  brute  beasts, 
as  the  Minister  o"  Traquair  says.  But  I  hope  in  God 
there  is  nae  siccan  a  thing  about  my  master's  place  as 
an  unearthly  visitor." 

The  smith  shook  his  head,  and  uttered  a  long  hem, 
hem,  hem  !  He  had  felt  the  powerful  effect  of  that 
himself,  and  wished  to  make  the  same  appeal  to  the 
feelings  and  longings  after  information  of  Jolm  Broad- 
cast. The  bait  took  ;  for  the  latent  spark  of  supersti- 
tion, not  to  say  any  thing  about  curiosity,  was  kindled 
in  tlie  heart  of  honest  John,  and  there  being  no  wit  in 
the  head  to  counteract  it,  the  portentous  hint  bad  its 


THE  LAIRD  OP  WINEHOLM.  317 

full  sway.  John's  eyes  stelled  in  his  head,  and  his 
visage  grew  long,  assuming  something  of  the  hue  of 
dried  clay  in  winter.  "  Hech,  man,  but  that's  an  aw- 
some  story !"  exclaimed  he.  "  Folks  hae  great  reason 
to  be  thankfu'  that  they  are  as  they  are.  It  is  ti*uly 
an  awsome  story." 

"  Ye  ken,  it  just  beats  the  world  for  that,"  quoth  the 
smith. 

"  And  is  it  really  thought  that  this  Laird  made  away 
wi'  our  auld  master  ?"  said  John. 

The  smith  shook  his  head  again,  and  gave  a  strait 
wink  with  his  eyes. 

"Weel,  I  hae  great  reason  to  be  thankfu  that  I 
never  heard  siccan  a  story  as  that  I"'  said  John.  "  Wha 
was  it  tauld  you  a'  about  it  ?" 

"  It  was  nae  less  a  man  than  our  raathewmatical 
Dominie,"  said  the  smith ;  "  he  that  kens  a  things,  and 
can  prove  a  proposition  to  the  nineteenth  part  of  a 
hair.  But  he  is  tenified  the  tale  should  spread ;  and 
therefore  ye  maunna  say  a  word  about  it." 

«  Na,  na ;  I  hae  gi-eat  reason  to  be  thankfu  I  can 
keep  a  secret  as  weel  as  the  maist  feck  o'  men,  and 
better  than  the  maist  feck  o'  women.  What  did  he 
Bay  ?  Tell  us  a'  tliat  he  said." 

"  It  is  not  so  easy  to  repeat  what  he  says,  for  he 
has  sae  mony  lang-nebbit  words,  which  just  beat  the 
world.    But  he  said,  though  it  was  only  a  supposition, 


318        THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

yet  it  was  easily  made  manifest  by  positive  demonstra- 
tion." 

"  Did  you  ever  hear  the  like  o'  that  I  Now,  havena 
we  reason  to  be  thankfu'  that  we  are  as  we  are  ?  Did 
he  say  that  it  was  by  poison  that  he  was  taken  off,  or 
that  he  was  strangled  ?" 

"  Na ;  I  thought  he  said  it  was  by  a  collar,  or  a  col- 
lary,  or  something  to  that  purpose." 

"  Then,  it  wad  appear  there  is  no  doubt  of  it  ?  I 
think,  the  Doctor  has  reason  to  be  thankfu'  that  he's 
no  taken  up.     Is  not  that  strange  ?" 

"  O,  ye  ken,  it  just  beats  the  world  1" 

"  He  deserves  to  be  torn  at  young  horses'  tails,"  said 
the  ploughman. 

"  Ay,  or  nippit  to  death  with  red-hot  pinchers," 
quoth  the  smith. 

"  Or  hanowed  to  death,  like  the  children  of  Am- 
mon,"  continued  the  ploughman. 

*'  Na,  I'll  tell  you  what  should  be  done  wi'  him — 
he  should  just  be  docked  and  fired  like  a  farcied  horse," 
quoth  the  smith.  "  Od  help  ye,  man,  I  could  beat  the 
world  for  laying  on  a  proper  poonishment." 

John  Broadcast  went  home  full  of  terror  and  dis- 
may. He  told  his  wife  the  story  in  a  secret— she  told 
the  dairymaid  with  a  tenfold  degree  of  secrecy ;  and 
so  ere  long  it  reached  the  ears  of  Dr  Davington  himself, 
the  New  Laird,  as  he  was  called.     He  was  unusually 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  319 

affected,  at  hearing  such  a  terrible  accusation  against 
himself;  and  the  Dominie  being  mentioned  as  the  pro- 
pagator of  the  report,  a  message  was  forthwith  dis- 
patched to  desire  him  to  come  up  to  the  Place,  and 
speak  with  the  Laird.  The  Dominie  suspected  there 
was  bad  blood  a-brewing  against  him  ;  and  as  he  had 
too  much  self-importance  to  think  of  succumbing  to 
any  man  alive,  he  sent  an  impertinent  answer  to  the 
Laird's  message,  bearing,  that  if  Dr  Davington  had  any 
business  with  him,  he  would  be  so  good  as  attend  at 
his  class-room  when  he  dismissed  his  scholars. 

When  this  message  was  delivered,  the  Doctor,  being 
almost  beside  himself  with  rage,  instantly  dispatched 
two  village  constables  with  a  warrant  to  seize  the  Do- 
minie, and  bring  him  before  him  ;  for  the  Doctor  was 
a  justice  of  the  peace.  Accordingly,  the  poor  Dominie 
was  seized  at  the  head  of  his  pupils,  and  dragged  away, 
ci'utch  and  all,  up  before  the  new  Laird,  to  answer  for 
such  an  abominable  slander.  The  Dominie  denied 
every  thing  concerning  it,  as  indeed  he  might,  save 
having  asked  the  smith  the  simple  question,  "  if  he 
had  heard  ought  of  a  ghost  at  the  Place  ?"  But  he  re- 
fused to  tell  why  he  asked  that  question.  He  had  his 
own  reasons  for  it,  he  said,  and  reasons  that  to  him  were 
quite  sufficient ;  but  as  he  was  not  obliged  to  disclose 
them,  neither  would  he. 

The  smith  was  then  sent  for,  who  declared  that  the 


320      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

Dominie  had  toM  him  of  the  ghost  being  seen,  and  a 
murder  committed,  which  he  called  a  rash  assassinct- 
tiofi,  and  said  it  was  obvious,  and  easily  infen-ed  that 
it  was  done  by  a  collar. 

How  the  Dominie  did  storm !  He  even  twice  threat- 
ened to  knock  down  the  smith  with  his  cratch  ;  not 
for  the  slander, — he  cared  not  for  that  nor  the  Doctor 
a  pin, — but  for  the  total  subversion  of  his  grand  illus- 
tration from  geometry ;  and  he  therefore  denominated 
the  smith's  head  the  logarithm  to  number  one^  a  re- 
proach of  which  I  do  not  understand  the  gist,  but  the 
appropriation  of  it  pleased  the  Dominie  exceedingly, 
made  him  chuckle,  and  put  him  in  better  humour  for 
a  good  while.  It  was  in  vain  that  he  tried  to  prove 
that  his  words  applied  only  to  the  definition  of  a  pro- 
blem in  geometry, — he  could  not  make  himself  under- 
stood ;  and  the  smith  maintaining  his  point  firmly,  and 
apparently  with  conscientious  truth,  appearances  were 
greatly  against  the  Dominie,  and  the  Doctor  pronoun- 
ced him  a  malevolent  and  dangerous  person. 

"  O,  ye  ken,  he  just  beats  the  worM  for  that,"  quoth 
the  smith. 

"la  malevolent  and  dangerous  person,  sir  !"  said 
the  Dominie,  fiercely,  and  altering  his  crutch  from  one 
place  to  another  of  the  floor,  as  if  he  could  not  get  a 
place  to  set  it  on.  "  Dost  thou  call  me  a  malevolent 
and  dangerous  person,  sir  ?    What  then  art  thou  ?    If 


THE  LAIRD  OP  WINEHOLM.  321 

thou  knowest  not  I  will  tell  thee.  Add  a  cipher  to  a 
ninth  figure,  and  what  does  that  make  ?  Ninety  you 
will  say.  Ay,  but  then  put  a  cipher  above  a  nine,  and 
what  does  that  make  ?  ha — ha — ha — I  have  you  there 
Your  case  exactly  in  higher  geometry  I  for  say  the 
chord  of  sixty  degrees  is  radius,  then  the  sine  of  ninety 
degrees  is  equal  to  the  radius,  so  the  secant  of  0,  that 
is  nickle-nothing,  as  the  boys  call  it,  is  radius,  and  so 
is  the  co-sine  of  0.  The  yersed  sine  of  90  degrees  is 
radius,  (that  is  nine  with  a  cipher  added,  you  know,) 
and  the  versed  sine  of  180  degrees  is  the  diameter; 
then  of  course  the  sine  increases  from  0  (that  is  cipher 
or  nothing)  till  it  becomes  radius,  and  then  it  de- 
creases till  it  becomes  nothing.  After  this  you  note  it 
lies  on  the  contrary  side  of  the  diameter,  and  conse- 
quently, if  positive  before,  is  negative  now,  so  that  it 
must  end  in  0,  or  a  cipher  above  a  nine  at  most." 

"  This  unintelligible  jargon  is  out  of  place  here,  Mr 
Dominie ;  and  if  you  can  show  no  better  reasons  for 
raising  such  an  abominable  falsehood,  in  representing 
me  as  an  incendiary  and  murderer,  I  shall  procure  you 
a  lodging  in  the  house  of  coiTection." 

"  Why,  sir,  the  long  and  short  of  the  matter  is  this 

— I  only  asked  at  that  fellow  there,  that  logarithm  of 

stupidity  I  if  he  had  heard  aught  of  a  ghost  having  been 

seen  about  Wineholm  Place.  I  added  nothing  farther, 

o  2 


S22  THE  SHEPHEUD  S  CALENDAU. 

thither  positive  or  negative.  Now,  do  you  insist  on  my 
reasons  for  asking  such  a  question  ?" 

"  I  insist  on  having  them." 

"  Then  what  will  you  say,  sir,  when  I  inform  you, 
and  declare  my  readiness  to  depone  to  the  truth  of  it, 
that  I  saw  the  ghost  myself? — yes,  sir — that  I  saw  the 
ghost  of  yom-  late  worthy  father-in-law  myself,  sir; 
and  though  I  said  no  such  thing  to  that  decimal  frac- 
tion, yet  it  told  me,  sir — yes,  the  spirit  of  your  father- 
in-law  told  me,  sir,  that  you  ai'e  a  murderer." 

"  Lord,  now,  what  think  ye  o'  that?"  quoth  the  smith. 
"  Ye  had  better  hae  letten  him  alane ;  for  od,  ye  ken, 
he's  the  deevil  of  a  body  that  ever  was  made  I  He  just 
beats  the  world  !" 

The  Doctor  grew  as  pale  as  death,  but  whether  from 
fear  or  rage,  it  was  hard  to  say.  "  Why,  sir,  you  are 
mad !  stark,  raving  mad,"  said  the  Doctor ;  "  therefore 
for  yom*  own  credit,  and  for  the  peace  and  comfort  of 
my  wife  and  myself,  and  our  credit  among  our  retain- 
ers, you  must  imsay  every  word  that  you  have  now 
said." 

"  I'll  just  as  soon  say  that  the  parabola  and  the  ellip- 
sis are  the  same,"  said  the  Dominie ;  "  or  that  the  dia- 
meter is  not  the  longest  line  that  can  be  drawn  in  the 
circle.  And  now,  sir,  since  you  have  forced  me  to  di- 
vulge what  I  was  much  in  doubt  about,  I  have  a  great 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  323 

mind  to  have  the  old  Laud's  grave  opened  to-night,  and 
have  the  body  inspected  before  witnesses." 

"  If  you  dare  disturb  the  sanctuary  of  the  grave,"  said 
the  Doctor  vehemently,  "  or  with  your  unliallowed 
hands  touch  the  remains  of  my  venerable  and  revered 
predecessor,  it  had  been  better  for  you,  and  all  who 
make  the  attempt,  that  you  never  had  been  born.  If 
not  then  for  my  sake,  for  the  sake  of  my  wife,  the  sole 
daughter  of  the  man  to  whom  you  have  all  been  obliged, 
let  this  abominable  and  malicious  calumny  go  no  far- 
ther, but  put  it  down  ;  I  pray  of  you  to  put  it  down,  as 
you  would  value  your  own  advantage." 

"  I  have  seen  him,  and  spoke  with  him — that  I  aver," 
said  the  Dominie.  "  And  shall  I  tell  you  what  he^said 
to  me?" 

"  No,  no !  I'll  hear  no  more  of  such  absolute  and  dis- 
gusting nonsense,"  said  the  Laird. 

"  Then,  since  it  hath  come  to  this,  I  will  declare  it 
in  the  face  of  the  whole  world,  and  pursue  it  to  the  last," 
said  the  Dominie,  "  ridiculous  as  it  is,  and  I  confess  that 
it  is  even  so.  I  have  seen  yom*  father-in-law  within  the 
last  twenty  hours ;  at  least  a  being  in  his  form  and  ha- 
biliments, and  having  his  aspect  and  voice.  And  he 
told  me,  that  he  believed  you  were  a  very  great  scoun- 
drel, and  that  you  had  helped  him  off  the  stage  of  time 
in  a  great  haste,  for  fear  of  the  operation  of  a  will,  which 
he  had  just  executed,  very  much  to  your  prejudice.  I 


324      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

was  somewhat  aghast,  but  ventnred  to  remark,  that  he 
must  surely  have  been  sensible  whether  you  murdered 
him  or  not,  and  in  what  way.  He  replied,  that  he  was 
not  absolutely  certain,  for  at  the  time  you  put  him 
down,  he  was  much  in  his  customary  way  of  nights, — 
very  drunk ;  but  that  he  greatly  suspected  you  had 
hanged  him,  for,  ever  since  he  had  died,  he  had  beea 
troubled  with  a  severe  crick  in  his  neck.  Having  seen 
my  late  worthy  patron's  body  deposited  in  the  coffin^ 
and  afterwards  consigned  to  the  grave,  these  things 
overcame  me,  and  a  kind  of  mist  came  over  my  senses  ; 
but  I  heard  him  saying  as  he  withdrew,  what  a  pity  it 
was  that  my  nerves  could  not  stand  this  disclosure. 
Now,  for  my  own  satisfaction,  I  am  resolved  that  to- 
morrow, I  shall  raise  the  village,  with  the  two  ministers 
at  the  head  of  the  multitude,  and  have  the  body,  and 
particularly  the  neck  of  the  deceased,  minutely  ia- 
spected." 

"  If  you  do  so,  I  shall  make  one  of  the  number," 
said  the  Doctor.  "  But  I  am  resolved  that  in  the  first 
place  every  mean  shall  be  tried  to  prevent  a  scene  o-f 
madness  and  absurdity  so  disgi-aceful  to  a  well-regu- 
lated village,  and  a  sober  community." 

"  There  is  but  one  direct  line  that  can  be  followed, 
and  any  other  would  either  form  an  acute  or  obtuse 
angle,"  said  the  Dominie ;  "  therefore  I  am  resolved  to 
proceed  right  forward,  on  mathematical  principles ;"  and 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  325 

away  he  went,  skipping  on  his  crutch,  to  arouse  the  vil- 
lagers to  the  scrutiny. 

The  smith  remained  behind,  concerting  with  the 
Doctor,  how  to  controvert  the  Dominie's  profound 
scheme  of  unshrouding  the  dead ;  and  certainly  the 
smith's  plan,  viewed  professionally,  was  not  amiss.  "  O, 
ye  ken,  sir,  we  maun  just  gie  him  another  heat,  and  try 
to  saften  him  to  reason,  for  he's  just  as  stubborn  as 
Muirkirk  ir'n.     He  beats  the  world  for  that." 

While  the  two  were  in  confabulation,  Johnston,  the 
old  house-servant,  came  in  and  said  to  the  Doctor — 
"  Sir,  your  servants  are  going  to  leave  the  house,  every 
one,  this  night,  if  you  cannot  fall  on  some  means  to  di- 
vert them  from  it.  The  okl  Laird  is,  it  seems,  risen 
again,  and  come  back  among  them,  and  they  are  all  in 
the  utmost  consternation.  Indeed,  they  are  quite  out 
of  their  reason.  He  appeared  in  the  stable  to  Broad- 
cast, who  has  been  these  two  hours  dead  Tvith  terror, 
but  is  now  recovered,  and  telling  such  a  tale  down  stairs, 
as  never  was  heard  from  the  mouth  of  man." 

"  Send  him  up  here,"  said  the  Doctor.  "  I  will 
silence  him.  What  does  the  ignorant  clown  mean  by 
joining  in  this  unnatural  clamour  ?" 

John  came  up,  with  his  broad  bonnet  in  his  hand, 
shut  the  door  with  hesitation,  and  then  felt  twice  with 
his  hand  if  it  really  was  shut.  "  Well,  John,"  said  the 
Doctor,  "  what  absurd  lie  is  this  that  you  are  vending 


326  THE  shepherd's  calendar.         \ 

among  yom-  fellow  servants,  of  having  seen  a  ghost?" 
John  picked  some  odds  and  ends  of  threads  out  of  his 
bonnet,  and  said  nothing.  '-'  You  are  an  old  supersti- 
tious dreaming  dotard,"  continued  the  Doctor ;  "  but  if 
you  propose  in  future  to  manufacture  such  stories,  you 
must,  from  this  instant,  do  it  somewhere  else  than  in 
my  service,  and  among  my  domestics.  What  have  you 
to  say  for  yourself?" 

"  Indeed,  sir,  I  hae  naething  to  say  but  this,  that  we 
hae  a'  muckle  reason  to  be  thankfu  that  we  are  as  we 
are." 

"And  whereon  does  that  wise  saw  bear  ?  What  re- 
lation has  that  to  the  seeing  of  a  ghost  ?  Confess  then 
this  instant,  that  you  have  forged  and  vended  a  delibe- 
rate lie." 

"  Indeed,  sir,  I  hae  muckle  reason  to  be  thankfu' " — 
"  For  what  ?" 

"  That  I  never  tauld  a  deliberate  lee  in  my  life.  My 
late  master  came  and  spake  to  me  in  the  stable ;  but 
whether  it  was  his  ghaist  or  himsell — a  good  angel  or 
a  bad  ane,  I  hae  reason  to  be  thankfu  I  never  said ;  for 
I  do — not — kenJ' 

"  Now,  pray  let  us  hear  from  that  sage  tongue  of 
yours,  so  full  of  sublime  adages,  what  this  doubtful  be- 
ing said  to  you  ?" 

"  I  wad  rather  be  excused,  an  it  were  your  honour's 
will,  and  wad  hae  reason  to  be  thankfu." 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  327 

"  And  why  should  you  decline  telling  this  ?" 

"  Because  I  ken  ye  wadna  believe  a  word  o't,  it  is 
siccan  a  strange  story,  O  sirs,  but  folks  hae  muckle 
reason  to  be  thankfu'  that  they  are  as  they  are !" 

"  Well,  out  with  this  strange  story  of  yours.  I  do 
not  promise  to  credit  it,  but  shall  give  it  a  patient  hear- 
ing, provided  you  swear  that  there  is  no  forgery  in  it." 

"  Weel,  as  I  was  suppering  the  horses  the  night,  I 
was  dressing  my  late  kind  master's  favourite  mare,  and 
I  was  just  thinking  to  mysell,  An  he  had  been  leaving,  I 
wadna  hae  been  my  lane  the  night,  for  he  wad  hae  been 
standing  over  me  cracking  his  jokes,  and  swearing  at  me 
in  his  good-natured  hamely  way.  Aye,  but  he's  gane  to 
his  lang  account,  thinks  I,  and  we  poor  frail  dying  crea- 
tures that  are  left  ahind  hae  muckle  reason  to  be  thank- 
fu' that  we  are  as  we  are ;  when  I  looks  up,  and  behold 
there's  my  auld  master  standing  leaning  against  the  tri- 
vage,  as  he  used  to  do,  and  looking  at  me.  I  canna  but 
say  my  heart  was  a  little  astoundit,  and  maybe  lap  up 
through  my  midriff  into  my  breath-bellows — I  couldna 
say ;  but  in  the  strength  o'  the  Lord  I  was  enabled  to 
retain  my  senses  for  a  good  while.  '  John  Broadcast,' 
said  he,  with  a  deep  and  angry  tone, — '  John  Broadcast, 
what  the  d — 1  are  you  thinking  about  ?  You  are  not 
currying  that  maie  half.  What  a  d — d  lubberly  way 
of  dressing  a  horse  is  that?' 


S28     THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

"  '  L — d  make  us  thankfu',  master !'  says  I, '  are  you 
there?' 

"  '  Where  else  would  you  hare  me  to  be  at  this  hour 
of  the  night,  old  blockhead  ?'  says  he. 

"  '  In  another  hame  than  this,  master,'  says  I ;  '  but 
I  fear  me  it  is  nae  good  ane,  that  ye  are  sae  soon  tired 
o't.' 

('  i  A  d — d  bad  one,  I  assure  you,'  says  he. 

"  '  Ay,  but,  master,'  says  I,  '  ye  hae  muckle  reason 
to  be  thankfu'  that  ye  are  as  ye  are.' 

"  '  In  what  respects,  dotard  ?'  says  he. 

"  '  That  ye  hae  liberty  to  come  out  o't  a  start  now 
and  then  to  get  the  air,'  says  I ;  and  oh,  my  heart  was 
sair  for  him  when  I  thought  o'  his  state !  and  though  I 
was  thankfu'  that  I  was  as  I  was,  my  heart  and  flesh 
began  to  fail  me,  at  thinking  of  my  being  speaking  face 
to  face  wi'  a  being  frae  the  unhappy  place.  But  out 
he  briks  again  wi'  a  grit  round  o'  swearing  about  the 
mare  being  ill  keepit ;  and  he  ordere'l  me  to  cast  my 
coat  and  curry  her  weel,  for  that  he  had  a  lang  journey 
to  take  on  her  the  mom. 

"  '  You  take  a  journey  on  her  I'  says  I,  '  I  fear  my 
new  master  will  dispute  that  privilege  with  you,  for  he 
rides  her  himsell  the  morn.' 

"  *  He  ride  her  1'  cried  the  angiy  spirit ;  and  then  it 
burst  out  into  a  lang  string  of  imprecations,  fearsome  to 
hear,  against  you,  sir ;  and  then  added, '  Soon  soon  shall 


THE  LAIRD  OP  WINEHOLM.  329 

he  be  levelled  with  the  dust !  The  dog !  the  parricide  ! 
first  to  betray  my  child,  and  then  to  put  down  myself ! 
— But  he  shall  not  escape!  he  shall  not  escape!'  cried 
he  with  such  a  hellish  growl,  that  I  fainted,  and  heard 
no  more." 

"  Weel,  that  beats  the  world  !"  quoth  the  smith ;  "  I 
wad  hae  thought  the  mare  wad  hae  luppen  ower  yird 
and  stane,  or  fa'en  down  dead  wi'  fright." 

"  Na,  na,"  said  John,  "  in  place  o'  that,  whenever 
she  heard  him  fa'  a-s wearing,  she  was  sae  glad  that  she 
fell  a-nickering." 

"  Na,  but  that  beats  the  haill  world  a'thegither !" 
quoth  the  smith.  "  Then  it  has  been  nae  ghaist  ava, 
ye  may  depend  on  that." 

"  I  little  wat  what  it  was,"  said  John,  "  but  it  was 
a  being  in  nae  good  or  happy  state  o'  mind,  and  is  a 
warning  to  us  a'  how  muckle  reason  we  hae  to  be  thank- 
fu'  that  we  are  as  we  are." 

The  Doctor  pretended  to  laugh  at  the  absurdity  of 
John's  narrative,  but  it  was  with  a  ghastly  and  doubt- 
ful expression  of  countenance,  as  though  he  thought  the 
story  far  too  ridiculous  for  any  clodpole  to  have  con- 
trived out  of  his  own  head ;  and  forthwith  he  dismissed 
the  two  dealers  in  the  marvellous,  with  very  little  cere- 
mony, the  one  protesting  that  the  thing  beat  the  world, 
and  the  other  that  they  had  both  reason  to  be  thankfu' 
that  they  were  as  they  were. 


330      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

The  next  morning  the  villagers,  small  and  great,  were 
assembled  at  an  early  hour  to  witness  the  lifting  of  the 
body  of  their  late  laird,  and  headed  by  the  established 
and  dissenting  clergymen,  and  two  surgeons,  they  pro- 
ceeded to  the  tomb,  and  soon  extracted  the  splendid 
coffin,  which  they  opened  with  all  due  caution  and  cere- 
mony. But  instead  of  the  murdered  body  of  their  late 
benefactor,  which  they  expected  in  good  earnest  to  find, 
there  was  nothing  in  the  coffin  but  a  layer  of  gravel,  of 
about  the  weight  of  a  corpulent  man ! 

The  clamour  against  the  new  laird  then  rose  all  at 
once  into  a  tumult  that  it  was  impossible  to  check,  every 
one  declaring  aloud  that  he  had  not  only  murdered  their 
benefactor,  but,  for  fear  of  the  discovery,  had  raised  the 
body,  and  given,  or  rather  sold  it,  for  dissection.  The 
thing  was  not  to  be  tolerated !  so  the  mob  proceeded 
in  a  body  up  to  Wineholm  Place,  to  take  out  their  poor 
deluded  lady,  and  burn  the  Doctor  and  his  basely  ac- 
quired habitation  to  ashes.  It  was  not  till  the  multi- 
tude had  surrounded  the  house,  that  the  ministers  and 
two  or  three  other  gentlemen  could  stay  them,  which 
they  only  did  by  assuring  the  mob  that  they  would 
bring  out  the  Doctor  before  their  eyes,  and  deliver  him 
up  to  justice.  This  pacified  the  throng ;  but  on  inquiry 
at  the  hall,  it  was  found  that  the  Doctor  had  gone  oiF 
early  that  morning,  so  that  nothing  further  could  be 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  331 

done  for  the  present.  But  the  coffin,  filled  with  gravel, 
was  laid  up  in  the  aisle,  and  kept  open  for  inspection. 

Nothing  could  now  exceed  the  consternation  of  the 
simple  villagers  of  Wineholm  at  these  dark  and  myste- 
rious events.  Business,  labour,  and  employment  of 
every  sort,  were  at  a  stand,  and  the  people  hurried 
about  to  one  another's  houses,  and  mingled  their  con- 
jectures together  in  one  heterogeneous  mass.  The  smith 
put  his  hand  to  the  bellows,  but  forgot  to  blow  till  the 
fire  went  out;  the  weaver  leaned  on  his  beam,  and  list- 
ened to  the  legends  of  the  ghastly  tailor.  The  team 
stood  in  mid  furrow,  and  the  thrasher  agaping  over  his 
flail ;  and  even  the  Dominie  was  heard  to  declare  that 
the  geometrical  series  of  events  was  increasing  by  no 
common  measure,  and  therefore  ought  to  be  calculated 
rather  arithmetically  than  by  logarithms ;  and  John 
Broadcast  saw  more  and  more  reason  for  being  thank- 
ful that  he  was  as  he  was,  and  neither  a  stock  nor  a 
stone,  nor  a  brute  beast. 

E  veiy  new  thing  that  happened  was  more  extraordinary 
than  the  last ;  and  the  most  puzzling  of  all  was  the  cir- 
cumstance of  the  late  Laird's  mare,  saddle,  bridle,  and  all, 
being  off"  before  day  the  next  morning  ;  so  that  Dr  Da- 
vington  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  his  own,  on 
which  he  was  seen  posting  away  on  the  road  towards 
Edinburgh.  It  was  thus  but  too  obvious  that  the  ghost 
of  the  late  Lakd  had  ridden  off  on  his  favourite  mare, 


332      THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

the  Lord  only  knew  whither !  for  as  to  that  point  none 
of  the  sages  of  Wineholm  could  divine.  But  their  souls 
grew  chill  as  an  iceberg,  and  their  very  frames  rigid,  at 
the  thoughts  of  a  spirit  riding  away  on  a  brute  beast  to 
the  place  appointed  for  wicked  men.  And  had  not  John 
Broadcast  reason  to  be  thankful  that  he  was  as  he  was  ? 
However,  the  outcry  of  the  community  became  so 
outrageous,  of  murder,  and  foul  play  in  so  many  ways, 
that  the  officers  of  justice  were  compelled  to  take  note 
of  it ;  and  accordingly  the  Sheriff- substitute,  the  She- 
rifF-clerk,  the  Fiscal,  and  two  assistants,  came  in  two 
chaises  to  Wineholm  to  take  a  precognition ;  and  there 
a  court  was  held  which  lasted  the  whole  day,  at  which, 
Mrs  Davington,  the  late  Laird's  only  daughter,  all  the 
servants,  and  a  great  number  of  the  villagers,  were  exa- 
mined on  oath.  It  appeared  from  the  evidence  that 
Dr  Davington  had  come  to  the  village  and  set  up  as 
a  surgeon — that  he  had  used  every  endeavour  to  be 
employed  in  the  Laird's  family  in  vain,  as  the  latter  de- 
tested him.  That  he,  however,  found  means  of  in- 
ducing his  only  daughter  to  elope  with  him,  which 
put  the  Laird  quite  beside  himself,  and  from  thence- 
forward he  became  drowned  in  dissipation.  That  such, 
however,  was  his  affection  for  his  daughter,  that  he 
caused  her  to  live  with  him,  but  would  never  suffer 
the  Doctor  to  enter  his  door — that  it  was  nevertheless 
quite  customary  for  the  Doctor  to  be  sent  for  to  his 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  333 

lady's  chamber,  particularly  when  her  father  was  in  his 
cups ;  and  that  on  a  certain  night,  when  the  Laird  had 
had  company,  and  was  so  overcome  that  he  could  not 
rise  from  his  chair,  he  had  died  suddenly  of  apoplexy ; 
and  that  no  other  skill  was  sent  for,  or  near  him,  but 
this  his  detested  son-in-law,  whom  he  had  by  will  dis- 
inherited, though  the  legal  term  for  rendering  that  will 
competent  had  not  expired.  The  body  was  coffined 
the  second  day  after  death,  and  locked  up  in  a  low 
room  in  one  of  the  wings  of  the  building ;  and  nothing 
farther  could  be  elicited.  The  Doctor  was  missing, 
and  it  was  whispered  that  he  had  absconded  ;  indeed 
it  was  evident,  and  the  Sheriff  acknowledged,  that  ac- 
cording to  the  evidence  taken,  the  matter  had  a  very 
suspicious  aspect,  although  there  was  no  direct  proof 
against  the  Doctor.  It  was  proved  that  he  had  at- 
tempted to  bleed  the  patient,  but  had  not  succeeded, 
and  that  at  that  time  the  old  Laird  was  black  in  the 
face. 

When  it  began  to  wear  nigh  night,  and  nothing  far- 
ther could  be  learned,  the  Sheriff-clerk,  a  quiet  con- 
siderate gentleman,  asked  why  they  had  not  examined 
the  Wright  who  made  the  coffin,  and  also  placed  the 
body  in  it  ?  The  thing  had  not  been  thought  of;  but 
he  was  found  in  court,  and  instantly  put  into  the  wit- 
ness's box,  and  examined  on  oath.  His  name  was 
James  Sanderson,  a  stout-made,  little,  slu'ewd-looking 


334  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

man,  with  a  very  peculiar  squint.  He  was  examined 
tJius  by  the  Procurator-fiscal. 

"  Were  you  long  acquainted  with  the  late  Laird  of 
Wineholm,  James  ?" 

"  Yes,  ever  since  I  left  my  apprenticeship  ;  for  I 
suppose  about  nineteen  years." 

"  Was  he  very  much  given  to  drinking  of  late  ?" 

"  I  could  not  say.  He  took  his  glass  geyan  heart- 
ily." 

"  Did  you  ever  drink  with  him  ?" 

"  O  yes,  mony  a  time." 

"  You  must  have  seen  him  very  dnink  then  ?  Did 
you  ever  see  him  so  drunk  that  he  could  not  rise,  for 
instance  ?" 

"  O  never !  for,  lang  afore  that,  I  could  not  have 
kenn'd  whether  he  was  sitting  or  standing." 

"  Were  you  present  at  the  corpse-chesting  ?" 

"  Yes,  I  was." 

"  And  were  you  certain  the  body  was  then  deposit- 
ed in  the  coffin  ?" 

"  Yes  ;  quite  certain." 

"  Did  you  screw  down  the  coffin-lid  firmly  then,  as 
you  do  others  of  the  same  make  ?" 

"  No,  I  did  not." 

"  What  were  your  reasons  for  that  ?" 

"  They  were  no  reasons  of  mine — I  did  what  I  was 
ordered.     There  were  private  reasons,  which  I  then 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  335 

wist  not  of.  But,  gentlemen,  there  are  some  things 
connected  with  this  affair,  which  I  am  bound  in  honour 
not  to  reveal — I  hope  you  will  not  compel  me  to  di- 
vulge them  at  present." 

"  You  are  bound  by  a  solemn  oath,  James,  which 
is  the  highest  of  all  obligations ;  and  for  the  sake  of 
justice,  you  must  tell  every  thing  you  know  ;  and  it 
would  be  better  if  you  would  just  tell  your  tale  straight 
forward,  without  the  interruption  of  question  and  an- 
swer." 

"  Well,  then,  since  it  must  be  so  :  That  day,  at  the 
chesting,  the  Doctor  took  me  aside,  and  says  to  me, 
*  James  Sanderson,  it  will  be  necessary  that  something 
be  put  into  the  coffin  to  prevent  any  unpleasant  flavour 
before  the  funeral ;  for,  owing  to  the  corpulence,  and 
inflamed  state  of  the  body  by  apoplexy,  there  will  be 
great  danger  of  this.' 

a  i  Very  well,  sir,'  says  I — <  what  shall  I  bring  ?' 

"  *  You  had  better  only  screw  down  the  lid  lightly 
at  present,  then,'  said  he,  '  and  if  you  could  bring  a 
bucketful  of  quicklime,  a  little  while  hence,  and  pour 
it  over  the  body,  especially  over  the  face,  it  is  a  very 
good  thing,  an  excellent  thing  for  preventing  any  de- 
leterious efiluvia  from  escaping.' 

"  '  Very  well,  sir,'  says  I ;  and  so  I  followed  his  di- 
rections. I  procured  the  lime  ;  and  as  I  was  to  come 
privately  in  the  evening  to  deposit  it  in  the  coffin,  in 


336  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

company  with  the  Doctor  alone,  1  was  putting  off  the 
time  in  my  workshop,  polishing  some  trifle,  and  think- 
ing to  myself  that  I  could  not  find  in  my  heart  to  choke 
up  my  old  friend  with  quicklime,  even  after  he  was 
dead,  when,  to  my  unspeakable  horror,  wlio  should 
enter  my  workshop  but  the  identical  Laird  himself, 
dressed  in  his  dead -clothes  in  the  very  same  manner 
in  which  I  had  seen  him  laid  in  the  coffin,  but  ap- 
parently all  streaming  in  blood  to  the  feet.  I  fell  back 
over  against  a  cart-wheel,  and  was  going  to  call  out, 
but  could  not ;  and  as  he  stood  straight  in  the  door, 
there  was  no  means  of  escape.  At  length  the  appa- 
rition spoke  to  me  in  a  hoarse  trembling  voice,  enough 
to  have  frightened  a  whole  conclave  of  bishops  out  of 
their  senses ;  and  it  says  to  me,  *  Jamie  Sanderson ! 
O,  Jamie  Sanderson  !  I  have  been  forced  to  appear  to 
you  in  a  d — d  frightful  guise  !'  These  were  the  very 
first  words  it  spoke, — and  they  were  far  frae  being  a 
lie ;  but  I  hafflins  thought  to  mysell,  that  a  being  in 
such  circumstances  might  have  spoke  with  a  little  more 
caution  and  decency.  I  could  make  no  answer,  for  my 
tongue  refused  all  attempts  at  articulation,  and  my  lips 
would  not  come  together  ;  and  all  that  I  could  do,  was 
to  lie  back  against  my  new  cart-wheel,  and  hold  up  my 
hands  as  a  kind  of  defence.  The  ghastly  and  blood- 
stained apparition,  advancing  a  step  or  two,  held  up 
6 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WINEHOLM.  337 

both  its  hands,  flying  with  dead  ruffles,  and  cried  to 
me  in  a  still  more  frightful  voice,  '  O,  my  faithful  old 
friend !  I  have  been  murdered  I  I  am  a  murdered  man, 
Jamie  Sanderson !  and  if  you  do  not  assist  me  in  bring- 
ing upon  the  wretch  due  retribution,  you  will  be  d — d 
to  hell,  sir.' " 

"  This  is  sheer  raving,  James,"  said  the  Sherifl^,  in- 
terrupting him.  "  These  words  can  be  nothing  but 
the  ravings  of  a  disturbed  and  heated  imagination.  I 
entreat  you  to  recollect,  that  you  have  appealed  to  the 
great  Judge  of  heaven  and  earth  for  the  truth  of  what 
you  assert  here,  and  to  answer  accordingly." 

"  I  know  what  I  am  caying,  my  Lord  Sheriff,"  said 
Sanderson ;  "and  am  telling  naething  but  the  plain 
truth,  as  nearly  as  my  state  of  mind  at  the  time  per- 
mits me  to  recollect.  The  appalling  figure  approach- 
ed still  neaier  and  nearer  to  me,  breathing  threatenings 
if  I  would  not  rise  and  fly  to  its  assistance,  and  swear- 
ing like  a  sergeant  of  dragoons  at  both  the  Doctor  and 
myself.  At  length  it  came  so  close  on  me,  that  I  had 
no  other  shift  but  to  hold  up  both  feet  and  hands  to 
shield  me,  as  I  had  seen  herons  do  when  knocked  down 
by  a  goshawk,  and  I  cried  out ;  but  even  my  voice 
failed,  so  that  I  only  cried  like  one  through  his  sleep. 

"  '  What  the  devil  are  you  lying  gaping  and  bray- 
ing at  there  ?'  said  he,  seizing  me  by  the  wrists,  and 

VOIi.  I.  p 


338  THE  shepherd's  calendar. 

dragging  me  after  him.     '  Do  you  not  see  the  plight 
I  am  in,  and  why  won't  you  fly  to  succour  me  ?' 

"  I  now  felt  to  my  great  relief,  that  this  teiTific  ap- 
parition was  a  being  of  flesh,  blood,  and  bones,  like 
myself ;  that,  in  short,  it  was  indeed  my  kind  old 
friend  the  Laird  popped  out  of  his  open  coffin,  and 
come  over  to  pay  me  an  evening  visit,  but  certainly 
in  such  a  guise  as  earthly  visit  was  never  paid.    I  sooA 
gathered  up  my  scattered  senses,  took  my  old  friend 
into  my  room,  bathed  him  all  over,  and  washed  him 
well  in  lukewarm  water;  then  put  him  into  a  warm 
bed,  gave  him  a  glass  or  two  of  warm  punch,  and  he 
came  round  amazingly.     He  caused  me  to  sm-vey  liis 
neck  a  hundred  times  I  am  sure  ;  and  I  had  no  doubt 
he  had  been  strangled,  for  there  was  a  purple  ring 
round  it,  which  in  some  places  was  black,  and  a  little 
swollen ;  his  voice  creaked  like  a  door  hinge,  and  his 
features  were  still  distorted.     He  swore  teiTibly  at 
both'  the  Doctor  and  myself;  but  nothing  put  him 
half  so  mad  as  the  idea  of  the  quicklime  being  poured 
over  him,  and  paiticularly  over  his  face.     I  am  mis- 
taken if  that  experiment  does  not  serve  him   for  a 
theme  of  execration  as  long  as  he  lives." 

"  So  he  is  then  alive,  you  say  ?"  asked  the  Fiscal. 

"  O  yes,  sir  !  alive  and  tolerably  well,  considering. 
We  two  have  had  several  bottles  together  in  my  quiet 
room  ;  for  I  have  still  kept  him  concealed,  to  see  what 


THE  LAIRD  OF  W1NEH0L3I  339 

the  Doctor  would  do  next.  He  is  in  terror  for  bim 
somehow,  until  sixty  days  be  over  from  some  date 
that  he  talks  of,  and  seems  assured  that  that  dog  will 
have  his  life  by  hook  or  crook,  unless  he  can  bring 
him  to  the  gallows  betimes,  and  he  is  absent  on  that 
business  to-day.  One  night  lately,  when  fully  half- 
seas  over,  he  set  off  to  the  schoolhouse,  and  frighten- 
ed the  Dominie  ;  and  last  night  he  went  up  to  the 
stable,  and  gave  old  Broadcast  a  hearing  for  not  keep- 
ing his  mare  well  enough, 

"  It  appeared  that  some  shaking  motion  in  the  cof- 
fining of  him  had  brought  him  to  himself,  after  bleed- 
ing abundantly  both  at  mouth  and  nose  ;  that  he  was 
on  his  feet  ere  ever  he  knew  how  he  had  been  dispo- 
sed of,  and  was  quite  shocked  at  seemg  the  open  coffin 
on  the  bed,  and  himself  dressed  in  his  grave-clothes, 
and  all  in  one  bath  of  blood.  He  flew  to  the  door, 
but  it  was  locked  outside  ;  he  rapped  furiously  for 
something  to  drink ;  but  the  room  was  far  remt)ved 
from  any  inhabited  part  of  the  house,  and  none  re- 
gai'ded.  So  he  had  nothing  for  it  but  to  open  the 
window,  and  come  through  the  garden  and  the  back 
loaning  to  my  workshop.  And  as  I  had  got  orders  to 
bring  a  bucketful  of  quicklime,  I  went  over  in  the 
forenight  with  a  bucketful  of  heavy  gravel,  as  mucli 
as  1  could  carry,  and  a  little  white  lime  sprinkled  on 
the  top  of  it ;  and  being  let  in  by  the  Doctor,  I  de- 


340         THE  SHEPHERDS  CALENDAR. 

posited  that  in  the  coffin,  screwed  down  the  lid,  and 
left  it,  and  the  funeral  followed  in  due  course,  the 
whole  of  which  the  Laird  viewed  from  my  window, 
and  gave  the  Doctor  a  hearty  day's  cursing  for  daring 
to  support  his  head  and  lay  it  in  the  grave. — And  this, 
gentlemen,  is  the  substance  of  what  I  know  concern- 
ing this  enormous  deed,  which  is,  I  think,  quite  suffi- 
cient. The  Laird  bound  me  to  secrecy  until  such 
time  as  he  could  bring  matters  to  a  proper  bearing 
for  securing  of  the  Doctor  ;  but  as  you  have  forced  it 
flora  me,  you  must  stand  my  surety,  and  answer  the 
charges  against  me." 

The  Laird  arrived  that  night  with  proper  authority^ 
and  a  number  of  officers,  to  have  the  Doctor,  his  son- 
in-law,  taken  into  custody ;  but  the  bird  had  flown  ; 
and  from  that  day  forth  he  was  never  seen,  so  as  to  be 
recognised,  in  Scotland.  The  Laird  lived  many  years 
after  that  ;  and  though  the  thoughts  of  the  quick- 
lime made  him  diink  a  great  deal,  yet  from  that  time 
he  never  suffered  himself  to  get  quite  drunk,  lest  some 
one  might  have  taken  it  into  his  head  to  hang  him, 
and  he  not  know  any  thing  about  it.  The  Dominie 
acknowledged  that  it  was  as  impracticable  to  calcu- 
late what  might  happen  in  human  affairs  as  to  square 
the  circle,  which  could  only  be  effected  by  knowing 
the  ratio  of  the  circumference  to  the  radius.  For 
shoeing  horses,  vending  news,  and  awarding  proper 


THE  LAIRD  OF  WIXEIIOLM.  341 

punishments,  the  smith  to  this  day  just  beats  the 
world.  And  old  John  Broadcast  is  as  thankful  to 
Heaven  as  ever  that  things  are  as  they  are. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


S^ 


EMNBURGH 

PKIKTED  BY  BALLANTyNE  AND  COMl'ANT, 

PAUL'S  WORK.  CANONGATE. 


UNIVERSrTY  OF  ILLINOIS-URBANA 


3  0112  084212833 


SiS-S' 


SM&^ 


iiiSM 


m^^. 


^:-*'''f*i 


im 


Kl 


lliiiiil 
