An Outline of Christian Theology (W.N. Clarke, 1898)
==========================================================
Clarke's 1898 Outline of Christian Theology — the Colgate theologian's liberal Baptist system, theology from the Christian consciousness. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

06


$9

Z _j
D


129 159


UNIVERSAL

UBRARY


AN OUTLINE

OF

CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


BY WILLIAM NEWTON CLARKE, DJ>.


THB IDEAL OF JEStlB

BDCTT TEAB8 WITH THE BIBUS

THE CEBXSTIAN DOCTRINE OF GOO

THE TT8B OF THE 8CRIFTimE8 IN THEOLOGY

A BTtJDT OF CBBlSTtAN ICSSIOKS

GAN 1 BEIJEVE IN 600 THE FATHER?

WHAT SHALL WE THINK OF CHBI8TUN1TT ?
AN OUTLINE OF CHBISTIAK THEOLOGY


CHARLES SCRIBNER!S SONS


AN OUTLINE


OF


CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


BY

WILLIAM NEWTON CLARKE, D.D.

PROFESSOR OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY IN COLGATE UNIVERSITY
HAMILTON, NEW YORK


NEW YORK

CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS


COPWlGHt, 1898 , B«
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

Printed in the United States of America


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

tAKSBL

lOcUGioN AND Theology.* <

Religion.— Theology as related to Religion. — The Christian Re*
ligion and its Theology. — Christian and non-Christian Theologies.

— Revelation..*.. i-io

The Sources of Christian Theology lo

1 . The Christian Revelation as a Source of Theology 12

Made in life and action 13-16

preserved,

In the Religious Life that sprang from it— The service rendered

by Christian Experience 16-22

In the Scriptures. — The collection, the authorship, the date and
the spiritual quality of the Scriptures. — The Scriptures as various,
progressive, free. — The Inspiration of the Scriptures. — The
Authority of the Scriptures.— The use of the Scriptures in


Theology 22-47

II. Sources for Theology outside the Christian Revelation 47

Man. — The Universe interpreted by Science, and by Philosophy. 47-53

Qualifications for the Study of Christian Theology 53

Intellectual Qualifications. — Qualifications in Spirit and Temper

of Mind. — Qualifications by way of Knowledge 53*57

General Method of Study 58-62

Terminology and Order of Treatment * 62


PART 1. GOD.


4. The Christian Conception of God. 63

r. The Definition of God 64

The Nature of God. — The Character of God. — The Relation

of God to other Existence.— The Motive of God 64-75

2. The Attributes of God 75

Defined. — Distinguished from his Being. — How learned.—
How classified. —Omnipresence.— Omniscience. — Omnipotence.

— Immutability. — Holiness. — Love. — Holiness and love. —
Wisdom .«.75-xo2


CONTENTS


IL The BMstence of God 102

Introductory Statements * 102*105

U Evidence from the Intellectual starting-point.— Through the
intelligibleness of the Universe to us. —Through the idea of
Cause. — Through the presence of Ends in the Universe. .... 105*118
2. Evidence from the Religious starting-point — Through the re-
ligious Nature of Man. — Through the great Dilemma, a good
God or a bad one. — Through the spiritual Experience of

Men - 118*126

Objections 126*128

HI. The Relation of God to the Universe 128

As the Source of the Universe. — As a free Spirit — As to his
uniform method. — As to his spiritual purpose. — As to his right
of control. — As to his exercise of control — As to his attitude,
as Father and Servant. — As to his moral government. — As to
predestination. — As to his Providence. — As to the existence of

Evil. — The relation of the Universe to God 128*161

tv. The Divine Trinity and Triunity- 161

1. The Trinity, or the Threefold Self-Manifestation of God. —The

One God. — Jesus Christ the Son of God. — The Holy
Spirit ..161*165

2. The Triunity, or God’s Triune Mode of Existence. — The
material in the New Testament. — The unfolding of the doctrine.

— Statements on the meaning of terms.— Definition of Tri-
unity.— Explanation from the nature of Self-Consciousness.—
Comments on this explanation. — Relation of Trinity and Tri-
unity to Christianity .165*181


PART II. MAN.


I. The Human Constitution of Body and Spirit. 182
** Soul ” and ** Spirit.” — The Human Body. — The Human Spirit
and Personality. — The distinctive mark of Man, in contrast to
animals. — The likeness of God in Man. — The Immortality of
Man .182-198

£ 1 . Man as a Moral Being 198

Conscience. — Obligation. — The Ground of Obligation. — The
Standard of Obligation. — The Will — The Freedom of the
Will....... 198*215

III. The Relation of the Individual to the Human Race* 215

Theories of Pre-cxistence, Immediate Creation, and Tranemission

of Life. — Influence of the Race upon the Individual through in-
heritance, and through relations 21

IV. The Origin of the Human Race 222

Remanded to the appropriate Sdences..*..* *.*222*226


COi^TEirTS


V«


PART IIL SIN.


pags

I. The Reality of Sin. zzy

Testimony of the Christian Revelation* of the common moral
judgment, and of observed facts. 227-251

II. The Nature of Sin 231

1. Insufficient explanations of Sin* As dominion of Body over

Spirit. — As blameless incident of growth 231-233

2. The determinative Quality of Sin. — Five views of Sin, with

definition 233-239

III. Sin in Relation to the Human Race. 239

The entrance of Sin to the Human Race. •— The perpetuation of
Sin in the Human Race. — Depravity. 239-245

IV. Sin in Relation to the Individual before God 245

The Nature of Guilt — The Nature of Penalty. — The Nature of
Forgiveness. — The Attitude of God toward Sinful Men ....••. 24^59


PART IV. CHRIST.


Introductory. Thb Place of Christ in History. 260

1 . The Recorded Facts concerning Christ — The Sources 261


I. The most important Events in the Life of Christ — A miracii*
lous Birth. A human Life.— A unique relation to God.— A
Ministry of usefulness. — Teaching. — Miracles. — Rejection by
Israel. — Death. — Resurrection. — The Record of a sinless


Life 263-276

2. The Purpose of Christ’s Mission in the Gospels. — Statements

of the Synoptics. — Statements of the Fourth Gospel 276-280

3. The Result of Christ's Mission, in the later Scriptures 280-284

II. The Person of Christ 285

1. The Incarnation in the New Testament 286-290

2. The Possibility of the Incarnation 290-297

3. The Person that resulted from the Incarnation 297-302

4. The Place of the Incarnation in the Plan of God 302-304

III. The Unity of Christ with God and with the Human Race. ..... 305


A Vital Relation on both sides. — Son of God.— Son of Man. .305-308
Consequences of Christ’s vital Oneness with God and Man. — Rev-
elation of God, and of Man, in him, — Sympathy on his part with
God, and with Men. — Reconciliation between God and Men.—
Names of the Work of Christ — Theories of the Work of

Christ 30S-321

IV. The Reconciliation of God and Men in Christ 521

1 . The Conditions of this Reconciliation. — As to its Personal
Nature. — As to the vrillingness of the parties. — As to the claims
of Law. — As to the necessity for Punishment .321-332


CONTENTS


• ••

Vlll


l^AGB

a* The Work of Christ in effecting this Reconciliation 332

Preparatory Statements. — The Work of Christ in the light
of his Person. — The Work of Christ as a work of God acting
simply in free Grace. — The Work of Christ as a direct and vital
means of Reconciliation, rather than a transactional basis

for it 332-339

The action of God in Christ was self-expression with reference
to Sin. — Expression of God as hating Sin, as Saviour to sinners,
and as the great Sin-bearer. — Redemptive Suffering in God, and

m Christ 339-347

The Object of God in this self-expression. — To win Men, and

to satisfy God himself. — Propitiation 347-349

The self-expression of God as made within humanity. — The
human joined with the divine in seeking reconciliation. — Vica-
riousness. — The New Humanity established in Christ, wherein
Men are reconciled to God. — This Humanity redemptive.. . *349-360
The Outcome of the Work of Christ. — How God thinks of the
World. — How God thinks of Men who are in Christ. — -How


Men should think of God • • 360-362

V. The Present Activity of Christ 362

As King. — As Priest ••••365-367


PART V. THE HOLY SPIRIT AND THE DIVINE
LIFE IN MAN.


L What is meant by the Holy Spirit. 369

U. The Holy Spirit in relation to the Work of Christ. 373

The Promise of the Paraclete •••*373-37^

III. The Work of the Holy Spirit in the World 376

The Convincing of the Spirit — The Extent of this Work 376-381

IV. The Work of the Holy Spirit in the Church 381

The Church. — The work of Reminding. — The work of
Guidance 3^i'"3S5

V. 'fhe Work of the Holy Spirit in Individuals 386

1 The Nature of the Divine Life in Man. — Ploly Love, to God,

and to Men : 38^389

The Freeness of the Divine Life. — The meaning of God's

Election 339*395

j. The Beginning of the Divine Life. — Regeneration. —Antece-
dents to Regeneration. — Repentance. — Faith, --Justification. 395-409

4, The Progress of the Divine Life, — Sanctification. — Helps to

the Divine Life. — Prayer.— The Length of the Process of
Sanctification * .409-4x8

5. The Permanence of the Divine life, — Two doctrines on the

subject — Statements presenting the case 418-424

Vl. A Group of the Holy Spirit's Works 424

Gifts in the Apostolic Age. — Inspiration. — Revivals of Reli*
gion ••424-427


CONTENTS


fat


PART VI. THINGS TO COME.


i. Things to come In this World 428

I, The Conditions of Study. — Ignorance of the future.— Ab-
sence of Revelation 4^*436

3. The Second Coming of Christ — Christ's Predictions of his
Coming. — How they were understood. — flow they were ful-
filled. — Summary of the Scriptural view. — Questions that remain

unanswered 436-443

II. Things to come Beyond this World 448


Death, and the Continuance of the Spirit. — Annihilation.— Condi-
tional Immortality. — Resurrection. — Judgment. — The Life Be*
yond.— A Life of Moral Action. — Infants in that Life.— Two
Moral States in that Life. — The question of Unchangeableness.—
The question of the aim of Retribution. — Dangers and safeguards


in present thought 449-480

Conclusion * 4S1-482

Index.*.


AN OUTLINE


OF

CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


INTRODUCTION

RELIGION AND THEOLOGY

Religion. — Theology is preceded by religion, as botany
by the life of plants. Religion is the reality of which
theology is the study.

Religion is the life of man in his superhuman relations ;
that is, in his relation to the Power that produced him, the
Authority that is over him, and the unseen Being with
whom he is capable of communion. This unseen Being,
this Authority, and this Power are one, in the good God
and Father whom it is eternal life to know; but this is a
last religious truth for man, rather than a first, and until this
comes religion is incomplete, one-sided, and more or less
misleading. But religion is always the life and experience
of man as a being who is dependent upon power, answer-
able to authority, and adapted to commune with unseen,
spiritual reality.

Religion is grounded in the constitution of man, for man
possesses a religious nature. That is to say, man is a
dependent being, related to a Power above him ; a respon-
sible being, answerable to an Authority over him ; and a
spirit, adapted to acquaintance and fellowship with God.
This religious nature bears fruit in human life. It is accord-
ant with man’s constitution that he should be appealing
to an unseen Power, bowing to an unseen Authority, or
seeking an invisible fellowship ; or that he should have a
religion that combines all these forms of action. Religion
is natural to man.

I


2


AN OUTUNE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Being natural to man, religion is universal among men.
Exceptions to its universality are sometimes claimed, but
if they exist at all they are of such nature as really to
establish the rule. In the lowest races of men religion is
rudimentary and crude, and so low in grade or so con-
cealed that perhaps a stranger may scarcely recognize it
Nevertheless even here the essential elements are present,
and man as man is a religious being.

Conceivably, religion may be simply a reaching-forth on
the part of man ; for by an inward necessity man does
reach forth to the realities with which religion is con-
cerned, whether he has definite knowledge of God or not.
He forms such conceptions of the Power above him as he
can, and performs such acts of worship as he feels to be
appropriate. But so far as religion becomes a vital and
uplifting experience, it becomes such because the living
God himself meets the religious nature of man and mani-
fests himself to it, according to man’s ability to receive
him. God is real, and is nearer to men than they can
know while they are groping after him (Acts xvii. 24-28) .
The universal prevalence of worship, however imperfect,
means that there is One above.

Religion is a function of the invisible and spiritual part
of man; not of the visible and mortal part, but of that
unseen part in which resides the ability to think, to feel,
and to will. It is especially a function of the heart, the
affectional nature. Religious experience results in the de-
velopment of the spiritual nature of man, bringing it to
the highest quality in affection, aspiration, and action
This spiritual nature receives development in the common
experiences of life, but the religious experience bring? ii
to its true place as the crown of humanity. It is from the
best development of this spiritual nature that man obtains
his best consciousness of immortality.

Religion includes worship, trust, and self-surrender,
and finds expression in prayer, because it looks up to a
higher power and seeks a higher fellowship. It includes
morality, gives law to conduct, and induces penitence


RELIGION AND THEOLOGY


3


and obedience, because it looks up to a higher authority.
Faith and duty both lie within its domain. But the great
vitalizing element that gives power to both faith and
duty is the living God with his personality and character,
and the possibility of holding actual communion with
him. The glory of religion lies in the reality of the
good God.

Religion is a source of institutions as well as a life of the
soul, and results in the existence of religions. A religion is
a system of thought, feeling, acts, and institutions that has
grown up among men to express and represent their
religious life. Thus the ancient religion of India grew up
with its doctrines, devotions, and institutions, gathering
into a unity the expression of the general religious life.
The religious ideas of Mohammed, combining with those
of his countrymen, grew to a great system known as
Islam. Both are religions. Christianity is a religion also,
appealing to the same elements in human nature as the
others, but appealing with a fulness of truth and power
peculiar to itself.

A religion is true so far as it embodies true concep-
tions of God and the relations of men to him. The
great religions of the world are not false, in the sense of
being the fruit of imposture, or of intending to deceive
men. Probably no religion that took a strong and lasting
hold upon great masses of mankind was ever founded by
an impostor. Great religions are works of sincerity, not
of fraud, though doubtless fraud may sometimes be found
in connection with them all. All the great religions con-
tain some truth concerning religion. But the various
religions of the world have not attained to truth, that is,
to accordance with reality, in their conceptions of God
and the relations of men to him, and in this fundamental
sense they are not true religions. They more or less mis-
lead the religious nature of man while they attempt to
satisfy it. Christianity claims to be the true religion, in
the sense that it correctly s6ts forth the real Ck>d, and
rightly declares the relations of men to him.


4


AHr OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Theology as Related to Religion. — Intellectual atten-
tion to religion results in theology, which is the unfolding
and exposition of the conceptions that enter into religion.
Religion is a life, a spiritual experience in which the affec-
tions and the will are active and the whole man is involved :
theology is the intellectual presentation of the subject-
matter of religion.

The intellectual unfolding of a great experience like
religion is a necessity of the mind. Hence every religion
has its theology. A religion may be so crude that it can
suggest only the rudiments of a theology, but the fetich-
worshipper’s reason for his worship is a theology, never-
theless. Hinduism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism, have
their theologies, partly historical and partly mythical,
partly representative of their best thought and partly
fantastic; and within each of the ancient religions there
are various schools of theology, differing as widely as
the schools that exist within Christianity. Everywhere
theologies differ with difference of mind, experience, and
education, but theology is the inseparable companion of
religion.

Is theology the science of religion ? We might truly
answer Yes; but the name has been appropriated to
another study, and clearness may be best served if the-
ology resign it.

But in resigning this name we do not resign the claim
that theology is essentially a scientific study. The name
indeed is a true and appropriate one. Theology is the
study of religion and of nothing else, and thus its field
possesses such unity as a science requires. Its work is
the investigation and classification of facts, it employs
both the inductive and the deductive method, and it seeks
to hold whatever is legitimately ascertained and nothing
more. Thus as to field and methods it is related to its
material, the facts of religion, much as botany is related
to the facts of plant-life, or astronomy to the facts of celes-
tial matter and motion, and ranks with them among sciences.
It is no objection that the facts with which it is concerned


RELIGION AND THEOLOGY


5


have not all been ascertained, for that is the case with all
sciences. Theology claims that its facts are ascertainable
in a reasonable degree, and capable of scientific treatment.
Facts in the spiritual world may be as ascertainable as
facts in the physical world : it certainly is unscientific to
assume the contrary, or to insist that even facts concerning
God are essentially beyond ascertainment. Some such
facts may become thoroughly known. Nor can it fairly
be claimed that the facts of religion are incapable of scien-
tific treatment They may at least be treated with that
candor and impartiality which science often claims as its
own, and they may be subjected to investigation and
classification in the truly scientific spirit.

The recognition of theology as the science of religion,
whether we use the name or resign it for use in another
field, has this practical value, that it limits the field and
scope of our study. Theology thus deals only with the
realities that make up religion, and with them only as they
enter into religion. Its aim is practical ; it is the servant
of the religious life. It does not philosophize for the sake
of philosophizing. As the science of religion, it seeks
to discover and make known the true, rational, abiding
foundation of real and eternal religious life for man, and
thus to promote such life. This alone is the object in the
present course of study.

The Christian Religion and its Theology. — Chris-
tianity is a religion, inasmuch as it is one of the forms taken
by the life of man in his relations with God. It differs
from other religions in this, that its conception of God
and of man’s relation to him, and its impulse and power
for the religious life, are derived from a self-revelation of
God in human history, which culminated in Jesus Christ;
and that it is under the influence of that revelation that
the Christian religious life is lived. Nineteen centuries
ago a certain part of mankind began to live the religious
life under the influence of Jesus Christ. From him came
fresh views of God in his character and relations with men,


6


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


and new power to live in holy fellowship with him. Christ
opened to men new possibility of fulfilling the idea of
religion ; and after him the life of religion was more true
to reality and more satisfactory in experience. The life,
thought, feeling, and institutions that have resulted from
his influence upon the religious life of mankind constitute
the Christian religion, or Christianity.

Christian Theology is the intellectual treatment of the
Christian religion. Defined most broadly, Christian the-
ology includes three parts ; but only the third of these is
commonly assigned to the department of Christian the-
ology in theological seminaries, while the first and second
are considered in other departments.

1. Christian theology properly includes the evidences
of Christianity, or rather the evidences of the Christian
revelation ; the showing that in Christ God has manifested
himself to men, in order that they may know him and be
blessed in the knowledge.

2. Christian theology includes the examination of the
contents of this revelation, in order to learn what it is that
has thus been made known. This is the work of Biblical
exegesis, or interpretation, with its companion study of
Biblical introduction ; and of Biblical theology, In which
the doctrinal contents of the Scriptures are exegetically
ascertained and historically grouped, according to author,
topic, and stage in the progress of revelation.

3. The main work of a department of Christian theology
is to present the Christian doctrine, grounded in the Scrip-
tures, in the form to which historical development has
brought it, and to study the facts of religion in the light
of the Christian revelation. Among the many views that
may be taken of God and man, good and evil, duty, life,
and destiny, there is a Christian view, obtained mainly by
means of Christ ; and Christian theology aims to present
that view in systematic order and proportion. Its great
themes are, God as Christ has made him known, and man,
sin, salvation, duty, life, and destiny, in the light of Christ’s
revelation.


RELIGION AND THEOLOGY


7


Christian and Non-Christian Theologies. — Since
religion has to do with certain human relations, theology
must treat of certain corresponding topics. Since these
relations are universal, theology finds the same fields of
inquiry inviting its work in all religions. The experience
of man as a religious being opens to him certain questions,
which thus become the questions of theology. What is
man himself; whence came he ; and what is the meaning of
his life? Whence came the world in which he finds him-
self; and what is the meaning of the great mass and order
of things by which he is surrounded? What is that higher
Power in which he instinctively believes? Is it one, or
many; and how is it related to the world and to man him-
self? What are right and wrong? What is the signifi-
cance of the evil that man does; and what must be its
effect upon him? Can sin be forgiven; and if so, on what
grounds, and by what means? Can man be made right in
character; and if so, how? Will he live after death; and
if so, in what state of being? What is the principle of
human duty ; and how shall man fulfil his destiny ? These
are the practical questions of universal religion; these
therefore are the problems of universal theology. The
guesses, legends, and traditions that accompany the re-
ligions of the world are fruits of the universal eflfort to
answer these questions, and the nobler elements in all
theologies are steps toward explanation of these ancient
and universal mysteries.

Christian theology enters no field that has not been
entered by other theologies. It meets the old religious
questions of humanity, but meets them with new light Its
themes are as old as man, but the grace and truth in the
light of which it treats them came through Jesus Christ
The new light brings help for the old hard places, and new
solutions of the ancient problems: so that Christianity
differs from other religions, and Christian theology from
other theologies, by possessing fresh experience and knowl-
edge, richer than any other that men have known, upon
the great themes of universal interest


8


Air OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Though Christian theology thus possesses the best light
in the world, it should not be contemptuous toward other
religions, or rule them out as containing nothing valuable.
Christians should view such religions, not with contempt,
but with generous and compassionate consideration. The
necessity for religion is innate in man, and the capacity for
religion created in him has never been wholly lost or
become inoperative. Nor have the great religions of the
non-Christian world grown up unknown to God or un-
watched by him. They embody the genuine religious
experiences of humanity, and express its real aspirations
toward God, and contain at least such truth as groping
after God can find. More than this is true. Since Chris-
tianity teaches us that God is near to his world, and earn-
estly desires his creatures to find him when they feel after
him, we are sure that in the great religions there must be
some truth that has come by spiritual impartation from
himself. The knowledge that they contain is partial, one-
sided, and often misleading, as it stands in human appre-
hension, but it is not blank ignorance. In all the great
non-Christian religions there are expressions of holy as-
piration, or of love and adoration toward a good God.
that are worthy utterances of religion, and closely akin to
Christianity. There is something profoundly touching to
a Christian heart in the best non-Christian prayers. The
religions are often better than their theologies, as the heart
is apt to be wiser than the head : yet even the theologies,
though they may account absurdly for what is genuinely
religious, are results of sincere reflection upon the uni-
versal problems.

The inestimable advantage of Christian theology is that
it walks in the light Its first fact is that God has willed
to make himself known. Hence its office is not to “ seek
after God, if haply it may feel after him and find him,"
but to receive his self-manifestation made in Christ, and
view the field of truth and religion in the light of it. Upon
the basis of the Christian revelation it builds a structure
into which it works all the proper materials of theology


HEL/G/OJV AND THEOLOGY


9


To other religions it says, with Paul, “ What therefore ye
worship in ignorance, this set I forth unto you.” It de-
clares that where men have groped after a God, a God
exists, a real and living God, the Father of Jesus Christ,
a Saviour to men.

Paul’s methods of dealing with non-Christian religions,
illustrated in Acts xiv. and xvii., are thoroughly Christian,
and full of wisdom. At Lystra he met paganism in a
gross form, and at Athens in a highly cultured form ; and
in both forms he treated it with a genuine human sym-
pathy and justice, while setting forth his own nobler and
diviner faith. Few human utterances are richer in wisdom
than his discourse at the Areopagus.

Revelation. — By revelation is meant, primarily, self-
manifestation on the part of God. It is his making him-
self known to his creatures, in his character and his relations
to them. Revelation is not primarily the giving of infor-
mation on the various themes of religion : the chief and
central theme of revelation is God himself, and revelation
is self-expression. When it has been made, men have
fresh means of knowing what manner of being God is.
When God is rightly known, he stands as a central and
all-illumining reality, and from knowing him men know
practical truth in all parts of the sphere of religion. In
revealing himself God gives light upon every important
religious subject; but revelation is rightly conceived only
when it is seen to be primarily God’s self-manifestation.

We cannot here unfold the evidences of revelation, and
in this course of study it is taken as a fact that in the Chris-
tian revelation, culminating in Christ and recorded in the
Scriptures, the clearest and fullest revelation of God has
been made. He that has seen Christ has seen the Father.
It is well, however, to indicate where the evidence of this
great fact is found. We find it in the Old Testament, in
Christ, and in Christianity.

1. The Old Testament, studied historically, critically,
and exegetically, gives evidence of a gradual discovery oi


10


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


God on the part of men, which is accounted for in the
record, and can best be explained in fact, by a deliberate
and gracious self-revealing on the part of God. This
divine explanation of the Old Testament story is con-
firmed, not weakened, by the better understanding of the
ancient documents which modern study has obtained.

2. Christ. We study the authorities for the story of his
life, their genuineness and trustworthiness, the proof that
we possess historical knowledge of him ; the record of his
life, the substance of his teaching, the quality of his charac-
ter, the presence in him of what is more than human, the
impression made by his personality and his work, the
record of his death and resurrection, — all tending to show
that he stood in unique relation to God, and gave unique
expression to his character and will,

3. Christianity. We examine its doctrine and life, its
nature as an experience, its spiritual richness and sim-
plicity, its agreement with the primal certainties of the
human spirit, its power of appeal to the heart and con-
science ; its early victories, showing its moral vigor ; its
renewing power upon men ; its adaptation to men of vari-
ous races and grades of culture ; its power of self-renova-
tion and reform ; its progressiveness ; its superiority to
other religions in its conception of God, and in ability to
render that conception effective in the moral transforma-
tion of men ; the nature of its ideals in personal character
and in social life; its devotion to the idea of love; its effi-
ciency as “ the power of God unto salvation.”

Study in these fields gives sufficient evidence that in
Christ the living God stands expressed more fully than
elsewhere, and that knowledge of him legitimately obtained
from Christ is true knowledge,

THE SOXJRCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY

Where shall Christian theology find its materials?

Anywhere, It should learn from any teacher that can
teach i^ and receive light from any source. Wherever


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


11


there is truth concerning God or our relation to him, or
concerning any of the subjects that are involved in theo-
logical inquiry, there is proper material for Christian
theology. Christianity claims to set forth the one living
God, to whose realm all things belong. Its field for ma-
terials is therefore as wide as his creation.

' In Christian theology, the chief source will evidently be
the Christian revelation. The self-revelation of God not
only illumines the central field of theology, but throws its
light over all subjects with which theology is concerned.
Christ is the inspiration of the Christian religion, and
therefore the main source of Christian theology. What-
ever is richest and most characteristic in it comes from
him.

But Christ is not the only revelation of God or source of
religious knowledge, and the Christian revelation does not
render other expressions of his nature worthless. The
psalmists say that the heavens declare his glory, and the
earth is full of his riches. The Scriptures teach that man
was made in his likeness, and that his Providence adminis-
tering the affairs of the world illustrates his character.
Under the guidance of such conceptions, theology may
find material for its use in the constitution, history, and
religious experience of man, and in the creation of God as
it is known through science and interpreted by philosophy.

Thus there are two great sources for Christian theology.
The Christian revelation is one, and the universe (includ-
ing man and nature) is the other.

Religion has often been divided into two kinds, known
as natural and revealed religion, corresponding to these
two fields of knowledge ; and natural religion, the lower
and less perfect of the two, has been supposed to be the
way of approach to revealed religion, or the indispensable
forecourt to the temple of revelation. Since the spiritual
is the higher, it has been thought that the natural must be
the road to it, and that man must learn to “ look through
nature up to nature’s God.” Is this the right order?
Shall Christian theology first learn what it can of God


12


AJV OUTLINE OE CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


from the world and man, and then come at last to Christ
as the highest source of knowledge ?

No. This is exactly what Christian theology is not com-
pelled to do. Christ is the first source, not the second.
A Christian is not obliged to work his way up toward
knowledge of God by the long and weary course by which
humanity has approached it ; not first through nature, or
even through the partial revelations of the Old Covenant,
are we to learn God, but directly from Christ. A Christian
has been born into the day ; he has not to wait and learn
what day is, by watching for the dawn and seeing the day
break. The best of all revelations of God has been made
in Christ, and rendered available to men of the modern
age, and with this Christian theology is entitled to begin.
In the light that streams from Christ it is permitted to do
its work.

1. The Christian Revelation as a Source of The-
ology. — By the Christian revelation is meant that mani-
festation of himself, and so of truth for the spiritual
good of man, which God made in the person and work of
Christ; together with the special preparations for it and
the earliest unfoldings of its meaning.

God’s richest, most spiritual, and most effective self-
expression to men was made in Christ, — in what he was,
in what he said and did, and in the fact that God gave him
to the world. The heart of what we call the Christian reve-
lation is in Christ.

The way of this revelation was specially prepared in the
dealings of God with the race of Israel, into which Christ
was born. By this it is not meant that God was dealing
with that race alone, and leaving the other nations of man-
kind without his providential training. Then as now he
was the God of all, and all nations were under his watchful
guidance. Human history is one ; but in the race in which
his Christ was to come God was for ages giving such guid-
ance and instruction as would prepare for his advent. We
have the record of this preparatory instruction and self*


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


15


expression in the Old Testament; and the truth concern-
ing God and his relations with men that is there expressed
we class with what came later in the Christian revelation.

After Christ had come, his early disciples, illuminated by
his Spirit, unfolded, according to the exigencies of life, the
meaning and effect of his mission; and their statements,
so far as they have been preserved, are gathered in the
New Testament. These unfoldings are also included in
what we call the Christian revelation.

Since the Christian revelation, thus broadly defined, is
the chief source for Christian theology, it is necessary to
note in what manner it was made, and in what manner it
has been preserved to us.

I. As to the manner of God’s self-revelation: It was
made IN LIFE AND ACTION.

That is, It was not made in written history, or in writing at
all, or primarily in speech, but in act and fact, — by doing.
Not in writing, but in living history, in actual life, God
showed himself to men. Revelation was made less by what
he said than by what he did. ‘‘Thus saith the Lord” was
one form of revelation ; but Thus hath the Lord done ” was
the form in which the richest expression of God was made.

So when God showed himself to Abraham, we hear of
no written revelation, of some spoken revelation, and of
much acted revelation ; for it was in what he did to the
man who trusted him that God became known for what he
was. Revelation to Israel through Moses was not made in
writing ; it was made in small part by speech, but mainly
by action, — for Israel was taught to know God and hir will
mainly in what he did among them. To Israel throughout
its history God revealed himself not mainly in words, and
still less in writing, but in action. The prophets did indeed
speak of him, and speak from him, but they also pointed
to him as a God manifest in his doings, — a God present
and acting, and known by his acts. God was revealed in
Israel by his providential care, his great deliverances, his
historical judgments ; by his appointed institutions and his


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


14 -


spiritual influences, inspiring piety, penitence, and hope;
by his influence upon prophets, awakening them to utter
his truth, and by his persistent purpose to train the nation
for himself. He revealed himself by entering into the life
of Israel and acting there. The truth that he would practi-
cally teach he expressed in living history.

Thus it was not in writing that God revealed himself.
The revelation that we find in the Book of Exodus was not
made in the Book of Exodus, but in the events that the
book records, — not, for example, in the fourteenth chap-
ter, but in the deliverance from Egypt. So throughout
the Old Testament : God showed himself in the life of men ;
and the story of his self-showing, with the substance of
what men learned from it, was written afterward. In the
Scriptures the name “ Word of God ” is rarely if ever ap-
plied to writings. It always denotes the living communi-
cation of God to human being.s.

When God revealed himself in Christ, the method was
the same. This, too, was historical revealing, — done in
life, and not in writing. We have so long associated the
Christian revelation with the New Testament that we may
almost think it was made when the New Testament was
written. Not so : it was made in the person, mission, and
work of Christ. God showed himself in what Christ
actually was, said, and did. “ Thus was the Lord, thus said
the Lord, thus did the Lord,” in Christ. When Christ had
finished his course, this greatest chapter in revelation was
finished; for they who knew him had seen the Father.
The Gospels partially narrate the life and acts in which
God was revealed ; but the revelation was made before the
Gospels were written, and they could never have been writ-
ten if it had not been made already.

This method was not accidental or arbitrarily chosen ; it
was the best, or rather the only way. Action alone can
adequately express character; and it is character in God
that men most need to know, and he most wishes to ex-
press. If God desired to make himself thoroughly known
to men in character, his only course was to come near to


SOU^RCMS OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


>5


them, within their range of personal knowledge, and live a
life among them, in which they might see him as he is.
This he did in Christ; and the life and death of Christ
showed men what manner of God they had to deal with.
This, therefore, back of all records of it, was the revelation.

Did the life and work of Christ complete the Christian
revelation? In one sense. Yes; in another sense. No.
The direct personal manifestation of God in human life was
made once for all in Christ, and completed. But the reve-
lation had still to be made effective in individual men and in
the larger life of man, else God would not be actually known
by means of it, and it would miss the aim of revelation.
Christ the revealer and God the revealed must be made
inwardly known to those for whose sake the manifestation
had been undertaken; the revelation must be carried to
their inner life and be made real in their experience.
Thus Paul says (Gal. i. i6), “ It pleased God to reveal his
Son in me.” So 2 Cor. iv. 6. The agent in this work is
the Holy Spirit, and the results are the Christian experi-
ence and the spiritual church. This is what Christ prom-
ised (John xvi. 14), “He shall glorify me; for he shall
take of mine, and shall show it unto you.”

Is this revelation? Certainly it is, though of course not
in the same sense with that in which we say that God was
revealed in the person of Christ. If we deny that this is
revelation, we shall have to define revelation in external
fashion, and find some other name for God's actual becom-
ing-known to his creatures. This is not new revelation of
additional matter, but it is the completing of Christ’s re-
vealing action. Christ reveals God, and the Holy Spirit
reveals Christ to those whom his revelation was intended
to benefit. The two works are parts of one process of
becoming-known on God’s part, and both are elements in
his revelation. The work of the Holy Spirit is continuous
until now, and is still a revealing work, though not in the
independent sense in which the work of Christ was a re-
vealing work. The living Spirit still reveals in men the
Son of God who reveals the Father. So new is Christ to


I6


AM OVTLIME OF CHRISTIAM THEOLOGY


men that this often seems like fresh revealing; and so in-
exhaustible is Christ that he often becomes known in
aspects that have not been discerned before.

The first years of this working of the Spirit were full of
rich, strong, creative energy in the Church. The friends
of Jesus, who had known him in human acquaintance, now
knew him with divine insight through the teaching of the
Spirit, and by new knowledge of him they had new knowl-
edge of God whom he revealed. For the minds that were
nearest to Christ it was the glorious age of spiritual per-
ception and power; and from this revealing and creative
work of the Spirit sprang the teaching of the apostles and
their companions. Under the same influence were pro-
duced those writings which, under the name of the New
Testament, have stood till now, and will always stand, as the
record of the Christian revelation. That was an age of
freshness and power in the Christian life, and the utterances
of the time, both in speech and in writing, were well worthy
to represent the revealing Spirit.

This later and inner revelation proceeded upon essen-
tially the same method as that which preceded It. God
was expressing himself primarily not in records or in
utterances, but in the actual life of men, whence came
forth the appropriate and effective utterances that we
possess. Hence we may extend our statement of the
manner of revelation, and say that the entire Christian
revelation, from inception to completion, is a historical
manifestation, made in life and act. It is a self-manifes-
tation of God in human experience. It is not rightly
understood until it is thus traced back of all its expressions
in speech or writing, to its actual production in life.

2. As to the manner In which the Christian revelation
has been preserved in the world until now : it has been
preserved in the Religious Life that sprang from

IT, AND IN THE SCRIPTURES.

(i) The Christian revelation has been preserved IN THE
Religious Life that sprang from it.


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


17


Made in life, it has lived in life. The acquaintance with
God that resulted from revelation produced in men a life
that kept the revelation from being forgotten, and held
it where it could do and extend its enlightening work.
Slowly yet surely the truth revealed from time to time
entered with some effectiveness into the life of men, and
remained there as a living force', working according to
God’s intention. The work was imperfect, but it was real.
In the Psalms, for example, which expressed the religious
life that was existing in their times, we see God’s self-
manifestation bearing fruit. God had made himself known
to men, and the religious life that sang the Psalms was the
result ; and by means of that resulting life and its expres-
sions the knowledge of God perpetuated and extended
itself. This was the indispensable way ; otherwise revela-
tion would have failed. If the knowledge of God imparted
at some given time had been preserved in writing alone,
the writing would have been only a book, lifeless and inef-
fective. Revelation was meant for men, and accomplished
its objects only so far as men learned the lesson of God
for themselves.

When Christ had come the method was still the same.
It was in the lives of his disciples that his revelation of
God was first preserved. There it lived in intense vigor,
and for years it was preserved in life alone, without aid
from writings. We read in the Acts of the Apostles how
it was preserved and extended in the world through the
powerful religious life that sprang from it. The early
Church was a body in which Christ’s truth lived as a spirit.
God freshly revealed in Christ was a new God to the
Christians. The new names given to him in the New
Testament, — as God of all grace, of peace, hope, patience,
comfort, love, — names unknown to the Old Testament
and suggested by the Christian experience, show how
powerfully the truth that Christ revealed took hold of the
Christian people. Further, a warm fellowship and charity
sprang up in the early Church, and in this we see Christ's
revelation of the spirit and law of love, perpetuating itselt


1 8 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY

in the life that Christ awakened. The early Church enter-
tained a vivid hope of Christ’s speedy return to them ;
and although this hope was not realized in the form in
which they held it, it shows how truly he had enthroned
himself in their hearts as a beloved Master, and how his
influence persisted as a living force.

So ever since, the Christian experience has been the
great preserver of the Christian revelation. The Christian
experience is the life, individual and collective, that con-
sists in fellowship with God as Christ reveals him, and in
the fruits of that fellowship. That life, though imperfect
and varying in truth, depth, and richness, has been con-
tinuous since Christ lived and died. This experience is
the actual life of Christianity itself ; in it Christianity lives
and has its being. The Bible itself is an expression of
experience. If this experience had not continued the
Bible would have become only the record of an ancient
and forgotten life, powerless to preserve Christianity in
the world. This experience, on the contrary, would have
preserved Christ’s gift to man if there had been no Bible.
The value of the Scriptures in keeping the experience true
is beyond all estimation ; and yet to think that Christianity
would have perished from the world if there had been no
Scriptures is to overlook its living power, as well as the
teaching of its early history. Certainly Christianity would
have suffered without the Scriptures, but who, knowing
what was done in the first age dares affirm that it would
have become extinct? The gospel is the power of God
unto salvation, simply by being able to produce the ex-
perience of salvation. The Christian experience, that is,
the saving of men and the renewing of their life, is the
living proof and testimonial of Christianity.

Thus the Christian experience is one of the channels
through which the Christian revelation enters to theology.
It is a real mediator between Christian theology and its
main source, the Christian revelation. By this is meant, —

a. That the continuous Christian experience is what has
kept the Christian revelation as a constant living power in


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


19


the world until this day, and prevented it from lapsing
into mere history.

b. That the theology of any age is largely an expression
of the Christian experience of that age. The general
experience of any given time, with its characteristic pecu-
liarities, grows up into a style of thinking, a moral and
spiritual consciousness, from which there is no escaping.
It influences the understanding of the Scriptures. It limits
and modifies religious thought. Theology is formed in it
as in an atmosphere. The theologies of to-day are part
and product of the Christian life of to-day, true offspring
of the present Christian age. This is why they differ from
previous theologies. If the theology of a time is various
and changing, it is because the life of the time is various,
growing, transitional.

c. That the theology of any individual Christian receives
much from his personal Christian experience. Personal
Christian life is essential in preparation for a theologian’s
studies, and though a theologian is a child of his age, still
each one is himself, with his own individual life, which
must necessarily color his thinking about God and man.
No man’s views can be independent of the way in which
God has led him.

Many have been suspicious of Christian experience, and
wished to rule it out as a counsellor in theology. It has
seemed to them too subjective and variable to be trusted,
and its testimony too far removed from the testimony of
God. But if what has now been said is true, experience
has its rights in theology, and rights which it need not be
anxious to defend, for they are self-asserting, self-enforc-
ing, and self-vindicating. Welcome or unwelcome, experi-
ence enters and helps to form theology. To theologize
outside the Christian consciousness of one’s age is as im-
possible as to live outside the atmosphere. Not to inherit
from the past is as impossible as not to contribute to the
future, and both are as impossible as to stop the flow of a
r-iver. Experience cannot be set aside as mediator between
theology and its chief source, the Christian revelation.


20


AJ\r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


This is right. Theology is the fruit of religion, and
religion is a life. The vital Christian experience of any
time is the best interpreter for that time of God and
eternal life. It is the experimental nature of Christianity
that makes Christian theology so fresh and living as it is.
It would be a speculative and comparatively lifelc.ss
study, if the nature of Christianity did not ensure it con-
stant refreshing from the current of the divine life in
humanity.

This is the greater blessing, because the testimony of the
Christian experience is not purely human. It is not
wholly distinct from the testimony of God. There is a
perpetual movement of the Spirit of God in man, by which
the apprehension of truth is redeemed from being purely
human. This divinely guided progress produces a gene- •
ral Christian consciousness, which partakes indeed in
the imperfection of humanity, but which is a genuine fruit
of grace, and which brings fruits of grace into theology.
Progressive experience makes an ever growing Church, and
out of the ever growing life of the Church comes an ever
growing theology, with the indwelling Spirit of God as the
guide of its progress. Theology can never stand still while
the divine life of the Church is moving forward. The for-
ward movement of theology which we can so plainly trace
through past ages has not reached its end, for the Spirit
abides with the Church, still to guide it into truth.

Two questions may form the transition to the next
subject

a. Is Christianity a book-religion?

It is not Islam is a book-religion, for the religion of
Islam is absolutely contained in the Koran, a book dictated
to the prophet from a book in heaven. The Koran is so
uniquely divine that not even a translation of it is the
word of God. But the Christian revelation was not made
in a book, or in writing, or by dictation, but in life and
action, especially by the living Christ It was not given
in order to be written out. It would have' lived if it had


SOURCES OR CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


21


not been written out at all. There was no hint that it was
all to be written out, and it was not all written out, for it
could not be. Rich utterances of Christ that are not pre-
served are mentioned in the Gospels. God was expressed
in much that could never be put into words, because it
consisted in life and action, — as in the very act of sending
his Son (John iii. i6), and in the spirit that led Christ to
endure the cross. Christianity is not a book-religion, but
a life-religion. It centres in a person, and consists in a
life, and Scriptures are its servant,’ not its source. To
treat it, in proclaiming it or defending it, as a book-reli-
gion is to resign one of its bests points of advantage.

Does the Bible give us Christ, or does Christ give us
the Bible?

Christ gives us the Bible. The Old Testament came
into existence because of the revelation that was prepara-
tory to Christ, and the New because of Christ himself. If
there had been no Christ there would have been no Chris-
tian Bible; if there were no Bible, Christ would still be
what he is, and men could be saved by him. He was
effectively at work among men before the New Testament
was written to show him forth, and out of his effective
saving work the New Testament itself proceeded. Christ,
who is indispensable to Christianity, gives us the Bible,
which is of inestimable value to Christianity; or Christ,
who is Christianity, gives us the Bible, which teaches us
Christianity.

Yet this very statement implies that in another sense
the Bible gives us Christ. It informs us concerning him.
It was written and preserved that we might know him, and
God through him. It is hb servant, and we owe to it our
most effective knowledge respecting his historical reality
and significance. Only in this character is the Bible
rightly understood.

With this view of revelation, as preserved in the life of
the men to whom it was made, we are ready to consider tlie
other great means of its preservation.


22


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


(2) The Christian revelation has been preserved IN THE
Scriptures. What, then, are the Scriptures?

The sacred writings of Christianity are gathered in a
single book, known as the Bible. This name is popularly
rendered into English as “ The Book ; ” but the word
“ biblia,” of which it is the representative, though singular
in Latin, whence it came into English, is plural in Greek,
where it originated, and means books, or booklets. Its
original use points to the fact that our Bible is a collection
of books.

These writings are divided into two groups. The Old
Testament, better named the Scriptures of the Old Cove-
nant, containing books of history, law, prophecy, poetry,
wisdom, and apocalypse, preserves the sacred literature of
the Hebrew people before Christ. The New Testament,
better named the Scriptures of the New Covenant, contain-
ing books of biography, history, letters, and apocalypse,
preserves the earliest literature of Christianity.

These are external descriptions. When we look within,
and inquire concerning the moral and religious significance
of these writings, we find it most exceptional and impor-
tant. In the pre-Christian literature of the Hebrew people,
we have the record and literary memorials of God’s long
and gradual self-revelation in the history of that people,
leading up to Christ. In the earliest Christian literature
we have the record and literary memorials of God’s
supreme self-revelation in Christ, and of the first working
of that revelation as truth and life among men.

Thus revelation is the basis of the Scriptures. God
made special use of the Hebrewpeople, from Abraham, its
father, in order gradually to manifest himself in his rela-
tions with men; and when the fulness of the time was
come, he brought his Son Jesus Christ into the world, to
complete the revelation that had been partially made
before, by doing his supreme work of grace for the salva-
tion of men. This progressive revelation is the basts of
the Scriptures. God expressed himself in life and action
that men might know him and learn his will, and the


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


23


Scriptures tell us of the life and action in which he was
revealed. Not indeed that the whole is there recorded.
As we have seen, it was impossible to put the whole revela-
tion into language, and no attempt was made to do so.
We possess parts of history of which we long to know the
whole, and have allusions to utterances the hearers of
which we envy. Our Scriptures do not bring us the entire
revelation of God, or even the entire Christian revelation.
They give us rich portions, but they could not give the
whole.

As to the collecting of these writings into the two groups
that make up our Bible, or the formation of the Canon,
first of the Old Testament, and then of the New : it should
be constantly remembered that the various books were
composed with no expectation on the part of their writers
that they would be gathered into a collection such as we
possess. Some of the later books of the Old Testament
were perhaps written with the intention of adding them to
the growing canon; but in the New Testament no such
thing as a canon was thought of till the books that now
compose it had long been in existence. The thought of
our present Bible as a whole, with its present contents
and limits, was entirely unknown to the writers of the
Bible.

When the selection and collection of sacred books was
made, first of the Old Testament and then of the New, it
was not done by direct command or authority from God,
nor was it done by any formal agreement of men or by
churchly decree. The Church gathered into sacred wholes
the writings that it held sacred separately; and it held
them sacred partly because of their contents, and partly
because it believed them to have been written by men
specially honored and inspired. The process was gradual,
because genuine and natural. It is sometimes imagined
that councils fixed the canon ; but in fact councils scarcely
did more than recognize and ratify the judgment of the
common Christian body. The canon was the outcome of


24


A/f OUTLmE OF CHFISTIAFT THEOLOGY


the religious life that sprang up from the divine revelation:
that is to say, revelation first produced its own divine life
in men, and then through that life produced, collected, and
organized its records and other literary memorials. The
judgment by which the canon was formed was the religious
judgment of the believing people. No critical judgment in
the modern sense was involved, but we have no reason to
doubt that the best spiritual judgment of the time was
exercised in the selection. It is certain that writings were
not chosen for the canon because they were all alike, or
because all were held to teach with equal authority, but
rather because all had been judged worthy of a place in
the sacred collection by reason of their relation to the
revelation of God, their special authorship, or their useful-
ness to the religious life.

As to the authorship of the Scriptures, it is partly known
and partly unknown. In some cases we have certain knowl
edge, as in that of the Epistle to the Galatians ; in some
we are wholly ignorant, as in that of the Book of Judges,
and of the Epistle to the Hebrews. In some, as in that of
the latter part of the Book of Isaiah and of the first two
Gospels, we have tradition, Hebrew or Christian, which is
always subject to criticism, and must be judged in the light
of evidence. In the Old Testament more than half the
pages are of unknown or uncertain authorship, and in
the New, though perhaps the proportion of uncertain
parts is smaller, some interesting questions of authorship
remain unsolved. In both Testaments modern study is
revealing the presence of composite authorship, of such
nature that some books in their present form were not
written by any one person, but contain results from the
labor of many. In such cases the identity of the various
contributors is of course lost beyond recovery. In a
word, large parts of our Bible are anonymous, and are
certain to remain so. Some authors now unknown may
yet be identified, but it is too much to expect that all
will be.


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAI^ THEOLOGY


25


From these facts we may be sure that full knowledge of
the authorship of the Scriptures is not indispensable. If
it were we should have it. There are cases, indeed, in
which the question of authorship is important to us, be-
cause it affects the value of a book. Of this the fourth
Gospel is the leading instance. But in general, and apart
from such special reasons, the value of the Scriptures to us
does not depend upon our knowing who wrote them. If
it did, we should have to confess that our present igno-
rance destroyed a great part of their value. The true
definition of the Scriptures as sacred writings cannot be
that they are writings produced by such and such persons,
— for example, by prophets, apostles, and companions of
apostles, — for we cannot prove that the Scriptures corres-
pond to this definition. From the fact that large parts of
the Scriptures are permanently anonymous, we may infer
with certainty that if the Scriptures are valuable to us their
value cannot depend upon our knowing who the authors
were. We must hold no theory of the Bible that makes
its value dependent upon its human authorship, for to hold
such a theory is to be in danger of losing our Bible.

What is true of authorship is true, for similar reasons, of
date of .composition. Some books we can confidently
assign to their position in order of time, and some we can-
not, even after patient inquiry. Some are in discussion.
Questions of date have their importance for the interpreta-
tion of Scripture. To prove a new date might be, of
course, to prove a new author. A change in our concep-
tion of the dates of composition of a series of books might
change our conception of the order of events in history,
and thus alter our conception of the order of God’s revela-
tion, and of the substance of revelation also. Such a change
in our opinion as to authorship, and in our understand-
ing of God’s self-revelation, will follow if we accept the
results of modern study regarding the dates at which the
first books of our Bible were composed. A correct scheme
of dates is important to a right understanding of the Scrip-
tures, but we must not forget that questions of date rank


26


AIV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


mainly as questions of interpretation. In any case the
Scriptures bring us knowledge of God’s revelation, and
knowledge of dates of composition ranks only as an ele-
ment in the understanding of that revelation. A new
scheme of dates would change our understanding of our
Bible, but would not destroy its quality.

On all questions of date and authorship, critical inquiry
has full rights. It is most desirable that all possible
investigation should be made, and that all that can be
known on either subject should be ascertained. If such
investigation can legitimately destroy our confidence in
the Bible, our confidence should by all means be destroyed.
A rational faith will not shrink from investigation, and
Christians have no cause to fear it, for the Scriptures
will bear examination. Criticism in this field is the duty
of the Christian people, and all persons who are qualified
for the work should receive from their Christian brethren
the heartiest encouragement in prosecuting it. To repress
criticism is to invite unbelief, and to drive criticism into
the hands of sceptics is unwise.

From these statements of fact concerning date, author-
ship, and collection, we must now advance to the con-
sideration of the inner character and quality of the
Scriptures.

If we could open the Bible for the first time, we should
be impressed by a high exceptional quality in the
CONTENTS OF THESE WRITINGS. The Bible is not like
other books.

If the Bible be opened at random, remarkable sayings
strike the eye of even a superficial reader: “In the begin-
ning God created the heavens and the earth.” “God is
love.” “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”
“ Create in me a clean heart, O God.” “ Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be filled.” “God commendeth his own love toward us,
in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us.”
“It doth not yet appear'what we shall be.” “The peace


SOUBCMS OJr CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


27


of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your
hearts and minds by Christ Jesus.” Merely turning the
leaves, one sees that this is no ordinary book. These are
words of spiritual insight, certainty, authority, power,
and hope, — such words as humanity thirsts for.

Is the quality that appears in these sayings character-
istic of the whole book? Not of the whole book equally
throughout, but of the book as a whole. There are
differences and inequalities; some parts are inferior to
others, because earlier and preparatory; there are pas-
sages that fall far below the spirit of those that are
highest Nevertheless the quality of the highest sayings
is the quality of the book as a whole. The Bible is the
book of holiness as against sin, of power as against weak-
ness, of comfort as against sorrow, of hope as against
despair, — in a word, it is the book of God’s deliverance,
in which we see divine love and power coming forth
against human evil. It exalts the good God, and conveys
spiritual help to sinful men. It is not of the world in
spirit, while yet it is most tender and human in its near-
ness to man and the manner of its appeal to his heart
Accordingly it is full of power. The Scriptures find the
hidden spirit of man, and cleanse his open life. They
convince of sin, lead to repentance, and guide in the way
of holiness. They are channels of grace and means of
goodness. Even those parts which we find inferior in
spiritual quality fulfilled this mission for the times to
which they first appealed, and are still helpful to it when
they are rightly understood. We are surely justified in
saying that the high exceptional quality that appears on
the surface of the Bible belongs to the Bible as a whole.

Evidently we discover this quality and power in the
Bible, not from what we know of its history, or of the
manner in which it was composed, but from the character
of its contents. Not in the origin of the book, but in the
book that lies before usj we find the present excellence.
Hence we ask what it is in the Scriptures that gives the-Tp
this quality and power. The popular answer to this oues


28


4^r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


tion is as true as any answer could be. The Scriptures
have their peculiar quality and power because God is
IN THEM, — that is, because they preserve God’s expres-
sion of himself to men in that course of revelation which
culminates in Christ.

The theme of the Bible is the entrance of God to
THE SPIRITUAL LIFE OF MAN. The Bible unfolds and
illustrates God’s announcement, “I will dwell in them,
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people. ” In Old-Testament times God offered his
spiritual influence to the men of Israel, entered into
gracious covenant with them, and made himself known to
them in proportion to their ability to perceive his char-
acter and make the knowledge practical. He took them
as they were, appeared always above them calling them
upward, and taught them, “Be ye holy, for I am holy.”
In Christ he came directly into humanity itself, to save
men out of evil into his own fellowship. In Christ’s
life and death he is brought nearest to the heart of man-
kind. By the gift and indwelling of the Holy Spirit he
has made his practical and permanent abode in human
beings, to guide and sanctify them. The Bible not only
brings us this revelation of God, but exists in order to
bring it to us. It exists especially to make real to us
Christ in whom this revelation was brought to completion,
and the Holy Spirit by whom it is brought to fulfilment.
It is the presence of this revelation that gives the Bible
its peculiar quality and its spiritual power. Not some
peculiarity in the mode of its production, but this great
peculiarity in its contents, makes it a book of divine
virtue to men.

This peculiar purpose of the Bible is the key for under-
standing it. No other key will rightly open its meaning.
The Bible does not exist to teach us all religious truth,
or to explain all mysteries. We may easily look into it
for what it does not contain. It does not give a complete
religious history of the past, and still less a map of the
future. It does not teach science, or illustrate the scien-


SOU'J;CES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


29


tific method in writing history. It does show how God
prepared his way of spiritual approach to humanity; how
he came, full of grace and truth, to save men from sin to
himself, and how he awakened a new divine life in men
by his Spirit. It sets forth God in Christ as a present
Saviour so clearly and powerfully that millions of men
under its influence have trusted him unto eternal life.
We may forgive the Bible for not telling us all that we
wish to know, in view of its telling us this, which it is
eternal life to know.

Gratefully recognizing this purpose and this glory of
the Scriptures, we may examine them further in order to
learn what other qualities they possess. We shall find
these writings varxous, progressive, and free.

A. The Scriptures include great variety within them-
selves, and find their unity in their relation to the
revelation of God.

a. There is great variety in literary structure and
style. This would naturally be expected ; for the Scrip-
tures come from various ages, are written in different
languages, and are directed to various purposes. They
include historical writings in various styles, books of
law, hymns of devotion in many strains, didactic poems,
prophecies in great variety, proverbs, biography, letters,
apocalypses. They thus embody the products of a great
variety of mental operations and literary activities.

b. There is wide variety in the individuality of the
writers. There has been no effacement of personal quali-
ties ; each one is most thoroughly himself, and the Bible
is the most human and personal of books. The prophets
are as strongly marked in their individuality as the great
modem preachers. Even the unnamed historians have
impressed something of their personality upon their
work. The psalmists sing each from his own experience.
Each evangelist has his peculiarities and his point of view
in telling the one story of the life of Christ. Literature
affords nothing more expressive of individuality than the


)


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


tters of Paul. The writer to the Hebrews is unknown
’ us by name, but we can draw his mental and spiritual
)rtrait from his epistle. The Bible is a book made by
)ntribution from a rich variety of independent and indi-
dual sources, and nothing has been done to remove the
aces of individual personality in the writers.

c. There is wide variety in the religious point of view
lat the writers occupy. The entire Old Testament
•ffers in religious point of view from the New, inasmuch
1 one was written before Christ and the other after,
he prophet differs in point of view from the priest or
wgiver; and the apostle, being a man of the gospel,
iffers from both. Various prophets have various points
: view respecting God and duty. The various psalmists
se God in different lights. The four evangelists have
leir four points of observation; so have the apostles
hose epistles we read. One view of Christ and the
jspel came to James, another to Peter, another to Paul,
id another to John; and no one of the four saw all that
as to be seen of the Saviour’s grace and truth. Even
ithin the writings of Paul we .can trace shiftings of the
iligious point of view, with the progress of his own
cperience and the conditions of the Christian service,
m the whole, the variety here is such that only by com-
irison of the various utterances can we ascertain the
;stimony of the Scriptures upon a given subject. This
reat variety makes the Bible apparently more difficult
ut really easier to understand, and adds vastly to its
piritual richness. The gospel is far more effectively set
nth than if there had been only one point of view occu-
Led by these many writers.

d. There is great variety in the spiritual intensity of
ifferent parts of the Scriptures. Some parts spring
irectly from the fount of divine life in the soul, and
jveal the richest experience of divine realities that has
ver found expression. The intensest spiritual utterances
1 the world are in the Bible. The 51st, 96th, 103d, and
30th Psalms, the 53d and 55th of Isaiah, the 8th of


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


3t


Romans, the 4th and 5th of Revelation, the first Epistle
of John, — these are among the intensest utterances of
spiritual life and thought that have ever been made.
Other utterances not so lofty as these are not less intense,
as some sermons of the prophets on themes peculiar to
their own times. But not all Scripture is of this quality.
There is no such spiritual intensity, for example, in the
Proverbs as in the Psalms, in the historical books gen-
erally as in the prophetical, in the Song of Solomon as in
the Book of Job. Intense spiritual activity on the part
of the writer is required by the character of some writ-
ings, and not by that of others, and the Scriptures vary
accordingly in the depth and strength of their spiritual
quality. They vary all the way from ordinary writing to
the most intense and vigorous of all human expressions
in the realm of the spirit.

This great variety in qualities, which so greatly enriches
the Bible for all readers, is by no means inconsistent with
a real unity. These writings are bound together in a
vital oneness by their relation to the revelation of God.
It was this relation that caused them to be gathered into
one collection and regarded as sacred writings. The
relation is sometimes closer and sometimes more remote ;
in a few cases it may be that modem judgment would
scarcely recognize it; but the Church felt the presence of
it, and therefore organized the canon as it is. From first
to last God was moving on, as these records and memo-
rials show him, coming ever nearer, expressing himself
more fully, entering more richly into the life of man
bringing in the grace that brings salvation. These writ •
ings are held together in unity by their relation to the
course of events and action in which God was revealing
himself.

B. The Scriptures are progressive, as recording a pro-
gressive revelation of God.

The revelation was progressive, advancing from partial
beginnings to the fulness that appeared in Christ and


33


A/iT OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


was unfolded by the Spirit. Revelation was educational ;
that is to say, God was seeking actually to impart knowl-
edge of himself, so that men would possess it. There-
fore revelation was by necessity progressive, as all
educational processes must be. Men had first to be
taught almost as children, who must have training adapted
to their state. God brought in higher truth as rapidly
as man could learn to act upon it : in fact, he was always
in advance of man, and chargeable rather with haste than
with needless delay. His prophets were always far ahead
of the people whom they taught, and fresh messages
always came in before the hearers had mastered the earlier
ones, or were ready to turn the new ones into action.
With eagerness and with self-restraint, God was con-
stantly pressing on to self-expression, regulating his
movement according to the condition and capacity of
men.

The Scriptures are progressive in the same manner as
the revelation. They were composed at various points
along its line of progress, and resemble the revelation in
both these respects : they partake of the quality of their
own times, and they are above their own times in spiritual
quality and practical power. Scripture belongs to its
own age, and yet leads it.

a. Scripture belongs to its own age. Each writing
derives quality from its own period. The entire Old
Testament is pre-Christian in date and in quality. It
looks forward to the gospel and leads up to it, and
resembles it, but does not contain it. The full revela-
tion of God is not in the Old Testament, for that revela-
tion had not yet come. Neither in doctrine nor in
morality, therefore, can the Old Testament be expected
to stand on the level of the New. Christ called attention
to the inferiority of its standards in speaking of the
Mosaic law of divorce (Matt, xix. 8), and of the spirit of
Elijah (Luke ix. 54-5$), and by the sharp contrast of his
own “I say unto you” with earlier teaching, in the
Sermon on the Mount The imprecations in the Psalms


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


33


that are so painful to Christian ears are to be judged in
the light of their own age, and not of ours, and were
less unworthy of good men then than they would be now.
Some representations of God in the Old Testament must
be understood in view of the incompleteness of revelation
at the time. But though this plain fact concerning the
Old Testament is helpful by relieving us of some well-
known difficulties, it would be a great mistake to infer
that the chief quality of the Old Testament was inferior-
ity to the New. The Old Testament is rich with the
contents of positive revelation. Men could not have
known God as he is celebrated in the 103d Psalm, if God
had not been intentionally expressing himself and mak-
ing known his character. The highest of the prophets
had clear visions of the perfect goodness. The Old
Testament evinces a knowledge of God that is wonderful
in a pre-Christian age, and is so full of him that it can
never cease to be helpful to Christian faith.

h. Yet Scripture leads its own age. These writings
when they were composed were at the front of the religious
life of their time and led it forward. The prophets were
always in advance of their contemporaries, pronouncing
judgments that only the future could vindicate, and call-
ing for immediate spiritual progress. The psalmists
sang out the best religious experience of their age. The
historical books were produced upon the highest plane of
their times: they were not written primarily for the
preservation of the history, but for the purpose of religious
instruction, — to show God in the history, and to teach
the readers faithfulness to him. The narratives of the
creation and the early events of human history, as they
stand in Genesis, bear some resemblance to traditions
on the same subject that were current in Western Asia;
but if the narratives in the two forms had any community
of origin, they have passed, in Genesis, under a new
influence and attained a new character; they are mono-
theistic now, and profoundly religious. Of the New
Testament, it scarcely needs to be said that it leads its


34


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGi


age, for it leads all ages. It shows the high-water mark
of Christianity in the apostolic time, and sets a standard
of simple and strong experience to which no subsequent
age has done full justice. In this superiority to their
times, and this power of leading forward, the Scriptures
reveal their divine element. God went before his people
in these holy writings, as in the pillar of cloud and fire.

The relation between the two parts of the progressive
revelation, and between the two Testaments, was set
forth by Christ when he said, “ Think not that I came to
destroy the law or the prophets : I came not to destroy,
but to fulfil. ” By the negative statement, “ I came not
to destroy,” he bore witness to the divine worth of the
earlier revelation ; by the positive statement, “ I came to
fulfil,” he bore witness to its incompleteness. He meant
that he had come to complete the work of the law and the
prophets, and to accomplish their object; to do by other
and better means what they had undertaken but had not
been able to finish. By the law and the prophets God
and the way of eternal life had been made known in part;
he had come to complete that work, and thus to fulfil
their intention. Hitherto the best light for men had
been in them. He did not come to destroy, or show that
it had been false light, but to fulfil, or bring the light to
perfection. The perfect light would show at once how
true the earlier was, and how far from perfect. Thus the
later part of the Bible declares the earlier part to be
superseded, but by fulfilment, not by destruction; by
being completed, not by being rejected. It is superseded,
as spring is superseded by summer. It ceases to be the
best, but only by being absorbed into a better.

In such conditions the Old Testament will certainly
contain genuine nourishment for the Christian life in all
ages. The genuine teaching of God is in it, to be read
by the Christian light. The New Testament throws
even more light upon it than it throws upon the New
Testament, and from the Christian point of view we fi nd
5t abounding in instruction.


SOURCSS OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


35


C. The Scriptures are characterized by the freedom of
life, rather than by any extraordinary precision of state-
ment or accuracy of detail.

The literature that we possess in the Bible is remark-
ably natural in its tone, and the literary methods that we
trace in it are simple and unconscious. As we find
genuine writers, so we find genuine writing, with the
freedom of genuine life. Men wrote to be understood by
their contemporaries, and used the methods of their time,
as they were obliged to do, since neither writers nor
readers were familiar with any other. There is no stiff-
ness, and no effort to conform the writing to any special
standard. Accordingly, the Scriptures afford us a fresh
and living view of God’s movement in the history of man-
kind. The naturalness of method lets us into the very
secret of reality in the story of God’s revealing work.

But the Bible itself releases us from all obligation to
maintain its complete inerrancy, in the sense of freedom
from all inaccuracy and incorrectness of statement, and
shows us a higher quality, in which is manifest a higher
purpose than that of inerrancy. The Scriptures never
claim accuracy for all their statements, or in any way ask
us to expect it from them : and careful reading is sufficient
to show that accuracy has not been attempted. There are
frequent divergences between parallel narratives, as in
Kings and Chronicles, and in the four Gospels. The
evangelists differ when they are expressly quoting definite
language; as when they quote the words of our Saviour
at the Last Supper, and of the inscription above the
cross. The two reports of the Sermon on the Mount
cannot both be accurate, and the two genealogies of Jesus
have not yet been harmonized. Quotations from the Old
Testament in the New are made in various ways, now
from the Hebrew, now from the Greek version, and now
not exactly from either. They are evidently sometimes
made from memory, and from natural memory with its
imperfection. The method that was followed in writing
history proves to be the method of ancient times, and not


36


AJ^ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


the more exact and scientific method of our day. History
was compiled from previously existing sources, not by
analyzing documents, but by combining them as they
stood, though sometimes their statements were not har-
monious; with the result that we sometimes find state-
ments of detail so differing that all cannot possibly be
correct.

Such facts as these, open to all readers, are enough to
make it plain that perfect accuracy of statement, or what
is now named inerrancy, was not sought in the composi-
tion of the Scriptures. This quality fails to be found in
our present copies of the sacred writings, and we have no
reason to suppose that it existed in the original manu-
scripts. If it did exist there, the changes that must have
occurred in bringing the text to its present condition
would be so great as to destroy our confidence in our
existing Scriptures altogether. Nor can we see why the
divine Spirit should lodge inerrancy in a single manu-
script, to be lost as soon as copies of it were multiplied.
If we may judge the divine intention concerning the
Scriptures from what they are, we must say that the end
in view certainly was not minute accuracy of statement.
Rather was it the living and effective conveyance of truth
concerning God and man. God has manifested himself
in his relations with mankind, and the Bible tells, in the
manner of the times in which it occurred, the story of his
doing and the effect of his revelation. The free and
natural method of the Bible has opened actual experience
to our sight, and given us the divine realities in human
life in all their freshness and power; and this quality of
livingness is worth more to us than what we call inerrancy
would be. We could not have both, for an influence
sufficient to make inerrancy would have put an end to the
simple human experience of God’s presence, and taken
away the naturalness of the Scriptures.

If it is thought that inerrant documents are indispen-
sable for the conveying of truth, the suggestion is nega-
tived by all our experience in learning from the past


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


37


We have learned all that we know of general history with-
out inerrant documents. Especially should we remember
how we have learned concerning Christ. Our historical
knowledge of him, with all its enlightening effects, has
come through the four Gospels, which are indeed harmon-
ious in their general testimony, but which indicate their
lack of inerrancy by the differences that students have
always found between them, and the difficulty that has
always been experienced in harmonizing their details.
We have become Christians by the help of documents to
which inerrancy does not belong. The Bible as it is has
shbwn us the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and
will continue to show that glory to men.

Such are the Scriptures, the book of God-in-man, the
record and memorial of God’s historical self-expression,
high in quality, and full of God. They are various, pro-
gressive, free; various in form, individuality, religious
point of view, and spiritual intensity; progressive, like
the revelation that they preserve, belonging to their own
times, yet leading them; free, with the simplicity and
naturalness that render revelation fresh and living as
we read. Bringing the revelation of God, they become
practically a revelation, or a means of revelation, to every
age.

Concerning the Scriptures, the Church has long held
some doctrine of iNSPiRAriON; that is, some doctrine
concerning the divine influence under which they were
composed. The doctrine has varied in various ages and
sections of the Church, having been more prominent in
later ages than in earlier. The word “inspiration” is
used in connection with the Scriptures solely on the
authority of 2 Tim. iii. i6, where it is said that “ Every
scripture [of the Old Testament] is inspired,” or God-
breathed, or else, and more probably, that “ Every inspired
scripture,” or writing, “is profitable.” There is no
authority in the Scriptures for applying the word to the
present Bible as a whole, and theology is not bound to


38 AAT OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


employ this word in defining the quality of the Scriptures.
Long discussion has rendered the word “inspiration”
ambiguous, and a better day for the popular faith will
have come when discussion has been transferred from the
inspiration of the Scriptures to the Scriptures themselves,
their qualities, their value, and their power.

Independent of the name, however, is the question of
the manner and degree of divine influence in the compo-
sition of the Scriptures. But, interesting as this question
is, it is not vital to the truth of Christianity. It cannot
be so, for any doctrine of divine influence in composing
the Christian Scriptures presupposes the truth of Chris-
tianity. If Christianity were not historically true, no
divine aid in the composition of its scriptures could make
it true, nor would such aid be given. Divine inspiration,
either certifying or merely conveying the Christian state-
ments, is inconceivable unless the Christian facts were
already in existence, and Christianity were thus true
already. Christ was saving sinners before the New Tes-
tament existed, and could do the same to-day if it had not
been written. Christianity is grounded not in the in-
spiration of its documents, but in the reality of its facts.

Therefore if the Scriptures should by sound evidence
be reduced to the level of ordinary human records, pos-
sessed simply of ordinary human veracity and correctness,
Christianity would not be altered thereby. A religion
of facts cannot be dependent for its reality upon its docu-
ments. It is often thought that a historical revelation of
God must require more than ordinary historical evidence
to prove it; that what is supernatural must needs be
supematurally attested. But this assumption is neither
correct nor helpful to Christianity. If a special divine
presence in certain events of history cannot be learned
from the facts when they are fairly known by ordinary
means, it cannot be established at all. When God seeks
to reveal himself he will not be hidden. If he has really
entered by special action into human history, the results
will make him known, though they be reported only ia


SOUSCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


39


ordinary ways. If Christ has come, his true character
and power will be known, on such evidence as certifies
other great facts in history. Christianity claims to be
founded in history: therefore it is not free to claim
exemption from the laws of historical evidence, and insist
that its documents must be supported by supernatural
certification. Christianity is really founded in history,
and will stand firm as a living reality, whatever may
prove to be the manner in which the record of its found-
ing has been written.

This conclusion is to be thankfully received: for, first,
it leads us to seek the argument for Christianity mainly
in its historical facts and its living power, where the best
evidence is found ; and, second, it prepares us for candid
and fearless inquiry into the real nature of tbe Scriptures.
If the annihilation of the Scriptures would not abolish
the saving power of Christ, the question of the manner of
divine aid in their composition is not a question of life
and death, but one that may be calmly examined. If
special inspiration in the Scriptures were wholly dis-
proved, Christ would still be the Saviour of the world.
But the divine element in the Scriptures will never be
disproved.

With this view we have spoken of the characteristics
of the Scriptures, before inquiring into their inspiration.
Concerning the latter point, the real question is what
qualities the Scriptures possess, and what evidence they
jdford that God had some part in producing them. If we
cannot find evidence in the quality of the Scriptures
themselves that God had specially to do with producing
them, we cannot find it anywhere. The inductive method
is the only sound method here. We have no right to
start with the assumption that Scriptures must be inspired
after such or such a manner. We must not begin with a
definition of inspiration, made apart from the facts of the
Bible, and insist that our book must correspond to it.
This is often done, but not legitimately. The Bible is
inspired as it is inspired, not as we may think it should


40


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


be. Whatever may be the manner in which God has in-
fluenced these writings, we must discover it from the
writings themselves, for we have no other source of infor-
mation. Theology is not bound to say that they are in-
spired in any manner, until it has fairly inferred the fact
from what it finds them to be.

That there was a divine influence in the production of
these writings is certain from their quality. They bear
the marks of the present God. Can we tell how this
divine influence came, and what its nature was ?

Primarily men are inspired, not writings. This is
recognized in the common statement that “The Scrip-
tures were written by men inspired of God. ” Inspiration
in writings is secondary ; there is no way to bring it into
writings except through men.

It is certain that divine influence did not enter the
Scriptures by dictation to the writers. These writings
could not be dictated; they are too human and alive, too
full of life and feeling, too evidently suggested to living
writers by living occasions. Nor does any theory of ver-
bal inspiration holding that God gave the writers the very
words accord with the facts. It would be of no permanent
use for him to give the very words unless he afterward
took care of them in his Providence. But the original
manuscripts have been allowed to disappear, the text has
been subject to the fortunes that befall written documents
in general, and our present Scriptures differ (we know
not just how widely) from the original Scriptures. For
us, therefore, there are no verbally inspired Scriptures,
and we have no evidence that there ever were any. Direct
or virtual dictation of these writings is at once unprovable
in history and impossible in fact.

Nor can divine influence in the production of these
writings have been of any one kind. No single and uni-
form process can account for the facts before us; the
Scriptures are too various. We cannot define the inspi-
ration that would produce these writings, unless we are


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


41


content with a definition that is very broad and general.
Just as no one kind of human activity would account for
all the phenomena that these writings present, so no one
kind of divine influence could produce them all. How
can we cover with one definition the inspiration of the
Psalms and the Book of Judges, the Proverbs, the Apoc-
alypse, and the Book of Job, the books of Ecclesiastes,
and Isaiah, the Epistle of Janies, the Gospel of John,
and the Epistle to the Romans ?

Nevertheless, the ordinary^, simple, untechnical sense
of the word “ inspiration, ” as we find it in the dictionaries,
accords very well with these varied facts. Only premise
that the work or influence is effected in this case by the
Spirit and truth of God, and the definition of the Century
Dictionary will guide us very truly. According to this,
inspiration (apart from any special or technical use of
the word) is “ a breathing or infusion of something into
the mind or soul; an awakening or creation of thought
or purpose, or any mental condition, by some specific in-
fluence; intellectual exaltation.” Inspiration is exalta-
tion, quickening of ability, stimulation of spiritual power;
it is uplifting and enlargement of capacity for perception,
comprehension, and utterance ; and all under the influence
of a thought, a truth, or an ideal which has taken posses-
sion of the soul. When such influence comes from God
through the power of some truth of his imparted, a man
should be larger, freer, richer-minded, with ability more
prepared, and touched to diviner issues. He should be
constrained by a living word, and strong to utter it. In-
spiration inspires, — that is, it spiritualizes, exalts, sug-
gests, empowers; it gives a man’s powers to the divine
Spirit for all high uses.

Inspiration of men, of the kind that has now been de-
scribed, was a result that was to be expected from revela-
tion. The truth that was coming from God concerning
himself and the relation of men to him made its impres-
sion upon his people, and especially upon the choicest
spirits among them. Using the truth thus revealed, the


42


jtJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Spirit of God wrought directly and powerfully upon re-
ceptive minds. Revelation resulted, as we have seen, in
a corresponding religious life; and the highest form of
this religious life, as an inner experience, before Christ,
was the spirit of prophecy or the inspiration of sacred
song. Men were led and enabled to speak in God’s
name, declaring his will, his promises, and his judgments;
or they were filled so full of holy life and emotion that
the high praises of God came forth in the Psalms, that
still glow with life. Truth in the soul pressed for utter-
ance, as it did in Jeremiah (xx. 9), and God’s Spirit was
with the truth in its demand. So after Christ came, the
Spirit was in Christians of every class, — as at the Pente-
cost the whole body was under the influence ; but in the
special souls the holy influence rose to strong inspiration;
so in the chief apostles, and in men like Stephen and the
writer to the Hebrews. In the whole Church the Spirit
dwelt; but the crown of the Spirit’s work in the Church
was the high inspiration of the select souls, — an inspira-
tion by virtue of which they were possessed by the truth
that God had shown them, and impelled to utter it with
more than human power. This divine influence upon the
few was not of radically different kind from that which
blessed the many; it was rather the highest instance,
the noblest sample, of the work of the Spirit through the
truth in believing men. It was because there was gen-
eral inspiration in the Church that there was special and
superior inspiration in prophets and apostles.

This special and superior influence brought forth the
oral teaching of prophets and apostles, and the worthy
words of all who felt the inspiring power. The influence
that brought forth speech from some brought writing from
others. Some recorded the oral teaching. Some wrote
the ancient history for the edification of God’s people;
others wrote the story of the Saviour's life, and narrated
the history of the early Church. Others wrote practical
counsel for Christians. Full of truth, purpose, and de-
votion, a man wrote according to the truth and spirit that


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


43


dwelt in him. Inspiration to write was not different in
kind from the general inspiration of the divine Spirit.
The writing of the Scriptures was one of the higher and
finer fruits of the influence of God upon the whole body
of believing and receptive people. No promise can be
cited of a divine influence differing from all other, given
on purpose to prepare men to write; nor is there any
claim in Scripture that the whole class of writers, as
writers, were wrought upon differently from other sons of
God. Men wrote from some inward impulse. They
wrote because they were impressed by truth from God,
and were so affected by its power and value that they
could write it in abiding forms. Luke wrote, as he says
(Luke i. 1-4), because he was a well-informed man, and
desired the true narrative to be written; John in his
Epistle (i John i. i), because he was glowing with a mes-
sage; Paul (Rom. i. 1-7), because he had something to
impart to his brethren, — but all because the truth from
God had impressed and inspired them, so that they could
utter it worthily, powerfully, and abidingly. In all this
the Spirit of God was present, with such power as was
manifested in all the higher forms of the divine life.

The special quality by which the writers of the Scrip-
tures give evidence that God was working in them is their
discernment of God, and their power to see facts and
truths in the light of his revelation. With more or less
of clearness, they felt with God. This quality gave the
point of view to the historians, and impelled them to
write the history. This awakened the psalmists, and
made the prophets. This gave fulness to the thought of
the apostles. This quality has given the highest excel-
lence and power to our sacred writings, and by it they
hold their sway in the world. By virtue of this quality
in the writers the Word of God as it came to holy men of
old has been brought to our times, and comes as the Word
of God to us also.

It is evident, however, that this high quality belongs
to different parts of the Bible in different degrees. Some


44


AJf OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


books — the extreme cases being the books of Esther and
Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon — show it but
faintly, while in the great majority it is the ruling trait.
On some theories of inspiration this inequality would
occasion difficulty, but not upon the present view. The
books that were accepted by the Church as sacred were
not all of ' iqual quality, and were not supposed to be so
when they were accepted. Inequality in the Scriptures
is so plain a fact that all theories that have no room for
it are inadequate. By a fact so unquestionable no one
should be disconcerted. If we should even be convinced
that some book would better have been omitted from the
canon, our confidence in the Scriptures would not be
thereby shaken. The canon did not make Scripture, but
Scripture made the canon. The inspiration of the Bible
does not prove its excellence, but its excellence proves
its inspiration. It is the quality of the Scriptures that
convinces us of a divine element in them. If any one is
not convinced of their inspiration by their quality, he
cannot be legitimately convinced of it by any other
means.

The better we understand the Scriptures, the more
intelligible does the inspiration of its writers become, for
it becomes more like the ministrations of the Spirit that
we have experienced. It is often assumed that inspira-
tion must be wholly different from all other influences of
the Spirit. But why must it be ; and who told us that it
was? Christ’s promise of the Spirit in John xiv.-xvi. is
the promise of an abiding Spirit to enlighten and guide
the Church through all its days. It is not a promise to
apostles alone, nor is it a promise merely of inspiration
for writing, for nothing is said about writing. The Spirit
who spake by the prophets and apostles dwells with the
Church to guide it into truth. We cannot write an eighth
chapter of Romans, it is true; but we do not see the
greatness of that chapter until we see it as something
that we could equal if we had enough of the divine life
that Christ imparts. The wonder of the New Testament


SOUJiCES OF CEE/Sr/AAT THEOLOGY


45


is that the Spirit of God could bring it forth, in all its
richness, from the Christian life of men. And if tha'c
Spirit should some day bring forth something more that
was equal to the New Testament, all Christians ought to
rejoice and be thankful.

This is not making the Bible an ordinary book. The
Bible cannot be made an ordinary book : it is the most
wonderful book in the world, most full of God, most help-
ful to man. It is the guide of Christian life, and the
chief and indispensable source of Christian theology.

The AUTHORITY of the Scriptures is the authority of the
truth that they convey. The Scriptures are authoritative
to us because they contain the highest moral and relig-
ious truth, which has the right to satisfy our reason and
bind our conscience.

There are two views of the authority of the Scriptures.
According to one, authority is imparted to them by divine
certification; God has given them an inspiration that
makes their contents authoritative, as the seal of the
king gives authority to a state document ; what the Bible
contains is binding, because inspiration proves that it
came from God. According to the other, the authority
of the Bible is found in the truth, worthy of God and
man, which it contains : not by a seal upon it, but by the
substance of its contents, is the document known to be
from the king.

In judging between these two views we must remember
that God alone has authority over man, and truth alone
can demand to be received. Real authority is not exter-
nal, but inward, consisting in the accordance of the truth
that is offered us with the standard of the true and good
that God has placed in us. No authority can be given by
external certification to anything that is not true; and
anything that is true depends for its authority upon its
trueness, and not upon certification from without. Hence
the Bible can have authority only by having truth. It
can have no separate authority of its own, apart from that


46 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


of the truth that is in it, and of the God whose message it
conveys. Authority is in God, and the Bible helps us to
know his will. The inspiration of the Bible is not the
ground of its authority, so much as its authority is the
evidence of its inspiration.

It is often supposed that the great need of mankind is
an outward standard of truth, corresponding in its sphere
to the standards of weight and measure that are kept by
governments, — a standard precise, unmistakable, infalli-
ble, and unalterable. Such an infallible standard some
seek in the Church, and some in the Scriptures. But the
real need of mankind is rather an abundance of truth
itself, not in words merely, but in life, — truth rich, free,
spiritual, plentiful, alive, self-imparting, even as it is in
Christ, together with a heart that perceives its divine
beauty and authority and accepts it from inward love.
The needful gift is not an infallible form of words, valu-
able because accurate, influential mainly upon the under-
standing; but rather a divine Saviour, full of grace and
truth; a divine religion, true and vital; a Holy Spirit,
who can make of men new creatures.

When Christ was departing, he trusted his gospel in
the world to the keeping of the Holy Spirit, who was to
abide with men. He never promised an infallible
church, or an infallible book, or any infallible visible
guide, but committed his kingdom to the Spirit and the
divine life. Divine Providence brought the Scriptures
in as a most valuable help; and they proved so valuable
that they have sometimes almost been thought to take the
place of the abiding Spirit. So highly have they been
prized that Christians have not always felt themselves
free to magnify the present Spirit, lest they should admit
a rival to the Scriptures. Yet Christ was right and wise
in trusting his kingdom to the Spirit and the divine life
in men. That is where it should be trusted. The Spirit
brought the Scriptures in to help his work, but not to
take his place. Christian faith may well rise to the
Master’s point of view, and recognize in the Scriptures


SOURCES OF CHRISTJAN THEOLOGY


4;


an authority that does not bind but sets free, and hea
them saying with Paul, — himself writing Scripture whei
he said it, — “Not that we have dominion over your faith
but we are helpers of your joy ; for by faith ye stand. ”

God is our Father, and the Bible is his servant, to malo
him known. Christ is our Saviour, and the Bible is hi:
servant, that he may save us. The Holy Spirit is ou
teacher, and the Bible is his servant, to show us Christ
We are God’s children, and the Bible is our servant, ti
show us our Saviour and our Father, and to guide our fee
into the way of peace.

What is the right use of the Scriptures as a source fo
theology? As we have implied already, they become i
source for theology by bringing us the Christian revela
tion, which is our primary source.

Finding the Christian revelation in the Bible, som<
have assumed that the two are therefore identical, anc
have used the Bible as if all that it contains were of th(
substance of the Christian revelation. With this view
doctrine was drawn deductively from its statements, anc
its separate utterances found their chief use in theology ai
proof-texts. But the Bible is not primarily a collectioi
of authoritative statements: it is a history of the self
manifestation of God. It serves as a source for theolog}
primarily by giving us the needed ground for viewing thi
facts of religion from the Christian standpoint. It showi
us what the Christian standpoint is, and brings us th(
light that we must turn upon all the various objects 0
theological investigation. It gives us that knowledge o
Christ without which Christian theology would not exist
and enables us to look with Christian eyes upon the ex
periences and problems of religion. Both formally anc
informally, it is our constant guide in exploring the grea
field of religion and theology.

II. Sources for Theology outside the Christian Rev
elation. — In seeking to know all that gives light upon it


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THBOLOGV


great field of religion, theology must take account of
man and his constitution, life, and history, especially as
a religious being, and of the universe, with the testimony
that it bears when investigated by science and interpreted
by philosophy. It is true that these fields overlap each
other. We cannot study the Christian revelation without
studying man, and undoubtedly both man and the Chris-
tian revelation are parts of the universe. In our study of
the universe as a source for theology we even include
man, when we come to the final interpretation. Never-
theless this classification of sources is a correct one, and
will justify itself as we proceed.

I. Man. — In the science of religion, or the study of
the life of man in relation to God, man himself is of in-
terest in many ways. He is the being in whom the expe-
riences of religion exist and to whom they belong, and
we cannot understand them without first understanding
him. Moreover, he is the chief creature of God in this
world, and in him God must be manifested more fully
than in any other of his works that are known to us.
The conception of man largely dominates theology, and a
theology that misconceives him cannot be profoundly
true. If we radically misconceive man we shall be study-
ing religion on a false basis.

Directly or remotely, the whole of man is of interest
here. Psychology, the study of man as a spirit, is impor-
tant to theology, because it is in man the spirit that re-
ligion exists : and psychology properly begins with physi-
ology, the study of the human body. Especially must
theology be familiar with man as a religious being, pos
sessed of moral constitution, obligation, faculties of love
and worship, and capacity for intercourse with God.
Toward the requisite knowledge of man all moral and
religious experiences of mankind contribute; hence the-
ology is interested in all the religions in which the nature
of man has sought satisfaction. From all religions Chris-
tian theology can learn something, and from the great
religions much, even though it can teach them more.


S0U11C£S OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


49


History contributes to theology by illustrating the
nature of man, and his character. Both his constitution
and his moral state are manifested in what he has done.
History shows him at his worst, and gives manifold illus-
tration of human sinfulness; it also shows him at his best,
and illustrates the nobler human traits and possibilities.
History at the same time gives light upon the character
of God as it is expressed in his providential government
of the world.

What history shows on the broad scale, the common life
which is open to common observation shows on a narrower
field, and nearer at hand where observation is easier.
Common life, indeed, on however narrow a scale, is his-
tory in the making. The natural relations of life, seen in
the family, are of high import to theology, for God calls
himself a father, and it is from the natural life that we
learn what fatherhood means. Common life illustrates
common duty, and is the field for the study of morals.
Common life reveals the actual human character. Theol-
ogy should seek to know human character exactly as it is.
It must study the evil, but not the evil alone; it is equally
interested in knowing all the good of humanity ; it must
weigh the virtues of man as accurately as his sins, and
learn from humanity at its best, as well as at its worst.
Humanity at its worst is not always found in prisons,
and humanity at its best is found in homes, where the
ordinary work is done and the common burdens of life
are borne. Theology must not observe man under mor-
bid conditions alone; so far as it finds him in normal
conditions, or in conditions that exhibit anything of the
better human nature, it must study him in these, and form
its estimate of actual humanity in view of all classes of
facts.

To know man is in a measure to know God, since man
bears God’s image. It is from self-knowledge and the
study of our kind that we come to understand those nat-
ural and moral qualities which we attribute to God, and
conceive as making up his nature and his character. Right


50


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOOy


understanding of the facts of human nature is the found*
tion of right conceptions concerning God.

2. The Universe. — Once we should have spoken of
the world as a source of information for theology, but
now we must speak of the universe. The Scriptures tell
of the earth and the surrounding heavens as the scene
of God’s work and manifestation j but we now know this
earth with its immediate surroundings to be but a single
item in a vast order, from the whole of which theology
must learn.

The recent enlargement of our conception of the uni-
verse has transformed the thought and consciousness of
the age, and brought to theology new material of great
importance. If we think of our own earth, geology with
its kindred sciences, looking backward, has opened the
record of immeasurable time, and shown us our world
unfolding like a flower through the long course of ages.
Looking outward, astronomy has infinitely extended our
conception of the vastness of creation, revealed a common
order reigning through innumerable worlds and immeas-
urable spaces, and shown us the universe also blooming
like a flower through inconceivable periods. Looking
downward and within, the microscope has extended our
range of observation not less than the telescope, has re-
vealed the same order prevailing in the infinitesimal as in
the infinite, and has shown us the same flower-like growth
and opening in realms so minute that we thought to find
nothing there. Thus our thoughts have been infinitely
enlarged, and we know ourselves citizens of a universe
and heirs of countless ages, whereas our fathers thought
themselves dwellers in a world and children of yesterday.
It is a great thing to live in a universe. With so vast an
outlook, the very thought of a real oneness and a universal
order is almost an education.

The newly known universe contributes to theology an
enlarged conception of God. The enlargement of our
thought of him under the influence of modern knowledge


SOURCES OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


SI


amounts to an additional revelation, not directly of his
character, but of his greatness, and ultimately of his charac-
ter. It is a revelation of unsuspected greatness, power, and
wisdom in him who is the source of all. It is a revelation
also of the method of his working, in creation and con-
trol ; it shows us God at his daily work, and immeasurably
enlarges and enriches our conception of him as a God of/
order. It is a revelation of the significance and value of
man, who suspected at first that he was belittled by the
new greatness of the universe, but who proves on better
understanding to be crowned with fresh honor by it. It i.s
thus a revelation full of profound and far-reaching signifi-
cance, whose full extent and importance it is yet too early
for any one to perceive.

Nature cannot give us a complete revelation of God,
for nature does not provide a field for complete expression
of perfect character. But the phenomena of nature make
a real contribution to a true knowledge of God, and the-
ology must learn from them.

In learning from the universe theology must consult
with natural science, and with philosophy.

Natural science, in its various departments, discovers,
examines, and classifies facts in the order of nature, and
thus seeks to know the universe as it is. Science, though
it is an imperfect witness, is the only available witness con-
cerning this vast field. It is an imperfect witness, because
its investigations are incomplete, and because there is con-
stant danger of accepting premature conclusions. Both
imperfections are inevitable : incompleteness of investiga-
tion, because the field is boundless and the application of
scientific methods to the knowledge of it has but just be-
gun ; and the danger of hasty judgment, because man's
powers are limited, and because he is eager for certainty
and often impatient of long inquiry. Yet science, imper-
fect though it is, is the only proper witness for interpreta-
tion of the facts of nature, and within its own field science
is free. God has never dictated to students of the uni-


OUTLINE OP CNKj-STjaI^ THEOLOGY


S2


verse what facts they must find there, or what conclusions
they must draw from what they find. Theology must
receive conclusions of science, when they are legitimately
reached and firmly established, with the reverence that it
owes to truth from any source, and must freely and can-
didly make room for them in Its own scheme of thought,
so far as they may bear upon its subject-matter. Theology
needs all truth, and should welcome truth from any quar-
ter. It must cherish a reverent dread of hasty conclusions,
and an equal dread of indiflference to facts and rejection of
what is true. Superciliousness of theology toward science
is as wrong as superciliousness of science toward theology.

Philosophy views the facts of existence from a higher
point than science. It investigates the spiritual law and
method that run through the universe, and seeks to know
the forming principles that can be traced in its structure
and life. Science examines and classifies facts ; philo.so-
phy inquires concerning spiritual meanings. Science seeks
to know the universe, philosophy to understand it. Thins
in its characteristic endeavor philosophy is closely allied
to theology, and is richly helpful to it. The two are
friendly fellow-students, studying the greatest field of hu-
man thought from similar points of view.

Thus it appears that the various sources and forms of
knowledge are tributary to theology, in an ascending
series. Concerning the constitution of man, physical and
mental science are witnesses. Biology, physiology, and
anthropology bear their testimony; for man is a part of
the terrestrial order, organized after the manner of physi
cal life in general. Psychology reports upon his mental
endowments and possibilities; and history illustrates his
powers and tendencies by exhibiting him in action. The
world in which he lives is helpful in showing what manner
of being man is, and the universe of which it forms a part
makes large revelation of the mind of God. Thus all
science, investigating the universe, has its contribution to
offer to theology. Moreover, all .science is tributary to
philosophy; for philosophy looks out upon the universe


QUAZ/jP/CA T/OJVS FOR THE STUDY


53


that science has discovered, with intent to understand it.
It takes the results of science, and interprets them with
reference to higher meanings than science by itself could
discover. Philosophy spiritualizes the universe that science
has viewed in its material aspects. Philosophy is in turn
tributary to theology; for theology avails itself of the
labors of philosophy, in order to reach and to support its
own theistic and Christian interpretation of the universe,
which is the highest interpretation of all. Theology works
to the same end with philosophy in interpreting the universe,
and offers the supreme interpretation of all things when it
attributes all, in existence, plan, and end, to the God and
Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, from whom all things
proceeded, and for whose high purpose all things exist.
All forms of knowledge thus minister to the interpretation
of the world in the light of religion ; and in this sense it is
true, as it was said long ago, that theology is the queen of
the sciences.

QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE STUDY OF CHRISTIAN
THEOLOGY

I. Intellectual Qualifications. — Theology offers op-
portunity to the utmost powers of man. For this work no
intellect is too powerful, too wide in range, or too fine in
quality.

Theology calls for good ability in reasoning, — by which
is meant that in this field of study there is need of quick
and true discernment of relations, and ability to move
soundly and safely from premises to conclusion. What is
true in all thinking is true here: the mental processes
need to be sound, straightforward, and trustworthy. The-
ology requires no illegitimate processes of mind, and must
never admit them.

In this field there is perhaps exceptional need that
power of reasoning be accompanied by insight, intuitional
power, a sympathetic quality of mind. Theology rests, in
one aspect^ upon interpretation of the Scriptures; in an-


54


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Other, upon inner spiritual experience ; in another, upon
spiritual apprehension of great spiritual realities. All
these processes require the exercise of that power of spir-
itual perception which is rational in its character indeed,
and yet is not identical with reasoning. For all these pur-
poses a theologian needs to be in some measure a seer, —
a man of perception, gifted with a mind of insight, able to
enter into other minds, and able above all to discern and
estimate those primal certainties that are not reached by
demonstration, but lie back of the region of argument
There is a world that the spirit enters, and in that world a
theologian needs to be at home.

2. Qualifications in Spirit and Temper of Mind.—
The study of theology is the investigation of truth in the
richest and most important of fields. Therefore it requires
all such qualities, of heart as well as of mind, as are essen-
tial to the discovery and welcoming of truth anywhere.
Belief in the reality of truth, personal sincerity, reverence,
humility, candor, patience, loyalty \o facts, self-forgetful-
ness, the courage of one’s convictions, — all these are
necessary in theology, as they are in the investigation of
truth in any region. Without these qualities no student
of any science can expect the full reward of his labor in
discovery of truth ; and from this law a student in theology
can claim no exemption.

Specially should Christian theology be studied with a
mind attuned to the spirit of Christianity. One who
would rightly know the science of the Christian religion
must rightly know the Christian religion itself; and this
can be done only by experience. It is true that Chris-
tianity appeals to the common-sense and conscience of
mankind, and that its practical strength lies largely in
its adaptation to the general human mind. But it is also
true that Christianity will not be well understood except
from within; for it is not merely a system, — it is a life.
To understand it merely as a system, however candidly,
is to misunderstand it ; for it is more than a system, and
a life can be known only from within. Hence a theo*


QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE STUDY


55


logian needs to be a man in whom the characteristic life
of Christianity exists in vigor and fulness. The qualities
of the Christian character and the habits of the Christian
life need not only to be approved but to be possessed.
Prayer and fellowship with God must be moulding influ-
ences in his personal life. He must be a Christian
before he is a theologian ; and a Christian is one who is
attuned to the will of God. Christ said, “If any one
wills to do the will of God, he shall know of my teaching,
whether it is from God or whether I am speaking merely
from myself.” Loyalty of spirit to the holy will is an
indispensable help to right knowledge of the holy truth.

The exigencies of a theologian’s work bring into special
prominence the need of reverence and love for truth itself
for its own sake, and inextinguishable desire to possess
it. This spirit is his best safeguard between the claims
of two tendencies that draw in opposite directions, and
make a just attitude difficult to maintain, — namely, the
claims of conservatism and progress. The conservative
spirit prizes truth already held, and the precious fruits that
it has already borne, and sets a high estimate upon the
iralue of a settled state ; the progressive spirit is sure that
truth still more precious waits for him who will move
forward to take it, and is not content till it has bettered
:he imperfect present by advancing to what is just before.
Each tendency has its dangers. The one may easily
overestimate the advantages of a settled state, and the
Dossibility of maintaining it; and the other may easily
inderestimate the inheritance that has come from the
oast, and seize too eagerly what only seems to be the
oetter thing. Excessive regard for truth already known
is dogmatism, — a habit of mind into which self-will and
jelf-importance cteep all too easily. But excessive interest
,n truth just found or just in sight is an opposite extreme,
nto which self-will and self-importance quite as easily
ind their way. Between these two extremes, to one or
he other of which almost every student has some con-
ititutional inclination, the theologian’s safeguard is a


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


genuine love for truth, new or old, for its own sake. He
is safe only in a love of truth so genuine that he can
neither give up truth once held, save as he sees it bloom
into some higher form of truth, nor turn back from any
fresh truth that he may hope to make his own. Such an
impartial love for truth is his best guide in recognizing
truth, and a genuine power of recognizing truth is indis-
pensable in the study of theology. Truth in one’s
thought, in this field, consists in the correspondence of
one’s thought to the eternal reality that exists in God. To
this no man has fully attained ; but this correspondence of
thought to the eternal reality must needs be the object of
a theologian’s warmest love and most intense desire.

3. Qualifications by way of Knowledge. — A student
of Christian theology must know his Bible, in two ways.
First, he must have it well in hand, by thorough personal
familiarity. He needs thoroughly to know, by faithful
study and long intimacy, what the book contains, and to
have its contents for the familiar furniture of his mind.
Second, he needs to know how to ascertain what his Bible
means. One who has never yet read his Bible thoroughly,
or who has no good knowledge of the way to ascertain its
meaning, is not ready for the study of theology. Hence
in a course of study exegesis precedes theology, and the
work of systematic theology should be preceded by work
in Biblical theology, or the systematic historical study of
the doctrinal contents of the Bible. It is impossible to
know the Bible too well, and difficult to know it well
enough. No study upon it can be too searching or too
intelligent, if one seeks to do the best work in theology.

Nor can a theologian know too much in any field. No
familiarity with physical science, philosophy, history, or
human nature is in vain to him. Wherever God is shown
by anything that he has done, and wherever light may be
obtained upon the nature or the life of man, there a theo-
logian finds something for his purpose. Of course a
student in theology cannot become a specialist in an
these lines of study, or perhaps in any of them ; it would


QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE STUDY.


S7


be a vast acquirement to be a specialist worthy of the
name, in theology itself. Yet a student of theology
needs and should be sure to keep a general familiarity
with the progress and results of the study of his age.
A theologian cannot afford to be ignorant of what science
has done, in fields where its work affects his own. He
should keep a wide outlook, and not allow himself to fall
behind in knowledge of results.

A theologian needs to know the life and spirit of his
own time. Theology has often been viewed with preju-
dice and distrust, because it was supposed to be a study
of recluses or moral specialists, who lived apart from the
life of their age, and whose conclusions needed correct-
ing in the light of wider thought and larger experience.
Such impressions are not wholly false, and in so far as
they are correct, theology cannot complain if it is dis-
trusted. It may seem as if a man might successfully
study the themes of theology in the solitude of a recluse ;
but the thinking of recluses tends to abstraction, over-
systematizing, and neglect of the practical aspects of
truth. Theology is the science of religion, and religion
is a life. Surely the science of the richest life is entitled
to the benefit of health, vigor, and open air. In order to
success in theology, a man should be sensitive to life,
and able to think in sympathy with the living thought
around him. He should be ready to attend to the prac-
tical side of his theme, and capable of strong, practical
views. All the more should he be in touch with life
because theology is not a stationary science. It has
always changed with the changing life of successive gen-
erations, and can never cease to do so. Therefore a
theologian must needs have heard the voice of his own
generation, and be able to live in sympathy with the
Christian life that must send its vigor into his science.
Theology stagnates when it is cut off from present life
and thinking and has its sources wholly in the past, and
the theologian’s mind is the channel through which the
fresh stream must flow in.


58 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


GENERAL METHOD OF STUDY

In the study of Christian theology we review in orderly
method the truths that are involved in the Christian
religion. We endeavor to ascertain the doctrinal contents
of Christianity, to exhibit them in their connection and
unity, and to place them in the relation that they bear to
the eternal spiritual realities. The object in this study
is, to render clear, simple, and spiritual the thinking of
students upon the themes that are involved in the work
of the Christian ministry.

The importance of such study is evident. One who
preaches Christianity needs to have clear conceptions of
what Christianity is, and to free himself from all that
would obscure such conceptions or diminish their force.
Christianity is weakened alike by omissions and by addi*
tions. A preacher wants the full strength of the real
gospel, omitting nothing that belongs to it, and adding
nothing to its essential verities : and he needs to see in the
clearest light that what he holds and preaches is necessarily
and eternally true. Therefore one who intends to preach
the gospel owes it to himself to pass beyond fragmentary
study of Christianity, and make a comprehensive survey of
its contents. The truths of Christianity are interdepen-
dent and mutually supporting, as the truths of nature are,
and a preacher needs to know them in their unity. Only
thus can he know how strong is the foundation of his faith,
and only thus can he keep his thinking faithful to the
harmony and simplicity of the gospel.

The study of theology, rightly conducted, is favorable
to clearness of thought, and to simplicity and strength of
conviction, upon the vital themes of religion. It does
not dispel all mystery, but it does clear away many
needless confusions, and open the way to a free and satis-
factory Christian experience. The study of theology is
favorable to personal religion and to practical work. It


GENERAL METHOD OF STUDY


59


is true that in the early stages of theological study
students sometimes experience a weakening of faith and
a dampening of religious ardor. This is sometimes due
to faults in the conception and teaching of theology : but
it is also often due to the fact that students came from
home and church with crude ideas of the gospel, which,
however, they supposed to be the only true ideas ; and on
finding some of these untenable they fear that the foun-
dations are slipping from beneath their feet. But this
is a stage in healthy progress, and will soon be past.
Christianity is true, and intelligent study of its theology
will afford new grounds of confidence, stronger than any
inherited grounds that advancing knowledge shakes.

The study of theology finds a strong support and safe-
guard in the history of doctrines in the Christian church.
A student often begins with supposing that his own view
of doctrine, received by inheritance and teaching, has
always been held by Christians. We easily imagine our
own to be the only tenable view, until we see by what
steps of progress it was unfolded from the past. No
form of doctrine has ever been final, but a multitude of
forms have followed one another, each passing on its
vitality and value to that which came after it. The study
of history serves as a safeguard against narrowness and
provincialism, by the assurance it affords that present
forms of doctrine cannot be final, any more than were
those that went before, while at the same time it helps
us to see and prize the value of the present forms. If we
could not find truth profitable rmtil it had been perfectly
conceived and stated, the profitableness of truth to us
would be long delayed ; and, taught by the experience of
the past, we learn to live upon truth all the more joyfully
because we know that in human thought it is still grow-
ing toward its destined perfection. The broadening
effect of knowing the history of our own beliefs is specially
necessary in theology. Here private convictions acquire
a sacredness to their possessor from the sacredness of
their subject-matter, and there is special need of learn*


00


A2V OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


ing to distinguish between our present conceptions oi
truth and eternal truth itself.

In speaking of the method of study, mention should
be made of two opposite dangers, — the danger of over-
systematizing, and the danger of fragmentariness.

The danger of over-systematizing in theology is a
serious one, and is ever present. In one’s thinking on a
great subject, it is natural to seek unity and complete-
ness. The deeper one’s interest in the subject, the
stronger is this tendency likely to be. Moreover, the
idea that intellectual presentation of truth can be relied
upon to produce conviction is one of those half-truths
that men can scarcely refrain from holding for whole
truths. Hence, if the subject in question be one that
touches closely upon the eternal welfare of men, it may
easily seem a most solemn duty to make the exposition
as complete and harmonious as possible, without breaks
or omissions, in order that men may have no excuse for
rejecting what is so important to them. If parts of the
subject are shaded by mystery, all the stronger will be
the desire to clear the mystery away, and present a state-
ment that is equally clear and rational throughout. Thus
from various sides comes the demand upon the theologian,
if he would answer the questions of the soul, that he build
up a complete and rounded system, with one part as
strongly framed and well defended as another.

But to construct a complete and equal system is not so
easy. No doubt God knows a perfect system of truth,
but it does not follow that men, with their present limi-
tations, can discover or construct one. Attempts at
complete and equal treatment result in systems whose
parts are too unequal. When theology can build with
primal certainties, clear revelation, or sure reasoning for
its materials, it builds strongly; but what shall be done
when these are wanting ? Then comes the temptation to
theorize, and to give one's theories a place among the
certainties. Indeed, if a theologian must have complete-
ness, there is no way but to fill up certain places of


GENERAL METHOD OF STUDY 6t


inferior certainty with the best material that he can find.
Systems thus built up may present a strong appearance,
but in the end their very completeness is against them.
A theology too systematic is sure to be distrusted for that
very quality, and with good reason. If, in order to
, complete his scheme of doctrine, a theologian fills in with
speculative matter, whether he has thought it out himself
or received it from his predecessors, it will be felt some
day that he has given to such speculations an importance
that they did not properly possess, and has weakened his
system by introducing them. A wise student will not be
disconcerted if he finds in his system gaps that at present
he cannot fill Even if completeness should never be
attainable in this world, labor in theology would not be
in vain. Incompleteness is far better than a misleading
appearance of perfect system.

Yet over against this danger stands its opposite. De-
spairing of perfect system, or seeing how the idea of
system has sometimes proved misleading, a student may
begin to despise system, and be content with fragmentary
thinking in theology. One who is content with it may
easily come even to glory in it.

But system is not impossible in theology, nor is it to
be despised. There is a right order for theological study,
for there is an order that may be called natural. There
are certain topics that enter into any fair outline of
theological thinking, and these topics stand to one another
in a certain relation of internal order and natural develop-
ment. Theology is a unity, of such nature that part
illustrates part, and each is best understood in its own
relative position. Theology, moreover, is a part of the
vast unity of the universe of God. The great discovery
of modern times is that there are no fragments. Surely
so high a study as theology is entitled to claim that the
modern regard for unity in thought and knowledge be
not shut out from it. Fragmentary thinking leaves much
unexplained and unsupported, and misses a quality of
strength and confidence to which thought in this field is


62


AiV OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


entitled. Patiently and cautiously, therefore, believing
that such effort is not in vain, we must seek for unity
and consistency in our theological study. While we
dare not labor to obtain an artificial completeness, we
must refuse to be satisfied without a connected order and
an intelligible unity in Christian truth.

TERMINOLOGY AND ORDER OF TREATMENT.

In theology it is best to use, as far as possible, the
simplest and least technical language. From a strictly
scientific point of view, the preference might be given to
scientific terminology; but the practical point of view is
more important. Theology may easily be made an abstract
study; but, both for its own sake and for the sake of the
Christian people, it should be kept as near to actual life
as possible. Moreover, the long-used terms of theology
have gathered about them a mass of conflicting definitions
and associations that seriously embarrass straightforward
study. Long-continued discussion has rendered the
technical terms ambiguous, and the employment of them
is not now favorable to precision or to mutual understand-
ing. Hence the words of common life are best. It is
better to speak of Christ than of soteriology.

Of the subject-matter of Christian theology, the follow-
ing arrangement seems the simplest, the most natural,
and the most true to the relations of the various elements
that are to be considered : —

I. God.

II. Man.

III. Sin.

IV. Christ.

V. The Holy Spirit, and the Divine Life in Man.

VI. Things to Come.

In this arrangement the transitions are natural, and each
subject finds support in what has preceded it. To each
of these great themes a section must be devoted.


PART 1.

GOD.

Ik this part of theology must be considered the Chris«
tian conception of God; the reasons that we have for
believing that God, so conceived, exists ; the relation that
God sustains to the universe ; and God’s threefold mode
of manifestation and existence. This is the study of Chris-
tian theism, the Christian doctrine concerning God.

This part of theology is of the utmost importance.
Upon the conception that is entertained of God will de-
pend the nature and quality of religion in any soul or race ;
and in accordance with the view that is held of God, his
nature, his character, and his relation to other beings, the
spirit and the substance of theology will be determined.
It may almost be said that when one has stated his concep-
tion of God he has written his theology. A system of
theology is weak unless it is grounded in a clear and satis-
fying conception of God, and a vital change in the
thought of a man or an age concerning him is sure to be
attended by sweeping change throughout the field of
theology. Here, therefore, we need all the qualifications
for the discovery of truth. Humility, devoutness, and
diligence must be our constant companions.

“ In Thy light may we see light.”

I. The Chmstian Conception of God.

The origin of the word “ God ” is uncertain. It is a
Teutonic word, found in all the Teutonic languages, but
not elsewhere. It is not allied, as it has often been sup-
posed to be, with “ good.” Various derivations have been
proposed, but the word cannot be traced further than to
its Teutonic source, where it first appears usually in the


64 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


plural. There is no serious loss from our ignorance of the
earliest meaning; for the early history of the word is
pagan history, and could not help us, if we knew it, in
knowing him to whom we give the name. To no such
being was the name at first applied.

For convenience of treatment it seems best first to state
the Christian conception of God in a definition, and then
to unfold the conception more fully by considering the
attributes of his nature and his character. It might seem
that the definition should include the whole; but the
division of the subject that is now proposed will probably
justify itself as we proceed.

I. The Definition of God. — The subject is too vast
for satisfactory defining; but we possess materials for a
Christian definition of God, and are justified in framing
one, even though we know that it must be imperfect

We dare attempt to define God, because we have the
Christian revelation. Here is illustrated the statement in
the Introduction, that Christian theology should regard the
Christian revelation as its first source, not as its second.
We approach the knowledge of God from the standpoint
of Christianity, and use the light of Christ in making our
definition. The Christian religion, of which Christian
theology is the study, is characterized by its profound and
spiritual knowledge of God, — a knowledge experimental,
not theoretical, and the best that humanity has ever had.
“ To a Christian, ‘ God ’ is not a common noun, but a proper
name." In our religion we do not speak of “ a God,” but of
“ God,” — a single and definite being ; there is none like
him. As in our religion, so in our theology: we do not
grope up to God through lower grades of knowledge, or de-
fine him as if there might be more gods than one. We be-
gin from Christ, who has opened to us a definite conception
of God. From all its proper sources, indeed, our theology
must gather testimony concerning him; and a definition
of God may fairly be required to satisfy science as well as
religion, as a true definition must finally do. But we are


GOD


65


Christian students, and are permitted to begin under the
teaching of Christ the revealer, who has come forth to
minister to our need of knowing God. Natural theology
has sought to define God first according to the universe,
and has looked for evidence of his existence before it could
know what manner of God it was to look for, Christian
theology has often done the same, discussing the existence
of God while the name itself was still left undefined and am-
biguous. But we follow a different order ; we first set forth
the Christian conception of God, and then inquire what
reason we have for believing that such a God exists.

By a Christian definition of God is meant a definition
that expresses the conception of God that comes legiti-
mately from the Christian religion; one that is true if
Christ has made a true revelation. It expresses — if we
could but express it — Christ’s own conception. If we
can frame such a definition, we may say that it is one to
which Christianity stands pledged.

The best manner of framing a statement of what God is,
is not the enumeration of attributes, though this has often
been attempted in definitions, but rather the use of com-
prehensive expressions on the most important points, A
definition by enumeration is ponderous, and yet unavoid-
ably incomplete. In the case of the greatest truths, the
nearest approach to correct expression is made not by
exhaustiveness, but by suggestiveness. A definition may
be incomplete and yet essentially true, if the vital elements
are selected and made prominent. It is no objection that
a statement thus formed does not express ever)dhing, but
leaves much implied.

In a definition of God it is best as far as possible to avoid
figurative language; for metaphors are ambiguous, and
figurative language in a compact statement tends to destroy
the proportions and draw undue attention to minor points,
Nor should the definition be framed in the polemical spirit,
or with the idea of apologetics in mind. A definition
should seek to avoid errors, but need not refute them.
Fighting definitions have been nuinerous in the history of


66


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


theology ; sometimes they have been unavoidable, but they
have done much harm. A Christian definition of God
should be calm, restful, non-controversial.

The Christian conception of God may be thus ex-
pressed : —

God is the Personal Spirit, perfectly good,

WHO IN HOLY LOVE CREATES, SUSTAINS, AND ORDERS
ALL.

The essential matters are covered by this statement: —

(1) The nature of God: He is a personal spirit.

(2) The character of God: He is perfectly good.

(3) The relation of God to all other existence: He cre-
ates, sustains, and orders all.

(4) The motive of God in his relation to all other exist-
ence : His motive is holy love.

(i) The Nature of God. — “ God is the personal spirit.”

Spirit. — Negatively the word marks contrast with
matter. Spirit, we say, is immaterial. But this negative
statement does not tell us much, for vely little is known of
the real difference between matter and spirit, or of the
real nature of either. When Christ said, “ God is a spirit,”
he doubtless implied that God is immaterial ; but that was
not his main thought, and what he affirmed was something
far more positive and valuable. What is a spirit ? How
do we know? We know through our own consciousness.
Man has a body, but is a spirit, and is conscious of him-
self as a spirit, — that is, as a being who thinks and feels
and wills. These are the essential powers of a spirit, and
it is from our own possession of these powers that we
know what it means that God is a spirit. It means that
God is an intelligence; God is a mind. He thinks and
feels and wills. If the negative meaning is that God is
other than matter, the more helpful positive meaning is
that God is other than matter in the same way as man, by
possessing these powers of thought, affection, and will


GOD


67


We need no closer definition of the difference between
God and matter, if only we give full weight to this vital
and practical difference, that he is one who thinks and
feels and wills. The composition of spirit we may never
understand; but this is the action of spirit, and this is
intelligible.

That God is a spirit in this sense is taught and implied
in the Scriptures so constantly that special proofs from
that source are superfluous. From the first page of the
Bible to the last, he is everywhere the living and acting
God, always manifesting the essential powers of a spirit.

Personal. — The word may appear to be superfluous,
since the thought that it expresses is implied in “ spirit.”
Certainly it is implied in “ spirit,” as now defined, but not
necessarily in that word as it is sometimes used. A vague
usage, in which the thought of personality is but dimly
present, is known in literature and in common speech, and
may easily suggest its own vagueness to the word if with-
out further assertion it is applied to God. The word
" personal ” in our definition asserts self-consciousness and
self-direction in God ; for these are the powers of person-
ality as it is known to man. A personal spirit is a self-
conscious and self-directing intelligence; and a personal
God is a God who knows himself as himself, and con-
sciously directs his own action.

But can the word ” person ” be applied to God ? Is it
not inadequate and misleading? Does it not imply limita-
tions of being, and can we attribute limitations to him?
Does not the conception of a personal God transcend our
imagination, and even imply contradictions?

All this may be true: nevertheless the word is correct
at heart, and tells the truth. The word may be inadequate
to the nature of him who is great above all, and to apply
it to him may be to open mysteries that we cannot solve ;
but when this word asserts that God is self-conscious and
self-directing, it describes him rightly, and we have no
better word to take its place. More may be true of him,
that neither this word nor any other word of human


68


AJV' OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


framing can express, but this word is not false. It reports
him as he is. God may be more than we can mean by
personal, but he is not less.

Pantheism denies this, and allows to God only an exist-
ence that is not self-conscious or self-directing. It repre-
sents God as in the universe, somewhat as the life of the
tree is in the tree. But that the Christian revelation
represents God as personal needs no proof. He says “ I,”
and men address him as "Thou.” Nor does personality
belong only to the earlier manifestations of God, and dis-
appear in the later and higher. The personal element is
not less prominent in the latest and highest than in the
earliest of all Personality in God is not an outgrown
anthropomorphism. The representation of God as a
Father, emphasized by Christ, implies personality as
distinctly as any of the early anthropomorphisms, and far
more richly. Probably the truth is that complete person-
ality exists in God alone. He is the one perfect and typi-
cal person, and man, as yet, possesses personality only in a
rudimentary and imperfect way, as a growing gift which is
gradually coming toward perfection. We are compelled to
define personality from ourselves, and yet we can thus ob-
tain only a partial definition. God alone is fully personal.

After this explanation of “ personal,” it is scarcely nec-
essary to give warning against the popular error that con-
founds it with “ bodily.” Personality belongs to the spirit.

“ God is the personal spirit; ” not a personal spirit. He
is not one among many who might be thus defined. The
definition could not be true of another. " He is God
alone.”

Thus the first part of the definition declares that God
is the self-conscious and self-directing mind, concerning
whom the assertions that follow can be made.

(2) The Character of God. “ God is the personal spirit,
PERFECTLY GOOD.”

The word “ good ” is not limited here, as it often is in
popular speech, to mean kind, or gracious. It has its


GOD


69


richest meaning, and stands for the utmost that it ever ex-
presses. It tells of moral excellence, such as the best
heart and judgment of men approve. The word “ good ''
means essentially the same when used of God as when
used of man, except that here it reaches up to its utmost
fulness of significance. The definition perfectly good ”
attributes to God all possible moral excellence. It affirms
that he possesses every excellence that can belong to a
personal spirit, unmixed with evil, unweakened by defect,
unsurpassable in degree. It declares him good without
qualification, in the sense that the word bears at its best in
the language of men.

It may be objected that the definition is inexact, since
men are not agreed in their idea of goodness. It is true
that men differ as to what is good in many practical appli-
cations of the word, and in their ideals also. But it is also
true that beneath all such differences there is a deep agree-
ment among men at the heart of the matter. The human
conception of goodness is an idea springing and germi-
nant,” always growing, nowhere perfect, but it is a genuine
idea, with a definite character. Moral goodness is not a
name without a meaning. What our definition affirms is,
that man's highest thought of goodness rises directly
toward the reality that exists in God.

The word good ” means the same in him and in us,
else it means nothing to us ; and when all errors have been
corrected, and all inadequacies outgrown, and the best con-
ception of moral good that is possible to man has been
reached, it will be found that God corresponds to that con
ception, while yet he transcends it.

The conception of God as perfectly good is the crowning
characteristic of the Christian revelation, and to that reve
lation we are mainly indebted for it. Evidence of his
goodness has been sought in nature, and found in part. It
could not be found there in full, for perfect character
requires for its full expression a different field from that of
nature. Only in life and action can character be fully ex-
pressed. In Christ God has been expressed in life and


70 AJ\r OVTZIJVS OF CffRISriAN THEOLOGY


action, and been shown as the good God, excellent in all
respects, and worthy of the love and confidence of all
beings. Christ thus brings to men the joy and cheer that
spring from confidence in a God of perfect goodness, and
adds the strength of hope to every good endeavor.

(3) The Relation of God to other existence. " God is
the personal spirit, perfectly good, who . . . CREATES, SUS-
TAINS, AND ORDERS ALL.”

Who creates all. — The word “ create ” is here used in
the broadest sense, as covering the gift of existence, in
whatever manner it may have been imparted. The asser-
tion is that the good personal spirit lies back of the uni-
verse as the ground of its being, and the active cause of
its existence. He brought it into being, and it owes itself
to him. The existing universe he has thus created in the
past ; and if there is creation going on to-day, he is still the
Creator. Creative acts and processes, of every kind are
his alone. Plainly he must be greater than the universe, if
he has produced it. As to the mode of God’s action in
bringing all into existence, a definition can assert nothing ;
and the question of mode should be kept separate from the
assertion of the fact. Here is asserted simply the fact that
God has given existence to all things that exist. This truth
is expressed on the first page of the Scriptures, and runs
through them to the latest writing.

Who stistains all. — Here it is asserted that he who is
the original cause is also the perpetual cause, the upholder
of all things, who preserves them in existence. Here again
the definition asserts the fact, without indicating the man-
ner. The marvel of the universe is force, by means of
which it is sustained and held together. Force is from
God. How it proceeds from him we do not know, and
may never know; but he is somehow the origin of force
itself, and the author of the innumerable combinations in
which it performs its work of sustaining the universe.
Back of the continuance of the vast sum of organized exist-
ence and energy stands the same personal spirit who


COD


71


stands back of its origin. This is the constant doctrine oi
the Scriptures, that creation and sustaining are works of
one and the same God.

Who orders all — Here It is asserted that he who creates
and sustains the universe is also governing it, and direct-
ing it to an end. To his oneness it owes its unity. It is
his character of perfect goodness that provides the universe
with an end worth existing for, and guides it to the fulfil-
ment of its own significance. Here again all questions of
manner in God’s ordering are untouched : what is affirmed
is his unfailing, intelligent, all-comprehending care over
that which he has made, co-ordinating the whole into a
purposed unity and directing it to his own end.

These three statements concerning God’s relation to
other existence — that he creates, sustains, and orders
all — are closely parallel in meaning to Paul’s threefold
saying, “Of him, and through him, and unto him are all
things ” (Rom. xi. 36).

(4) The Motive of God in his relation to other existence.
“ God . . • IN HOLY LOVE creates, sustains, and orders
all.”

In holy love. — The motive of God in his activities is
doubtless implied in his character of perfect goodness;
yet in a definition of him we need to bring it out. Our
actual conception of God must be affected by what we
think him to be doing and aiming at in the vast work of
his universe. If we cannot know with some certainty the
motive that led him to produce and sustain existence, we
shall sooner or later come to feel that the real God is
unknown to us, and both theology and religion will be
embarrassed by our ignorance. But the Christian concep-
tion of God includes a conception of his motive. Through
Christ there has come to us a knowledge of the motive that
governs him in his relation to other existence.

The definition asserts that the motive of God in the
universe is holy love. This statement anticipates some
things that must be said hereafter of the attributes of God,


72


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


but this can scarcely be avoided here. From Christ we
learn that “God is love: ” that is, God has boundless im-
pulse to impart himself and all good to other beings, and
equally boundless desire to possess other beings as his
own, in spiritual fellowship. We learn at the same time
that love in him is always holy love ; that is, his love is
always in complete harmony with that perfect goodness
of character which is eternally his guiding principle. Love
desires to impart the good, and holiness holds immovably
to the right thought as to what the good is, and how it
shall be imparted. To say that God is ruled by holy love
in his relation to other existence is the same as to say that
he himself is morally perfect and acts upon his perfection,
ardently desiring to do good to all beings, and especially to
impart his own goodness to all beings that are capable of
goodness. Holy love is the combination of perfect good-
ness and immeasurable self-giving. Such holy love, our
definition asserts, being the substance of his character, is
the motive of God’s activity in relation to other existence.
In such holy love he created the universe, in holy love he
sustains it, and in holy love he directs it to the end to
which he has destined it.

To many this seems a most venturesome and unwarrant-
able assertion on the part of Christianity. The universe,
they say, does not prove, as we study it, that holy love is
the motive upon which it is conducted. But Christianity
does not claim to have learned this from the universe, but
from God himself, who has spoken in Christ and made his
motive known. In Christ he has explained the universe
by manifesting himself. Christianity expects that the
universe will in the end confirm this testimony of Christ,
and bear witness to the holy love that has produced and
governed it; but the end is not yet, and the range of our
knowledge is so narrow, in comparison with the sweep
of the universe, that it is no wonder if we do not perceive
the motive in its clearness, in the little part that we can
apprehend. Christianity meanwhile views existence in the
light of the Christian revelation, and rests in hope; so


GOD


73


Rotn, viii. 18-25. If mysteries remain, thus far insoluble,
and the affirmation of the reign of holy love has to be
made by faith, this is no real objection. Faith is a worthy
organ of confidence in the realm of the spirit.

Some omissions in the definition of God that has been
given must be accounted for.

Why omit the familiar word infinite?

Partly because the word “ personal,*’ expressing almost
a contrasted idea, is far more characteristic of the Christian
revelation, and far more useful in a definition. The idea
of personality is of the very substance of the Christian
thought, while the more philosophical idea of infinity is
reached by inference, and can better be spared from a
definition.

Partly also because the word is ambiguous and itself in
need of defining, and in its popular sense unhelpful to a
true conception of God. Popularly, it is almost certain to
act as a separating word, a negation of definition, a denial
of knowledge. It seems to deny to God the qualities
that render other objects intelligible and definable. Most
men think of infinite ” as a word of extent, rather than
of quality, meaning immeasurably great, boundlessly ex-
tended, filling all space ; and the effect of this conception
is to render God vague and unreal to the mind. Infinite
is indefinite ; and mere vastness, removal of limits in re-
spect of extent, is not helpful to our thought of God.

But we must not fail to note that this is not the proper
meaning of the word as applied to God. God is infinite,
not as being immeasurably vast and extended in space,
but as being free from all such limitations as we find upon
all our powers and activities. Our powers reach their
limits, his never. In this high sense he is infinite in all
his attributes. Every quality in him exists unhindered
and to the full, so that iti every department of his activity
to him all things are possible. If the word were under-
stood thus, it might be helpful in a definition.

Yet perhaps it might not be needed, for our definition


74


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


practically expresses the same thought. When we say
that God creates, sustains, and orders all, we make him
greater than all else that exists, and attribute practically
unlimited range to all powers and faculties in him that
are active in creating, sustaining, and ordering the uni-
verse. We do not literally assert, in this statement, that
he is infinite, but we assign to him activity that really
implies it.

Why omit the familiar word absolute?

Because it scarcely suits the purpose of the Christian
definition. It is a useful word, when we would represent
God as independent of the relations in which the existence
of anything besides himself places him. It expresses a
thought that is needed for the purposes of philosophy.
But the Christian conception of God views him in his re-
lations, and the Christian definition will do best to repre-
sent him there.

Why omit to say that God is self -existent?

Because the fact is sufficiently implied in what is said.
Our definition affirms that God is the source of the ex-
istence of all besides himself ; nothing outside of himself
is left, therefore, to be the source or cause of his existence.
The principle of causation satisfactorily applies to all exist-
ences but one. Manifold existence implies a self-existent
source, and that self-existent source must be sufficient to
the production of all.

Why omit to mention such attributes as omnipotence,
omniscience, and omnipresence? Because the possession
of these qualities is implied in the assertion that God cre-
ates, sustains, and orders all. A being cannot create a
universe, sustain it, and direct it to an end, without being
everywhere present with his works, knowing all things,
and possessing all power. Nor is it necessary to specify
wisdom in the definition, for this also is implied in the
action that is affirmed. When it is said that God does all
his work in holy love, the wisdom that is implied rises to
the highest quality, and becomes a moral attribute. What
is true of these so-called natural attributes is true also of


GOD


75


those moral attributes which are not specified, — they are
implied in the definition. If God does all in holy love,
it need not be added that he is righteous, or gracious, or
true. These words denote forms that are taken by the
fundamental qualities, holiness and love. The attributes
that have now been mentioned must of course be con-
sidered in our study, but there is no need to enumerate
them in defining God according to the Christian concep-
tion of his nature.

This, then, is the Christian thought. If Christ is a true
revealer and Christianity is true, God is the personal spirit,
perfectly good, who in holy love creates, sustains, and
orders all.

2. The Attributes of God. — According to the Chris-
tian conception, God is a personal spirit; that is, he exists,
and possesses the necessary powers of a personal spirit.
The powers of thought, affection, and will, existing in
perfection, are assumed as necessary elements of his being.
But the being whose existence as a personal spirit is thus
conceived must be characterized by certain modes of
activity, and certain moral qualities, in addition to the
elements that are included in the definition of a spirit.
If he is God, his necessary powers must act in certain
ways, and he must have a certain character. These modes
of activity and qualities of character are known as attri-
butes. The name originates in the fact that in our think-
ing about God we find ourselves attributing to him these
modes and qualities, in order either to clarify or to com-
plete our conception of him, or to account for what we
know of his action.

We may define thus : —

The attributes of God are the modes of activity and
the qualities of character that belong to him as God.

It is important to remember that attributes do not make
up the being of God. On the contrary, we have to con-
ceive of God as existing, with the essential powers of a
personal spirit, before we can begin to attribute to him


75 AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


modes of activity and qualities of character, The neces-
sary powers of a personal spirit are not attributes, but
compose the Being who possesses the attributes. Thus
the affectional nature is not an attribute, but love is. The
power of knowing is not ranked as an attribute, for a spirit
would not be a spirit without the power of knowing ; but
omniscience, which is a mode of exercising the power of
knowing, is an attribute of God. Will is not an attribute,
but a necessary power; but holiness is an attribute of
God, for it is the quality of character by which all action
of his will is determined. God exists as a personal spirit,
and his attributes belong to him, or inhere in him.

Back of all attributes, the Being to whom the divine
attributes belong possesses Personality (in the sense above
defined), and Life. In both Unity is implied, but it need
not be dwelt upon. Life is undefinable, and yet we know
it well. It implies all power of movement, action, thought,
emotion, self-direction, communication. It implies reality,
intensity, vigor, in all activity. He who is represented in
the Scriptures as the Living God is he in whom the attri-
butes inhere. He is thus represented in contrast to false
gods, which have no life, no real being as living spirits
(Jer. X. 7-12). Christ says that God has life in himself
(John v. 26). Through the whole course of revelation
God appears as a Being far more full of life than any that
he has created ; his thought is creative, his feeling is in-
tense, his action is infinitely free and powerful. This con-
ception of the Living God, with the accompanying sense
of his reality, presence, and power, is essential to all vital
religion, and to all true tlieology.

To the Living God belongs self-existence, as we have
seen; and self-existence implies eternal existence. The
self-existent is the eternal. If there is one divine spirit,
the source of all besides, his life must be from ever and
for ever, nothing back of it and nothing to outlast it; for
as nothing outside caused it, so nothing can bring it to an
end. “ From everlasting to everlasting, thou art God,” is
the language of adoration, and not less the utteratic,^ qt


GOD


77


sound reason. The eternity of God is taught us by his
relation to other existence.

To this God, the living personal Spirit, there belong
certain modes of activity and qualities of character, which
we call his attributes. They are not mere human concep-
tions of him, but real modes and qualities of an existing
God. But how do we learn what they are? Where do
we obtain such information that we dare attribute to God
a mode of activity or a quality of character; and how
shall we know when to close our list of attributes, as the
truest that we can make?

We learn the attributes of God partly from the Christian
revelation. His moral qualities are richly expressed in
Christ, and many of his modes of activity are set forth
in the Scriptures. But the Christian revelation was not
intended to throw equal light upon all that is true of God,
and the Scriptures never attempt a complete enumeration
of his attributes. Hence we cannot draw the line at the
modes and activities that are mentioned in the Bible, and
affirm that these are all.

We learn God’s attributes partly from the creation,
material and spiritual. The material universe and the
soul of man teach us much concerning the modes of his
activity, and not a little about his character. From human
life we learn what moral character means. But here again
we cannot be sure that we find the whole of God; or
rather, we are sure that creation is inadequate to express
the whole.

In judging what are the attributes of God, we are en-
titled to learn from our idea of a perfect being. From the
creation we learn that God must be adequate to the uni-
verse that he created and is conducting; adequate to all
its needs, in power, wisdom, and character. From Christ
we learn that he is perfectly good. From the two sources
together we conclude that God must be the most perfect
being that can be conceived. Then we learn something
about his attributes, or modes of activity and qualities of


78 Alf OUTLmE OF CHRISTIAN' THEOLOGY


character, by construction of the idea of the perfect being.
Whatever is essential to the idea of such a being we know
to be in God.

It is true that in this process we are liable to error. We
are imperfect, and our judgment of perfection is fallible.
We must be careful, but the method is legitimate, and we
cannot reject it. The relation of man to God is to be
trusted : man was made for God, and the idea of perfec-
tion is not foreign to his nature. Moreover, on the moral
side, which is the most important, we have a most valuable
check against error. In the character of Christ, and hence
in the Christian character, we possess a true and trust-
worthy view of the character of God. Christ is given us
as the expression of God, and as the example for men.
The ideal Christian character is like Christ, and so is like
God. Thus we learn the moral qualities of God from what
he has shown himself to be in Christ, and from what he
has commanded his children to be, and promised that they
shall become.

Since God is perfect, and our knowledge of perfection is
incomplete, we must admit that he may possess attributes
that are unknown to us. But our ignorance here cannot
be very harmful. We know that the perfect Being must
be self-consistent, and hence are sure that God possesses
no modes of activity or qualities of character that are not
in harmony with those that have been made known to
us. If there are such unknown attributes, we may be sure
that they are modes of activity rather than qualities of
character. Whatever is essential in the character of God
we know.

No classification of the attributes of God seems better
than the simple one made in our definition : Some attri-
butes are modes of activity, and some are qualities of
character. This classification corresponds in general to
the ordinary division into natural and moral attributes,

God, the personal Spirit, must sustain some relation to
other existence, with respect to presence, knowledge, and


GOD


79


power. The modes of presence, knowledge, and power
that belong to God as God, according to the Christian
conception of him, are Omnipresence, Omniscience, and
Omnipotence, and these we call attributes of God. That
it is difficult, perhaps impossible, for us to comprehend
these modes of activity, constitutes no objection to their
reality, for it is due to our limitations. It is the vast-
ness of the thought that troubles us, not some inherent
impossibility.

Omnipresence. — By omnipresence we do not mean a
presence of God that fills all space in the manner in which
we think of matter as filling certain parts of space. It is
not a universal diffusion of the essence of God, like diffu-
sion of the atmosphere. Since we do not conceive of
God as material, we must be careful not to affirm of him
an omnipresence that is related to space as matter appears
to us to be related. The idea of omnipresence will be
misleading and hurtful to the spirituality of religion, unless
we are able to associate it firmly with a spiritual conception
of God.

When we speak of God’s omnipresence, we mean that
God is not conditioned or limited by space in his power of
acting, but is able to put forth his entire power of action
anywhere. The whole of his ability for action, of every
kind, is available for exertion everywhere at any time,
without any need that he move from place to place in
order to reach the scene of action. Whatever God can
do, whether by way of knowing, loving, creating, or con-
trolling, he can do anywhere, and ever3rwhere at once. If
we ask further questions as to how he acts everywhere at
once, we cannot answer them, and we need not. We
know, and only know, that he is able to put forth all his
power of action, without regard to place.

The idea of such an omnipresence is a necessary part of
our idea of a Spirit who creates, sustains, and orders all.
There cannot be a real and living God, adequate to the
existing universe, without it If he works as God at all.


8o


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


he must in this practical sense be present to all things.
He is absent from nothing that exists, and in all his ability
to act he is present with everything that exists. Such
omnipresence is an element in the immanence of God, of
which we shall think hereafter.

Such omnipresence is implied in all real and vital reli-
gion. A local God could be no real God. If he is not
everywhere, he is not true God anywhere. The author of
Psalm cxxxix. had no philosophical thought of omnipres-
ence, but he had the true religious sense of it when he said,
“ Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee
from thy presence?” Omnipresence is implied in all
providence, all prayer, all communion with God and reli-
ance upon God. Such a God as Christ teaches us to trust
must be omnipresent. He affirmed omnipresence when he
said, to show that Jerusalem and Gerizim might be aban-
doned as places of special worship, “ God is a spirit,” to
be found wherever a true worshipper seeks him. He
affirmed it, virtually, when he said, “ Pray to thy Father
which is in secret.” All intelligent doctrine of a future life
implies God's omnipresence, not only in this world, but in
whatever realms of life the spirit of man may hereafter in-
habit. Wherever man at any time may be, the whole of
God is there, able to put forth his whole energy in action.

Omniscience. — Omniscience is an inseparable compan-
ion-fact to omnipresence; or rather, is really a part of it.
If God’s entire power of action is ever)nvhere available at
all times, his entire power of knowing is everywhere avail-
able at all times, for knowing is one form of his acting. A
thinking spirit who is perpetually present with all that
exists will have full knowledge of all tha^xists.

Omniscience may be defined as God’s perfect knowledge
of all that is or can be.

The omniscience of God is legitiimately inferred from
what we know of the universe. A God who is adequate to
the universe must know the universe, both as a whole and
in all its details. There is no alternative to this conclusion,


GOD


8i


except to affirm that in the universe there is no thought,
except that of limited beings like ourselves who can under-
stand only fragments of its greatness. Either the universe
in all its vastness and order goes on without an all-embrac-
ing thought, or there is one all-comprehending mind, —
one Being who has full knowledge of all existence, in whole
and in all its parts. But it is impossible permanently to
hold that the vast and orderly sum of existence is uncom-
prehended by any mind, and omniscience in God is the
alternative.

Omniscience in God is as essential to vital religion as
omnipresence. All personal relations with God presup-
pose in him a real knowledge to which we can set no limits.
Such trustful relations toward God as Christ leads us to
enjoy imply that God perfectly understands man with all
his interests and destinies ; but he cannot fully know man
without knowing all things. A God who did not know all
things, and embrace all existence in his perfect understand-
ing, ought not to be trusted with the destinies of a human
spirit. Only an omniscient God, indeed, would have the
right to call intelligent beings into existence.

The doctrine of omniscience has its difficulties, some of
them soluble, some perhaps insoluble. If we wish to con-
ceive of the method of God’s universal knowledge, it is
helpful to remember the relation above indicated between
omniscience and omnipresence. God is present with all
things, and thereby knows them. In earlier stages of
thought his knowledge was naturally pictured as the knowl-
edge of one who looks on from afar and sees all things ;
God beholds from heaven. So in Psalm xxxiii, 13-14.
In more modern form, it has been said that the omniscient
mind looks all ways at once. But the metaphor of looking
is incorrect in any form, for it implies distance between the
observer and what he sees ; but to God there is no such
thing as distance. Not that space and distance have no
meaning to him ; he knows what they are, but he is not
limited by space, or separated by distance from anything
that exists. He must know objects as distant from one


82


AJ\r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


cinother, but cannot know them as distant from himself.
His conscious spirit embraces and embosoms all, and he
knows all things by being present with them. All things
exist in him, and all action goes on where he is aware
of it.

As his knowledge is independent of space, so it is of
time, — a conception that is much harder to grasp than its
companion, and yet one that must be true. No conditions
of time limit his knowing. This independence of time has
sometimes been pressed so far as to make it mean that the
very idea of time and succession has no meaning to him,
the simultaneousness of his knowledge bringing all things
into an “ everlasting now,” and excluding all progress of
thought. But this cannot be so. God must be aware of
duration, and know events in their succession, one earlier
and another later, or he would not know things as they
are. If he had no sense of succession, he could not pos-
sibly understand a human life. Yet his knowledge cannot
be dependent upon succession, as ours is, or be limited by
it like ours. We cannot know to-morrow until to-morrow,
but he knows it to-day. He does not learn by experience,
observation, and inference, as we do ; he knows at once,
with a knowledge that sweeps the entire field of duration.

It may help us to understand the relation of God’s knowl-
edge to time, if we remember that he must have a double
knowledge of his universe. He knows it as it exists eter-
nally in his mind, as his own idea; and he knows it as
actually existing in time and space, a moving, changing,
growing universe, with perpetual process of succession. In
his own idea, he knows it all at once ; but he is also aware
of its perpetual becoming, and with reference to events as
they occur he has foreknowledge, present knowledge, and
knowledge afterward. The difference between these two
forms of omniscience is often overlooked. If they are
clearly distinguished, it will be plain that God in a real
sense has foreknowledge, and knowledge of the present,
and knowledge of the past, while yet in an equally real
sense he has simultaneous knowledge of all things. Per-


GOD


83


haps we may say that he conceives of all things simultan-
eously, but perceives all things in their succession.

Our definition of omniscience affirms that God has per-
fect knowledge of all that is or can be. But we cannot
refrain from asking whether it is true that God knows all
possibilities. Does he know all that might have been, or
would have been, in other conditions than those that have
existed ? Does he know, and did he know, all that would
have occurred in Pompeii if the eruption of Vesuvius had
not destroyed it? or all that would have followed if the
American Colonists had not been successful in the War of
the Revolution? In either instance, not only would new
outward conditions have come into being, but innumerable
human wills, with their mysterious gift of freedom, would
have been placed in new conditions, and would have acted
under influences different from any that did exist. In the
former case, new human beings that in fact were never
born would have entered into life and become factors in
the history. Does God know, and can he know, all that
free wills would have done under conditions that never
existed, and all that wills that never were created would
have done if he had given them life?

There are profound difficulties in either view. To affirm
that God knows what would be in conditions that never
existed is to suggest that he knows virtually an infinite
number of universes besides the existing one, and thus
possesses a far greater sum of hypothetical and unfruit-
ful knowledge than of knowledge of what exists. But a
greater difficulty is the impossibility of fully understanding
how God can know how his creatures will decide and act,
when once he has gifted them with such freedom as men
possess, — a mystery that we may never fully solve. Of
course, omniscience relates only to what can be known.
If there is anything that by its very definition lies beyond
the reach of all knowledge whatsoever, we cannot say that
omniscience includes it : and we often suspect that what
free beings would do in non-existent conditions is intrinsi-
cally unknowable. But, on the other hand, to deny that


84 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


God knows what would be in other conditions is to deny
him practical omniscience; for in that case, though he
might know his universe, in the sense of perceiving what
it contained, he would not understand it, in the sense of
knowing its possibilities. Where conditions are incessantly
changing, as they everywhere are, to know merely the
outcome of one set of conditions is by no means to be
omniscient. Nor is it to be free in the conducting of the
universe. If God could know only the result of one set of
conditions, he would not have opportunity to judge as to
what was best, or to exercise his will as to what should be.
The conducting of the universe would offer no field for
wisdom, if God could not know what would be in other
conditions. It is difficult to see how the theory of exist-
ence that would attend such a belief could differ from that
of fatalism.

Between these two sets of difficulties, we can judge
where the truth must lie. The difficulties in supposing
that God knows what would be in other conditions reside
mainly in our narrowness of knowledge ; but the difficul-
ties in denying it are such as would render a consistent
conception of God impossible. Though we cannot explain
the manner of it, we may be sure that God knows not only
what is, but what can be, and what might have been. If
this seems to fill the divine mind with needless knowledge,
we may remember that God is not a slave to any of his
qualities, and that the perfect mind will not hold in im-
mediate attention knowledge that does not need to be so
held.

The relation of omniscience in God to certainty in
events has been much discussed. It is often assumed, in
popular thinking, that God’s mere knowing is equivalent
to appointing, so that if he knows an event it is thereby
ordained, and could not be otherwise. This is a common
perplexity, and a serious one ; for many who have been
taught to believe in God’s foreknowledge of their destiny
have supposed that what he foreknew must come to pass,
and that their freedom was thus taken away from them.


But if God’s knowing does so establish certainty as to de-
stroy human freedom, then human freedom is destroyed,
or rather has never existed ; for certainly God does know
if God exists at all. But in fact no one practically believes
that God’s knowledge of events is the real cause of the
events, or destroys the reality of other causes. All men
know, practically, that it is not so. God must know
whether the apple-blossoms of a given year will fulfil their
promise; but no one supposes that his knowledge takes
the place of the natural forces that produce the fruit or
prevent its production. So in the realm of free action.
God knew that Abraham Lincoln would be murdered, and
by whom it would be done ; but no one supposes that his
knowledge caused the murderer to do the deed. We
should go against all the experience and common-sense of
mankind if we affirmed that God’s knowledge of our action
renders that action unfree.

To say that God’s knowledge destroys the efficiency of
the forces whose operation he foresees, especially when
those forces are human wills, is to assert that there is only
one will in the universe, the will of God, and thus to em-
brace humanity in a genuine fatalism. This has some-
times been maintained, and is sometimes implied in
arguments for the sovereignty of God, when no such doc-
trine is intended. But no doctrine of fatalism, and no
doctrine that abolishes the human will, can possibly be
true.

Omnipotence. — The doctrine of omnipresence teaches
that God is everywhere present with his full power of
action; the doctrine of omnipotence tells how wide a
range of possibilities is covered by his power. The name
denotes the possession of all power, and attributes to God
unlimited possibilities.

Omnipotence may be defined as the perfect ability of
God to do all things that his nature or his character can
suggest.

The thought of an Almighty God comes in its first form


86


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


from observation of nature. Power in nature is an obvious
and sometimes an overwhelming fact. The impression
that it makes upon the mind is independent of reasoning,
and exceedingly strong. The earliest human worship was
worship of power. When observation of nature becomes
science, the immeasurable sum of energy in the universe
is perceived more intelligently, and one who worships the
Creator is even more profoundly impressed by his omni-
potence. But wider familiarity with created things reveals
an unsuspected richness and variety in the universe ; and
the idea of omnipotence is no longer the idea of mere
strength, but receives the added conception of infinite ver-
satility, — ability to use an infinite variety of means and
bring to pass an infinite variety of results. Larger knowl-
edge enriches the thought of omnipotence, and God ap-
pears as the Being of unlimited ability, to whom nothing
is impossible. The Scriptures assert and reassert this view
of God, in a great variety of forms.

But from this point the popular idea easily diverges into
error. Omnipotence is taken to be ability to do literally
anything that can be thought of. A magical quality is at-
tached to it, making it to appear as mere power, separate,
irresponsible, unlimited. It is suspected that to deny that
God could make an old man in a minute is to limit his
omnipotence. Many persons have gravely supposed that
he could create a world in which two and two should
make five. It is often assumed that he could make it to
be well with the wicked while they still remained wicked.
Men sometimes speak as if God could abolish the past,
and undo real occurrences.

But omnipotence is only one attribute of God, and his
nature is self-consistent. Divine power can act only in
harmony with the divine reason and the divine character.
Omnipotence does not enable God to do what is intrinsi-
cally contradictory, or what is irrational, or what is wrong
and unworthy of him. It relates only to things that are
capable of being done. It is not limiting omnipotence to
say that God cannot express one-third in decimals. To


GOD


87


make an old man in a minute is impossible, because the
proposition is contradictory. That two and two could
make five is impossible, because irrational. He cannot
make it well with the wicked while they remain wicked,
because wickedness and well-being necessarily exclude each
other, and no effort to combine them would be worthy of
God, Suggestion of these things would never flow from
God s nature or character, and omnipotence does not in-
clude the power to do them. We may call this a limita-
tion if we wish, but it is better not to regard it so. God's
power is a part of himself, and does not extend to what is
not harmonious with his nature and his character.

The true idea of omnipotence is that of adequate ability,
— power adequate to all works that such a Being as he
can be moved to undertake, and to all needs that can arise
under the sway of a God like him. It is power, both phys-
ical and moral, sufficient for all works that express his
nature, and sufficient for his universe, with all its wants
and possibilities. If his nature had impelled him to make
the universe far vaster and more complicated, both physi-
cally and morally, than it is, omnipotence would still have
been equal to its demands. Nothing that God can under-
take is too great or hard for the power that he possesses.

In these statements it has been implied that God cannot
do wrong. This is true ,* but it should here be added that
God's inability to do wrong resides in his character. By
virtue of that constitution as a personal spirit of which we
have spoken, God possesses a genuine will ; and if he pos-
sesses a genuine will, a wrong volition cannot be constitu-
tionally impossible to him. But the moral attributes, or
qualities of character, that belong to the personal Spirit
that we call God are such that he can never put forth a
wrong volition. God cannot do wrong, but that is because
he is too good to do wrong. It is the nature of his power
to work in perfect unison with his character, and his char-
acter is such that his power can never be misused or turned
to any unworthy action.

The Scriptural affirmations of God's omnipotence are not


88


AJ\r OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


made in the form of definition, which is foreign to the
method of the Scriptures. It often appears in the form of
recognition of his universal sovereignty and appeal to his
sufficient power. But the most deep and spiritual affirma-
tion of this great reality is wholly informal, and without
apparent intention to emphasize the doctrine. It lies in
the broad fact that God is proclaimed throughout the
Scriptures as the One whose power can be safely trusted
by all souls, with all their needs and destinies, both now
and forever. The Christian thought of God is that of a
God who is able to do all rational, right, and worthy things,
a God equal to all emergencies, and competent to the care
of that which he has made.

These three attributes, as soon as they are grouped
together, illustrate for us that Unity in God of which we
have spoken, which underlies all his attributes. In omni-
presence one immeasurable Spirit is present to all things.
In omniscience one all-comprehending Mind knows all
things. In omnipotence one all-sufficient sway is over all
things, in a universe not too great for God. The Living
God is One, living in these vast modes of existence. These
attributes, it may be added, most effectively illustrate for
us the proper meaning of the Infinity of God ; for in them
we obtain a glimpse of what it means that in his powers
and in his acting God is free from all limitation. In re-
spect of presence, knowledge, and ability, we well know
in how close limitations we find ourselves, and how few
things are possible to us ; but we see God unrestrained by
limitations, and freely doing all that is natural to perfect
powers. This is his infinity.

Immutability is a characteristic of God that must be
mentioned. God is unchangeable in himself, and in the
essential modes of his activity. He is always a personal
spirit with the same elements of nature ; he is always the
same in character; and he always acts in essentially the
same modes. This must be true of a perfect Being. But
immutability must not be conceived as immobility, fixed-


GOD


89


ness, rigidity. It is not inability to act variously in various
conditions. The unchangeable God holds an unchange*
able purpose, but steadiness of purpose requires variety in
execution. Just for the reason that God is the unchange-
able One, steadily working out the purpose that expresses
his real self, he must act in a thousand ways, varying his
action with the occasion for action, while he himself
changes never. The inexhaustible versatility of the divine
mind is the true expression of its changelessness.

From attributes that are modes of activity we pass to
attributes that are qualities of character. Perhaps we
might interpret these also as modes of activity, — love as
the mode in which God's affectional power goes into action,
and holiness as the mode of activity of his will. But this
would not be the best interpretation, for the qualities of
character properly claim a place apart from such attributes
as we have been considering. They are often named
MORAL ATTRIBUTES; and under this head long lists of
qualities have sometimes been given. But there are two
qualities in which are really included all the moral traits
that we might enumerate. These two are Holiness and
Love, which may be said to compose the character of
God, according to the Christian conception. These two
must be carefully considered.

Which should come first in our study? And which is
the greater? Some theologians regard holiness as funda-
mental in the character of God, and some love. In our
treatment holiness is considered first, and is regarded as
the more comprehensive and fundamental of the two.
The reasons for this judgment will become apparent as we
proceed.

Holiness. — Holiness is the glorious fulness of God’s
moral excellence, held as the principle of his own action
and the standard for his creatures.

In this definition are three elements, all of them im-
portant No one of them must be overlooked.


90


jt^r OVTtmE OF CHRISTIAlf THEOLOGY


Holiness in God is, first, an inward character of perfect
goodness. God is perfectly good, possessing all moral
excellence without defect, full of actual and positive good-
ness as the sun is of light. Holiness thus regarded is not
one in a list of qualities ; it is a character rather than a
trait of character, a sum of excellences rather than an ex-
cellence. Like goodness in a man, it is the result of the;
union of all the existing excellences. To diminish any good
quality in a good man is to detract from his goodness as
a whole; and so if any moral excellence in God were
diminished, the perfection of his holiness would be de-
stroyed. His holiness is his perfect goodness, regarded,
first, as character in himself.

But the idea of holiness is not complete till the action
of God has been embraced in it. To the thought that
God’s inward character is that of perfect goodness we
must add the thought that God always holds that charac-
ter as the principle of his own action, and is always con-
sistent with it. Holiness includes both the perfectness of
God’s self, and the fact that he is always true to himself.
He cannot contradict himself, but is morally capable only
of action that truly expresses his character. His inner
perfection is the sole inspiration and standard of his con-
duct. He acts in perfect freedom; and every act of his
perfect freedom is in perfect harmony with his perfect
character. This consistency of God with his own perfec-
tion is the practical element in his holiness, and this is an
element that we can understand.

When God makes himself known to his creatures as
holy, he wishes them to know these two great facts : that
he is inwardly perfect, and outwardly consistent with his
perfection. But his holiness contains an element that
more directly concerns them, and he wishes them also to
know this third fact ; that the goodness which is the prin-
ciple of his conduct is also his standard for theirs. What
he acts upon he requires them to act upon. This is one
way in which he is true to the perfect goodness, — he pre-
sents it as the standard for us. Through this third fact


GOD


91


the holiness of God becomes directly influential upon
human life and destiny.

Thus holiness is not God*s character alone, or God’s
self-consistency alone, or God’s requirement alone. It is
all three. It is his character consistently acted out by
himself, and unalterably insisted upon with us men. In its
first aspect holiness is not, as is sometimes said, the attri-
bute that corresponds to God’s will, as love corresponds
to his affectional nature. It is a quality of his entire
being. But in its second and third aspects holiness does
correspond essentially to will in God.

Concerning God’s holiness in its relation to his creatures
something more must be said, since this is where this
great attribute influences religion and theology.

(1) God’s holiness (his perfect goodness consistently
acted upon) dictates the end for which he creates and is
conducting the universe. He can have no ultimate end,
as a Being of perfect goodness, except to produce good-
ness. His aim is to produce beings who are capable of
goodness, and then to make them good. For this he
created the universe, and for this he conducts it. A holy
God can have no lower aim than this, and with infinite
patience and steadiness he has been pursuing this high
end ever since he brought the universe into existence,

(2) Since holiness dictates God’s end in the universe, it
follows that for all beings who are capable of goodness,
holiness, or strong and consistent goodness, is necessarily
his standard. This he requires. His self-consistency must
dominate his universe. He cannot have one standard for
himself and another for his creatures ; hence he requires
men to be holy, and endeavors to make them so. He
says, Be ye holy, for I am holy ; ” and his meaning is,
‘‘Take perfect goodness as your standard of character,
and steadily and consistently act upon it This is my
way, and therefore it must be yours.” In the light of such
a command we see how it is that holiness means the same
in man as in God. A holy man, like a holy God, is one


92


OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


who has goodness for his standard, and consistently acts
upon it. Perfect holiness in man would be perfect prac-
tical consistency with perfect inner goodness, just as it
is in God. There is no such thing as perfect holiness
in man; but there is such a thing as growing holiness,
and growing holiness is increasing goodness of character,
with increasing conformity thereto in conduct. This, un-
til perfect holiness is attained, is what God requires of
men.

(3) It follows, further, that if sin exists, holiness in God
must absolutely and forever oppose it. Sin is the opposite
of that moral goodness for the sake of which God created
the universe ; and sin tends directly to the defeat of his
holy desire and purpose. God, therefore, acting in holi-
ness, is against it Nothing could possibly be more un-
compromising than the opposition of God as a holy being
to moral evil in the wills and character of his creatures.
His consistency to his own character makes him the abso-
lute and eternal enemy of sin. By that character he must
be impelled so to conduct his universe as that whatever is
wrong shall encounter the full force of his opposition.

(4) From this view of holiness we can understand
God’s justice, or righteousness, which is a form of his
holiness. To say that God is just, or righteous, means
that he is certain to do right, or the thing that ought to
be done. It means that the holy character which he con-
sistently acts out insures every form and kind of rightness
in what he does.

In view of what was said of the relation of God’s
holiness to sin, we see how holiness comes to express
itself as punitive justice. As for a man who freely com-
mits himself to moral evil, and joins his will to its oppo-
sition to God, that man has set himself against the
purpose for which God conducts the universe. God
cannot overlook him, or make it possible for him to
prosper in his evil way. He has placed himself where
he must either turn back and forsake his sin, or take the
inevitable consequence of resisting the purpose which


GOD


93


God is fulfilling. Resisting God, he runs into trouble,
as he ought. God’s self-consistent movement must go
right on, and penalty is inevitable if one resists it. Thus
justice is punitive when it needs to be; and punitive
justice is terrible, because it is so natural and so
necessary.

But justice, or righteousness, in God is much more
than certainty of punishment, for the quality in him that
insures this insures much besides. God’s justice or
righteousness is the certainty that he will be guided in
his action toward all beings by the rightness that enters
into his perfect character. He will wrong no one. He
judges all in perfect fairness, and never cherishes an
unfair thought concerning any. He insists upon all that
ought to be insisted upon, and upon nothing more. He
makes all just allowances toward other beings, without
grudging or unwillingness. He is as sure to recognize
good as evil, where it exists. He favorably regards all
that ought to be so regarded, as surely as he is against
all that ought to be opposed. Toward the sinful and
rebellious he is certain to do all the good that it is right
for their God to do. He is certain to conduct his uni-
verse as it ought to be conducted. Such is the justice of
a holy God. It enables him, when he commands men to
do right, to point to himself as their example and inspira-
tion, saying, “I also do right.”

(5) God’s holiness is thus the basis of moral signifi-
cance in his universe. All beings have to do with it, and
to them all it is as central and vital as the sun is to the
planets. It is the most living and glowing, the most
exacting, searching, and winning of all realities. It is
the shining glory of God. To good beings the holiness
of God is the theme of enthusiastic adoration. Nothing
could ring more joyfully than the song, “Holy, holy,
holy. Lord God Almighty,” when it is sung by the good.
To all who love the wrong, that same holiness is the
most serious and awakening of realities ; for it measures
their evil, and foreshows their doom unless they return to


94


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


the good. To sinners who are penitent and upward-
striving the holiness of God brings inspiration and hope,
even while it awakens a solemn awe; for it shows them
that in seeking the better life, so far from being alone
and unaided, they are joining themselves to the eternal
purpose. The holiness which is God’s own ideal and
standard gladdens all the good, dooms evil to defeat, and
is the hope of all who struggle upward.

The God whose holiness has now been imperfectly
described is the God whom the Scriptures progressively
reveal. The truth that was steadily urged upon ignorant
or unwilling men in the ages that are represented by the
Old Testament is this : that God is so holy that all who
have to do with him must put away their sins. The
conflict of those ages is the conflict between God impress-
ing this, and men ignoring or resisting it. This is
" Jehovah’s controversy with his people.” When Christ
came, God’s holiness was expressed in him; for in him
we see the true goodness and the true consistency of life
with goodness, in more than human perfection. In the
gospel of Christ holiness is the ideal, the substance of
Christian character, and the end in view in Christian
experience. It is the eternal beauty of God, which is to
be imparted as the crown of life to men. All the voices
of revelation unite in this key-note, “ The Lord your God
is holy.” This great word is one of the surest signs that
the true and living God is in the gospel; for here is
revealed and brought near a goodness that intelligibly and
unanswerably demands the highest goodness in man, and
at the same time a goodness that man could never con-
ceive through his own invention.

Love. — One of the supreme utterances of the Christian
revelation is the word of the apostle John, “God is love.”
We have now to learn, if we may, what love is in God;
for after pondering this word of the apostle, and after
learning from Christ, we see that we cannot expect to
know God aright without knowing love.


GOD


95


We may venture thus to define love as a quality of
character in God: —

Love is God’s desire to impart himself and all good to
other beings, and to possess them for his own in spiritual
fellowship.

There are two sources from which we are entitled to
obtain material for our definition of love in God. We
may learn what love is from love as it exists among men,
and we may look at the great exhibition of divine love
that was made in Christ. From both sources we shall
find support for the definition that has been given.

Human love, which in its various forms provides the
purest joy of common life, is an affection in which two
seemingly opposite impulses are combined, — a craving
impulse and a giving impulse. Love seeks possession of
its object, and love lives for its object. These two
impulses, which are not as opposite as they seem, are
combined in various proportions. In its lower forms
human love mainly yearns for its object, and craves
possession. It often seems the most selfish and jealous
of affections, — a desire, a craving. But as love grows
to a higher quality it takes on the opposite manifesta-
tion, and gives as well as asks. It yearns now for the
welfare of its object, and is impelled to do or suffer to
promote that welfare. At its best, human love is the
outgoing, self-imparting affection, by which one is
impelled to devote himself, and impart all possible good,
to his beloved. As love grows truer to its nature it
grows rich in the holy spirit of self-sacrifice. Though it
may begin with self, it is the affection that most effectu-
ally slays selfishness. Unselfish giving is its life. A
mother’s self-forgetful love is the best illustration of its
freeness and fidelity. And yet in the prevalence of
unselfishness human love never loses its desire for recip-
rocation. The most self-sacrificing mother is the very
one whose longing for the answering love of the child for
whom she gives herself is most de^ and inextinguishable.
Love would be mutilated and incomplete, lacking in a


96 AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


genuine quality, if it lacked this desire of possession.
The desire grows noble, and is purged from the stain of
selfishness as love grows higher in its quality, but it
never disappears.

And now we hear, in terms that human experience
enables us to interpret, that God is love. We expect,
therefore, to find in God the two impulses that make up
love, — the desire to possess other beings, and the desire
to give himself to them and impart to them all possible
good. As love has grown better in men, the larger
relatively has the self -giving element become ; and so we
are prepared to find that in God the self-imparting impulse
is equal to the craving of love. And we can see that
when love is combined with perfect moral character it
will be the most beneficent of all conceivable attributes.
If perfect goodness longs to impart itself to other beings
at any cost of sacrifice, and yearns for their responsive
love, we have the crown of all gracious activity. Noth-
ing more benevolent or beneficent is possible than holy
love.

We turn now to our second source of information con-
cerning love in God, the one from which the apostle John
learned that God is love, — namely, to the mission and
work of Christ. Concerning this we read, in one of the
great expressions on the subject, that God so loved that
he gave : “ God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him might not
perish, but have eternal life” (John iii. i6). Here God
gives his Son, and we learn from the tenor of the gospel
that this is equivalent to giving himself; and his object
in this self-giving is that he may further give eternal life
to men, — eternal life, the sum of all good. We read
also, in another great expression on the subject, that God
so loved that he sought. The mission of Christ is like the
journey of a shepherd who seeks a wandering sheep, the
desire of the divine heart for its own possessions being
the source from which the mission springs (Luke xv. 3-7),
The mission of Christ appears, when we understand it, to


GOD


97


have been one long movement of love, in this true sense :
that it was a great, forth-going, self-sacrificing search
for lost men who were precious to God, in order to impart
to them the fulness of God and the highest good, and to
win their love to God who loved them first. Here, at
inconceivable cost to himself, God comes forth to impart
himself to men and gain them for himself. Christ
expresses the yearning impulse and the giving impulse of
God; for in him God eagerly pours himself out to men,
and as eagerly seeks them for his own; and this is exactly
what we know as love.

The Old Testament was advancing to the height of the
truth that God is love ; for he who there revealed himself
as holy was more and more revealing himself in this
tender relation also. But the height was not reached in
the Old Testament. Fulness came in Christ alone. The
object of love in him is the world of men, earnestly
desired and sought by God. The purpose is the giving
of all good to them, and the winning of their responsive
love. The action is that of deepest self-sacrifice on God’s
part, in Christ. Thus, all the essentials of love are found
in the mission of Christ, in a fulness that is known
nowhere else.

This great illustration shows that love in God does
not necessarily imply approval. There is an impression
that a good Being cannot love one whom he cannot
approve. This is a natural thought for sinful men, slow
to see the meaning of perfect goodness, but it is utterly
condemned by the gospel. Of course the perfection of
love, regarded as a mutual and equal fellowship, does
imply approval, and there are many manifestations of love
that must wait that perfect relation in which each is
satisfied with the other. But to limit love to the affec-
tion that accompanies approval is to forget what we know
of love among men, and to contradict the revelation that
comes in Christ. The warmest human love is often given
to a wayward and unworthy object ; aild as to God, it is
enongh t9 remember that "God commendeth his own


98 an outline of Christian theology


love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
died for us.” If love in him implied approval, a sinful
world would never have heard that God is love.

Hence we may estimate the popular distinction between
love of complacency, which delights in its object, and
love of benevolence, which without approving desires to
do its object good. Is the difference in the love, or in
the objects? In either case the love is God’s desire to
give all good and have his love returned, and the differ-
ence is in the objects. The distinction is often helpful,
but must not be taken to mean that God loves in two
radically different ways. He loves two classes of beings,
morally regarded, and his love takes different forms
accordingly.

When it is said that God is love it is meant that love
is the characteristic and abiding quality in God, by which
his relations to other beings are determined. It is meant
that Christ is the expression, not of some temporary
phase of God, but of God as he essentially and forever is.
The real God is moved by these companion impulses : to
make himself and his goodness the genuine possession of
other beings, and to possess them in spiritual fellowship.
It is plain that this is what we should expect in a good
Being who is conducting a living universe. Love is
God’s desire for unity among spiritual beings, and for
full success in his creative undertaking. It is his desire
to bless all his creatures according to their capacity, and
to bring them to the end for which he created them ; and
it is his willingness to reach his end even through self-
sacrifice. If God were not love, there would be no hope
for his creation.

Holiness and Love. — How holiness and love are related
to each other we must learn from their nature. On the
one hand, we have the glorious fulness of God’s moral
excellence, held as the principle of his action and his
standard for his creatures; on the other, we have his
desire to impart himself and all good to other


GOD


99


and to possess them as his own in spiritual fellowship.
What is the relation between these two?

It is plain that holiness and love, thus defined, are
very near to each other. They are not the same, and yet
it is impossible to understand them without recognizing
that each implies the other. God would not be holy if
he were not love, and could not be love if he were not
holy.

God would not be holy if he were not love. Love is
an element in the perfect goodness, — that is to say, love
is an element in holiness. If God were not love, he
would be either selfish or at the best indifferent to other
beings ; but selfishness or indifference would be a defect
of goodness, and the glorious fulness of goodness which
constitutes his holiness would exist no more. Love is an
indispensable element in moral perfection. If this were
lacking in God, there would be no perfect character for
him to hold as his own principle of action or offer as a
standard to us. It has been truly said that “holiness is
central in God, but love is central in holiness.”

It is equally true that God could not be love if he were
not holy. An imperfect being can love ; but only a per-
fect being can be love. If love is the impulse to give all
good, love in the highest degree can exist only in one
who has all good to give. If love is the desire to possess
other beings in fellowship, it can be perfect only when
such fellowship is absolutely the best for other beings.
Thus perfect love implies that perfect character which is
holiness. Not even in God can love be perfect unless all
else is perfect. The form in which moral imperfection is
surest to be found, if it exists, is that of selfishness, or
preference for one’s own interests. But any touch of
selfishness would destroy the perfection of love. No
selfish being can be love. God therefore must be free
from all taint of that which is the subtlest form of evil,
— he must be perfectly good, or holy, — in order to be
love.

The close kinship of holiness and love may be made


100


OVTLim OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


plain in various ways. For example, we may remember
that holiness is God’s self-consistency, his unchangeable
fidelity in acting out his own character. But love, we
know, is a main element in the character which holiness
requires him to act out. Or, in other words, holiness
requires God to act as love. The action of love is a part
of the action of holiness.

Or we may remember that love is God's desire to
impart himself and all good to other beings. But the
self that he wishes to impart is holy, and the best good
that can be imparted to other beings is holiness. If God
wins the love of other beings to himself he thereby wins
it to holiness, and makes other beings holy. Thus the
desire of love is satisfied only when the beings whom it
seeks are rendered holy. Love, in fact, is the desire to
impart holiness.

Or, again, we may remember that holiness leads God
to insist upon his own character as the standard for hU
own action and for the action of his creatures. Hence
he must insist upon all law or requirement that expresses
his character. To his creatures such law is as sacred as
himself; and all who cross the operation of such law
must suffer. This is the demand of holiness, the con
sistency of God. But it is equally the demand of love.
The establishing and upholding of law that expresses hia
character is a part of that very self-impartation which
love is impelled to make ; for in this God not only becomes
known to his creatures, but offers them his own principle
of conduct, that they may make it the guide of theirs.
It is for the good of the universe that God should insist
immovably upon what his character requires; and love,
desiring to impart the best good, would be as unwilling
as holiness to have it otherwise.

So holiness and love suggest the same works to God,
and are satisfied with the same works of God. All work
of love is work of holiness, and all work of holiness is
work of love. , The two are not identical, as we have
seen, but thus do they work together.


GOD


lOI


If the two great attributes of character are thus related,
it is evident that there can never he conflict or perplexity
in God, as between love and holiness. It may appear to
men as if the two must be at strife, but that is because
men know them so imperfectly. In the deep life of God
'these two attributes can never need reconciliation with
each other. In God, indeed, conflict of attributes is im-
possible, — else he would be imperfect. In him holi-
ness always includes love, and love always expresses
holiness. In his relation to the universe, love can never
draw him in a direction that holiness disappro.ves, and
holiness can require no action that will be false to love.
With regard to sinful men, both holiness and love forbid
that it should be well with them while they continue
devoted to their sin, and both holiness and love suggest
that God deliver them from sin by a work of his kind-
ness ; for salvation satisfies at once the twofold desire of
love and the single demand of holiness. The two attributes
are practically at one, with differing forms of expression,
but with a single heart. In perfect unity of character,
God does all in holy love.

It is here, in the relation of holiness and love to one an-
other and to God’s administration of his universe, that the
Wisdom of God is best illustrated. Wisdom in God is
that quality by which he perfectly understands all things,
and knows how to accomplish the ends that his character
suggests. It is that penetrative understanding and well-
balanced intelligence by which he is able to use every-
thing according to its real nature, to set before him the
worthiest ends, and to direct all movements to the fulfil-
ment of his purpose. By it he weighs all ends, knows all
needs, comprehends all possibilities, estimates all methods,
understands all means, values all agencies, and knows how
the objects that his character sets forth are to be accom-
plished It is by virtue of his wisdom that he orders all
in holy love. Wisdom, indeed, is the ordering attribute,
the principle of comprehension and co-ordination in the
creative mind, and the medium of holy and gracious


102


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


administration in all affairs. The presence of it in God
gives assurance that holiness and love will always work
in harmony, and that neither will ever be defeated. On
the active and administrative side, wisdom is God’s
adequacy to his universe.

When we have understood holiness and love working
in wisdom, we have seen the character of God. To
specify other attributes of character would be simply to
unfold some contents of these. To call him true, or
faithful, is merely to reaffirm some traits of his holiness;
and to call him gracious, merciful, patient, is merely to
specify forms of his love, suited to various forms of need.
It should be added only that Grace, which is prominent
in the Scriptural statements, is love in God regarded as
free and unpurchased, coming out of its own accord to
bless the undeserving. It stands opposed to all forms and
phases of the idea of merit.

The conception of the character of God that has now
been presented is summed up in a single word by the
apostle John, when he says (i John i. 5), “God is light.”
That one glorious descriptive word sets forth the twin
conceptions of holiness and love. Light is pure, and
suggests the perfect goodness which is free from stain of
evil (“ in him is no darkness at all ”) ; and light is forth-
streaming, and suggests self-impartation, free coming-
forth to bless the world. “ God is light ” means “ God is
holiness, and God is love.”

Glory be to thee, O God.


II. The Existence of God.

Introductory Statements. — Having defined the Chris-
tian conception of God, so that we know what we mean
when we speak his name, we are ready to inquire what
reason we have for thinking that such a Being exists.
The word “God” now denotes to us the Being whom
the Christian definition describes; and the question of the


GOD


103


existence of God is the question of the existence of the
personal Spirit, perfectly good, who in holy love creates,
sustains, and orders all. We are now to examine the
reasons for thinking that there is such a Being as this.

Argument on the subject often attempts much less. It
is common to hear proof offered in support of the claim
that there is “a God.” But to say, “I believe that there
is 3 God,” may mean much or little. “A God” may be
simply a creator, or a first cause, concerning whose char-
acter or relation to men little or nothing is asserted.
Only unsatisfactory proof of the existence of God is
possible while the idea of God is undefined and the name
is ambiguous. To prove that there is a God is far less
than to prove that God, as now conceived, is a living
Being; and the question in Christian theology is the
same as that which is the vital question for mankind,
— whether the good God is real. This justifies the order
that is followed in the present discussion : we first define
God in the Christian light, and then, knowing what we
mean by the name, inquire whether the God whom we
have defined exists.

It may seem that proof of the existence of God must be
needless. It might be supposed that if God existed, his
existence would be the most obvious of all facts, — so
plain that no one could doubt it. This, however, proves
not to be the case. Men can doubt it. Some who hold
firmly to the existence of God doubt whether it is capable
of proof. Various arguments have been constructed for
the support of it, but all have been criticised, and held to
be inadequate to the conclusion. It is often said that
satisfactory proof is unattainable.

But dissatisfaction with the arguments is easily ac*
counted for. If God exists, he is the most vast and com-
prehensive of realities. If he exists, then, back of all
observed and observable existence there is, unseen, a
good personal Spirit, adequate to the producing and di-
recting of the whole. It is not surprising if arguments
for so vast a conclusion, and a conclusion of such a nature,


104 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


seem inadequate. The senses bear, of course, no direct
testimony; they provide premises for the argument, but
bring no conclusion. Demonstrative proof is not easily
found, for premises that fully contain this great conclu-
sion are not readily at hand. No single proof can suffi-
ciently support so great a fact. The reality of such a
Being can be firmly established only by concurrent
reasons coming from various realms of existence, and
approved by various powers of the human spirit. It is a
conclusion that cannot be reached without the aid of
arguments that by themselves are partial and only partly
sufficient. There must be arguments inadequate by
themselves to so great a result, yet valid in their place,
proving each some part of the great truth ; proofs cumu-
lative and complementary, each requiring others for its
completion. All arguments must be partial, but there
are many that are both sound and helpful ; and all proofs
from lower realms of being must need the confirmation
that they find in the highest region of spiritual life and
thought.

Plainly the case is such that some minds will be satis
fied when others are not. There will be some that do not
see that Goo exists, though they know that there is a
God. Others are as sure of God himself as they are of a
God. Those who best know that God is a living reality
can best understand the doubts of his existence that are
natural at certain stages of thought. It is not to be ex-
pected that all men will be equally convinced by argument
for his existence.

We should, therefore, remember the relation of such
argument to religion. Religion was not produced by
proof of God’s existence, and will not be destroyed by
its insufficiency to some minds. Religion existed before
argument ; in fact, it is the preciousness of religion that
leads to the seeking for all possible confirmations of the
reality of God. Belief that God exists has not waited for
evidences; the soul's affirmation of him has been made
from of old in various degrees of strength and clearness.


partly from partial evidence, but mainly from a necessity
in human nature. God has been his own witness. Yet
this is not to disparage the argument. We shall find our-
selves held to the Christian conclusion by the nature of
the evidence, and by the impossibility of the opposite.

There are two general lines of evidence for the exist-
ence of God. One starts from the intellectual standpoint,
and moves along with the intellectual action of man ; the
other begins from the standpoint of religion, and moves
along with religious and spiritual experience. The in-
tellectual movement leads in general to belief in the ex-
istence of a God, and the religious evidence, taking up
and crowning the intellectual, completes the certainty of
the existence of God. There is no separate line of phys-
ical proof of the existence of God. There is evidence in
physical facts, but it takes its place as intellectual or
spiritual evidence, appealing to the intellect or spirit of
man.


I. Evidence of the existence of God from the intel-
lectual STARTING-POINT.

This evidence extends to the discovery of a Mind in the
universe. The discovery of a Mind in the universe is
made, —

(1) Through the intelligibleness of the universe to us.

(2) Through the idea of cause.

(3) Through the presence of ends in the universe.

(i) The discovery of a Mind in the universe through
the intelligibleness of the universe to us.

Our human experience, both physical and mental, be-
gins with trusting our own powers, in confidence that we
can safely do so. All observation begins with trusting
our senses, and all reasoning begins with trusting our
minds. We are compelled to trust our powers if we are
to live and act at all ; if we could not, we should never
be sure that we were right or safe in any mental process,
and helplessness would be the consequence. We may


Io6 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY

know that all human powers are limited, and may admit
personally that other human beings possess larger powers
than our own ; yet we are perfectly sure that we are safe
in assuming that our senses give us generally trustworthy
information, and that our mental powers are worthy to
be followed in their normal exercise. We have named the
method of our minds “rational,” and we know that normal
rational action upon facts and relations around us is
worthy of our confidence. No one can make us doubt it.

The practice of trusting our own powers extends very
far, and leads to large results. It leads to diligent and
continuous study; and the consequence is that we find
ourselves able to understand the structure and order of
things around us. Not only can we make mental note
and record of things that our senses report to us, but we
can perceive how they are grouped and by what laws they
are organized. We find that we can discover and sys-
tematize the chemistry of all the worlds; we are able to
trace and formulate the laws of universal motion; to dis-
cern the principles of mathematics that run through the
universe; to trace out the vast system of classification
that prevails throughout the animal and vegetable king-
doms; to explore times and places most remote, and
understand what lies far beyond our experience. In all
this process of knowing — to the possibilities of which no
limits can be set — we are sure that our powers are to be
trusted. We may err for want of sufficient data to war-
rant firm conclusions, or because of careless and inefficient
work ; but it never occurs to us to doubt that our minds,
rightly used, are capable of true observation, right rea-
soning, and sound knowledge.

But we must not fail to notice what this means. Abil-
ity to trust our own powers in knowing things around us
implies that the structure and action of our minds corre-
spond to the structure and method of things around us.
To say that our powers of observation and reasoning are
trustworthy is to say that the existing order is an order
that we can understand. It is the same as saying that


GOD


107


one rational method is common to our minds and the
world that we observe. If our senses can correctly report
the things about us, and our minds in their normal action
can understand the general order, one method must pre-
vail within us and without us. If the universe were
rational and we were not, of course we could not under-
stand the universe; but it is equally true that if we were
rational and the universe were not, we could not under-
stand it. If we were made upon one plan and the universe
upon another, we could not understand it. A rational
mind can understand only what is rational. But we are
compelled for the very purpose of life to assume that we
are capable of understanding the universe, and by experi-
ment we find our assumption confirmed as correct ; there-
fore there must be one rational order in the universe and
in us.

But this is only another way of saying that the universe
is ordered by a rational Mind, to which our minds are
similar. We understand the universe because it is per-
vaded by a rational order, and a rational order could be
given it only by a rational Mind. Since we can under-
stand the universe, there must be in the universe a Mind
similar to our own.

It is not claimed that we know this when we begin to
think, any more than that we know the laws of motion
when we begin to act upon them by walking. But if what
has been said is true, the assumption of a rational order
in the universe is one of the necessities of thought, and
this assumption implies a rational Mind in the universe.
Without this assumption not even the most rudimentary
thinking is possible; and all thinking, from lowest to
highest, confirms the kinship thus discovered between our
minds and the Mind of the world. Man, beginning with
himself, finds the universe one vast mirror of his own
powers, reflecting at every point something like himself.
The laws of geometry are laws normal to the human mind ;
how significant then the fact that these laws have been
followed in the ■ universe; so that if.


I08 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


we give to the constructive Mind the name of God, we
shall say with Aristotle that “God geometrizes.” Every
step in the progress of physical science is taken in pursu-
ance of this kinship between our minds and the rational
Mind that framed the universal order, and every conclu-
sion that is reached in science confirms this kinship.
Without such kinship, science would be impossible; and
the vaster and richer our knowledge of the universe, the
more solid is the certainty that we and the universe are
alike, the universe bearing the impress of a Mind like
ours. Eternal Being is intelligent.

This is an argument that cannot be easily overthrown.
The intelUgiblenesss of the universe to us is strong and
ever-present evidence that there is an all-pervading
rational Mind, from which the universe received its char-
acter. Beside the famous argument, “Cogito, ergo
sum,” — I think, therefore I am, — may be placed this
other, “ Intelligo, ergo Deus est, ” — I understand, there-
fore there is a God.

It is sometimes said in reply that this finding of a Mind
n the universe means simply that man projects his own
nental processes into things around him, and reads in the
miverse the likeness of himself. But this explanation
loes not account for the facts. Man studies out the
lature of an ellipse, and then discovers that the planets
aove in ellipses. For the fact that the planets stand the
ssts that prove their orbits to be elliptical, man certainly
5 not responsible. This is not a mere finding of himself
\ the universe. He could not mathematically demon-
:rate elliptical orbits from the movements of the heavenly
odies if they were not there. Man is discoverer, not
•eator, and the universe bears witness to another Mind
lan his.

It has sometimes been suggested that there is nothing
range in man’s understanding the universe, since he
'.longs to it and is part and parcel of its method. There -
no need of a mind in the universe to render it intelligi-
e to man, since man, who is a product of the system, has


GOD


109


the same qualities with it, and might naturally be ex-
pected to understand it.

But why should there be any such thing as understand-
ing the universe ? Who proposed that the universe should
be understood ? If the order from which man came forth
is mindless, what is there in it to give any guaranty or
suggestion of understanding? What is there in such
an order to bring forth a being who can think of that which
has produced him ? If there is no understanding mind in
the premises, whence comes understanding mind in the
conclusion ? The world never understood itself, and for
ages it went on with no one in it to understand it : what
was there in such a world to produce a being who can
look down upon it all, and trace meanings that run through
its whole extent ? Moreover, what evidence is there that
there will be anything to be understood, if there is no
character-giving mind in the process? If there was no
mind in the universe before man, two wonderful things
happened. Man, a part and product of the system, grew
up greater than that which had produced him, with a
power of understanding that had never existed anywhere
before: and man, when he had thus come, was able to
read in the world vast and continuous meanings, rational
to him, which had never been put into the world by any
mind or power whatever, and had never even been thought
at all until he discovered them. Man, in fact, was in that
case the first being that ever thought.

(2) The discovery of a Mind in the universe through the
idea of cause.

In the natural use of our powers we advance from simple
observation to the assertion of cause for that which we
observe. To do this is to act upon one of the first neces-
sities of our minds. As soon as man begins to think, he
assumes that everything has its cause; and later thought
results in placing this primitive assumption among the
universal certainties. All science rests upon it. It
stands as an axiom that every effect has an adequate cause.


no


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Hence, when we observe ourselves and the things around
us, near and far, we naturally begin to inquire what caused
these objects of our observation.

We naturally assume and assert our own existence,
and the recognition of real existence outside of ourselves
comes next ; and when we have assumed that we and the
universe exist, we next wish to know what caused us and
the universe to exist. We did not make ourselves, and
the things that we behold, mutable though magnificent,
bear the marks not of original but of dependent existence.
Somehow existence has been caused ; the existence that
we discover must have some ground; some power must
have caused it to be, and to be as it is. It is true that
some accept a philosophy of idealism, and carry it so far
as to think that the things that we observe have no real
existence, but constitute what is practically a scheme of
illusion. But this makes no difference for the present
purpose; for even if existence as we observe it were proved
to be an illusion, it must still have been caused. So vast
a system of illusion would be perhaps even a more ingen-
ious contrivance than an equally vast scheme of reality,
and we should need to account for the existence of so vast
a pretence of existence. Whatever our theory, the cause
of that which is or seems to be must be sought.

We naturally assert that origin implies an originating
power. Absolute origination implies some sufficient
inventive and creative energy. Whatever has had a be-
ginning has been begun by some adequate force. Nor can
the need of originating power be evaded by claiming that
one existing thing has been unfolded out of another.
Changes in the form of things — as the change from seed
to fruit, or from caterpillar to butterfly — are not ac-
counted for by saying that the power of unfolding has
somehow been stored in the germ. The storing of such
power in germs is not so simple a matter. This power
of unfolding was somehow originated and imparted, and
this was absolute origination. All that has been orig-
inated, in whatever manner it may have reached its present


GOD


III


state, has been originated by some adequate power. And
the whole universe has been originated.

Concerning the universe, there are only two possibili-
ties. Either it has at some time begun to exist, or it
has never begun to exist, but is without beginning, and
has always existed.

Take the former, which is the ordinary hypothesis, and
say that the universe did at some time absolutely begin
to exist. Then it is necessary to affirm that it was
brought into being by some adequate antecedent power.
Just as we are compelled to assert a cause for each sepa-
rate thing or occurrence, so necessity is upon us to affirm
a cause for the sum -total of all that ever had a beginning;
and if the universe has had a beginning there must be a
First Cause, sufficient for the producing of all that exists
or has existed or is to exist, with all its power of unfold-
ing and all its significance.

Even if we accept the latter hypothesis, and say that
the universe has never had a beginning, but has always
existed, and always been passing through an unbegun and
endless round of change, still we must assign to it a cause.
We are relieved of the necessity of asserting a cause ante-
cedent in time, but not of the necessity of asserting an
underlying and determining cause. Beneath the material
form and movement and variety, and back of the process
of unfolding by which the universe has come to be what
it is, we are compelled to affirm .that there is some cause
for its being such a universe as it is, and a cause for its
existing at all. If the universe is eternal, we still have
to inquire how there came to be an eternal universe. If
the universe is ever changing and unfolding, we ask how
there came to be an ever-changing and unfolding universe,
and by what the character and direction of its endless
movement is determined. A cause still underlies it.

If we wish to know the nature of the cause that orig-
inated and gave character to the universe, we must exam-
ine the imiverse as an effect, and judge what manner of
cause would be adequate to it. When we do th^e »’<=> are


II2


AI/ OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


compelled to say that, the universe being what it is, the
cause can have been nothing but a Mind. The universe,
as we have seen, bears the impress of a Mind, for it can
be understood by minds. The only adequate cause for a
universe that bears the impress of a mind is a Mind, —
antecedent in time if the universe has had a beginning,
and eternally giving character to it if it has not. In the
instinctive endeavor to account for the things that we
observe, we are driven to recognize an originating and
character-giving Spirit, as the only sufficient cause for
what we find existing.

This is substantially the cosmological argument for the
existence of God, but it has here been framed to meet
various suppositions. Whether we say that the universe
has been created, or has always existed, or has no real
existence at all, still, with things about us as we find
them, we are compelled to inquire for one cause of all,
and can find it only in a Mind. The things that we
observe are due to a cause that is spiritual in its nature.
In the production of the things that we see, there must
have been a Mind adequate to devising them, and a will
adequate to carrying the conception into effect. But these
are qualities of a self-conscious and self-directing intelli-
gence, such as we name a Personal Spirit.

This is not an argument that has force in the childhood
of thought but grows less cogent with the advance of
knowledge. The vaster the sum of matter and motion,
force and life, spirit and meaning, that we discover in
existence, the more urgent the necessity of recognizing
some adequate source, spiritual, intelligent, and purpose-
ful, from which it has proceeded. The universe as known
to the scientist demands God for its cause far more
urgently than did the heavens and the earth as known to
the patriarch or the psalmist. The earliest assumption of
human thought, that an adequate producing power is im-
plied in the existence of what we see, is also the testi-
mony of the visible universe, with its immeasurable vast-
ness and its infinite variety. Nothing is more certain


than that science, in its maturity, will affirm one spiritual
cause for the universe.

It should be added that in this argument we observe at
once the validity and the limitation of the argument from
effect to cause. The process of inferring cause for any-
thing that exists is perfectly valid, but it must stop some-
where. Back of all causation that we can trace there
must be one source, — one uncaused cause, — and this can
be nothing else than a Mind. Here is mystery to us ; but
nothing can be conceived as self-existing, except a Mind
great enough to cause all other existence. If our search
for cause cannot rest here, it can rest nowhere.

(3) The discovery of a Mind in the universe through the
presence of ends in the universe.

The universe is one vast order, and abounds in apparent
adaptations — “useful collocations,” as they have been
called — suitable to the obtaining of ends. The constitu-
tion of the atmosphere and the organs of respiration in
man and animals, for example, are adapted each to the
other; and the collocation suggests an intention that life
shall be supported. Hence the teleological argument for
the existence of God, which has been stated thus : “ Order
and useful collocation pervading a system respectively
imply intelligence and purpose as the cause of that order
and collocation. Since order and useful collocation per-
■ vade the universe, there must exist an intelligence ade-
quate to the production of this order, and a will adequate
to the directing of this collocation to useful ends.” This
is one of the familiar arguments of natural theology.
Finding a watch, one could infer from its elaborate struc-
ture that an inventive and constructive mind had wrought
upon it ; and this conclusion would be immensely strength-
ened when it was discovered that the elaborate structure
was adapted to the measuring of time. But the universe
contains innumerable useful collocations as indicative of
adaptive intelligence and will as a watch, and proclaims
its Creator as plainly as the watch proclaims its maker.


1 14 AAT OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


It has always been felt that this argument was valid ;
liable, perhaps, to be overestimated among arguments,
but essentially a sound argument ; and so it is.

Modern science, however, has questioned the argument,
and has legitimately led to some modification in the form
of it. Natural theology assumed that every sign of adap-
tation to an end gave direct evidence that the Supreme
Mind had planned and created that very adaptation. But
it is now claimed that adaptations to ends often grow up
within the universe, instead of being always impressed
upon it from without. Man constantly makes them, as
we know, and they are attributed not to God but to him :
thus the adaptation of a knife to the cutting of wood
proves the seeking of an end by man, not by God. It is
now claimed that many adaptations that once seemed to
prove direct creative planning were not made by action
upon the universe, but were brought about by some expe-
rience or unfolding within it. In the vegetable and
animal worlds, there has been an age-long struggle for
existence. This struggle has developed new necessities
from time to time in living beings. New necessities have
led to the seeking of new objects, — objects that were not
ends at all before ; and with the necessity for seeking new
ends there has gradually been developed whatever special
power the seeking required. Thus the seeking of ends,
with the attendant adaptation of powers to ends, grew up
in great part within the universe because of incidental
necessities, instead of being impressed upon it by crea-
tive wisdom. In other words, the ends are those of the
creatures that seek them, not those of God. Darwin saw
conditions develop necessities, necessities develop ends,
and ends develop the power to seek them ; and he could
not see that in this there was any need of creative inven-
tion, or of creative purpose.

Yet certain facts must be met; namely, that living
things possess power to respond to conditions, develop
adaptations, and enter into the seeking of ends; an4 at
the same time, that this power is limited in a remarkable


manner. This power must have come from somewhere,
and so must its limitations. Somehow it was made pos-
sible for life to seek new ends when new conditions arose,
and somehow it was determined how far life could go in
so doing. Some changes for the sake of ends are pos-
sible, while others seem impossible; there are lines that
are never passed. Darwin himself asked in perplexity,
“ What determined each particular variation ? What
makes a tuft of feathers come on a cock’s head, or moss
on a moss-rose ? ” Somehow it comes to pass that some
changes are made for the sake of ends, while others are
never made. Nature gives power to modify structure for
the sake of needful ends, but gives it as it were grudg-
ingly, and closely shuts it in by confining lines. But
such gifts and limitations are nothing else than the work
of Mind. It has been decided that life may unfold from
stage to stage, and that within certain limits living
things shall have power to seek ends that may arise in
the course of the unfolding. If this gigantic conception
is not the offspring of a Mind, then we have no means of
knowing what a mind is, or what it produces. Nothing
bears clearer marks of organization by a ruling Mind than
the universe, viewed with reference to the vast, yet limited,
power of end-seeking and adaptation that exists within it.

The modern science which questions the argument from
end-seeking, however, makes known new fields of end-
seeking and adaptation of which the natural theology of
an earlier day knew nothing. Evolution is recognized
as the method of the universe, and evolution is end-
seeking. It is now possible to see that the process of
creation tended to the production of worlds; that one of
these worlds, at least, once produced, became adapted to
the support of life; that life, for which a home had thus
been provided, appeared ; that the career of life, when it
had come, tended toward man; that the story of man
records the growth and maturing in him of the spirit;
that the growth and maturing of the spirit in man, under
divine watching, has brought forth from the long course


AN- OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Il6


of creation true sons of God, to live in spiritual fellowship
with the Creator. In this great all-comprehending course
of end-seeking the innumerable minor end-seekings, down
to the lowest, find their place and explanation. Truly it
may be said that if this vast conception, sweeping through
the whole duration of the universe and comprehending
its infinity of details in one vast meaning, is not the
product of Mind, we cannot affirm that our minds are
acting when they strive to grasp it. If such end -seeking
is not the action of a Mind, we do not know what the
action of a mind is.

The character of the ideal that has thus been realized
is enough to vindicate the presence of a mind conceiving
it. A progressive system should be understood in the
light of its highest developments. So we say of human
plans in their unfolding, and so we ought to say of any
system in which unfolding can be traced. The meaning
of the whole is to be sought in the crown of the whole ;
and it is reasonable to hold that in an orderly system the
ideals that are finally wrought out into reality were enter-
tained before they were realized. It is not probable that
the most significant elements in a world came into il
without having been entertained during the process as
character-giving ideals. Now the cro.wn of the long
process in this world is a spirit, intelligent, emotional,
purposeful, moral, responsible, creative, capable of indefi.
nite intellectual and spiritual progress. The idea of man
is a spiritual idea, of intense and inexhaustible moral
significance; and this is the idea that has been realized,
thus far, in the long unfolding of the world. In all sound
reason, man must have been the end that was sought in
this unfolding. It. is impossible to believe that such a
mind was brought forth as the supreme product iq the
world, without a Mind to conceive it beforehand and
entertain it as an ideal. Man, the crown, is the living
evidence that the whole system was conceived by a spirit-
ual Being, who was cherishing moral ideals, and seeking
spiritual ends.


GOD


117


In its earlier stages the modern doctrine of evolution
has been awake to the existence of innumerable ends
within the universe, but not to one great end for the
universe itself. But it will come to be felt that a uni-
verse so full of ends and end-seeking must have an end
of its own; and such an end for the universe implies
one ordering and creative Mind. Many have supposed
that the teleological argument was discredited by mod-
em science, and especially by the doctrine of evolution :
but the fact is that only in the light of modem science
is that argument destined to appear in its full power
and value. Order and end-seeking on so vast a scale
give overwhelming evidence of a creative and directing
Mind.

It may be helpful to add that it requires a mind to
understand the universe; how much more to produce it!
A mind is required for the conducting of a scientific
investigation, and the discovery of that unity and mean-
ing in facts by which science is rendered possible : how
much more, then, is a mind required for so making and
ordering facts that a science of them shall be possible !

We may add, also, that the present problems of science
are problems that are soluble only by truth concerning
mind. Science has penetrated, back of single questions
regarding phenomena, to the great problem of energy and
its nature and applications. Energy suggests will; is the
suggestion a true one } Is matter simply a form of energy,
and energy an expression of spirit ? Is the universe wholly
spiritual, instead of wholly material as many once sus-
pected.^ The suggestion that all is spiritual is already
beginning to be heard. The way from energy to spirit is
not so long as once it looked, and is certain to be taken ;
and the way from the innumerable and infinitely various
applications of energy to intelligence and purpose is
equally plain and sure. In the march of science the
recognition of the Universal Mind is the next legitimate
stage.


Il8 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


These three lines of evidence lead fairly to the con-
clusion that a Mind caused the universe, made it intel-
ligible to us, and is conducting it to an end. The only
power that could conceivably do these things is a Mind,
self-conscious and self-directing. But a mind self-con-
scious and self-directing is personal, — the word may be
inadequate, but is not untrue. It is the nature of mind
to be personal, and we speak correctly when we say that
the universe is the work and expression of a personal
Spirit. There is a Mind in the universe, — that is to
say, there is a God.

2. The evidence of the existence of God from the

RELIGIOUS STARTING-POINT.

This evidence extends beyond the discovery of a Mind
in the universe, to the discovery of the good God, worthy
to be loved and trusted by all. This discovery of God is
made, —

(1) Through the religious nature of man.

(2) Through the great dilemma, — a good God or a
bad one.

(3) Through the spiritual experience of men, especially
in Christianity.

(i) The discovery of God through the religious nature
of man.

Religion, as we have seen, is natural to man, and
practically universal. It does not wait for proof of the
existence of God; it springs up from an intuitive sense of
unseen realities. Man looks upward and prays ; he thus
bears testimony to his sense of dependence and obligation;
he thus recognizes a power and an authority above him;
and he thus assumes that there is some one to whom his
prayer may properly be addressed. Religion may be
crude and superstitious, and the object of worship unknown
and misjudged; but the universal impulse and practice
declare that religion belongs to the nature of man, and


that there is a Being above man for him to worship. The
religious constitution of man asserts that there is some
Being whom man may worthily address in prayer.

We instinctively trust our intellectual powers, and
experience proves that we are safe in doing so, for we and
the world are made upon one method. Are we equally
safe in trusting the testimony of this religious intuition ?
Certainly we are, if we live in an honest world. Relig-
ious worship, obedience, and aspiration are as normal to
man as sensation or reasoning. Any one of these powers
may be misinformed or misdirected, yet they are genuine
powers of man. Sense and reason are normally trust-
worthy, and so, we instinctively affirm, is the impulse
to aspire, obey, and worship in the presence of a higher
Power. If the religious faculty is a normal part of honest
nature, then our sense of dependence is to be trusted when
it bears witness to a higher Power, bows before a higher
Authority, and aspires to communion with a living God.
In a world of reality every power has its counterpart, —
the eye has light, the reason has truth, and the religious
nature has God. If the religious nature in man has no
real being corresponding to it, no one who is worthy of
the adoration and trustful obedience that man is moved
to give to One above him, then we can only say that man
was bom with his highest nature looking out into empty
space. He was endowed with noble powers that can only
mislead and disappoint him; and thus he comes into
being possessed of a nature that is essentially false.
Moreover, it is the highest in him that is false. But if
human nature is false in its highest region, — false by
being made so in its very constitution, — then we cannot
be sture that it is true in any department of its activity.
If we say that man’s highest nature naturally deceives
him, we resign all right to rely upon our nature or the
validity of our powers, and confidence in our mental
processes is at an end. We are compelled to trust our
own powers just as truly in the religious realm as in the
physical or the intellectual. If we are not safe in this.


120


AN’ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


we are sure of nothing; and the powers that we are com-
pelled to trust affirm that there is One above us who is
worthy of our love and adoration.

This assertion of our religious powers is confirmed by
experience. History has shown that religion is a normal
exercise of humanity. The thought of a God worthy to
be worshipped is adapted to man. J ust as the mind of
man has proved itself adapted to a world that is con-
structed according to the methods of mathematics, so the
spirit of man has proved itself adapted to a world in
which there is a good God, with worthy power and author-
ity over human beings. Man comes to his best life only
in proportion as such a God is recognized. The history
of man shows that his nature and life are incomplete
without a God from whom he can learn his duty, whom
he can love, and in whom his sense of dependence can
find a worthy peace. Moreover, every step of safety and
success in trusting our rational powers argues the trust-
worthiness of our religious faculty. Every gain of science
is fresh evidence that we live in an honest world, in
which our powers will not call in vain for their counter-
parts.

This has been called the moral argument for the exist-
ence of God, and sometimes the anthropological argu-
ment. Our preceding arguments reach only to the
discovery of a Mind in the universe; but this asserts a
worthy character as necessarily belonging to that Mind.
It affirms that a good God, fit to be loved and trusted, is
as truly the counterpart of man’s spirit as light is of his
eye; and it adds that, if man exists with his present
nature, and this counterpart does not exist, he cannot
trust his nature, or be sure that he is capable of sound
thinking.

This argument naturally leads into another, similar in
method and aim, but more comprehensive in range.

(2) The discovery of God through the great dilemma, —
a good God or a bad one.


GOD


I2I


Various efforts have been made to construct an argu-
ment that shall conclusively prove the necessary existence
of a perfect Being. The arguments all fail somewhere,
and yet thought has lingered about the subject, with the
feeling that valid proof is somewhere to be found. Our
Christian definition asserts that God is the perfect Being,
in the realm of moral quality; and our present argument
asserts the existence of such a Being, on the ground of
the impossibility of the opposite. We are forced to affirm
or deny goodness in the Mind that governs the universe ;
and the latter we cannot do.

The argument is suggested by the character of human
life. We have found in the universe a Mind, which may
now be called God. He is the cause of the universe, and
must have intended the universe that he caused. In this
world is man, to whom life came as an unsought gift.
When he comes to know himself he finds himself to be
the crown of the earthly order, and is sure that his life
must possess high significance. The crown of his being
is a religious nature that seems to him to reach out into
immortality, and demands a good Being above him as its
counterpart. Meanwhile, life has its limitations, pains,
and perils. It abounds in suffering. It is harmed by
moral evil, for which man’s philosophy does not readily
account. Man finds life strange, perplexing, and often
disappointing. It often seems unworthy of him, and he
wonders whether it is a blessing. Reflecting upon suffer-
ing and sin, limitation and disappointment, he asks
whether it was good to be born. But he was not respon-
sible for being born ; God gave him life, and must have
meant the gift. What kind of Being, then, is God.?
What is his moral character? Is he a good Being, or
not?

The answer is that God is either good or bad ; and that
he is so good or so bad as to be, to our apprehension,
either the best possible Being or the worst.

We have seen that if there is not a Mind in the uni-
verse man cannot trust his own mind, and if there is not


122


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


a good God he cannot trust his religious nature. If
there is not a good God, man has been endowed with a
false nature, not corresponding to existence outside of
himself. His best part is delusive, reaching out after an
impossible fulfilment. Life must be a disappointment to
all who live, for it requires for its completion what does
not exist. Life is a series of rising energies and- hopes
that must subside and expire because there is nothing to
satisfy them. Life is full of evil, with no redeeming
good. It is not worth living. Human existence is a
curse if there is no good God.

But life proceeded from God, that is, from the Being,
whatever he may be, who is the source of all; and he
made it such as it is. He therefore, if he is not good, is
the author of hopes that take him for what he is not.
He is the author of religious aspirations for which no
satisfaction exists. He has forced intelligent beings into
a life in which delusion is their inevitable lot. Thus he
has not scrupled to fool his noblest offspring. He is a
bad Being, false, deceptive, and cruel. If intelligent
existence thus comes by fraud and deludes all who live,
then the universe is a vast practical joke, at which the
evil spirit who hears himself adored as God by his
deluded creatures must laugh in cruel triumph.

This is the alternative. Either God is the best of
beings, or he has perpetrated a gratuitous fraud upon man
in the constitution of his nature and the ordering of his
life. If God is not the best of beings, he cannot be
trusted or loved at all ; for, in that case, his first and
fundamental act toward humanity was to compel it into
a necessarily evil existence. Moreover, if our higher
nature misleads us, that means that our moral sentiments
are untrustworthy, and there is no reliance to be placed
upon our moral judgments. If God is not good, we can-
not be sure that we know what is good.

When this great dilemma is presented judgment is not
difficult. We are asked to contradict the primary asser-
tion of our minds that this is an honest world of reality.


GOD


123


where our essential powers have real counterparts, and to
accept a position in which we cannot be sure that there
is such a thing as trustworthy thinking. But humanity
cannot thus sign away its own soundness of thought and
feeling, and settle down to the conviction that its life is
a fraud. Pessimism may be offered as the explanation of
the mystery of life, but mankind will steadily decline to
stultify itself by accepting it. After all speculations and
doubts, we shall return to the first and natural assump-
tion, that we live in an honest world of reality, under an
honest God. But we can hold this only by recognizing
the existence of a God so good as to Ije worthy of the
perfect confidence and love of all other beings. Unless
he who made us is deceiving us all from first to last, and
we are mere puppets of his cruel play, God is the best of
beings, and is more than all that mind can think or heart
can wish in moral excellence.

(3) The discovery of God through the .spiritual experi-
ence of men, especially in Christianity.

Thus far in argument for the existence of God we have
made no use of Christianity or revelation, or any form of
religion. We have spoken only of man as an intellectual
and religious being, and of the world and life as mani-
festing God. But human experience in religion bears
witness to the good God, and affords in fact the most
practical evidence that he exists.

If there is a good God he will make himself known to
men. It is inconceivable that he will not. A good God
will bring to men the possibility of knowing him in per-
sonal experience, and having fellowship with him in
heart. Strictly, revelation cannot demonstrate his exist-
ence, for it must assume it; but it will manifest his exist-
ence and character to men, and will serve them as the
chief source of certainty concerning him, for it will teach
them what they could not know by other means.

Now there is in the world something that claims to be
the self-manifestation of the good God, the genuine reve-


124 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


lation of that Being whom all existence implies. It is
claimed that God’s character was shown in Jesus Christ,
and that in his life God has shown what he desires to be
to all men. It is the claim of Christianity that Christ is
the revelation of God, and that the God whom he makes
known to the world is the God who exists.

Of this claim of Christianity, it may at least be said
that it is identical with the demand of our religious
nature. It sets forth such a God as our nature needs to
find, and all that is best in us assents to the claim that
he is real. Here the best object of worship is found, the
most aspiring thought is satisfied, and the needs of life
are met.

But is it true? Is there really such a God? How
shall one know? how find whether here is really the
counterpart to his religious nature? The test of the
reality of counterparts to our powers is experience. It is
by experience that we know light to be the counterpart of
the eye, and sound of the ear. Only by the same test
can we ascertain that there is a counterpart for our
religious nature. By other means we may become sure
that there must be such a counterpart, but the final cer-
tainty comes only through experience. Hence one who
would have full proof of the good God’s reality must put
it to the experimental test. He must take the good God
for real, and receive the confirmation that will follow. If
there is such a Being, one who sincerely casts himself in
simple confidence upon him to trust him and do his will
will find living evidence that he exists. Such a God will
respond to confidence. If he is a living spirit the trust
of a living human spirit will find him.

The experiment has been made, and experience
brought its answer. Christianity is a life of faith and
fellowship with God, and men have been living it for
ages. Outside of Christianity also the highest souls have
tested the good God by believing in him, and have found
him real. Faith is a legitimate and worthy exercise of
human powers, and is capable of bringing valid evidence


cov


125


of the realities on which it lays hold. When faith has
reached out after God it has found him. It learns habitu-
ally to rely upon him, and is not disappointed.

“ Nothing before, nothing behind ;

The steps of Faith
Fall on the seeming void, and find
The rock beneath.”

Christian history yields a great mass of testimony from
experience, declaring that there is such a God as Christ
told of. Men have tested him by trusting him, and have
found what they had been encouraged to expect.

It is objected that this evidence is private, personal,
esoteric, known only to the initiated ; it will not suffice
him who has not the experience. Certainly this is true,
for this is inseparable from the nature of experience.
Experience is naturally esoteric, and the deepest experi-
ence most profoundly so. Experience of God cannot be
otherwise. If a good God exists, those who come into
personal relations with him will have a knowledge of him
that others do not possess. This is what experience
means, and only thoughtlessness can object to it. If
there is a good God, there will certainly spring up a
class of persons who possess an exceptional certainty of
his existence. They will be among the sanest and truest
of their kind, and their convictions will be among the
safest convictions of man. Such a class of persons there
has long been in the world; they have tried God, and
found him real ; while others have never tried him, and
can only say that they do not know. The fact that their
certainty is their own and not another’s, so far from dis-
crediting it, is what gives it value. They cannot doubt
that the good God is real, and their testimony is worthy
of all attention.

The evidence of experience, however, does not consist
wholly in testimony. Experience of faith in the good
God brings forth fruits of inexpressible preciousness,
Which attest the reality of the source from which they


126 AAT OUTLINS of CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


sprang. Trust in the God of moral perfection has always
tended to produce the elements of moral perfection in
men. This work has never been perfect, but it has
always been genuine. Purity, strength, and loveliness of
character, and unselfishness, usefulness, and efficiency in
life, have grown up in those who have put God’s existence
to the practical test. If there is a good God, those who
live in fellowship with him will grow in goodness.
Despite all the faults of religious souls the world over,
we safely appeal to this testimony of fruits in character.
The likeness of a good God has certainly been visibly
brought forth — imperfectly, yet really — in men who have
believed in such a God. Belief in such a God enlarges
all the spiritual powers ; it quickens hope of immortality,
and lifts man to his best possibilities. It must be a true
belief.

These three arguments lead to the conviction that God
must be real, with perfect goodness, by showing that
men were made for such a God ; that if he does not exist,
the great Being who does exist is the worst of beings,
and life is a delusion; and that experience finds him
real.

Objections. — Each of these two lines of proof, the
intellectual and the moral and religious, encounters a
characteristic objection, concerning which a word may
here be spoken.

The chief intellectual objection comes from those who
look abroad in the universe and report that they do not
find God. The universal order seems to them complete
and sufficient unto itself, and they see no need of GoA

But the presence of a rational Mind in the universe
seems to be established upon foundations that cannot be
moved without introducing radical distrust of our mental
processes. If we think with rational minds, there is a
rational mind in the things around us. If this is so,
opposition must ultimately give way, and a better under-


G0£>


127


Standing of the universe must result in recognition of the
existence of the universal Mind. There will be delays
in reaching this result, and many minds may be far from
having reached it; but the universe tells of the Spirit
who creates, sustains, and orders it, and its voice must at
last be heard.

The chief moral objection arises from the presence of
moral evil in the world. Moral evil is opposite to the
perfect goodness, and cannot be approved by it. It is
often said that if there is a good God he is not omnipo-
tent, or real master of all, or he would not have admitted
evil; and if there is an omnipotent God, he is not good,
since evil has been admitted. This moral perplexity goes
deeper than the intellectual question, just as the moral
and religious proof of God’s existence goes deeper than
the intellectual.

But it seems to be established that belief in a God of
moral perfection is the only alternative to moral anarchy
and the denial of our primary moral certainties. If this
is so, we can do nothing else than take the existence of
the good God as that which must be true; we are shut up
to it. Accepting it on such grounds, we are entitled to
use the existence of the good God as our guiding light in
the interpretation of the mysteries of existence. Appear-
ances may perplex us, but there is a God of all goodness,
or we are sure of nothing; and a truth thus grounded can
rightly be used as a key for explanation. It does not at
once explain everything, but we recognize it as a truth
that has unparalleled power to explain. Acknowledging
the good God, we are free to allow him time to vindicate
his ways. We confess the narrowness of our knowledge,
and are able to trust mysteries with him, confident that
larger knowledge will bring us deeper peace of mind. If
he exists, though there may be seeming chaos, there can
be no real chaos ; for that is not chaos over which a holy,
guiding Spirit broods. Since the eternal goodness is a
necessity of our thought, we can rest in confidence that


128 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


God will bring out of all confusion the order and the end
that please him. Thus faith in the good God brings rest
to the soul, and the only possible rest, in a world of moral
evil.

It is no sound objection that the existence of God must
be held in part by faith. In certain aspects, that fact is
not held by faith, but on cogent grounds of reason. But
when the truth that is sought is of the spiritual order,
faith is a proper organ of acquirement, and we should be
satisfied with it. The main diflSculty of belief in God in
the higher spiritual realm lies in the difficulty that we
have in appreciating faith, and rising to the exercise
of it.

III. The Relation of God to the Universe.

Under this head will be grouped several topics impor-
tant in theology, which are often treated separately. In
such grouping some anticipation of matter yet to be more
fully considered is unavoidable. On these subjects it is
intended to present the substance of the Scriptural teach-
ing, interpreted by Christian thought in the light of
modem knowledge. We seek to know the Christian
view of the relation of God to the universe. Difficulties
will be met at every point, and unanswerable questions
will be encountered; and beneath the general title there
lie questions that belong to philosophy rather than to
theology. But, despite all difficulties, it is to be firmly
held that neither the universe nor God is essentially and
altogether incomprehensible. Truth is not beyond the
reach of man ; and the general Christian position regard-
ing the great subjects with which we are here concerned
can doubtless be stated and rendered intelligible.

I. God is the Source of the Universe. — Whether by
immediate production at some point of time, so that after
he had existed alone there came by his act to be a uni-
verse, or by perpetual production from his own spirituaj


GOD


129


being, so that his eternal existence was always accom-
panied by a universe in some stage of being, God has
brought the universe into existence. Whatever the method,
it has no independent existence apart from him, its source.

The Scriptures have commonly been understood to affirm
the creation of all things by the fiat of God at some point

of time. God said, “Let there be ,**and there was.

The Scriptures do affirm, not only in the great creation-
passages, as the first chapter of Genesis, but everywhere,
that God is the source and Creator of all ; but, when the
Scriptures are well understood, the fiat-method is seen to
be more upon the surface of their teaching than in its
essential depths. Any method in which the independent
God could give being to a universe which without him
could have had no existence is accordant with Christianity.
Many find it easier, philosophically, to hold that God has
eternally brought creation forth from himself, so that there
has never been a time when there was not a universe in
some stage of existence, than to think of an instantaneous
creation of all existing things when there had been nothing
but God before. Between the two views theology is not
compelled to decide, if only the conception that the next
paragraph expresses be firmly held. It is enough that God
is the actual source of the universe, by whose free action it
exists, and without whom it could not exist.

2. God is a Free Spirit, greater than the Universe. —
God dwells in the universe, and is active in the whole of it,
but is not to be conceived as wholly occupied by it, or
exhausting his possibilities in conducting its processes.
It is true that greater than the universe” may seem to be
mere words, since the universe is so great that we cannot
comprehend it, to say nothing of a Being who is greater.
Yet the thought is quite intelligible, that great as the uni-
verse is, God is not limited to it, — wholly absorbed by
what he is doing in it, and capable of nothing more. God
in the universe is not like the life of the tree in the tree,
which does all that it is capable of in making the tree what

- o


130 AJV^ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


it is. God in the universe is rather like the spirit of a man
in his body, which is greater than his body, able to direct
his body, and capable of activities that far transcend the
physical realm. God is a free Spirit, personal, self-direct
ing, unexhausted by his present activities.

This statement aflSrms both the immanence and the tran-
scendence of God. By the immanence of God is meant
that he is everyAvhere and always present in the universe,
nowhere absent from it, never separated from its life. By
his transcendence is meant, not (as is sometimes repre-
sented) that he is outside and views the universe from be-
yond and above, but that he is not shut up in it, not lim-
ited by it, not required in his totality to maintain and order
it. By both together is meant that he is a free Spirit, in-
habiting the universe, but surpassing it, — immanent, as
always in the universe, and transcendent, as always inde-
pendent of its limitations and able to act upon it.

The ideas of immanence and transcendence are some-
times set in opposition to each other, and each has even
had its advocates ; but this, at least in the present age, is
needless and wrong. Each conception needs the other
Transcendence without immanence would give us Deism,
cold and barren ; immanence without transcendence would
give us Pantheism, fatalistic and paralyzing. But neither
is without the other ; the two coexist in God. His omni-
present energy is his immanence; but so great is that
omnipresent energy that instead of being the fully worked
slave of the universe that he inhabits and maintains, God
is its master, transcending it, exceeding it, controlling it,
making it the servant of his will. The presence of God
rules Deism out, and the freedom of God rules Pantheism
out. That “ All is God ” is not true, and that “ God is
All ” is not true. The truth is that " from him and through
him and unto him are all things.” Gk)d is Source of all,
and Lord of all. ’

3. God has Uniform Method in Conducting the
Universe. Uniform method is named law. A uniform


GOD


I31


method in. any given operation is called the law of that
operation ; and the reign of uniform method is spoken of as
the reign of law. To say that God has uniform method is
to say that he works according to law.

We must be careful, however, not to speak of law as if it
were an independent entity. It is sometimes said that the
universe is governed by law; but the word “by” is am-
biguous here, — it cannot mean more than “ according to.”
Law is not mind or force. It is not even a force. It can-
not propel itself. It is not ruler, or lawgiver. Law is
method in the exercise of mind and force, and implies both
force and mind. If law is uniformity of method in the
universe, then law, instead of justifying the inference that
no mind is present, indicates the presence of a mind so far-
seeing as to know that uniformity is good for the universe,
so wise as to establish a method in which uniformity will
be beneficent, and so powerful and calm as to exercise
uniformity in action with unvarying steadiness.

When we say that God has uniform method in conduct-
ing the universe, we do not deny that he employs innumer.
able forms of power and plan; but we mean that his
method as a whole moves on from age to age, always ex-
pressing the consistent intention of a single mind. We
mean that certain modes of exerting force prevail wherever
we look, and that certain moral sequences are universal.
The sum-total of God’s method in the material order is
called Nature; and experience places the uniformity of
nature, persisting, in spite of variations, among our firmest
certainties. Equally does experience establish the uni-
formity of the moral order, the certainty of moral se-
quences. It is true that this latter certainty is slower in
being recognized than the former, because the experience
that establishes it is deeper, and comes later, than that
which establishes the uniformity of nature, and because
the evidence of it does not appeal to the senses : but the
certainty is as solid in one case as in the other.

In general, God’s method in the universe is evolutionary.
A gradual, progressive method, operating from within.


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


characterizes his work in creating, sustaining, and ordering
all. It involves a continuous process of enfolding and
unfolding, of formation and disintegration, of growth, ripen-
ing, and decay, followed by recurrence of the same long
movement. As trees, animals, and men follow an order
of growth and decay, so do worlds and systems ; and so
does the universe as a whole. God himself, in a manner
beyond our present knowledge, ministers to his universe
the indwelling force by which the incessant movement is
carried on. God has unfolded, developed, evolved, the
universe of to-day, bringing it forth from other forms of
being ; and to still other forms he is bearing it on. Change
is incessant, rest unknown. Whether the movement will
ever end is known to him alone. Immeasurable ages are
required for this method, and so is immeasurable, wise, and
patient activity on the part of God. That this is God’s
method is certain, though concerning the process much is
yet to be learned, and all will never be learned.

This method implies that God is the source of the uni-
verse ; for we cannot think of him as guiding and unfold-
ing a universe that was not his own by origin. If we
recognize God as a free Spirit greater than the universe,
the method decides nothing as to his manner of originating
it. Indeed, so far as the doctrine of evolution knows, the
universe may have been originated or eternal. Origins lie
back of its field.

This evolutionary method does not necessarily preclude
acts of creation in the course of the general movement. A
free Spirit is not in bondage to his own methods. A
method of growth does not rule out acts of implanting:
conceivably it might imply them. Life, when its time
came, may have come in by direct creation; so may
human life, or the life of other species; or the whole
process of unfolding may have been continuous, impelled
by only one kind of divine movement from first to last.
Whether God has performed special acts of creation from
time to time is a question for evidence, which lies outside
the field of theology. We are free to recognize such acts


GOD


133


if we find evidence that they have occurred, and equally
free to dispense with them in our thoughts if evidence goes
to the contrary. Theology is indifferent as to the result of
the inquiry.

If God is a free Spirit above all, he must constantly be
carrying on processes and performing acts that do not
belong to the order w’ith which we in this world are
familiar. When such action appears in this world, it is
commonly called supernatural; and “the supernatural ” is
the name that is given to the activity and work of God
apart from the order that we are familiar with under the
name of nature. Whether the name is a helpful one is per-
haps open to question, for it is as ambiguous as its com-
panion-words “nature” and “natural.” In a true sense,
whatever God does is done in accordance with some
method that deserves to be called natural, just as well as
the order in which we live. All action of God is natural
to God as being in accordance with his nature, and also as
being part of some rational system of action. Even to us,
all action of God would appear rational, if we had the
means of understanding it aright. In its common use, the
word “ supernatural ” denotes all activity of God outside
the order that we know ; and it should be distinctly under-
stood that such activity is in a true sense natural, being
normal, rational, and intelligible. God is one, and his
action is equally normal to him, whether it falls within the
region of what we call nature or not. It is the extraordin-
ariness of what is commonly called the supernatural that
marks it as peculiar in this world, rather than any inherent
difference between it and other activity of God.

The name “ miracles ” has been given to special acts of
God departing from the ordinary method, performed in the
sight of men for a moral purpose. Whether miracles have
been wrought, and whether some given event is a miracle,
are questions for evidence; but the possibility of such
acts cannot be denied, except by Atheism, or by Panthe-
ism that makes God unfree. If God is a freje Spirit,
immanent and transcendent, not limited to what he is


134 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


doing, miracles are possible, and may occur on sufficient
occasion. But if they occur they will be comparatively
rare, else the beneficent general uniformity of nature would
be broken up, and the confidence of men in the order of the
world would be impaired. All alleged miracles should be
examined with care, and none should be acknowledged with-
out good evidence ; but the possibility of miracles should
never be doubted by believers in a personal God.

As miracles are possible, so also is that attention and
response of God to the desires of men which is called
answer to prayer. If God were not a free personal being,
answer to prayer would of course be impossible ; but if he
is a free Spirit, there is no reason why he may not grant
human requests if he sees sufficient reason. The main
function of prayer lies in the spiritual region of fellowship
with God, and here, in the freedom of a father with his
children, we may be sure that God will frequently fulfil the
desires of those who pray. In the realm of natural occur-
rences, direct intervention in answer to prayer, like mira-
cles, will not be frequent enough to destroy the general
order. But we must not deny the possibility of God’s
intervention in natural occurrences in answer to request
from his children ; neither must we so presume upon that
possibility as to insist upon our will as if it were better than
his. The chief assurances of fulfilment for human requests,
as in John xv. 7, are made upon conditions that imply
harmony of the human will with the divine.

Too commonly the presence of God with his universe
has been recognized mainly in interpositions. Special and
exceptional acts have been relied upon as the chief proofs
of his being, while the long testimony of his uniform
method and work was overlooked. But the truth is that
God is present and is proved by the steady order and un-
folding of creation, and would be commended to his crea-
tures by his work if no miracle had ever been wrought.

4. God has a Spiritual Purpose in the Universe. —
A spirit who could give existence to such a universe could


GOD


I3S


not do it without an all-comprehending purpose. The
order, unity, and uniformity of method that pervade the
existing universe attest the presence of such purpose.
There certainly must be “ one far-off divine event, to
which the whole creation moves,” — one great result and
outcome of the universal existence, for the sake of which
all was brought into being. In such a purpose must
be included innumerable subordinate and contributing
purposes, which, one after another, serve their term and
develop into purposes that follow, all ministering to the
final end.

Since God is a Spirit this final end must be spiritual.
The material enfolding and unfolding, rising and falling,
flux and reflux, in which the universe fulfils its course, can-
not be enough to command the deepest interest of God
the Spirit. The lower forms of life cannot suffice him, nor
can mere intellectual operation satisfy him. The universe
contains spiritual beings innumerable, of whom men are
the part known to us; and this part of existence, being
directly akin to God, is the dominant and characteristic
part, in which the significance of the entire system must
be found. Since the lower serves the higher the universe
must exist for the spirits that it contains, and for the higb
est that is in them, and the “ one far-off divine event ”
must be spiritual. In the goodness of God we find an
additional assurance of this ; for a good Creator will surely
take interest chiefly in the highest nature and destiny of
his creatures, and these are spiritual. The Highest cares
for the highest.

The final cause of existence is the overwhelming mys-
tery; nothing but the Christian light illumines it. In
Christ we learn that the God of all is perfect in goodnessj
and in Christ we see him working upon created spirits for
their good. In the Christian light, therefore, we safely
affirm that the purpose of God in creating and conducting
the universe is first to produce free spirits capable of good-
ness like hts own, and then to bring them into his own
moral likeness and fellowship. This, which is the only


AN' OUTLINE OF CffRISTIAN THEOLOGY


spiritual end that we can imagine the good God to enter
tain, is the end that Christ shows him to be pursuing.

5. God as the good Creator has full right of Control
throughout the Universe. — Since God is the source of
all being, all being is dependent upon him and subject to
his control. Over all that lies below free spiritual life,
God’s creatorship in itself gives unquestionable right to
organize and order, to construct and direct.

But if God gives existence to free spiritual beings, cap-
able of moral judgment and endowed with responsibility,
the case stands somewhat differently with them. Over
such beings his creatorship gives him a certain authority,
but not an authority that is complete and unquestionable
apart from his character. A bad creator ought to be
disobeyed If God were morally bad the only possible
suggestion of hope for the universe, spiritually regarded,
would be that some of his creatures might grow good
enough and strong enough to carry through a successful
rebellion against him. With God, right makes might, —
not the reverse. He can possess real authority over intel-
ligent creatures only by being worthy of it.

But the living God is a good being, perfect in holiness
and love, and as the good Creator he has full right of con-
trol over all that exists. All beings, each according to its
nature, ought to be controlled by him. Each free spirit
ought to do his will because his will is good, and seek to
be like him because he is perfect. His right is as perfect
as himself.

The sovereignty of God consists in his right of control,
together with his power of control. He neither possesses
nor desires any power over his creatures that does not rest
upon right, and hence his sovereignty is not arbitrary, but
is simply the active expression of his character, in the
relation that he sustains to his creatures. God is sover-
eign, simply because he is worthy and able to govern
that which he has made. Such a sovereignty can have
no parallel, and cannot be adequately illustrated from


GOJD


137


any human institutions. It has often been assumed that
the governments of this world offer a fair illustration of
the sovereignty of God, and his relation to his universe
has been represented as similar to that of kings to their
subjects. Human governments have indeed been helpful
for illustration, and doubtless it has been necessary to
impress God*s authority upon men by reference to author-
ity that was acknowledged by them. But when God's
sovereignty has been grounded in his creatorship, worthi-
ness, and ability, it is plain that it cannot be interpreted
from any sovereignty of man, without certainty of most
serious misunderstanding. Sovereignty that is grounded
in essential right and in creative goodness can have no
parallel. Neither can it have an end.

6. God exercises direct Control throughout the Uni-
verse, save as he has set off Spiritual Beings with a
certain Independence, able to do their own Wills
instead of his. — In its action upon unfree and unreasom
ing objects, the will of God may be called an arbitrary
will : the will is his, not theirs, and he enforces it It is
by his act, for example, that gravitation takes its place
as a power upon all material objects, and the method of
growth is impressed upon animal and vegetable nature.
On this principle God exercises direct control throughout
the universe. How power goes forth from him to its
work, we do not know, or how the forces that we can
observe and measure are related to his volition; but
throughout the material realm, where there is no room
for moral operations, we are sure that his will works
independently and alone.

But God has created spirits intelligent and free, with a
constitution that implies moral agency. He has given
them certain power to do their own will, even though it
be opposed to his. By such creative action God has
limited himself. He would otherwise have had the only
will in the universe; but he has called other wills into
being, and given to each one a limited field of genuine


138 AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


sovereignty. Their action is their own, with the responsi-
bility and the consequences. It is plain that from the
exercise of this created freedom there may follow results
that the will of God would not have produced if it had
kept the field to itself. It is a most wonderful thing that
God should create other wills and grant them sovereignty,
within a universe in which his will ought to be supreme ;
but the Christian light illumines the mystery, by showing
us the spiritual purpose of God just spoken of. Only
such beings are capable of goodness, and only by impart-
ing the ama2ing gift of freedom could God conduct his
creation toward its real end.

In relation to free beings the will of God is not an arbi-
trary will, enforcing itself without moral means. That
would be impossible. If the will of God is to be done in
free beings, it must be done in accordance with their
nature, through the freedom that he has given them.
They must be willing to do it, and do it willingly. Of
course his will affects them in many matters where it does
not appeal to them as moral agents; but wherever he
seeks the doing of his will by moral agents he has limited
himself to moral means of influencing them. Arbitrary
enforcement of his will upon them would be violation of
their nature. In fact, it is impossible, because contra-
dictory. The will of God that men should be virtuous
cannot be enforced upon them, for any action that was
enforced would not be virtuous. Free spirits must be
influenced, they cannot be forced. God shows respect
for his creatures, and for himself as their creator, and
upon the independence that he has given them he makes
no attempt forcibly to intrude. It is by the moral influ-
ence of truth and character that he seeks to lead men into
the doing of his will.

Yet probably we err in calling this a limitation, for it
opens wide the door for God’s dearest work. He limits
himself, it is true, by creating anything possessed of quali-
ties, for he must treat anything whatever as the thing that
he has made it to be, — rock he must treat as rock, water


GOD


139


as water, life as life. So he must treat the free as free,
and he cannot by will decide to treat it as unfree, any
more than he can decide to treat rock as water. But it is
really in dealing with the unfree that God is limited, for
here there is room only for the less spiritual methods.
When free spirits come into being, restriction to methods
of arbitrary control is past, and all God’s wisdom, love,
and goodness have free course and find full satisfaction in
appealing to living souls.

7. God’s Attitude toward the Universe is that of a
wise, holy, faithful Creator, who is at once Father
and Servant to his Creatures. — That God must be the
great servant of the universe is evident as soon as we re-
member that from him proceed all the wisdom, power,
love, and patience that it needs or has ever needed.

My Father worketh until now,” said Christ. God is as
actively at work in his universe to-day and all the days
as ever he was in creating it, and his work is perpetual
ministration. The universal Sovereign is the universal ser-
vant, and if he ceased to serve the universe would cease
to be.

But the truest name for God in his relation to his
creatures is Father, — a name that has Christ’s authority.
Human institutions have been much relied upon for illus-
tration of this relation ; but natural relations, being divinely
constituted, are far richer in meaning than institutions of
human origin can be; and Christ bids us understand
God’s relation to his creatures, especially to his intelli-
gent creatures, by the aid of the relation of father and
children, which illustrates it better than any other. Trans-
mission of life is the best human analogue of creating, and
God’s feeling toward his creation is best represented by
that of a parent. Father-like, he recognizes his creation
as truly his own, and rightfully entitled to his care. Faith-
fully does he intend the good of that which he has created,
and faithfully does he seek it If his creatures are respon-
sive and obedient, his helpful and educative care is ever


140


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


with them to lead them to their destiny of likeness to him-
self. If they are disobedient, and so misuse his gift of
freedom as to practise moral evil, which he hates, still he
unchangingly holds toward them the attitude of a true
Father. He expresses his paternal heart by insisting un-
alterably upon his claim to the loyal love of his creatures ;
he will not let them go into sin unwarned or unpunished.
And he expresses it further by seeking, at the cost of
immeasurable self-sacrifice, to bring back those who have
gone astray from him. Both the sternness and the com-
passion of God are paternal.

These two characters, father and servant, are not in-
compatible. Parents are necessarily servants to their chil-
dren, and the parental heart does not wish it to be
otherwise while the children’s need continues. If God
has produced a universe, it is inevitable that he should
serve it. The creative spirit, being essentially parental,
is essentially ministrant. The living God most willingly
bears the burdens of his creation and ministers to its neces-
sities, and thereby manifests that perfect character by
virtue of which he is eternally entitled to rule his creatures
and possess their love. The truth of his Fatherhood
should be studied in the Sermon on the Mount, where
it is set forth with Christ’s own power.

8. God’s Sovereignty over Free Beings is exercised
through Paternal Moral Government. — The name

moral government ” may easily mislead us, by suggest-
ing too definitely the methods of human governments;
therefore we explain and guard it by prefixing the word

paternal,”

God’s moral government is his administration of the
life of his free spiritual creatures, in respect of their moral
action and destiny. It is his mode of control in that
spiritual realm where spiritual agencies alone belong. All
free and responsible creatures have to do with it. It is
least significant where free and responsible life is least
developed, and most significant in those who Sitt


advanced in spiritual experience; but for all free beings
it exists, and is paternal in its spirit.

The very possession of the essential powers of human
nature puts the conduct and destiny of men under the
judgment and care of God. Freedom, or the power of
choosing between right and wrong, and conscience, or
the power of self-judgment respecting right and wrong,
are enough to place men under moral government. God
constituted moral government when he gave to men these
powers of moral action and judgment. These powers are
his means of communication with men concerning their
conduct, and the possession of them renders men respon-
sible to him who gave them. It might seem that a high
degree of knowledge as to what things are right and what
are wrong in God’s estimation must be added before men
would be under moral government; but it is not so. The
power to act, when accompanied by the sense of duty, is
the voice of God to man, and whenever these two elements
are present men are so related to God that he can ad-
minister their lives as spiritual beings in respect of their
moral action and destiny. Over all who have freedom
and conscience in any degree, the God who made them
exercises moral government, whether they know him or
not. Even though they are ignorant of God, men are
under his moral administration.

The principles upon which God administers the moral
life and destiny of men are very simple : —

(1) God, who desires the right and good for all his
creatures, requires the right and good from all his creat-
ures ; hence for them right is duty, and whatever is seen
by them as right is required of them as duty.

(2) Good works toward good, and evil toward evil; so
that whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap.

These principles — God’s holy requirement grounded
in his holy love, and the certainty of moral sequence —
are the principles of God’s rule over spirits. Under these
men live. This is what life is, — to be under a God who
treats men according to these simple, necessary, holy, and


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


beneficent principles. These are essentially the principles
of a paternal administration : a holy kindness first of all,
and a holy strictness following. Only the perfect and
faithful Father could administer all created life in this
spirit.

The object of the moral government of God is the good
of his creatures. The object is sometimes said to be the
glory of God ; but if so, it is the glory of God in the good
of his creatures. This needs no proof. A moral governor
who did not govern for the good of the governed would
be their enemy, open or concealed; and a Creator who
did not govern his own creatures for their good would
thereby show that his motive in creating them was unkind.
God does not govern men in order to condemn them, but
in order to do them good. His moral government does
not contradict or obscure his Fatherhood, but fulfils it,
acting out its spirit and accomplishing its end.

God has one moral government over men, not two. He
does not administer the life of one part of men paternally,
and that of another part judicially but not paternally. God
is one, and toward all men he is all that a father should
be, — just and gracious, righteous and kind, exacting and
merciful. His Fatherhood is not mere mercy; it includes
all the kindness and all the severity that are appropri-
ate in a great Spirit who has given birth to lesser spirits
possessed of the dangerous gift of freedom. He can never
be indifferent to men, can never do them wrong, and can
never approve them in evil. In this right and holy atti-
tude he is the same toward all that he has made.

It is certain that we have not exhausted the significance
of a good God’s moral government when we have repre-
sented it as made up of lawgiving, probation, and judg-
ment. The whole intent is not expressed in the statement
that God places men under law and obligation, gives them
opportunity to obey or disobey, judges them at last for
what they have done, and metes out to them the just con-
sequences. God’s action as Governor of men is often
thought to be limited to such acts as these. These are


GOD


143


indeed elements in a moral government, but they do not
make up the whole of the one under which men are placed.
God’s moral government is his care and administration
over his universe of spiritual creatures. It is intended for
their good. It does not reach its end until men have been
brought to their destiny in likeness to God, or else have
put themselves beyond the possibility of being brought
thither. Even after one or the other of these finalities has
been reached, moral government cannot cease; for it is
simply God’s administration of the spiritual life of his
creatures, and cannot come to an end so long as he and
they continue to exist. But certainly God’s moral govern-
ment in its present form, as we know it in this world, is
an administration that looks not merely to the testing and
judging of men, but mainly to their spiritual good. Pro-
bation and judgment are means, not ends. Testing comes
for the sake of grace, not grace for the sake of testing.
God’s desire is that all may be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth.

9. God does not by Predestination destroy that Free-
dom in Men Tvhich is essential to Moral Government.
— The question of predestination is rather a philosophical
than a biblical one, and has occupied a much larger place
in theology than it occupies in the Scriptures. Divine
revelation did not originate the problem, and does not
solve it. The Scriptures do not discuss the philosophical
question whether all that occurs is foreordained, and do
not profess to decide it.

The doctrine of a decisive predestination of all that
occurs has had two foundations, an inductive and a deduc-
tive. On the one hand, thoughtful minds have always
been impressed by the feeling that a firm and steady
power, mightier than man, was controlling the events of
time. This power has sometimes seemed purposeful, and
sometimes blind, and under the names of fate and foreordi-
nation it has been recognized in the religions of the world.
The doctrine came naturally, because it was a naturally


AAT OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


suggested interpretation of certain aspects of human life.
As interpretation of experience, it may be called a doc-
trine reached inductively. On the other hand, theology
has often assumed that all interpretation of the facts oi
life must begin from God. It has therefore begun by in-
quiring how God must conduct a universe, and has judged
that he could do this only on the basis of divine decrees,
or eternal decisions ; he must see and determine before-
hand all that is ever to occur, or he could not conduct the
universe as its God, — and of course his decisions must
be unalterable. Thus universal foreordination has been
reached by deductive or a priori reasoning.

The inductive argument is at least grounded in facts.
Man is part of an order that he did not create and does
not control. Amid all his uncertainties powerful certain-
ties affect him, and he often feels himself borne on as by
an irresistible current. This pressure of the inevitable is
often attributed directly to the will of a foreordaining God ;
but to doubt this explanation is not to escape the pressure,
or the mysteiy of it It often seems to us that the phys-
ical forces of the world, the outward conditions of life,
inheritance, education, the action of other wills, and emer-
gencies unforeseen but not uncaused, all act upon us as
genuine causes, and determine our conduct without our
aid. The facts in life that have suggested to theists an
absolute foreordination are capable of suggesting human
helplessness and fate or necessarianism to any one.

The deductive argument is less forcible; a priori reason-
ing is never most convincing. Theology is not called to
argue how God must conduct a universe ; it should rather
note how he is conducting one. So far as it ever has to
tell what God must do, it must tell by drawing conclusions
from his manifested nature and character, not by reasoning
on abstract principles. To say that God must have im-
mutable and irresistible decrees for all that comes to pass,
or not be God, is to run too great risk of refutation by
facts. The question between fate and free-will cannot be
decided by arguing from abstract principles, without in-


GOD


I4S


ductive study of man, the one responsible being with
whom we are acquainted.

If we look into the Scriptures, we do not find the ab-
stract question discussed. What we are there told is,
mainly, that the success of God’s gracious work is pre-
determined in his mind, and certain. The “ eternal pur-
pose '' of which Paul speaks (Eph. iii. ii) is the purpose
to send Christ and save men through him. God carries
on the movement of the world with steady mind ; he has
always intended to do for men what he is doing, and the
successful outcome of his work is foreordained and sure.
He has not begun without purpose to finish ; and this is
true not only of his work as a whole, but of his work in
individuals, — he intended it, and intends to complete it
(Eph. i. 4-5 ; Phil. i. 6). It is foreordained that his chil-
dren shall be made like Jesus (Rom. viii. 29). These pre-
destined certainties are not announced in order to perplex
men, but in order to give sure foundation for hope and
comfort to those who trust in the grace of God. The pre-
destination that we find in Scripture is a joyful and reas-
suring reality. Even the great passage Rom. ix.-xi,, which
has perplexed many, is not in its original purpose an
exception. So far from being intended to establish a doc-
trine of predestination and election, it was written to refute
an extravagant and narrow doctrine on those points, and
to assert the right of God to exercise free grace wherever
he will.

On the direct question whether the acts of men are un-
changeably foreordained, the Scriptures bear important
indirect testimony by always appealing to men as free.
The address of God to men from first to last indicates that
he has placed no constraint upon their action. If he had
unchangeably determined for them all that they were to
do, it is inconceivable that he should address them as he
does. To suppose it is to undermine all consistent idea of
his goodness, by making his sincerity appear impossible.

If we consult reason and human nature, they confirm
this testimony of Scripture. To ask whether the acts of

10


146 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOOy


free beings are predestinated is to ask a question without
meaning. Acts of free beings cannot be predestinated;
and acts predestinated are not acts of free beings. The
two ideas are mutually exclusive. Whatever room for
predestination there may be in the universe, the acts of
men are not included in it, if men are free. The real
question is, therefore, whether we men are free beings;
and the answer is that the negative involves intellectual
and moral suicide. If we are not free, we are not respon-
sible; in that case we can do neither right nor wrong, and
our life has no moral significance. Our nature affirms
our. freedom ; and if we are not free, we cannot trust our
nature, which affirms it, or our mental operations, which
assume it, — reasoning is at an end, and life is a delusion.
Doubtless our freedom is limited, but surely it is real.
Some hold that predestination is the fixed point that must
be held, because it is a point reached by necessary a
prion reasoning, and that our freedom can be only such
as is consistent with predestination. But we must
affirm, on the contrary, that freedom is the fixed point that
must be held, because it is an inalienable certainty of ex-
perience, and that predestination can be only such as is
consistent with it : else there is no rational and respon-
sible life.

What is here affirmed is not that there is no predesti-
nation in the universe, or that there are no difficulties in
the doctrine of human freedom. It is that such freedom
as is essential to moral government is an endowment of
human nature, and that God has not by predestination
rendered it a useless gift. Nor has he destroyed it in
subjecting men to the stream of influence that flows
through their life. Neither foreordination nor fate has
slain freedom, but freedom lives. To affirm the contrary
is to paralyze the soul. Predestination in other fields of
existence need not trouble us; but perplexity and anguish
unutterable enter if we admit the supposition, or even the
genuine suspicion that God has so foreordained our actions
as to take away our freedom. To this the history of


GOU


H7


Christian experience bears abundant witness. But the
anguish, sharp as it has been, is the healthful warning of
nature against logical interference with human liberty.
It can be avoided, or relieved, only by firmly holding that
God has really given us moral freedom and responsibility,
and has not destroyed the gift by predestination. It is
right for a man to insist against all doubts, “ I am a free
spirit, really responsible to a personal God.”

If we affirm the freedom and responsibility of man we
affirm all that is essential to religion, and take such
ground that no form of the doctrine of predestination can
interfere with religion for us. We are then free to re-
mand to philosophy the further discussion of the subject.
Theology is the study of the facts of religion, and religion
is the relation of man as a spirit to God as a Spirit above
him. That relation implies freedom ; and if predestina-
tion does not affect the acts of free beings in relation to
God, theology is not bound to give it further study.

10. God exercises a Providence over his Universe ;
by which is meant that Care and Direction of his
Works by which he conducts them toward the End of
their Creation. — Providence thus includes the two parts
of God’s control, — the conducting of the natural order,
and the governing of souls ; the control of unfree objects
by uniform method, and of free beings by moral govern-
ment. It also includes the mysterious combining of these
into a higher unity, in which both methods of control con-
spire to the accomplishing of spiritual ends.

The Providence of a good Spirit over spirits must seek
spiritual ends and be paternal in its quality. If there is
a Providence there must be a wise, kindly, faithful
administration of human life intended for spiritual good.
Providence must be the instrument of moral government,
and every man’s life must in some sense be a plan of God.
Life must be intended for the training of the soul. That
there is such a Providence as this is the teaching of
Christ and of Christianity.


148 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Difficulties in the doctrine of Providence arise from the
fact that men are living under the two administrations of
God at once. Free beings over whom God exercises moral
government are living at the same time under the natural
methods by which he governs unfree objects. The two
methods overlap, and often seem inconsistent one with
the other. Thus we say that a man is treated by God a.s
a moral being, adapted only to the sway of moral influ-
ences ; and yet we find him just as liable as his horse or
his house to the operation of natural forces, whether pre-
servative or destructive. We say that he is in a Father’s
keeping, and yet we find the events of his life determined
in great part by natural forces that are absolutely impar-
tial. The sun shines on the evil and on the good ; plenty
and want visit whole communities; accidents remove the
useful and the useless ; a clot in an artery will terminate
a man’s earthly career, whatever his moral condition.
Events of moral importance are determined by physical
causes; destiny itself often appears to us to be at the
mercy of forces that are not spiritual. At these facts
we wonder. Is not a paternal Providence protective?
Will not the care of a personal Father exempt his child
from the sway of laws that know no respect of persons ?
If man’s life is subject to impersonal and impartial
forces, how does it show a Father’s care? And how is it
possible for God to do his spiritual will by non-spiritual
methods ?

Of the Providence of God at least these things are
true : —

(i) Man does live under the natural order.

Physically, man is a part of the natural order, and
moral government does not make him otherwise. Provi-
dence, however paternal, does not exempt any one from
gravitation, or dependence for health upon food and oxy-
gen, or danger from poisons. The regularities upon
which life depends are such as nature orders. So are the
regularities that terminate life. Decay and death await
men as well as beasts and trees. Accidents come to all.


GOD


149


Accidents, as we name them, are unexpected results from
the operation of God’s natural method; unexpected be-
cause the conditions are unknown, unnoticed, or unusual.
Men are liable to accident, disease, and natural suffering,
and their moral career often seems to be at the mercy of
physical contingencies. Providence is not protective of
good men or destructive of bad men, as against God’s
regular order. Providence does not abrogate the regu-
larity of nature, but includes it.

(2) The natural order is adapted to the moral and spirit-
ual training of free beings.

If we ask how God can direct the lives of his children
in paternal wisdom when he has placed them under the
sway of impartial law, the answer is that in the natural
order itself God has wisely provided valuable means for
the spiritual training of men. He does not abolish law
for his children’s sake, and he need not. By impartial
operations and inevitable experiences he can teach men
what they need to learn. The common life abounds in
illustrations of this truth. Natural events are accounted
non-moral, but they possess moral and spiritual signifi-
cance as soon as they have entered into the experience of
moral beings. Gravitation is not a moral force; but a
fall, due to its impartial action, may become a means of
the richest moral culture to a human soul. Liability to
disease is a natural and non-moral liability, but sickness
has taught men ten thousand divine lessons. The cer-
tainty of death is a natural fact, but it has been one of
the mightiest moral educators of humanity. Physical
contingencies cease to be wholly physical when they
aflfect spiritual beings. The common order has always
been a powerful assistant to moral government, and is an
abiding element in the wise providence of a good God.
Life amid the regularities of nature has trained mankind
in confidence, industry, alertness, invention, hopefulness,
and good jud^ent. Men need not chafe against physical
conditions as if these in some way deprived them of the
advantages of moral government. These are in fact agen-


ISO AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


cies of moral government, adapted in the hands of God to
the good of man.

(3) God has the power, to us mysterious, of guiding
free beings from above their freedom, without interfering
with it.

The freedom of man is accompanied by a higher sov-
ereignty of God over spirits. We know ourselves free,
and yet find evidence of a plan in our life that is not our
own. We may seek to explain it by assuming that God
predestines our acts, binds our wills, and makes of us
mere instruments; but we need not. He is greater than
we think, and the solution of the mystery of Providence is
to be found in his greatness. Above the field of human
freedom he exercises a sovereignty in which there is no
constraint.

Evidence of this higher sovereignty meets us whenever
we find our lives falling into line, and working out a pur-
pose that we did not form or entertain. It appears also
in all working-out of large and high ideas in human his-
tory. The "power, not ourselves, that makes for right-
eousness ” is no dream, but a glorious reality. Something
is going forward in individual life, and in the movement
of mankind at large, that men did not devise, — something
so truly in the nature of purpose as to be surely the work
of mind; something that accords in character with the
character of God; something that expresses and repre-
sents his higher sovereignty. Men are not forced to work
out this idea which is not their own ; both individually
and collectively they are as free in all their doing as if
they fulfilled no meanings but their own. God rules
them from above their freedom.

The manner of this higher control is above our observa-
tion; yet there is something analogous to it in the rela-
tions of men. The most effective controlling influence
that is exercised by men among themselves is not exer-
cised through dictation or constraint; it is the work of
superior mind, exerted upon men in their freedom. The
higher judgment, wisdom, efficiency, and personal force of


one can influence the action of another, without suppress-
ing any worthy quality in that other. One secures from
another the doing of some noble thing that he desires;
while the other’s will, far from being crushed, is acting
at its noblest. Some men show ability to rule conflict-
ing forces, and bring into their service wills that are at
cross-purposes with them and with one another. We often
say that the business of a great establishment is the work
of a single mind, directing, co-ordinating and turning to
the best use the energies of a hundred minds, or of a
thousand, which do their best work under this strong and
intelligent organizing influence. All such acts of per-
sonal power on the part of men are indeed imperfect, but
they help us to imagine a higher control on the part of
God, preserving human freedom, and using free men for
higher purposes than their own.

How far this higher sway of God extends we cannot at
present know. Mystery remains in life, and we cannot
fully interpret Providence till we view it from above this
world. All Providence requires long time for its vindica-
tion, most of all this higher Providence. At our present
stage of knowledge we may hesitate to affirm that every-
thing occurs as God intends, and may equally hesitate to
deny it. But the reality of this higher sway over spirits
we cannot doubt ; and God, who has long time at his dis-
posal, will be his own interpreter. Faith inclines to
attribute more and more to the sovereignty of God ; for
while unbelief tends, as we know, to see no God, faith
tends to see God in all. Christian souls now stand
between these two extremes, and do not know exactly
what they are to see hereafter. Perhaps faith will ulti-
mately see that God’s guiding of men from above their
freedom is perfect and universal, and that his limiting of
himself by creating free wills, though real, has not
deprived him of anything of the control to which his
perfect goodness is entitled. But a faith so high, if it is
ever to be attained, waits for greater light than the Chris-
tian world has yet perceived.


152 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


(4) God can directly alter the course of events if he
will, in answer to human prayer, or without it.

The ordinary doctrine of Providence sets this element
at the front. In popular speech, indeed, Providence
chiefly means intervention and overruling. Events that
show wisdom and kindness are called, most unfortunately,
“providences.” When some event seems specially in
keeping with God’s known purpose, or helpful to his
children, men say, “There is a providence in it;” and
they say the same in a tone of concession if the event is
painful to his children or hard to reconcile with his
purpose. But we must firmly hold that Providence is
more than such occasional intervention of God, and must
beware of the temptation to see his hand in what we like,
and nowhere else. If our doctrine of Providence is a
doctrine of divine occasionalism, it will desert us in time
of need. Nor is it best to speak much of intervention, or
interposition, lest it appear that God is not in the order
of the world except at special moments. Yet the ability
of the free God to alter the course of events if he will is
by all means to be held fast. Providence is the indwell-
ing governance of the world by a God so free that he may
influence it as he wishes. Though our faith in his steady
governance grow so strong and serene that we do not ask
him to alter the course of events, still his power to do so is
essential to a clear and restful doctrine of his Providence.

This doctrine of Providence is by no means free from
difficulties; but it avoids the difficulties that beset the
doctrine of predestination. God is not moving men like
pieces on a chessboard, but is exerting over them, as free,
the guidance to which as a good God he is entitled. So
long as he treats them as the free and responsible beings
that they are, who can object to his ruling their life in the
interest of his own gracious and holy purpose ? These
statements do not remove mystery from Providence ; but
they justify confidence in such a Providence as the Chris-
tian revelation sets forth, — a care and direction universal,
oaternal in spirit, holy in aim, wise in administration, spirit-


GOD


IS 3


ual in quality, educative in purpose, looking ever to the
good, and using natural means along with spiritual as
agencies helpful to spiritual ends.

11 , God has not prevented Evil from entering his
Creation, but knows how to use it in the Administra-
tion of the Universe. — Evil, in the deepest sense, belongs
to the moral realm, and in any other realm has inferior sig-
nificance. The name ** physical evil,” however, is often
given to hardship, struggle, pain, disease, and death, in the
experience of living beings. Physical evil is the suffering
and hardship of life ; and its presence is an element in the
question of the relation of God to his creatures. Concern-
ing it we may say: —

( 1 ) Physical evil is a radically different thing from sin,
and is not evil in the same sense with it. Pain is hard to
bear, but is not the worst of things ; sin has a quality of
badness that pain can never possess.

(2) Physical evil existed before man, in the life of lower
living beings, and seems unavoidable in bodily existence.
Bodily life implies sensation; and sensation implies power
to suffer, as well as to enjoy. Bodies are liable to disease
and accident; effort is a universal necessity, and effort
may at any time become painful ; death seems to be the
universal correlate of birth, and the inevitable destiny of
physical organism.

(3) Though physical evil did not originate in moral evil,
it owes to moral evil very much both of its quantity and of
its quality. If humanity were delivered from sin, the ac-
tual burden of physical evil would be incomparably less
than it now is.

(4) By way of relief we may note that many things that
seem physically altogether evil prove not to be so. The
method of life seems wasteful ; but much that seems like
waste proves necessary for the preservation and improve-
ment of life. Much that brings inconvenience or danger
to man brings death to innumerable enemies of his welfare,
gnd protects him more than it harms him. Probably the


154 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


amount of actual suffering in the animal world has often
been overestimated, and the amount of pleasure underesti-
mated. Physical struggle has been painful, but has always
tended upwards.

(5) In the life of moral beings physical evil is not use-
less. Through the wisdom of God pain has its beneficent
mission, and hardship is a school of character. Physical
evil is not the whole, but it is an element, of that “ light
affliction which worketh a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory.”

(6) As spirits could not live an embodied life without
pain, so probably they could not be trained in character
without hardship and suffering. It is not safe to assume
that all could have been made easy for us if God had
wished. The gift of freedom is a tremendous gift, and the
conditions for the exercise of freedom are more serious
and exacting than we have often supposed. God himself
may not have been able to train up his human creatures
without the ministry of pain.

(7) The present order, so full of suffering, may not be
the ideal of God for his creatures, and yet may be the best
for them at the present stage of their existence, and for the
purpose that is now in hand. It is not necessary in the
administration of a good God that the world at present be
the best possible world, but only that it be the best world
for the present need and purpose.

Moral evil is that which is opposite to the character of
God, and which therefore no free being ought to choose
or do. It is odious to God from its character, and odious
again because it is destructive to his creatures and in
opposition to his end in creating them. Its presence in
the universe brings in the greatest existing moral prob-
lem, — a problem that all religions encounter, and all
experience keeps open. The subject of sin must be dis-
cussed elsewhere; but in this place something must be
said upon the presence of such an element in the universe
of the good God.


GOD


155


The Scriptural view of moral evil — established not so
much by single expressions as by the drift of the whole
Bible — is that God hates moral evil, as he has shown
throughout the course of revelation ; that his moral gov-
ernment is against it, as he shows by his constant com-
mands, entreaties, and threatenings, and by the unalter-
ableness of his established moral sequence; that he is
seeking to deliver men from it, as he shows by his redemp-
tion in Christ and by the work of his Holy Spirit ; and that
his attitude toward it is unchangeable, being the necessary
expression of his character.

Concerning the presence of moral evil in his universe, if
we cannot solve the problem, we can at least record some
truths that have their bearing upon it

{a) When and where the earliest moral evil occurred, or
how widely it has become diffused among worlds and races,
we do not know. Neither the early story nor the general
history of sin in the universe has been told us. All that
we know relates to this world, and even here we know far
more of the present than of the past But the manner of
its origin we know in general from its nature. Moral evil
is fault in free beings, whether in act or in character, and
can have come only by wrong action of free-will. Some
impulse or suggestion that was not worthy to be acted
upon was acted upon by beings who had power to do
otherwise ; and thus came the guilt of sin and the ten-
dency to sinning. Sin first came by the act of created free
spirits willing wrongly. Though there were tendencies
toward sin in inherited animalism, still there was no sin
until the spirit, capable of responsible action, accepted and
chose the inferior thing.

(^) Why moral evil was allowed to come into existence,
we may not be able fully to show ; but we may be sure of
some elements in answer to the question.

It is well to begin by recognizing the fact that God is
not disconcerted by the presence of moral evil. The
work of redemption in Christ gives solid evidence that he
is not surprised or overcome by this dark presence among


156 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


his creatures, Christ reveals him as doing exactly what a
good God must feel himself impelled to do, in delivering
men from sin. The great salvation manifests him as Lord
and Master, claiming for his own the field that sin has
entered.

Remembering this attitude of God in the presence of
evil, we may look back to his act of creating man. A free
spirit is the highest style of creature. God is a free Spirit,
and to make man in his own image is to make him free.
The life of free personal spirits is the crown and hope of
the universe, for the sake of which all below them was
created. But the gift of freedom implies the possibility of
sin. Will can be misused. In the balancing of powers
and passions, principles and appetites, the lower and un-
worthy can be preferred to the higher and divine. Free-
dom implies the power of self-ruin, as well as of perfection,
in moral life. Thus, God could not create man in his own
likeness without putting into his hands the power of intro-
ducing evil.

Indeed, remembering the weakness of the spirit in the
flesh, and the pressure of the lower elements in life, we are
compelled to say that this possibility, though not abstractly
involving necessity, amounted in fact to certainty. That
which came to pass in the entrance of sin was to be
expected, if responsible spirits, untrained, were to be
entrusted with the risks of embodied life. God must have
known that what came would come.

If God thus knew that sin would come, it is incredible
that sin formed no element in his plan. If he so framed
his creation of man that it would certainly come in, he
must have had a purpose that included it, and he must have
intended in some way to make it serve his own worthy end.
We often feel ourselves obliged to deny that God had
any responsibility whatever for the presence of moral evil
in his universe: but in such denial there is neither vindica-
tion of God nor relief from the problem. Such denial in
fact is impossible, as soon as we begin to see what it means
that God is really the author of the existing S5^stem. It is


better, because it is necessary, frankly to say that God must
have had a purpose that included the presence of moral
evil and the turning of it to his own good use. The sooner
we open mind and heart to this the better, for to the ac-
knowledgment of this it is absolutely certain that Christian
thought must come.

Can we imagine any purpose in the fulfilment of which
it would be worthy of God to admit moral evil to his
world? The range of selection is not wide, for God has
but one ultimate end, so far as we can judge, and that end
is spiritual, — the production of strong and virtuous souls.
These could not be produced without the exercise of free-
dom, and freedom could not be exercised, it would seem,
without resulting in sin. But when sin had once come in,
something had entered against which the will and effort of
God were instantly directed, and against which all created
wills ought to join with his. In God’s world, a long con-
flict against evil was certain to follow. In this conflict God
could reveal himself as Saviour, in self-sacrificing love, as
he could not in a sinless world. Men could be enlisted
with him in a strife that would make them partakers in his
character. Working against evil, human freedom could
be trained to goodness, and men could be brought into
confirmed and final fellowship with God. Evil could thus
be made the servant of good ; and evil, being incident to
freedom, came in that it might serve good by being put
away, through the long and patient endeavor of God and
his creatures. If some such explanation as this cannot be
accepted it will be necessary to leave the question abso-
lutely unsolved. It is true that such an explanation has
its deep difficulties ; but there is no other, and the diffi-
culties that this explanation relieves are far greater than
those by which it is attended.

We naturally feel that we do not know how to think of
moral evil until we know something of the place it will
prove on the whole to hold in the long unfolding of the
life of the universe. Of this we can judge only in the light
of God's revelation. There he stands forth as the right-


158 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


ecus Judge of all souls, the hater of sin, and the saviour
of sinners. It is in the universe of such a God that sin
is at work, and he is at work against it. We may be sure
that the final outcome will vindicate his wisdom and
righteousness in that admission of sin which has so per-
plexed his creatures. If he does not banish moral evil
jfrom his universe by winning all souls to holiness, it will
be because spirits that he has endowed with the amazing
gift of freedom persist in evil to their own ruin, though he
seeks to save them. We know God so well in Christ that
we can trust to him even a universe with the problem of
evil in it, confident that the end will crown the work of
creation with perfect vindication of God.

12. The Relation of God to the Universe shows
how we ought to think of the Universe in Relation to
God. — We find God the Creator of all, who is holy love
and greater than all that he has made, inhabiting his uni-
verse, and present everywhere to its being and life. If
this is true, plainly we should think of the universe in the
light of it. The universe is not a lifeless thing. Matter
and spirit are not antagonistic to each other. We should
not speak of dead matter or brute force ; for the universe
of matter and force is as full of life as a man's body is
when Inhabited by his soul. Moreover, we should not
leave man out of our thoughts when we think of the uni-
verse, but should think of the universe as including man ;
and we should conceive of the universe as animated and
inspired through its whole extent and duration by that
spiritual thought of God which is finally expressed in the
creation and perfecting of spirits.

This thought of the immanence of the transcendent God
is a magnificent conception, that is destined powerfully to
influence religion, theology, science, and common life. It
is at once so vast and so new an idea as scarcely to have
begun its work. If our own God thus pervades the uni-
verse with his presence, purpose, and action, then indeed

every place is hallowed ground.” Nothing is profane,


GOD


159


all is sacred. The universe is sanctified by the presence of
its God, and we have no right to think of nature or of life
without the reverence for which his presence calls. Chris-
tian thought will some day more strongly grasp this splen-
did conception, that the God and Father of Christ, our
Father who is in heaven, is present in his whole creation,
providing it with power to exist and end to exist for. By
this thought worthily grasped all life will be elevated and
purified. Religion will be freshly inspired, theology will be
transfigured, and science will become a spiritual worship.

Recapitulation : On the Relation of God to the
Universe.

(1) God is the source of the universe.

Whether instantaneously or eternally, from him it has
come forth.

(2) God is a free spirit, greater than the universe.

He is immanent and transcendent at once, a master in-
habiting his creation, not limited to what he is doing,
able to act beyond his present acting; the personal, inde-
pendent Lord of all.

(3) God has uniform method in conducting the universe.

Uniform method is called law, and nature is uniform,

under the reign of law. His method is evolutionary, a
method of growth and unfolding. Yet since God is free
it does not forbid creation at first, or creative action later,
or miracle, or answer to prayer.

(4) God has a spiritual purpose in the universe.

His purpose is to produce spirits and make them per-
fect. No lower end could satisfy the perfect Spirit.

(5) God as the good creator has full right of control
throughout the universe.

The sovereignty of God is that right and power of con-
trol which he possesses by virtue of creative goodness.

(6) God exercises direct control throughout the uni-
verse, save as he has set off spiritual beings with a certain
independence, able to do their own wills instead of his.

Whatever is unfree he controls absolutely; but he has


l60 AN OUTLINE OE CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


given free beings moral agency, whereby he has opened
the way to the use of moral means in dealing with
them.

(7) God’s attitude toward the universe is that of a wise,
holy, faithful Creator, who is at once Father and Servant
to his creatures.

He serves his creatures as being his own, and seeks their
good. Alike in the firmness of his holy requirement and
in the self-sacrificing spirit of his grace, he displays a
father’s heart.

(8) God’s sovereignty over free beings is exercised
through paternal moral government.

Freedom and conscience are sufficient to render men
responsible to God. His administration of their life pro-
ceeds upon simple and intelligible principles, intends their
good, and continues in its present form until they have
reached a definite and final moral state.

(9) God does not by predestination destroy that freedom
in men which is essential to moral government.

The acts of free beings cannot be predestinated.

(10) God exercises a providence over his universe; by
which IS meant that care and direction of his works by
which he conducts them toward the end of their creation.

Providence includes control of the unfree, moral gov-
ernment over the free, and mysterious guidance of the free
from above their freedom. It is universal, constant; pater-
nal, and uses natural means along with spiritual as agencies
helpful to spiritual purpose.

(11) God has not prevented evil from entering his
creation, but knows how to use it in the administration of
the universe.

Physical evil, apparently inseparable from bodily exist-
ence, is not useless. Moral evil came by misuse of free-
dom. It is the dark mystery of creation, but God has use
for it as a servant to good ; and to the good God we can
trust even a sinful universe.

(12) The relation of God to the universe shows how we
ought to think of the universe in relation to God.


GOD


l6l


The universe is full of God, and is sanctified by his
presence.

In the relation of God to the universe the vital points for
religion, and hence for theology, are, that the good God is
a person, a free being, source of all, able to exert his will
toward his creatures ; that men are free and responsible,
and he is their father, administering their life for good, in
love and holiness. He is both friend and judge, insisting
upon what is right, in the spirit of one who desires it to be
done. There is nothing arbitrary, irrational, or non-moral
in the relation that he sustains to men. He is the God in
whose love and justice we may rest, in whom all our powers
find their satisfaction, and concerning whom we can say,

AU that is within me, bless his holy name.”

IV. The Divine Trinity and Triunitt

The one term, Trinity, is generally employed to cover
two doctrines, that of God’s threefold self-manifestation,
and that of his triune mode of existence ; the two being
usually distinguished as the Trinity of manifestation, or the
modal or economic Trinity, and the essential or immanent
Trinity. But these two doctrines, however closely con-
nected, differ widely in their nature, one being grounded
in historical occurrences, while the other leads the student
at once into the realm of metaphysics. The two doctrines
are so profpundly unlike in their nature that it would be far
better if they bore separate names : great perplexity would
have been avoided, indeed, if they had not been regarded
as virtually identical. In this discussion an attempt will be
made to secure greater clearness by distinguishing be-
tween them. To this end we shall observe the following
definitions : —

The Divine Trinity is God’s threefold self-manifes-
tation.

The Divine TRiUNnYis God’s triune mode of existence^

n


i 62 AJ\r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Both of these, as they appear in Christian theology, are
distinctively Christian doctrines. Neither of them is dis-
covered in the realm of theism, outside of Christianity.
Theology conceives of the Triunity as the ground of the
Trinity, and holds that there is a threefold manifestation
because there is a triune mode of existence. Hence we
might be expected to treat, first, the Triunity. But we
shall understand the two doctrines and their position in
Christianity far better if we follow the opposite order.
The Trinity was first known, and it was from it that the
Triunity was inferred. No one would have thought of a
triune mode of existence if there had not been a threefold
manifestation of God. It is better to study the two in the
order of their unfolding.

I. The Trinity, or the Threefold Self-Manifestation
of God. — The doctrine of the Trinity, thus defined, is a
historical doctrine, developed from events. Three succes-
sive manifestations of God have given rise to it.

(l) Before Christ, God was manifested in the relation
that he bore to the Hebrew people ; and in this relation
much of what is fundamental in the knowledge of God
came to light. Over against polytheism, he was known,
firsts as the sole God of Israel, and then as the sole God of
all. He became known as the sole Creator of all things
(Gen. i.) ; as the Lord of all, whom all should adore and
obey, and in whose universal reign lies the hope of the
world (Ps. xcvi.) ; as the holy, gracious, and forgiving
God, to whom the sinful should penitently and trustfully
resort (Isa. Iv.). The revelation was gradual and progres-
sive, and the actual conception of God in the minds of men
was always partial and imperfect, retaining inferior elements
while it received superior ones ; but the manifestation of
God before Christ was such that by means of it men might
know, and some men did know, the living God of all, near,
holy, and merciful.

The God thus manifested was one in evety sense, no
internal distinctions being attributed to him, and no


GOD 163


distinctions in the realm of manifestation being found.
There is neither Trinity nor Triunity in the Old Testament,
although foreshadowings of the later thought appear
(Jobxxviii.; Prov. viii.).

(2) When Christ came, there came in his teaching, and
especially in his character and life, a new and richer mani-
festation of God. More of his inmost character was
shown by Christ, and more of the relation that he bears to
men. God was now revealed as he had never been re-
vealed before.

As the popular expectation of the Messiah did not look
for a divine being, so acceptance of the Messiah when he
had come did not imply recognition of Deity in him.
Christ appeared as human, a man among men, living a
human life. But he claimed a unique relation to God as
his Son (Matt. xi. 27; John v, 17-29), and those who
knew him best became satisfied that he possessed it. The
Church of the New Testament, shown us in the Acts of
the Apostles and the apostolic epistles, worshipped Christ,
prayed to him, gave him divine honors. Very early his
followers were known as “ they that call upon the name ”
of Christ (Acts ix. 14). Yet Christ, it is needless to say,
did not displace for them the God who sent him. That
God was to them “ the God and Father of Jesus Christ,”
the first and abiding object of worship, and Christ was
exalted and honored with him. There was no philosophiz-
ing in this : the Church simply viewed Christ as “ exalted
to the right hand of God,” and entering into the life and
power of God above, because his rightful place was there.
They did not forget the humanity that his earthly life had
shown forth, and how divinity and humanity were united
in him they did not yet inquire. But the humanity was no
bar to the adoration, when once he had returned to the
Father and imparted the gifts of Pentecost.

Thus the effect of the life of Christ was to enlarge the
conception of God by the admission to it of what that life
had exhibited, and by the admission of Jesus himself to a
place beside the Father. The Cliurch was sure that God


I64 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


was in Christ as he was in no other; that his self- manifes-
tation in Christ was not like any that he had made through
Moses or Isaiah, but was unique, effected by a personal in-
dwelling that made Jesus divine. Moreover, the effect of
the life of Christ was to enrich the conception of God on
the paternal side. Jesus was known as the Son of God,
and the unfathomable richness of the paternal relation was
illustrated in the relation between God and the Son in
whom he was well pleased. God, therefore, was thence-
forth thought of more distinctly as Father, while to Jesus
was assigned, in divine honor, the place of Son.

(3) After Christ, came the great and abiding activity of
the Holy Spirit. Christ had foretold this gift, sometimes
in strong personal terms, indicative of a will and a purpose
in the coming Spirit. From the day of Pentecost the
Church recognized this promised Spirit as present. The
marvellous energy of that convincing and renewing Spirit
which thenceforth dwelt in the Church and wrought upon
the world was enough to identify the Holy Spirit as God
himself indwelling, worthy to be adored and worshipped
with the Father and the Son. As God himself had come in
the Son, so, it was felt, he had come in the Spirit. The one
God of all, known to the fathers, had manifested himself in
the divine-human Christ, and in the invisible Spirit of truth
and life. Both were his, and yet each was truly himself.

This is the living and practical Trinity of the New Testa-
ment, the only Trinity that was known to the early Church.
This Trinity was implied in the founding of Christianity,
and from the beginning is a part of Christianity itself. It
is expressed in the baptismal formula, according to which
disciples are baptized “ into the name of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Spirit.” Here are three men-
tioned, but the name ” is one. With the same thought
Paul invoked now a twofold and now a threefold blessing
upon his brethren; now from ‘‘God the Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ,” and now, in fuller form, “ The grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Jove of God^ and the com-
munion of the Holy Spirit, be with you ali/


GOD


165


In thus acknowledging the divine Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit there is no sign that the Church felt the least em-
barrassment by reason of mystery. Speculation had not
yet begun upon the divine-human person of Jesus or the
triune life of God. There was no such word as Trinity in
apostolic times, and no perplexing thought of the mystery
of three in one. There is no indication that Paul ever
encountered the question how the three are one. The
spiritual and practical interest was at the front. Belief in
Father, Son, and Spirit, all divine, was light, not dart
ness, to the eyes of the early Christians, as the New Testa
ment shows. The divine Son had been among them,
the divine Spirit dwelt in them, and by both the divine
Father was made real to them. God was in Christ recon-
ciling the world unto himself, and God by the Spirit was
revealing himself and giving life to men. This was their
Trinity.

2. The Triunity, or God*s Triune Mode of Exist-
ence. — From these three manifestations of God has
grown up the conviction that a ground for them must
exist in the being of God himself. From such Trinity in
self-expression it has been inferred that there is Trinity,
threeness, in the unity of God’s essential nature; that God
is three in one, existing in a triune mode.

Evidently this doctrine is reached by a process of
thought; it is a work of reflection, rather than of direct
revelation. If we hold that the doctrine of the Triunity is
a revealed truth, we must admit that it is a truth that has
been revealed through Christian thought partly outside the
New Testament, The formation of the doctrine was indeed
begun within the New Testament, but was not completed
till centuries after the contents of the New Testament had
come into being. But the process was inevitable. Simple
recognition of God thrice revealed could not permanently
remain unconsidered or undeveloped. Inquiry was certain
to follow in the course of time, and sure to discover a deeper
foundation for the original simple confidence.


1 66 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


We must first see how, from the material that is con-
tained in the New Testament, the doctrine of Triunity was
built up.

The thought that is most fundamental in the formation
of the doctrine is contained in the Fourth Gospel. Accord-
ing to this Gospel, among the great assertions made by
Jesus stands the assertion of his own pre-existence. His
mission, he claimed, was not like that of other men, who
are born into the world and grow up to find out what they
were born for. When he came hither he came forth from
God. His mission was that of one who was with the
Father, God, before his birth, and came into the world on
purpose, in order to accomplish a work already conceived
and prepared for him (John viii. 42, 58; xii. 44-50; xvi.
28; xvii. 4, 5, 24).

The prologue to the Fourth Gospel (John i. i~i8) appears
to have been framed on purpose to introduce this claim of
pre-existence. It begins with affirming that in the begin-
ning there was with God the Logos, — the Word. This
Word, which was naturally understood to be the utterance
or expression of God through the eternal thought or reason,
not only was with God, but was God, — not another, but
his very self. This Word was the medium of God’s action
in creation, and all things came into being by means of
him. In this Word was life, to be imparted, — not merely
life living in itself, but life life-giving, or self-imparting, —
which became light to men. Of this Word it is last
declared that the Word became flesh, and tabernacled
among men, full of grace and truth, in Jesus; so that men
who knew Jesus beheld the glory of the Word, which was
not his own merely, but was glory of God derived, —
glory as of one only-begotten from a Father, The glory of
Jesus was the glory of God himself, because in Jesus the
Word that was with God and was God had become flesh.

Here is a distinction, — God, and God-with-God ; and
the office of the God-with-God is that of utterance, forth-
going, action. This forthgoing Word dwelt in Jesus, and
caused him to be the genuine revelation of God* The


GOD


167


great thought is very briefly stated and not unfolded fur-
ther. There is no Trinity in this; but there is a distinc-
tion in the Godhead, a duality in God. This distinction,
or duality, is used as basis for the idea of an only-begotten
Son, and as key to the possibility of an incarnation. The
writer evidently intended to set forth this distinction in the
Godhead as explanation of the divinity and pre-existence
of that Christ who had so wonderfully revealed to men the
unseen God.

The Epistles of Paul were written earlier than the Fourth
Gospel, and the idea of pre-existence is already found in
them. In Phil. ii. 5-1 1, the coming of Christ into human-
ity is represented as an act of humility on his part, and an
example of humility to men, on the ground that he came
from previous existence in the form of God, and on an
equality with God, and did not cling to that high estate,
but emptied himself of that state of equality when he came
to exist in the likeness of men. In Col. i. 15-17, Christ is
said to be the One in whom all things were created and
hold together, or have their abiding strength and signifi-
cance. He is also called the first-born of all creation, — •
that is, the One who is heir and sovereign of all created
things, by virtue of his priority to all. These passages are
profoundly similar to the prologue to the Fourth Gospel,
in attributing to Christ a pre-existence that may well be
described as that of a God-with-God. The Epistle to the
Hebrew.'! also has a similar passage (i. 1-4). Here, too,
is represented a pre-existent One, who is God's likeness,
who is like light forth-shining, through whom creation
was effected, whose word of power upheld all things ; and
it is said that this One became the Christ, who made
purification of sins. Here, again, is the Logos doctrine,
though without the name.

Thus, in the New Testament itself is begun the work of
grounding in the nature of God those manifestations which
make up the Trinity; for the accepted truth concerning
Christ is already traced back to this deeper foundation.
The New Testament begins the work, but does not finish


l68 AJ\r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


it ; for it contains no similar teaching with regard to the
Holy Spirit. The unique nature and mission of Christ are
traced to a ground in the being of God; but similar
ground for the divineness of the Spirit is nowhere shown.
Thought in the New Testament is never directed to that
end. Thus the Scriptures take the first step toward a doc-
trine of essential Triunity, or threeness in the being of one
God; but they do not take that second step by which
alone the doctrine could be completed.

Why, then, speak of Triunity at all? Why think there
are eternally Three in One? Because the Trinity of man-
ifestation rendered it certain that the conclusion concern-
ing the Spirit would be the same as concerning the Son.
The Son and the Spirit were parallel manifestations of
God in his work of grace. If one was carried back from a
manifestation to a distinction within the Godhead, the
other was certain to go with it. Christ and the Holy
Spirit, related as they are in the Christian revelation, can-
not be essentially unlike, one grounded in God’s eternal
mode of being and the other not. It was certain to appear
that in whatever manner the Son is divine, in that manner
the Spirit is divine also. Hence, if Paul, John, and the
writer to the Hebrews discern one distinction in the God-
head, they thereby lead on toward the recognition of
another. Christ and the Holy Spirit are so related in rev-
elation and redemption that both must be essentially
within or essentially without the Godhead; and Christ
was seen to be essentially within it. But this duality —
the duality of the prologue — could not stand as final; it
must become a Trinity in the one God who had been
thrice manifested.

Why not at once? Why did not the prologue treat the
Spirit as it treated Christ? or why did not some other
writing within the New Testament do the same? One step
at a time. Trinity in one God must be apprehended pro-
gressively. Each step requires that the preceding should
have taken effect. If the thought of God as One had not
been strongly present, the idea of the Word as the one


God^s utterance and going-forth would have had no mean-
ing. So until the idea of the Word and of the Incarnation
had taken strong hold of the Church the time could not
come for a deeper doctrine of the Spirit. The Church was
compelled first to think of its Redeemer and Lord. Until
he had been traced to a place in the eternal being of God,
no one would think of such a place for the Spirit When
some progress had been made in its thought concerning
Christ, it might turn attention to the Spirit who was its
unseen life, but not till then.

This second unfolding of doctrine came, but the writings
that we possess in the New Testament were too early to
record it. Even the first unfolding was only begun in the
apostolic age, and occupies but little space in the New
Testament. It is in the latest of the great books, the
Fourth Gospel, that it is carried furthest The second
could not possibly come at once. Even the doctrine of
Christ in relation to the Godhead had still to be developed,
and much more the doctrine of the Spirit. God works
everything in its season, and centuries passed, as they had
to pass, before the relation of the Spirit to the Godhead
came clearly into sight, and a definite doctrine of essential
Triunity in God was established. The history of this de-
velopment cannot be traced here. In many respects it is
a sad history. In the early centuries undue importance
was given to metaphysical speculations regarding the
Trinity, while at the same time discussions of doctrine
were complicated with political strifes. The period, in-
deed, was one of ecclesiastical politics and intellectual
creed-making. Yet amid all the confusion the legitimate
progress of doctrine went on, and the Church advanced in
the knowledge of God. If we ask when the progress
ended, so that the doctrine of the Triunity was finished
and complete, the answer is that it has never ended, and
the doctrine is not yet finished and complete. The Spirit
of truth is still guiding the Church into the truth, and gen-
uine progress in apprehension of truth respecting Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit is to be expected yet Failure to


170 AN 0U7'LINB OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


recognize this great fact tends to impoverish both theology
and religion.

Thus, belief in a triune mode of existence in God has
come, by a historical process quite intelligible, from re-
flection upon his threefold self-revelation. But the con-
ception of a Triunity in God is a metaphysical conception,
and the question whether triune existence is possible is a
metaphysical question. When we come to this metaphys-
ical question, can we do anything toward making plain
to ourselves the meaning and the possibility of triune
existence ?

We can proceed toward an approximate definition of
triune existence by making two statements about the
meaning of terms.

I. No true doctrine of Triunity can mean that God is
three in the same sense in which he is one. Popular ob-
jections to the doctrine have often represented that it must
mean this, saying, “ If God is one, he is not three ; if he
is three, he is not one.” But this is an objection against
a sheer absurdity. If the doctrine means anything, of
course it asserts that God is three in some sense in which
he is not one.

2!. It is somewhat misleading to speak of “ three per-
sons ” in one God. The word “ person " in its modern
sense differs widely from the Latin word persona as it was
when it was first used in this discussion. Modern thought
insists upon the separateness and self-included nature of
personality, — a conception unknown to antiquity ; and
if we claim that there are three persons in God, we cannot
wonder if we are understood to mean that there are three
full personalities, like three men, — an idea scarcely dis-
tinguishable from that of three Gods. The word persona
indicated, and should still be understood to indicate, much
vaguer distinctions. It corresponds more nearly to the
word “character,” as it is used in the drama. In early
Christian discussions it was never meant that there were
three modernly conceived persons in God, nor can it now


COD


I7I


be maintained. God, of whom we have spoken as a per-
sonal Spirit, has but one personality, in the sense which
that word now bears. God is one Person. We maintain
this in our argument for Theism, and must not deny it in
our theology.

This seems a point too clear and too important to be
overlooked ; and yet, in view of the constant use of the
phrase “ three persons,” it is indispensable that we make
some effort to keep it steadily in mind. It is largely be-
cause we are under the spell of a word, and unconsciously
labor to find three modernly conceived persons in the
Godhead, that we find the doctrine of Triunity so difficult.

Something like this, then, we mean by Triunity in God:

God is a Person, in whose nature there is a threeness
that has been expressed in his threefold self-manifestation.

What does this mean? What threeness can there be in
the nature of a unipersonal God?

Sometimes we are inclined to regard this question as
unanswerable. We may simply accept the doctrine of
Triunity as a helpful element in our Christianity, unifying
to our conceptions of truth and uplifting to our hearts,
but lying essentially beyond the reach of human under-
standing. Many reverent students treat it thus and are
content. It may be that to this we shall return, after any
excursions that we may make into the mystery of the divine
nature. But we may at least inquire whether we can see
any light from known sources falling upon this mystery.
We may ask whether our study of Scripture and our
knowledge of the human soul can bring us any help, and
we may suggest any analogies that may possibly lead us
nearer to the truth. This is all that is attempted in the
following paragraphs, in answer to the question what three-
ness there can be in the nature of a unipersonal God.

One point is given us at once in the prologue to the
Fourth Gospel, where Two are sppken of; namely, that the
First is the source of the Second. God is the source of
the Word. So if we carry the names Father and Son


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


back to the beginning, — Father is the source of Son, It
is true that the name Son is not given in the Scriptures to
the Second within the Godhead, but only to the Second
in the manifested Trinity, — not to the Word, but to Jesus
Christ No ‘‘ eternal Son ” is mentioned in the Scrip-
tures, Yet the name might be there, for it is justified by
the relation ; it certainly expresses the same thought as
Word, and expresses it more richly. Both names suggest
that God in some way reproduces himself, or utters him-
self into reality, by action that is eternal and necessary to
his nature. Thus the ideas of eternal fatherhood and
eternal sonship are present if the names are not

The phrase “ eternal generation was long ago coined
and adopted to describe this production of Second from
First The phrase had value in asserting that the produc-
tion is not an act of time, but is dateless and perpetual.
But it is puzzling and misleading, and has long since com-
pleted its usefulness in the history of doctrine. Yet if such
names as God and Word, Father and Son, rest upon any
reality, the reality must be this, that God is in some man-
ner forever reproducing himself within himself. And can
we obtain any light upon such a process ?

We at least know where to look for hints. Whatever
goes on in God is perfect action of the perfect Mind. Man
is made in the likeness of God. Man's mind is not perfect,
indeed; it is finite, subject to growth, and hence always
less than perfect, even of its finite kind ; but if anything
can illustrate the necessary working of God's mind, it will
be such action as is necessary to the mind of man. In fact,
nothing that is totally foreign to the action of mind as
we know it in ourselves can be permanently recognized as
natural to the perfect Mind. Does man, then, in his men-
tal action, in any manner reproduce himself? Is there
anything here that is analogous to the perpetual production
of a second self?

The fundamental state of a personal spirit is self-con-
sciousness, — which is the consciousness of a person as
himself. Perfect self-consciousness is complete conscious-


COD


m


ness of all that the self is and contains. In order to have
perfect self-consciousness, a man must think of himself in
his completeness, just as he is, all in all, and must then
recognize the self that thus stands before him in thought
as identical with the self that thinks. Without some
rudimentary action of this kind there cannot even be
the ordinary mental consciousness that we all possess.
The fuller and truer the mental reproduction of the real
self, and the more vivid the recognition of it as identical
with the self that thinks, the richer and more perfect is the
self-consciousness that is the result. The assertion “ I am
I ” means, “ The I that I think of is identical with the I
that thinks.” The completer this identity the completer
the self-consciousness. As this identity is never perfect in
man, self-consciousness in man is never perfect.

If God is the perfect Mind, action of the same nature
with this will enter into his self-consciousness also. He too
will reproduce himself in thought, and recognize the re-
production as identical with the Mind that thought it forth.
He too will think himself, and perceive that that which he
has thought is himself. In the perfect Mind, as in our
minds, self-consciousness would seem to imply this kind of
action.

Such action in God will differ from such action in man,
but how will it differ? It will differ in this, that in God
the action will be free from all defect, and will be the per-
fect action of the perfect Being. Man gropes after his
thought, gets the vision of himself only slowly and in
fragments, never fully thinks and recognizes all that he is.
Hence man’s self-consciousness is never complete; but
God’s is always perfect. There is always present to him
the perfect thought of all that he is. As an eternal mind,
he forever thinks forth a perfect thought, or utters forth
from himself a true and unerring Word, comprehending
and expressing all that his being contains. This Word is
with God, and is God ; and furthermore, God knows that
it is so. He perfectly recognizes that which he has thought
himself to be, as perfectly identical with the original self


174 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


that thought it. He recognizes himself in his thought of
himself. So the circle of consciousness is complete ; the
God-with-God is bound back to God in conscious unity;
the thinking being has returned into himself and is per-
fectly self-conscious, and thus the perfect inner life of a
conscious personal spirit exists in God. Personality in
God would seem to imply this interior action. The imper-
sonal deity of Pantheism, if he existed, would never think
himself at all; but a conscious personal God, it would
seem, must project himself in thought before himself, and
know as himself that which thus stands before him. This
utterance and recognition of the true, adequate, self-ex-
pressing Word is God’s “ I am I,” and this process, if it
is real at all, must in him be as eternal as himself. It
never began, and can never end.

In finite and imperfect minds these real mental move-
ments pass half-noticed, and oftener wholly unnoticed ; but
we may ask whether this can be so in the perfect Spirit.
The perfect Mind, with self-consciousness complete and
faultless, may be aware of them, and may always know
himself in the three aspects of being that are involved.
There is an aspect of his being in which he is simply and
purely God ; there is an aspect in which he is God uttered
or going-forth ; and there is an aspect in which he is God
recognizing and resting in himself in the completeness of
his being. These three essentials of self-consciousness
may well be real to him as they are not to men ; and when
we think of the perfect Being, it does not seem impossible
that to him each of the three should be a centre of con-
scious life and activity, and that he should live in each a
life corresponding to its quality. The assertion that he
lives such a threefold life is the assertion of the divine
Triunity. He lives as God original and unuttered, he lives
as God uttered and going-forth, and he lives as God in
whom the first and the second are united. He not only
lives and is conscious in these three modes, but from each
of these centres he acts from everlasting to everlasting.
His perfect life consists in the sum of these three modes


of activity. The three modes of being are mutually re-
lated and dependent, so that no one of them exists with-
out the others. First in order of thought, though not in
order of time, for all is timeless and eternal, is God orig-
inal and unuttered ; then God going-forth ; then God re-
turning into himself in unity. God going-forth is related
to God original as word to mind, or as son to father ; he is
uttered, or begotten, or sent forth from the primal Being.
The third element is the unifying Spirit, the common life
of Father and Son, God completing his own being in eter-
nal unity. These three modes of being, if indeed they
rest upon essential elements in divine self-consciousness,
are not shadowy or transient, but real, abiding, and eter-
nal. They are not personalities, in the modern sense of
the term, but are separate aspects of one personality.

Conceiving thus of God, we are not surprised at what
we hear in the Christian revelation of his relation to
other beings. If he creates, he will act as God going-
forth ; and we hear that aU things came into being through
the Word. If he enters into a race of created spirits he
will again act as God going-forth ; and we hear that the
Word was made flesh and tabernacled among us. If he
is to work within alienated spirits to restore them to
himself, he will be working harmony, establishing unity;
and we hear that it is the Spirit that brings men home to
God. We are not surprised that renewal and sanctifica-
tion are the work of the Spirit of completeness, who
works unity with God, even as he works unity in God.
Yet all such worlis of Word and Spirit are essentially
works of God original, sending Word and Spirit, and yet
going in and with them; for neither of them can work
apart from him or be severed from unity with him. God
is One.

Neither are we surprised at hearing the Word who has
become flesh saying in prayer to his Father, “Thou
lovedst me before the foundation of the world.” Only
the doctrine of Triunity affords a social conception of
God, or adequately satisfies the statement that “God is


176 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


lo\’e.” If God is love, eternally, not only, it would
seem, must the impulse of love be in him eternal: it
would seem also that there must eternally be an object
fully worthy of his affection. But such an object must
be as great as himself, and as good. He must have such
an object within himself if he has it at all, and it must
be an object that he can love without becoming selfishly
self-centred. The words that follow may seem cold and
abstract, but they have a meaning worthy of God, that
will grow upon us as we ponder them : — God with his
perfect character finds eternal delight and satisfaction for
his love in God going-forth to gracious activity ; and God
going-forth eternally loves and delights in God with his
perfect character. The perfect Father eternally loves
the Son in whom his perfections become effective for
gracious activity ; and the perfect Son eternally loves the
Father in whom his perfections have their spring.

Can we think of these three modes of being as in any
way identified or associated respectively with the three
essential elements in the constitution of a personal spirit,
the powers of intellect, affection, and will.? It is an
interesting inquiry, but one that perhaps we should not
answer very confidently. But the Christian revelation
makes known to us that God is love, which means that
God, whom in his creation and providence we learn to
know as a mind, is even more profoundly a heart. It is
the eternal nature of God, even back of all revelation or
expression, if we can think so far, to give all good and
seek all fellowship, after the manner and spirit of love.
So the First in God, though it includes all fulness, is
most profoundly the affectional. The Second in God is
named the Logos, which is the eternal thought or reason
coming forth in utterance. So in the Second the eternal
reason brings out to expression, in creation and redemp-
tion, in ways divinely wise and worthy, the original and
eternal love. The Second in God, though it reveals the
affectional, is most profoundly the rational and wise,
forthgoing to reasonable and loving expression. The


GOD


177


Third in God brings to practical effect the love and wis-
dom that are dominant in the First and Second, com-
pleting the unity and fulfilling the purposes of the
Godhead. Thus the Third corresponds to that executive
and effective power which we call the will. God the
eternal heart of love, Christ the rational e.xpression of
the eternal heart, and the Spirit the accomplisher of the
work of both, make up the Godhead. This analysis is
only tentative, but it may perhaps commend itself as
true.

Thus there appears to be reason to hold that there are
natural elements in God’s self-consciousness, composing
a Triunity in him, on which are founded the three self-
manifestations that make up the Trinity. This view is
speculative, not scriptural: but so any view must be,
regarding the inner life of God. This view grounds the
action of God in his nature, and therein is at least w'ork-
ing in the right direction. Some comments upon this
view may be added for the sake of clearness.

(rt) This view differs from Tritheism, and from such
forms of essential Trinity as approach Tritheism, in that
it does not assert distinct personalities, in the modem
sense, in the Godhead. In this threeness there are not
three wills ; there is only one will. One person exists in
three modes, which are essential to his one personality.
This is a real Triunity; in one sense God is three, while
in another sense, just as truly, he is one.

{b) On the other hand, this view differs from the ordi-
nary doctrine of modal Trinity of manifestation, which
simply spps one God thrice expressed. It differs by add-
ing that God actually exists in three modes, to which the
modes in question correspond and give expression. This
is a doctrine of eternal and necessary threeness in God.
As long as God is personal, so long is he triune, being
three in a sense in which he is not one ; being three for
the very reason that he is one. This is a Triunity that
can never be dissolved.


1/8 OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


(c) This doctrine accounts for the full presence and
activity of God in each of the three manifestations. It
avoids separating God into parts, and distributing his
powers and attributes among the three elements of his
life. Neither Son nor Spirit is a section of the Godhead,
and no one of the three has attributes that the others do
not possess. God lives three lives in living one, but it is
the one God that lives them all, and does the works that
correspond to them.

(S) This doctrine shows how one operation of God does
not withdraw energy from another. The activity of God
as the Spirit, for example, does not diminish the sum of
his existence or operation as the Father or the Son, An
incarnation of the Son into humanity will not withdraw a
part of Deity and leave the universe without its God, or
with its God diminished. An action of the Word, how-
ever great, cannot interfere with God’s activity, or pre-
vent other actions of the Word from proceeding at the
same time. Thus if the Son of God was “ upholding all
things by the word of his power ” before the Incarnation
(Heb. i. 3), he was no less doing the same while he was
“making purification of sins.” From any one of the
three centres of life the whole God is acting, according to
this view, and from all of them at once, and from each
in many ways at once. All action of each and of all
moves in the one sphere of the infinity of God.

(j) This doctrine has the advantage of being grounded
in what belongs essentially to the operation of mind. The
standing objection to a doctrine of immanent Trinity in
God has been that it was non-natural, and unsupported
by anything that we know of the modes of spiritual
existence. Unless something analogous to Triunity is
found to be in some way characteristic of spiritual life as
spiritual life, the belief in a real Triunity in God cannot
permanently hold its place in thought. This doctrine at
least represents an endeavor to ground the belief in
Triunity where it cannot be shaken. If, as it holds, the
manifested Trinity is a natural expression of a Triunity


GOJD


179


that is essential to personal life in the perfect Spirit, then
the conception of God that is characteristic of Christian-
ity is vindicated, and the inner Trinity in God can
verify its claim to be an element in eternal reality.

How are the kindred doctrines of Trinity and Triunity
related to Christianity? and what is their value?

1. The Trinity of manifestation, or, as we have called
it, the Trinity, is a part of historical Christianity, and
enters into the foundation of Christian faith. God the
eternal Father, revealed in his Son in whom he comes to
men to save them, and entering our life most intimately
in the Holy Spirit of enlightenment and renewal, — this
i# the very substance of Christianity. Incalculable loss
to the vividness of our conception of God would attend
the obscuring of this threefold manifestation, or of the
oneness of him who is thrice manifested. The Christian
experience emphatically bears witness to a divine Father,
a divine Saviour, and a divine Renewer. Yet it knows
nothing of three Gods, and asserts that these three are
one. That practical Tripity which cheered the early
Church still supports and illumines Christian experience.

2. The essential Trinity in God, or, as we have called
it, the divine Triunity, has had its value in doctrine
largely through its relation to other elements in Chris-
tianity. It has served for explanation, being, as has been
said, a mystery, but a myste^ that explains many other
mysteries. The Logos-doctrine, which is the Biblical
element in the doctrine of Triunity, has served the pur-
pose that the writer of the Fourth Gospel intended, by
standing as foundation for the doctrines of the Incarna-
tion and the Deity of Christ. Christianity knows that
by personal entrance to humanity God has come to man
for his salvation; and the doctrine of the Logos, the
forth-coming, self-uttering, self-communicating God,
mysterious though it may have been, has thrown li^ht
upon the way of God to incarnation. It has thus served
to account for the divine Saviour, and has been a help to


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Ido


faith. The doctrine of the Triunity has also unquestion-
ably added much to the strength and vividness of the
faith with which the Church has received the Holy Spirit,
the comforter and guide. It has also, in a way that
rationalists do not appreciate, confirmed the rationality
of the Christian faith. So great a redemptive work as
Christianity must needs have a great foundation. It is
more rational to believe it if it can be traced directly to
the only adequate foundation, in the eternal being and
nature of God.

3. The doctrine of the Trinity as a whole, including
the two parts that we have called by different names, is
often spoken of as if it had been a source of perplexity
rather than of help in the history of the Church; but
there could not be a greater mistake. In the general
Christian experience, the conception of God has been
rendered vastly richer, more vivid and more practical, bj
being thus broken up from bare unity into variety, even
though it has been imperfectly understood. Without it
God would have been far less loved, for the effect of it
has been to illustrate and emphasize his lovableness and
accessibility, and to bring all his graces and glories near
to men. \^atever harm has come from the doctrine has
come because of over-definition, unspiritual discussion of
a spiritual mystery, and misuse of the doctrine in its
abstract and difficult metaphysical forms as a test of faith
and orthodoxy.

4. The prominence of the doctrine of the Trinity at
any given time will depend upon the thought of the time.
It is not likely to be at the front when the living con-
troversies of the age relate to Theism itself. In defend-
ing the reality of God against Materialism or Agnosti-
cism, few will discuss the inner mode of his existence: it
is enough to maintain his personality, his character, and
his relation to his universe. But this does not disprove
the truth or value of the doctrine. It may even be vita]
in the life and thought of a period when it is not promi-
nent in discussions. At the present day there is less


GOD


I8l


defence, and less proclamation, of the Trinity than at
many other times, but the doctrine itself is more vital
than in many periods when it was more thoroughly elabo-
rated and defended. Much of the vital thought of our
time is strongly Christological, and tends to make much
of the Incarnation; and emphasis upon the Incarnation
implies, almost by necessity, a hearty recognition of
Triunity in God. The Unitarian controversy has set the
doctrine free from Tritheism, and established it upon a
firmer spiritual basis. At present the most vital Chris-
tian thought is putting the doctrine of the Trinity in its
place and using it for the purposes of life and edification,
rather than discussing it with intent to establish it.
This is far more natural and healthful than controversy,
and the practical result will be the confirming of the doc-
trine to the general Christian mind. As it sprang up in
experience, not in speculation, so in experience it will
find its most valuable illustration and support.

GLORY BE TO THE FATHER, AND TO THE SON,

AND TO THE HOLY GHOST; AS IT WAS IN THE
BEGINNING, IS NOW, AND EVER SHALL BE, WORLD
WITHOUT END. AMEN.


PART II


MAN

Since religion rests upon a relation between two,
theology, in unfolding its significance, must seek to set
forth a true knowledge of both those who are concerned
therein. Hence next after the study of God comes the
study of man, the being whose relation to God gives
existence to religion. We need to know him well ; for a
false conception of him must lead to untrue thought con-
cerning his relation to the One above him. We need
to know what manner of being he is in constitution and
essential powers. Not all of his powers are of equal
importance for our purpose, however, and we must direct
our attention chiefly to that moral and spiritual constitu-
tion by virtue of which he is capable of doing right and
wrong, and of holding relations with God ; and we must
view the individual man in the relation that he bears to
the race of which he is a member.

I. The Human Constitution of Body and Spirit. — -
This twofold division of man is the one that we most
readily put forward, because it is the one that is most
naturally and instinctively discerned in common life.

It is the division that a man is aware of when he thinks
of himself, and that he discerns in others ; and it is the
only division of human nature that men learn from self-
knowledge. The body is known as the organ of sensation
and expression, and the link of connection with the mate-
rial universe; but the person, the self-conscious moral
agent, is not the body ; rather does it inhabit and rule the
body. Sensations and perceptions come through the body,
but have significance only when they come to the cogni-


183


zance of the spirit. Self-consciousness, reflection, under-
standing, responsibility, belong to the spirit alone.

Many have understood the Scriptures to supersede this
simple twofold division of man (known as dichotomy), by
teaching a three-fold division (trichotomy), into body,
soul, and spirit. That man is thus essentially threefold
has been supposed by some to be the necessary doctrine
of Christianity. This view is founded upon the passages
in which the words “ soul ” and “ spirit ” appear not to be
interchangeable. Once the three words — “spirit and
soul and body ” — are used together to describe the whole
of man (i Thess. v. 23). In other places soul and spirit
are distinguished, especially in i Cor. ii., where the
spiritual man and the psychical (or soulish) man are
brought into contrast. As ordinarily defined by trichot-
omis'-s, the spirit is the highest in man, — the organ of
divine life and communion with God, the seat of the
divine indwelling; while the soul is the seat of the
natural human life, where dwell and act the naturally
used faculties of the conscious being. It is commonly
held that the soul, being thus intermediate between the
body and the spirit, is the seat of personality; so that
man is a soul, but has a body and a spirit.

But the Scriptural usage of the words “soul” and
“spirit” more naturally yields another meaning. When
the words are not interchangeable, the best interpretation
f i n ds them to be names of the same element in man,
viewed in diflFerent relations. The non-bodily part of
man may be viewed in its relation to God, or in its
relation to the life that it is living in the body on the
earth. On the one hand, it may be viewed as coming
from God, akin to God, adapted to communion with God,
and capable of his indwelling; and in this highest rela-
tion it is usually called spirit. On the other hand, it
may be viewed as living a constituted life, related to the
body that it inhabits, and active in the experiences of
earthly existence; and in this lower relation it is usually
called soul. It is not that the lower faculties constitute


r84 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


the soul and the higher the spirit, but that the entire
non-bodily part bears one name as inhabiting the body
and related to the present world, and the other as kindred
to God and capable of fellowship with him. In this light
it is not strange that when a man lives wholly in the
earthly realm, and has no actual life above it, he is called
a soulish man, and that when he lives in fellowship with
God, making his higher relation real, he is called a
spiritual man, as in I Cor. ii.

This is the best explanation. The Scriptural division
of man, like that which common-sense discovers, is a
twofold division; but it takes two views of the higher
part. “ Man’s nature is not a three-storied house, but a
two-storied house, with windows in the upper story look-
ing in two directions, toward earth and toward heaven, —
an outlook toward things below, and a skylight through
which to see the stars. ”

As to the body of man, theology is not concerned with
it, except to note how truly, both in material and in
structure, it is a part of the physical universe. It is
composed of the same matter as the planet upon which it
lives. It is controlled by the common laws of physical
and chemical action. In organization it resembles the
bodies of animals in general, and is properly classified
among them. It lives a genuine animal life. It is easier
to define man zoologically than psychologically, for the
qualities of his physical constitution give him a precise
place in the exact classification of science. Any cyclo-
pasdia will show just where zoology places him. The
possibility of such a definition as is given, for example,
in the Century Dictionary illustrates the closeness of
man’s connection on the bodily side with the material
order and the lower forms of life. He is properly a part
of animated nature, and cannot disown his kinship with
ihe earth and the creatures that live upon it.

No one supposes, however, that a zoblogical definition
of man, putting him where he belongs in a classification


MAiV


185


of animals, gives an adequate account of him. Man
stands apart from lower animals by virtue of qualities of
which zoology takes no account.

How the part of man that is not body is linked to his
body no one knows. The connection is extremely inti-
mate, however, and the brain is the bodily organ in which
it is centred. So close and vital is the union of body
and spirit that in recent times the most intelligent study
of psychology begins with physiology, in study of the
brain and the nervous system. It is rightly recognized
that the mind, which used to be studied as a thing apart,
cannot be well understood except in connection with the
body, — the organism to which it is so marvellously
joined, and through which it acts.

When the connection is so intimate and so invisible, it
is not strange that the mind has sometimes been thought
to be only a function of the brain. It has been held that
body is first, and what we call spirit is a result from its
activity. It is true that action of the mind is most inti-
mately associated with action of the brain, yet physiology
has nowhere discovered the spirit itself in the brain, or
proved it to be a product of physical organization. Just
as the mind in its action is unconscious of any connec
tion with the brain, so examination of the brain discovers
nothing of the mind. Nor is it strange that, on the other
hand, the spirit has often been held to be antecedent to
the body, and possessed of the organizing power by which
the body is formed. But this, however accordant with the
superiority of spirit, does not lie within the reach of
proof. The real relation may be one of concomitance
from the beginning, neither mind nor body giving exist-
ence to the other. If either is formative of the other, it
is more likely to be spirit. The relation of mind and
body is investigated in our time with the utmost zeal,
and with increasing light, so that we may hope for larger
knowledge; but the real secret is likely to prove undis-
coverable, the mystery of life too deep to be solved by


1 85 AA^ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


the living. In theology, however, the question need not
detain us. It is enough that the spirit of man always
lives and acts in the character which the common-sense
of mankind assigns to it, as a distinct element in the
human constitution, the living ego, to which alone life
is morally significant

The spirit of man is conceived as incorporeal and imma-
terial, inhabiting and acting through the body. The
human spirit cannot be analysed as the body can, and we
have no means of defining its essential nature. It is
manifested only in action, and only from its action can
we know what it is. Observation upon the action of the
human spirit reveals three modes of activity, so differing
among themselves that we naturally refer them to three
sets of powers corresponding to them, which are named the
intellect, the sensibilities, and the will. Man thinks; he
knows, judges, remembers, imagines, reasons; and these
activities belong to his intellect. He feels; he experi-
ences mental pain or pleasure, he enjoys or suffers, he
lives an afifectional life, he loves and hates; and these ex-
periences proceed from his sensibilities. He constantly
acts, and constantly encounters facts or influences that may
suggest action to him, or discourage it, or guide him in it ;
among these he decides upon his course, and sends forth
his personal force in action ; and this power of choice and
action is his will. The moral faculty, which is the power
of judging right and wrong, is sometimes counted as a
fourth in addition to these three great primary powers of
man. But the moral nature is a resultant from the union
of these three essential powers of the spirit; and the
moral faculty, though it is a distinct element in the expe-
rience of life, is not to be regarded as a fourth essential
power, co-ordinate with the three.

We can roughly trace the order in which these powers
act together. Before them all, preparing for their action,
are the bodily senses, with their reports of objects per-
ceived. The senses bring external materials of knowl-


i8;


edge, and the spirit takes cognizance of them, and uses
upon them its power of knowing, understanding, estimat-
ing, reasoning. This is the work of the intellect. In
view of what is thus known, judged, and held in thought,
rises feeling or emotion, of some one of many possible
kinds ; this is the contribution of the sensibilities. From
the union of thought and feeling comes the impulse and
resolution to act; and it is the will that determines upon
the act and puts it into execution, upon the suggestion of
what is thought and felt. Upon all action of the spirit,
but especially upon its volitions, the moral faculty passes
judgment, as it does upon moral good and evil wherever
found, and the man knows himself morally approved or
condemned.

This, it is true, is only a general account of an order
that is far from invariable. The intellect is not solely
dependent upon the senses, for, supported upon the gen-
eral basis of physical life, it rises to independent work,
advancing by its own processes. The affections are influ-
ential upon the intellect, and in some regions feeling
precedes thought and governs it. The habitual action of
the will influences both sensibilities and intellect, and
the practice of all the powers affects the moral faculty,
which in turn dictates more or less to them. Thus the
order of action varies, the actor being one : yet in general
this may be called the normal order, — perception,
thought, feeling, volition, moral judgment.

Personality in man is made up by the combination of
these powers of intellect, sensibility, and volition in a
self-conscious unity, with moral judgment crowning their
action with significance. As for the body, it is the ser-
vant of personality for the gathering of sensations, and its
organ for the expression of its life and action. It is the
seat and the means of the present personal life, but of per-
sonality itself it is no necessary part. Personality might
exist without it. The spirit with its essential powers
might live a separate life, in which it would learn exter-
nal things otherwise than by sensation, and express itself


1 88 A^r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


otherwise than through the body, and yet personality
would be as real as it is at present. There can be no
substitute for intellect, sensibility, or will in personality,
but there can be substitutes for bodily sensation and ex-
pression; hence personality is essentially complete with-
out counting the body as an element. The spirit is the
ego, the person, and the body is its close ally and servant.

In the capacities of the spirit must be found THE Dic-
TINCTIVE MARK OF MAN, as a being separated from all
animals below him.

To draw an exact line between man and other animals
is impossible. The old popular saying that man has
reason and animals have instinct does not mark the real
distinction. Something of all the essential powers of
man is found in other animals. There is something of
intellect, in the forms of memory, reasoning, and a
limited range of general conceptions. There are sensi-
bilities, manifested in likes and dislikes, and in decided
affections; and there is volition as real as that of man,
and often of great intensity. In some of the animals at
least the rudiments of a moral sense appear. Some
animals possess an elaborate social organization. Prob-
ably man possesses no attribute, below his highest, of
which he does not find at least rudimentary traces in the
animal world below him. In all discussion of the subject
we are obliged to admit the difficulty that arises from our
lack of a common medium of language with the animals.
If we could talk with them we should know them better.
Nevertheless it is certain that man is separated by a
vast interval from even his nearest animal neighbors;
and the broadest distinction lies in the realm of the
spirit. Some points of difference may be noted: —

(i) In man self-consciousness has a strength, a definite-
ness, an intelligence, that it does not possess elsewhere.
Doubtless animals know themselves as distinct from
others, and know more than their mere distinctness ; but
we have no reason to suspect that anywhere in the animal


189


world there is any such reflective consciousness of inner
life as exists in man.

(2) In man the power of abstract thought not only
exists, but is capable of extension to vast ranges, and of
boundless enrichment. It is not wholly wanting in
animals ; a dog may have the general conception of heat
or of weariness, as all animals have, in this sense, the
general conception of hunger. But this, after all, scarcely
deserves the name of abstract thinking ; this is only the
unconscious entertaining of general conceptions. Man
can think of his general conceptions, and by inward na-
ture does so. He can think of any quality as a quality; he
can discern relations between objects, relations between
qualities, and relations between relations. Of course this
power does not come to fulness without training ; but in
man it can be trained, as in animals it cannot.

(3) Wider is the difference in respect of amenableness
to moral law. Animals can learn obedience; some of
them attain to a fine fidelity; some give signs of shame
for wrong-doing; many probably have ideas of morality
in connection with their social organization, for where
there is social organization there is possibility of right
and wrong. But we do not know that any of them grasp
the fact and significance of obligation, or moralize upon
their actions, or feel themselves responsible to an author-
ity above their race. But man knows himself under
obligation, more or less distinctly, and is capable of
apprehending the moral law that is over him. Every-
where he has the idea of rights and duties, of desert,
guilt, and innocence. His conscience is a reality, and
can be appealed to. He knows himself a moral being.

(4) Closely akin to amenableness to moral law is
capacity for religion. Man has been called a praying
animal. There may be something akin to worship in the
feeling of certain domestic animals toward masters who
are also friends ; but any such feeling, if it is at all of
the same nature, is immeasurably below that natural
aspiration and impulse to adore and pray by which


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


religion has been made universal among men. The
naturalness and universality of religion in the human
race marks the separateness of man from all creatures
below him.

(5) Power of choosing his supreme end is a mark of
man. Animals are driven as it were from behind ; man
is drawn from before. Animals follow their nature ; man
has the power of acting upon his own nature almost as if
from without, of guiding it within certain limits, of
modifying it by the choice emd prosecution of ends in
life. Man entertains ideals, and ideals become his
inspiration. Man can be true or false to his nature.
He can elevate or degrade himself. He can be a hero
or a fool ; and no lower animal can be either such a hero
or such a fool as can man. Both possibilities, the noble
and the base alike, indicate man’s greatness.

(6) There is a wide range of activities that is peculiar
to man. Language is not his exclusive possession, for
animals communicate with one another; but man forms
vocal utterance into arbitrary forms of expression,
develops speech into elaborate languages, studies them,
modifies them, learns to think in more than one, trans*
lates from one into another. Man alone writes, and
makes pictures. Animals play, and there it ends; but
the play of man becomes Art, whose capacities are beyond
his power to conceive. Man alone builds fires, constructs
tools and machinery to supplement his powers, treats his
own diseases, investigates nature as nature, explores the
universe, forms his knowledge into sciences, obtains large
control of natural forces. Man alone, in a word, is a
constructive master of things around him: beavers may
dam a stream, but man alone can make it turn a wheel to
grind his food or weave his raiment. By the use of such
powers he makes for himself a history, preserves the
record of his own past, finds his history instructive to
himself, builds institutions of civilization, contributes
directly to the development of his own abilities, and
works intelligently toward the improvement of his race.


MAI^


191


Man has power of initiative and of appropriation, in a
thousand respects in which no such power has been mani-
fested by any other creatures that have lived upon the
earth.

Although we may not be able clearly to trace the line
of distinction between man and other animals, the dis-
tinction is unquestionable, and resides in the qualities of
the human spirit Even between the lowest of men and
the highest of lower animals there is a vast interval ; for
man, even at the lowest, possesses powers that can be
developed, as experience shows, into the full life of the
spirit. We may grant that like the principle of life, the
principle of mind, expressed in man, finds genuine though
partial expression in the animal world below him. Yet
it is true that man is unique in spite of his community
with the inferior world, and stands on a plane of essential
separateness, by virtue of qualities that are all his own.

In the capacities of the human spirit is found that
image or likeness of God, the biblical suggestion of
which has been so fruitful in Christian thought. The
constitution of man as a spirit is like that of God as a
spirit. The qualities that distinguish man from other
beings on the earth are in some true sense qualities that
he shares with God. In his measure, he differs from the
creation below him as God does. His body is akin to
the material universe, and bears the likeness of terres-
trial organization, but his spirit is akin to the eternal
creative Spirit, and bears the likeness of God.

That God and man are essentially alike in mental
structure and method is legitimately gathered both from
revelation and from science. If the two were not alike,
there could be neither revelation nor science ; God could
not manifest himself to man, and man could not under-
stand the works of God. But in fact man finds his own
mind a counterpart of the Creator's. If the creation is a
mirror of God, it is a mirror in which man sees his own
face also ; and in Christ God finds expression in the very


192 A2^ OUTUNB OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


terms of human nature and human character. Man the
spirit is experimentally found to be of kindred nature with
God the Spirit.

If man was created in the likeness of God, he was by
that very fact created the child of God. The natural
relation between God and man is essentially that of
parent and child; for man came into existence in the
likeness of God, as a child comes into existence in the
likeness of his father. God produced by his creative
wisdom, love, and power a being that resembled himself.
The practical effect and value of this likeness of man to
God is that “spirit with Spirit can meet,’’ — intercourse
is possible ; the invisible God and the invisible man have
such community of nature that they can have communion
with each other. Man was created with aptitude for God,
fitted to be a living member of his family ; and the apti-
tude resides in the spiritual constitution that he possesses
in common with God.

If the likeness of God in man consists in man’s spiritual
constitution, it is plain that it must continue so long as
man’s constitution as a spirit continues. While man is
a person who thinks and feels and wills, so long does he
exist in the image of God. Resemblance to God in
moral character may exist or not, but that likeness of God
in which man was created can be lost only by destruction
of his spiritual personality.

Concerning the spiritual constitution of man it may
further be said that MAN IS IMMORTAL, — that is to say,
the human personality is undying.

The spirit is the person, and what is here affirmed is
that the human spirit, with its essential powers in which
it resembles God, is destined to live on endlessly. A
human being will never cease to be a human being. The
question how a human spirit can exist without a body
need not trouble us here, for this statement does not
affirm that it will or that it will not exist without a body.
A human spirit contains all that is essential to person-


193


ality, and would continue a personal being if the present
organism ceased to be. With the nature of any organism
that it may possess hereafter we are not now concerned.
That is an after-question upon which the hope of im-
mortality does not depend.

The immortality of man, like facts in the spiritual
realm generally, is incapable of demonstrative evidence.
It can always be doubted, and doubting eyes usually see
the evidence ior it as but slight and shadowy. The
doctrine has suffered from poor defences, — as when it
has been argued that the soul is immortal because it is
immaterial, or because it is simple, uncompounded, and
therefore incapable of being dissolved. Such assertions
merely play with our ignorance. Moreover, such argu-
ments move on the wrong plane, and can never produce
the right kind of conviction. Nor have Christians
strengthened the doctrine when they have represented
immortality as purely a truth of revelation. So vast a
truth cannot be satisfactorily received solely from author-
ity, even though it be authority of revelation; for it will
inevitably be felt that if the statement that man is im-
mortal is not supported in some reasonable way by what
we find in man himself, it cannot he true. Nor is assent
to such a doctrine a sufficient belief of it; only when
men know and feel themselves immortal, and are impressed
with the deathlessness of their kind, has immortality
been fully believed in. Hence much of the evidence
must be inward, subjective, and more or less indefinable.
Without such evidence belief in immortality would fade
away ; and yet the very quality that makes the strength
of the evidence is often cited against it, as if something
demonstrative would suit the case better. Men are liable
to doubt immortality imtil they have inwardly learned
it. All low, worldly, and unspiritual life tends toward
doubt of it, and all high living tends to belief in it.

Some of the grounds of belief in immortality are here
given : —

(i) The continuance of the spirit after death has been


194 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


almost universally believed in, in all ages, by men of all
grades of intelligence. The belief has taken various
forms, and had various degrees of strength and of dignity,
but it has been virtually universal. Belief in future life
is a vital part of the experience of mankind.

This universality is not surprising, for, among other
reasons for it that might be given, the belief is supported
by a universal experience. Death is universal, and all
men have been compelled to reflect upon it. Man has
always known himself to be more than body, and felt the
inferiority of his body to his thinking part. Bodies were
seen to die and perish, but no one ever saw a spirit go
out of existence; and the sense of the superiority of the
spirit wrought the conviction that the spirit did not go
out of existence, but existed though the body had died.
Invisibility was no bar to such a belief, for the thinking
part was always invisible even in the body. Thus spirits
came to be conceived as surviving death, and were pictured
as peopling earth and air. Mortality, forced upon the
attention of all men, suggested immortality. Death was
the great preacher of deathlessness.

Was this merely the reasoning of a childish age } and
is the conclusion a fruit of superstition, worthy only to
be thrown aside ? It is difficult to see why. Death is
still universal, and the superiority of the spirit to the
body is far plainer than it was ages ago. No one has yet
had evidence that this superior part perishes with the
body. The heart of humanity still cries out that m^n
does not wholly perish in death, but that the nobler part
survives. The plea cannot be set aside as that of igno-
rance and superstition. As long as the body dies, so
long will men be haunted by the strong conviction that
the spirit does not die.

(2) The conviction that another life follows this finds
various support in human thought and experience.

The human ego knows itself a living being that exerts
a force n on-bodily; it lives a life in things immaterial
and spiritual; it has keen consciousness in relations that


MAN


195


are not physical ; and it thereby shows itself capable of
non-bodily existence. A human spirit has such vigor in
invisible activities, and exerts such force in affection,
thought, and will, that men find it hard to believe that
the stopping of the physical movement stops it forever.
It is dependent upon the body for its present mode of
existence, but not necessarily for its power of existing;
for a spirit is a high creature, — it is a minor being,
struck out in the likeness of the eternal Mind; and if
God can exist as a spirit, so can man. Personality can
stand alone, in the universe of God, its Father.

There are many confirmations that do not readily take
form as arguments, but they are not less powerful on that
account. Human powers are large, in comparison with
the opportunity that this short life affords them. Self-
consciousness is a mighty product of time, for one that
is to be possessed for an hour and then lost forever. If
after God’s long work of evolution personality has at
length been attained, with its immeasurable possibilities
of growth and progress, it is scarcely credible that per-
sonal existence is to be limited to this brief mortal life;
for then the gain of painful ages would be ingloriously
thrown away. In all its spiritual aspects, present living
is mere beginning, and it is strange if spiritual begin-
nings are not introductory to continuance. How to live,
or how not to live, is about all that the present life even
begins to teach us, and the future seems to be needed, to
make such lessons worth the learning. This world is
full of inequalities and unsolved problems, and the out-
come of it is incomplete and unsatisfactory in a thousand
ways ; if existence is to have a meaning, another stage is
needed for the completion and interpretation of this.
Man is capable of knowing God and the universe, and the
present narrow but suggestive life awakens boundless
curiosity and eagerness to know things unseen; it is
mysterious indeed if all this must come to nothing. The
intenser and more satisfactory the life of the spirit is,
the more unnatural and shocking is the thought of extinc-


ig6 AN' OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


tion. The stronger and more vital the conviction that
there is a living God, the surer does it seem that man,
his spiritual offspring, must partake in his unalterable
life. The higher the spiritual quality in men, the stronger
grows this expectation.

The poets are true prophets here, truer than mere logi-
cians. Not that reasoners always depress our hope j but
whether with reasoners or against them, the genuine
poets sing of immortality. The highest spirits of the
race are the prophets of its future; they see that for a
being like man the presumption is in favor of immortal-
ity. Tennyson expresses the calm aspiration, and grounds
it in faith in God : —

“Thou wilt not leave us in the dust:

Thou madest man, he knows not why ;

He thinks he was not made to die ;

And thou hast made him : thou art just.’*

Here, after all, is the immovable foundation. If God is
good and true, if the world is an honest world, if life
has the meaning that we are compelled to find in it, if
moral values hold and moral possibilities are precious, if
existence itself does not deceive and defraud us, then
it is incredible that personal life has been summoned
out of the void, only to return so quickly to the void
agaia

(3) Christ greatly enriched and confirmed the hope of
Immortality, and made it practically a part of Chris-
tianity. Nowhere else is the hope so vivid, or so noble,
as it is under his influence.

The work of Christ upon this hope was not done in
advance of his coming. The Christian hope of immor-
tality is not characteristic of the Old Testament. The
expectation of future life is there, but is not prominent,
and mainly bears a lower form, viewing the future exist-
ence as shadowy and comparatively cheerless. Glimpses
of a clear and cheering hope appear, but they are not
sufficient to give character to the Old Testament faith.


197


But after the Exile, at the very close of the Old T esta-
ment period, belief in immortality became common
among the Jews, and when Christ came he found it in
existence. Though denied by the Sadducees, it was
firmly held by the Pharisees, and had taken strong hold
upon the people.

What Christ did for the hope of immortality may be
seen in that hope as it shines in the writings of his
friends. If we compare the glowing hope of Paul or Peter
(Phil. i. 19-25: 2 Cor. v. 1-9; i Pet. i. 3-5; v. 10) with
the brightest hope that appears in the Old Testament, we
see how truly Christ had “ brought life and immortality
to light” (2 Tim i. 10). He had done exactly this. He
had not revealed immortality as something unknown
before, but he had cast the light of reality upon it, and
given it for a living possession to those who learned of
him. The “eternal life” of the New Testament is not
mere continuance of being; it is enriched and elevated
being, as worthy and glorious as it is endless. This is
what Christ offers, — immortality raised to its true worth.
The effect of Christ’s resurrection was immeasurably to
enhance the sense of the reality of the unseen world and
of life therein, and thus to support the Christian hope:
for when he who was most loved and trusted had gone
into that world as others go, and afterward had given
evidence that he had not perished but was alive for ever-
more, it was not only easier but more rational than before
to look for immortality. From the influence of Christ as
a whole has come the historic Christian hope of eternal
life, a hope clear, warm, holy, elevating. It has grown
stronger and nobler as men have grown in fellowship
with God: and it has found world-wide confirmation in
the visible progress of multitudes of human beings toward
the destiny upon which their hope laid hold. Christian
growth has given promise of the Christian immortality.
The height to which godly souls can rise in this lile is
the surest presage of the life to come.

Thus far of the Christian immortality. Concerning the


198 AfT OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


general immortality, the influence of Jesus certainly has
supported in Christians the conviction that all men live
forever; for among Christians this belief has been held,
with only occasional variations, not merely as a natural
conviction but as a Christian certainty. Christ does not
affirm in so many words that all men live forever, but he
powerfully teaches it by his attitude and mode of appeal
to men. His attitude toward immortality, like his atti-
tude toward sin, is mainly practical. Just as he addressed
men as beings who need deliverance from sin, so he
addressed them as beings whose destinies reach beyond
this world and go on endlessly. His promises and warn-
ings powerfully reinforce man’s premonition of endless
life, for he assumes the great destiny as the basis of his
estimate of man’s value. The hope of a glorious immor-
tality is the crown of the gospel, and the danger of ever-
lasting loss through sin is the dreadful warning contrast.
He makes men know their greatness of destiny, with all
its risks and all its glories.

Nevertheless it is not to be expected that all will at
once believe in immortality. There are three stages in
the matter : the instinctive hope and conviction ; reaction
into uncertainty, whether from unspiritual living, from
scientific thought, or from struggling with the problems
of destiny; confidence regained through higher spiritual
experiences, especially in Christ. Many rest in the first
stage, but many camnot remain there; many see no
further than the second stage, but many cannot remain
there; many rest in the third stage, while many cannot
yet find it In the end, nothing but fulness of life will
most richly certify endlessness of life.

2. Man as a Moral Being. — A moral being is a being
who is active, free, and under obligation with respect to
right and wrong. Man is such a being; and the elements
of his moral constitution must now be examined. The ex-
amination begins with Conscience, because it is through


MAN


199


conscience that man becomes aware of the moral signifi-
cance of his life.

Conscience is the judgment of a man applied to his
own conduct, affirming that acts for which he deems him-
self responsible are approved or condemned by his stan-
dard of right.

This definition must be unfolded and explained-

Judgment, a work of the intellect, is the discerning of
relations between objects or ideas, and the affirming of the
relations that are discerned. Among the relations that
man judges is the relation that acts or qualities sustain to
the conceptions of right and wrong. As he can judge and
affirm relations of similarity and difference, distance, num-
ber, situation, and the like, so he can discern and affirm
right and wrong in acts and qualities. The power of judg-
ment acting upon right and wrong is called the moral fac-
ulty. In nature it is not essentially different from the power
of judgment in general. So far as it is peculiar it is so be-
cause of the peculiarities of the subject-matter upon which
it acts. The moral faculty does not create its own stan-
dard of judgment, or bring to its work any invariable stan-
dard, but judges according to whatever standard the soul
may possess. The soul, which is the man, is the judge,
and can estimate acts only by comparison with the stan
dard of right and wrong that the man has accepted.

The moral faculty judges right and wrong whenever and
wherever the question is submitted to it, whether in the life
of the person who judges or elsewhere. It equally passes
self-judgment and judgment upon others, and in either
case the judgment is accompanied by approval or by con-
demnation. But self-judgment respecting right and
wrong has a moral significance that is not found in any
judgment passed upon others. Self -approval and self-
condemnation have a unique character among judgments.
They bring a peculiar pleasure and pain, satisfaction and
shame, rejoicing and remorse. They have the impor-
tance and solemnity that attend the moral quality. The
testimony of the soul in approving or condemning itself


200


AAT OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


profoundly affects its self-respect, and is deeply felt to
be prophetic of a higher judgment.

The moral faculty is called conscience when it acts
upon the doings and character of self, judging, and
approving or condemning, in accordance with the standard
of right and wrong that the soul accepts. Conscience is
thus a department of the general power of moral judg-
ment ; it is not a separate faculty, but a general faculty
acting within a special field. It is judgment, moral
judgment, moral self-judgment.

Conscience thus defined is an inalienable and inevi-
table element in the life of man. The soul judges itself
unasked ; for it is the nature of man to judge himself, by
comparison with his own moral standards. The will does
not need to invite self- judgment, nor can the will make
sure of preventing it. If a man could be sure of putting
conscience permanently to silence, life would be a very
different thing from what it is. To the naturalness and
inevitableness of self-judgment much of the seriousness
of life is due.

What gives conscience this exceptional importance?
Why is self-judgment so serious a matter? What does
it matter whether a man is self-approved or self-condemned ?
The importance of conscience is due to OBLIGATION.

Whenever a question of right or wrong is considered,
it is the nature of man to know and affirm, “ I ought to
do the right. ’’ Self -approval means, “ I have done what
I ought ; ” self-condemnation, “ I have done what I ought
not.” To do what one ought not is to incur blame-
worthiness, guilt, which the soul acknowledges as a
necessary and righteous consequence, and cannot shake
off. It is true that a man recognizes the “ought” as
binding upon others as well as upon himself, and there-
fore condemns others when he judges that they have done
wrong; but what others do is not so directly his affair.
In self-judgment he passes judgment upon his own moral
value; he ascertains the degree in which he can respect


MAN


201


himself, and estimates his prospects in the judgment of
God. Self- judgment is thus a serious and solemn matter,
because of the abiding obligation that renders all action
serious and all life solemn. The sense of obligation can
be trifled with, but it cannot be wholly destroyed. Man is
a being who knows by nature that he “ ought,” and who
cannot wholly escape that knowledge.

We cannot escape the confession that the sense of obli-
gation bears witness to truth, and that obligation itself is a
reality. This deep, native assertion of the soul is not
false ; duty is not a dream. Man ought to do the right,
and ought never to do the wrong. The terms indeed are
interchangeable; the right is what he ought to do, and the
wrong is what he ought not to do. Right and duty are
correlatives ; the soul so declares, and so it is. Man is a
being on whom genuine obligation rests. It is the true
sense of this inevitable “ ought ” that gives to conscience
its solemn power.

Whence came the sense of obligation? Where did we
learn the great fact that we “ought”? Searching does
not reveal the source of the sense of obligation ; it only
shows that the sense of obligation is inborn, natural, to
man. The individual finds it in himself, and neither knows
nor asks whence it came; and when he turns to asking,
the question comes more easily than the answer. So far
as any man is aware, the sense of obligation is a native
part of the human constitution, as memory is, or reason.
Why a man ought to do this or that particular thing may
need to be explained ; but the sense of “ ought” in gene-
ral does not wait to be accounted for or understood ; it is
antecedent to all explanations. Duties may be traced to
a variety of causes and occasions ; but the fact of duty is
a fact co-ordinate with the life of man, encountered as soon
as man knows himself, and never left behind while life con-
tinues. Of such a sense of a great reality we can only say
that it has its source in the reality itself; the sense of
obligation is caused by the fact of obligation; we know
that we “ ought ” because we really “ ought”


202


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


What, then, is the GROUND OF OBLIGATION itself? Why
is it that we “ought”? Whence this great and solemn
element in our life?

It is implied in what has just been said, that practically
man finds a ground of obligation in his own being. If he
knew no reason beyond himself for duty, he might still
feel, as he does feel, “ I ought,” and justify the feeling to
himself by saying, “ I am so constituted that I ought.”
This is by no means low authority, even though it were
not further explained. In the absence of other foundation
for duty this would stand, and give support to the moral
quality in life. Man was born to duty, as well as to the
sense of duty; obligation, like the sense of obligation, is
natural to him, and from what is grounded in his constitu-
tion he cannot escape. Yet we wish to know more than
this, and naturally ask what it is in man that brings him
under obligation. By virtue of what facts in himself or in
his relations is man subject to duty?

There are two answers to this question. The first
extends to so much as lies within the limits of the human
constitution, and the second reaches beyond man to God.

The first answer is, that obligation necessarily belongs
to personality. The elements of personality are such, and
so related among themselves, that a person cannot avoid
obligation.

Personality includes the power of rational judgment,
which belongs to the intellect. Power of rational judgment
implies power to judge and to missjudge; to use the facul-
ties of knowledge and thought according to their nature,
or in disregard or violation of their nature; to judge in
view of all available relevant facts, or in view of only a
part of them ; to judge according to reality, or not. This
power being present, of what nature is the difference
between one kind of judgment and the other? The dif-
ference includes a moral element One kind of judgment
is normal, the other abnormal ; one is the best that can be
done with the powers and opportunities that are concerned,
and the other is not But where there is power of rational


203


judgment, there is an “ought” between the normal and
the abnormal, between the best that can be done and what
is less than the best The possession of rational powers
carries with it the obligation to use them normally and in
a well-regulated manner. The power of judging implies
the duty to judge as truly as possible. The “ought” is
axiomatic. The obligation inheres in the constitution of
personality, and is strong in exact proportion to the devel-
opment of its powers.

Further: the being who has the ability to know, to
reason, and to judge, has also the power to feel, and to be
inwardly moved by what he knows; and, to crown the
whole, he has the power to act, and is under a natural
necessity of acting. His judgments, and the feeling that
attends them, will certainly be embodied in action. Here
also the moral element is inevitably present, for here, even
more plainly, there is an “ ought ” between the normal and
the abnormal. To act in view of partial judgments and
unwarranted feelings is to violate the normal law of activ-
ity, and thus to be false to one’s self, and do what one
ought not. The power of acting on rational and worthy
grounds cannot exist without the duty to act only on
rational grounds and in a normal manner. In the nature
of the case there is obligation to act in accordance with
the truest judgments and the worthiest feelings. Here
also the “ ought ” is axiomatic, being involved in the
necessary relation of action to the actor.

Thus obligation is inborn, natural to man. Duty insep-
arably belongs to personality, and man is a person. The
ground of obligation, being inwrought to the personal con-
stitution, will remain as long as the personal being of man
continues.

The second answer to the question goes farther back,
and affirms that the perfectness of God is the ground of
obligation for all other beings.

The former answer, true as it is, does not reach to the
heart of the matter. We still ask why personality should
be what it is. We know that man is not the original and


204 OUTLINE OF CHEIS77AN THEOLOGY


typical person, for we find clear marks of powers similar
to his in the Mind that is expressed in the universe, the
Mind from which the universe and man himself must have
proceeded. Evidently it was in the likeness of that orig-
inal Mind that man was created as a person: man is a
personal spirit because God is a personal spirit. But if
God is a rational Mind, as the universe shows, and a per'
sonal spirit, as we thence infer, then God is also a moral
being- Of him too we must say that he cannot put forth
action that is destitute of moral quality. He too must
always be performing acts that bear the quality of good or
evil; and he too, as a Being who thinks and feels and
wills, ought to be always doing what is right and good.
He too is bound to act normally, according to. the right
operation of all his powers. Obligation inhered in God
before it was implanted in man, for God was the original
moral being, Man is created in the likeness of God's
moral nature and responsibility, as well as in the likeness
of his thinking, feeling, and willing.

But God differs from all other beings, in that he has the
perfect goodness in himself. He possesses in himself the
character that is the true standard for all character. When
we say that God as a moral being is eternally bound to the
right and good, we are not saying that he is bound to a
standard or a lawgiver outside of himself; we are saying
that he is eternally bound to his own perfect self, bound to
be himself in perfect consistency. Both God and man are
bound, as moral agents, to be like the perfect Good ; God
therefore is bound to be like himself, and man is bound to
be like God. When we have found a good God, whose
likeness man bears in personality and moral agency, we
have found the ultimate source of the ought ” in man.
The fundamental moral fact of existence is, that ETERNAL
Being is good ; a fact for which universal and eternal
thanksgiving would all be too little, so glorious and gra-
cious a reality is it. Moral goodness is the original of all
things, the source of man, the starting-point of creation.
That original and eternal Being which is the fount of


MAN


205


being not only possesses moral quality, but is morally
perfect : all other moral being therefore ought to be like
it. Since there is an existing Being whose character it is
right and normal for all other beings to resemble, we say
that the perfectness of God, the great original, is the ulti-
mate ground of obligation for man. Deeper than this we
cannot go, and a firmer ground we do not need.

This truth concerning the ground of obligation may be
seen in stronger light if we bring it into comparison with
other views on the same subject. Four general views have
been held, of which the fourth is identical with our own.

( I ) We ought,” because it is for the good, or advantage,
of ourselves, or of others, or of all, that we should do right.
The ground of obligation is found in the ends that are to
be obtained. The right is that which yields the best
results ; and the greatest happiness, or the greatest good,
makes the law of duty. Here are grouped all the utilitarian
theories of ethics. Here also belongs the doctrine of some
evolutionists, that the idea of right and wrong originated
solely in the idea of advantage, to one's self or to others,
and means nothing more.

Such theories do not do justice to the moral distinction.
They make goodness the means, and happiness the end;
whereas goodness is higher than happiness, and higher
than any form of welfare, viewed apart from goodness
itself. Further, such theories class actions by reference to
their consequences, not to their motives and their char-
acter. Good judgment does not admit that consequences,
important as they are, form the determining element by
which actions should be weighed, or that the decision to
perform them or not should turn mainly upon what will
come of it. Moral quality resides in the act itself, with
its motive, not mainly in the fruit Further, the tendency
of utilitarian theories to selfishness is plain. If there is no
more commanding conception than that of advantage,
one's own advantage is likely to be the overshadowing
element. The voice of conscience condemns selfishness


206 an outline of CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


far more strongly than such theories can condemn it.
And as to the minimizing of the moral distinction in view
of its supposed evolutionary origini it may be said that
even if the idea of right and wrong did grow up from the
original suggestion of advantage, it unquestionably has a
far deeper meaning now. The relation is to be estimated
in the light of its present quality and power, not in the
light of the less clear and important relations from which
it may have been developed.

(2) We “ought,” because of certain principles which
the mind intuitively discerns and recognizes as authorita-
tive. Man naturally perceives certain eternal truths or
laws, binding upon all beings, conformity to which is
right.

This view is higher than the first, for it acknowledges an
authority above man and the level of his life. But the
authority resides in certain principles. Whence came
they? Are they self-existent, — independent of God, if
there be a God? How did they obtain their authority?
By what right do they bind us? Whence came the
"ought” in them? Moreover, just what are they? — for
men do not all intuitively perceive them alike. These
questions this view does not answer. Solid ground for
that peculiar authority which belongs to duty is not found
here. Abstract principles are not sufficient.

(3) We "ought,” because we have been commanded.
The decretive will of God, supported and enforced by his
power, is the supreme authority for man, and the ground
of his duty.

This view is higher still, for it refers duty to God, and
thus finds a definite basis. It is true that the will of God,
thoroughly ascertained, is a sufficient guide for men ; but
the will of God cannot be the ultimate ground of duty.
For will cannot possibly be ultimate; back of it always
lie the nature and the character of the person who wills.
Back of the will of God lie the nature and the character of
God. The one thing certain about commands is that they
are expressions of the moral nature of him who utters


MAir


207


them. Duty therefore cannot be ultimately grounded in
commands. If we say that we must do a certain thing be-
cause it is commanded, the question still remains why it
was commanded ; and the real reason why we ought to do
it resides, not in the fact that God commanded it, but in the
reason that he had for commanding it. This is true even
of duties in detail, and much more of the principle of duty
in general. The deeper and ultimate ground of our obli-
gation to obey God is identical with the ultimate ground
of his commands to us, — namely, back of his will, in God
himself.

If will could be received as truly ultimate, it would
thereby lose all claim to be regarded as the ground of duty.
If will is ultimate, it is arbitrary. If it need not be deter-
mined by nature or character lying back of it, it may be
anything. If we hold that God*s mere will is the ground
of duty, we must admit that God might have willed that
to be duty which he has now forbidden as wrong. Some
Christians have held this, thinking thereby to exalt and
honor God; but this doctrine subverts the very idea of
duty.

Each of these three views contains truth. It is true
that goodness tends to welfare, that obligation is eternally
grounded outside of man, and that its foundation is in God
But these partial truths find completion in the fourth view.

(4) We “ ought because the original and perfect Being
is the standard of character and action, and has inwrought
duty to our constitution. Not the will of God, but the
nature and character of God, with our relation to him, is
the ground of obligation.

Obligation, as we have seen, is grounded at once in the
nature of man and in the nature of God, and both because
it is grounded in the nature of rational existence. While
man continues to be a person, obligation continues upon
him. Duty exists because there is moral ability within
man, and a standard without him; because he has power
to be something morally, and there is something in God
that he ought to be. God, the original and typical Mind,


208 an outline of CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


in whose likeness man was created, is absolutely good ;
therefore he is bound in all his actions to be like himself,
and man, formed in the likeness of his moral ability, is
bound in all his action to be like him. This is the ground
of duty.

This ground of obligation plainly indicates what is to be
regarded as THE STAOT)ARD OF OBLIGATION, the test by
which right and wrong in actions is to be judged. The
ultimate standard can be nothing else than the perfect
goodness, which exists in God. The original and eternal
Being is the sole type of right character. Whatever is like
God is right.

The clearest expression of this standard, for human pur-
poses, has been made in Christ, Here God has shown
what the right character is, in such a way that men can
adopt it as their own. Here is the standard in available
form, — truly divine, and yet most practical.

But the standard of obligation is brought even nearer to
all men than this, for it is written in the constitution of
man. The law of human nature requires conformity to
the perfect goodness, the character of God.

Every organism has its laws, — that is, every organism
must work in certain ways in order to reach its perfection
and fulfil its end. Man is no exception. Just as truly as
it is the law of the pond-lily, by which alone it can live its
proper life, that its flower-bearing stem grow up through
water, so truly does man have his laws, definable and in-
dispensable ; he must live in certain ways in order to reach
his perfection and fulfil his end. The law of his body re-
quires that he have food and exercise; the law of his mind,
that he learn from others, and think for himself. The law
of his moral nature is not’ less positive, and it requires that
he live in accordance with that very standard which resides
in the nature of God. The character that appears in Christ
is adapted to man, and he to it He cannot reach his per-
fection, and fulfil the natural end of his being, except by
possessing it So the divine character, consisting in all


MAN-


209


moral excellence, is the natural standard for man, expressed
in the necessities of human existence. The need of being
like God is written in the constitution of man. To this
standard of duty conscience is ever bearing witness. Self-
judgment is constantly applying it as the test of life. The
best in man approves conformity to it When this stand-
ard is set forth, as it is in the life of Christ, the moral
judgment of man assents to it, and the more warmly as the
moral judgment grows riper. In this true sense the per-
fect goodness, found in God alone, is written in the consti-
tution of man as the standard of obligation.

But we are met by the fact that men cannot reasonably
be expected to be conformed at once to the ultimate stand-
ard. Perfection, or fully normal living, cannot be de-
manded of any man to-day, for no man has yet fully
apprehended the standard of perfection. The standard
that exists in God is not yet fully known to any man, and
the standard that is in man himself is but gradually dis-
covered. There must then be some actual working stand-
ard of obligation, by which the conduct of an individual
may at any given time be fairly judged. What is this
working standard ?

The standard of obligation for an individual at any given
time is the best that is known to him ; for this is the near-
est possible approach, in his case, to the perfect standard.
It may be indeed that he ought to know something better
than he does know, but has failed to do so, and thus is
amenable to a higher law than he knows, — but with this
modification (which may often be important) it is true
that each man's standard is the best that he knows. The
best that he knows is what any man ought to do, and can
reasonably be required to do. Ignorance has a low stand-
ard of obligation, which is raised by every advance in
knowledge. The perfect goodness is the standard, in pro-
portion as it is discerned. This is the uniform doctrine of
Scripture, which always teaches that men will be judged
according to their light. So Luke xii. 47-48. and Rom. ii
throughout


210


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


To say that a man ought always to do the best that he
knows is to say that a man ought to act upon his best
moral judgment, or, in popular speech, to obey his con-
science, There are difficulties in applying this principle,
but the principle itself is unquestionable. No one natur-
ally doubts it ; every one's conscience appeals to him as
that which he ought to follow. Although no man admits
that he can fairly be expected to be perfect to-day, every
man does admit that he may fairly be expected to live up
to his own moral sense, judging in the light of the standard
that he has accepted. It is naturally implied, however,
that a man ought to be desirous of doing the best, and
ought therefore to seek all possible means of improving
his moral judgment and elevating his moral standard. All
instruction and experience that will enable one to judge
more truly of right and wrong ought to be welcomed.
One of the best helps to improving the moral judgment is
obedience to the best dictates of the moral judgment as it
is. Fidelity to conscience tends to clarify it One who
really does the best that he knows will know how to do
better.

This doctrine does not make the standard of obligation
shifting and uncertain. There is but one standard, the
same for all, and each is bound to conform to it, just so far
as it has been brought home to him and made available
for governing his conduct The standard is invariable, but
there is wide variety in the beings to whom it is applied, and
hence in the application of it that can reasonably be made.

From discussing conscience and obligation we must
proceed to consider THE WILL, the power by which man
becomes an actor. In order to a responsible life there
must be the essential elements of personality, some knowl-
edge of right and wrong, and power and freedom to choose
and act. This third element is the will, which may be
thus defined: —

The will is the power by which a man determines whether
and how he shall act, and puts forth his energy in action.


MAJ^


211


Suggestions of action are constant and various. Rising
within, they come from bodily appetites, affectional desires,
rational judgments, spiritual convictions, declarations of
conscience. Rising without, they come from human in-
tercourse, from the surrounding facts of life, from experi-
ence of every kind. The outward suggestions blend in all
possible combinations with the inward, to awaken, reinforce,
modify, or discourage the impulse to action. Standing
amid these innumerable suggestions of action, higher and
lower, worthy and unworthy, the man is the one who de-
termines what he will do and puts his determination into
effect ; and the power by which he does this is the will.

We readily see that the normal office of the will is that
of control among the various powers of the human being
and their proposals, so exercised that the higher powers
shall dominate the lower, and the whole being shall be
held to its right proportions and normal balance. The
will is the executive power in man, — or, rather, it is the
man in action, “ the soul in movement/* It is the man
deciding, and enforcing his decision, as to which of his
powers shall now act, and in what manner his action shall
go forth. Such a function is evidently regal in its nature-
By it the man arbitrates among his powers and the various
suggestions that they may make or receive, enforces upon
himself what is worthie.st to be enforced, and puts into
effect the judgments of his rational and moral nature.
This power is liable to abuse, but it is a power truly
imperial.

In determining whether and how he shall act, a man
proceeds under the influence of various considerations
favoring the decision that he makes ; and other consider-
ations opposing it or favoring other action he may reject.
These considerations suggesting or favoring action are
called Motives.

Motives are not constraints upon the will, dictating and
demanding their own course of action; they are simply the
considerations among which a man chooses and decides
which one to follow. Motives are not separate forces.


212


AN^ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


definite and measurable; the quality that induces the
decision does not reside in the motive itself, but in the
man to whom it offers its appeal, with his constitution,
habits, tastes, and character. A motive is strong or weak
according to the character of the person concerned. What
is strong with one may be weak with another, and what
is strong to-day may be weak to-morrow with the same
person. A man really makes his own motives, and deter-
mines — not by his will, indeed, but by his character —
the power that any given motive can exercise upon him.

The freedom of the will is simply the ability of
the man to decide whether and how he shall act. To
assert the freedom of the will is simply to say that a man
is not restrained from this natural action, but is able
to perform it- The freedom of the will is the reality of
the will. The meaning is not that the will is free from
external compulsion; such a meaning would be nuga-
tory, for man is so made that in normal conditions exter-
nal compulsion upon the will is impossible. Powerful
influence may be exerted, but no one but the man him-
self can act, or decide that he shall act. The meaning
rather is that there is nothing in human nature or life
that prevents a man from being the one that decides
whether and how he shall act.

The freedom of the will is denied from various points
of view.

(1) Fatalism holds that all things occur according to a
fixed order, with which causes have nothing to do. In
such a system there is no place for efficiency in human
wills.

(2) Predestinarianism holds that all that occurs is fore-
ordained by God. Confidence in the wisdom of God
leads to the belief that there are reasons for what occurs,
and here the system differs from Fatalism; but the
reasons are unknown to men. In such a system, strictly
held, there is no room for freedom. If predestinarians
hold to real freedom, they do so by an inconsistency.


MAJV


213


(3) Necessarianism holds that the will is only a link
in the universal chain of cause and effect, and that every
volition is caused by its antecedents. Here is no room
for freedom.

(4) Determinism holds that all volitions are deter-
mined by motives acting on the character of the actor, so
that action is not the result of free choice. Determinism
admits moral responsibility, and allows to all action its
proper influence and significance in the course of events,
but it does not admit of freedom.

It is not strange that the mystery of human life should
suggest doubts of freedom, or that terribly convincing
arguments against it should seem possible. Yet it is the
instinctive and abiding testimony of humanity that life
has a meaning that only freedom could render possible.
Free-will is essential to man, indispensable to moral
action, and to rational action as well. Consciousness
affirms it, and conscience would have no significance if
it did not exist. Take it away, and man is a mere
machine. Every man knows that he decides his own
action, and would not be a man if he did not. Even if
a man doubts his own freedom, he constantly acts upon
it, and conducts himself like a free and responsible
agent. The fact that freedom is set about with limits,
and may be impaired by evil, does not destroy its claim
to be a real power.

Free-will is limited in at least two ways.

(i) The sphere of free-will is narrower than that of
life. To say that a man has power to determine his own
action is not to say that he has control over all the influ-
ences that affect his life. Much enters into every man’s
life that lies beyond the sphere of his volition. No
man chooses his nationality, parentage, constitution, or
early environment. No man determines the action of
other wills upon him. Unforeseen combinations of force
and circumstance are constantly affecting every life and
influencing action. All these things are among the
conditions of human activity. Yet man is an actor by


214


OUTLItfE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


his very nature, and an actor who knows that his action
is his own. These conditions modify the extent of both
freedom and responsibility, but they do not destroy either.
All action that is so far his own that he is responsible
for it, each man feels that he determines, and does
determine.

(2) The effect of free-will is diminished by want of
harmony among the powers of man himself.

The ideal freedom of the will can exist only in a
morally perfect life. Freedom reaches the ideal when
the will always asserts what is normal to man, and the
powers are all in harmony so that nothing in the man
resists the decision of the will in favor of the best.
When the will determines that the higher nature shall
rule and the lower shall be subordinate, and all parts,
higher and lower alike, harmoniously execute the de-
cision, then the ideal of freedom is reached, the will
being able perfectly to execute its normal decision. Of
this nature is the freedom of God.

But in man this does not occur. No man has perfect
harmony of powers. Some affection may resist and
prove too strong for the will. Some passion may strike
for control. Some power that is needed for normal action
may be dormant or undeveloped. The man may be
divided: so Christians are (Gal. v. 16-17). As in the case
presented in Rom. vii., lower elements that should be
subordinate may prove to be supreme, so that the wor-
thier determination of the will cannot be enforced. Then
the will is a rightful sovereign over a rebellious kingdom.
Its nature is still regal, but its power is limited by inhar-
monious elements in the man himself. The man cannot
do the thing that he would, or even the thing that he
wills. This is Moral Inability : the will has its natural
power of direction, but for moral reasons it has not its
normal control over the quality of action. This occurs
when sin has weakened the good and strengthened the
evil in man. So far as the cause is personal sin, the man
in whom it exists is responsible for the condition, and


MAM


21$


for the resulting failure to will rightly. What such a
man needs is the inbreathing of a holy, spiritual energy
that shall enable the will to reassume and hold its normal
place.

3. The Relation of the Individual Man to the
Human Race. — The individual man has been produced
in the succession of individuals, and is a member of the
mass of men connected by blood and common nature.
The sum of men thus united is humanity, or mankind,
or the human race.

The relation of the individual to the race is that of
product, or offspring. The individual man is born of
humanity, the child of mankind.

No one questions this relation so far as the body is
concerned, for it is known that the body is formed by
natural process, through the powers of reproduction that
belong to the human species. But it has often been ques-
tioned whether the soul of man is produced together with
the body, or comes into being in some other way. Un-
willing to associate the spirit thus closely with the body,
some have framed other theories to account for it.

(i) For the soul has been formed the theory of Pre-
existence. Birth, it is said, is incarnation. Souls have
existed before the present life, and enter this bodily state
from another state of existence. At some point in the
natural development of the body, God causes a spirit
from some other life to be united with it for the making
of a man.

This doctrine is at home in the thought of India, but not
in Christianity. It has been entertained by some among
Christians mainly because it seemed to promise relief
from the difficulty of explaining the entrance of sin to
mankind. Some have thought that the presence of sin
would be accounted for, and the meaning of life would be
plainer, if we could hold that sin began elsewhere, and
human birth was incarnation of fallen spirits, either for
punishment or for reformatory discipline. But this


2I6


Air OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


would explain the presence of sin nowhere but in this
world; it would not touch the existence of evil itself,
where lies the real difficulty. To move the problem
back is not to solve it. Perhaps this speculation even
enlarges the mystery of the existence of evil : for if this
is not the only sinning world, but there existed one before
it, great enough to furnish all the souls that ever entered
or will enter humanity, then plainly the problem is both
older and greater than this life has led us to suspect.
Here is no relief. But the real difficulty of the theory
lies in the lack of evidence to support it. It is a haunt-
ing speculation that has long hung in the atmosphere of
human thought, but there is no evidence that it is true.

(2) More common among Christians is the theory of
Immediate Creation. Each soul is created by direct
act of God, and placed in the body, which is produced by
natural process. The body is descended from human
parents, but the soul is God’s immediate work.

Some have thought this the only method worthy either
of God or of human greatness. Generation of the soul
with the body has been thought materialistic, tending to
assimilate the soul to the body. The kinship of the
spirit with God has been held to imply direct derivation
from him in every instance. So, it has been held that
when the growing body had attained a separate life, God
called a new soul into being by direct creation, to in-
habit it. But in two respects the theory fails to account
for the facts. It does not show why an individual re-
sembles his parents and often his remoter ancestors, in
spirit as well as in body. Such is the fact, as all
observers know. Bodily resemblances are naturally re-
ferred to derivation: it does not appear why God in
separately creating souls should give them spiritual
resemblances to their parents, now greater and now less,
as if to mislead observers and blind them to the fact that
he was creating. Arbitrary creation of peculiarities that
descent would account for is not in God’s manner.
Neither does this theory show why souls come into life


MAif


217


with tendencies to sin, as all experience testifies that
they do. If God creates all souls separately, then either
sin resides wholly in the body, or God directly creates the
tendency in the soul. But the former supposition is
disproved by experience, and the second is incredible.
Thus Creationism disappoints us.

(3) So we come to the theory of Transmission, or
Traducianism. The entire being of the individual, body
and soul together, is derived by natural process from
the previous being of the parents. To produce a child
is to produce an entire human being, body and spirit.
The individual is born of the race that was before him.

This is the only theory that explains the facts. It
accounts for the resemblance of children to their ances-
tors in spirit as well as in body. It accounts for inborn
tendencies to sin, and for the perpetuation of moral evil
in the race when once it has entered. It accords with
God’s general method, for everywhere we find him work-
ing rather by processes than by fiats and single creative
acts. In the present state of knowledge it is impossi-
ble to doubt that this is the true doctrine, and that man,
body and soul, is born of parents, — that is to say, born
of the race. And too much is known of God’s method in
the universe for us to suspect that the method of trans-
mission is unworthy of God or degrading to man. More-
over, this theory is the only one that makes of the
sum-total of men a genuine race. Upon other theories
man is physically a race, but not spiritually. If there
is no connection of souls from generation to genera-
tion, there is no oneness or continuity in the significant
life of men. Without full transmission, the unity of
man is merely a unity of bodily life, a material unity ;
human bodies constitute a race, but souls are separate
units.

It is not true that the theory of transmission is mate-
rialistic. Parents are themselves both body and spirit:
what is there of materialism in their transmitting to their
offspring the two elements of their own constitution?


2 i 8 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


How, indeed, should spirit be brought into existence in
an organism, except by previous spirit, acting through
its organism ? If any theory of the origin of individual
men is materialistic, it is that which represents man as
essentially a body, with no soul save as a soul is specially
created in him. Nor does this theory place a great in-
terval between God and the soul. God is not far from his
works. The race produces the individual, but does not
create him : God creates the individual, but creates him
through the race. The mystery of life remains, and the
fact of God’s connection with life remains. God is in all
creative processes, and all creative power is from him.
Reproduction is God’s method of creation.

According to this conception, the human race is one
both physically and spiritually; and the peculiarity of a
race is its oneness in life-connection. There is blood-
and-soul connection between parents and children, and
among all the generations. By universal interflow of
life, each individual derives existence from others, and
each is in vital union with the common stream of human-
ity. In other words, there is a common humanity, out of
which each individual is born. An individual thinks of
himself, it may be, as merely the child of his parents and
the descendant of the ancestors that he can trace; but he
is really the child of the race, the offspring of mankind.
One has but to count his ancestors, and notice how many
streams converge in him, in order to see how true this
is : and yet an individual can trace these streams but a
little way, and can form but slight conception of his
indebtedness for what he is to the connected, interpene-
trating life of the common humanity.

Evidently a member of such a race must be something
more than a mere individual, and all doctrine of mere in-
dividualism must be one-sided and incomplete. A race-
connection so vital must necessarily exert a profound
influence upon every individual, in respect of what he
is in himself, and in the life that he lives.


MAJV


219


(i) In his own person the individual is influenced by
the race-connection through inheritance.

Since life is passed on as a whole from parents to chil-
dren, inheritance relates to the entire being, bodily and
spiritual. The continuous life is human, and each indi-
vidual in the long succession is a person, self-centred,
with a will of his own, and not a thing made as if by
machinery; each individual is a living soul in a living
body: and yet each is only such a man as his ancestors
were capable of producing, under the conditions in which
he was produced. Since the race is a race of persons,
ancestors transmit personality, or give being to persons ;
and they also, by an invisible process of contribution,
build up each one’s individuality, or that peculiar group
of qualities by which each is differenced from others.
The creative power is God’s, but it is exerted through the
race.

Heredity thus forms the stream of physical and moral
continuity that flows through human history. Scientists
are still discussing in what degree the effects of use in
modifying the human powers are transmitted to offspring,
but no one doubts that in some degree or other, directly
or indirectly, the principle of heredity tends to perpetuate
the mistakes and failures of the race, and to preserve its
gains. By means of it qualities that have entered the
race are kept there, and tendencies, whether upward or
downward, are continued and extended. Each individual
is “the heir of all the ages,” and receives from the ages
bequests both of evil and of good. Heredity opens to
the individual certain possibilities, and limits or closes
others. It often seems to draw lines beyond which a
man cannot go ; but it also brings down gains from the
past for use in the present.

The relation of heredity to responsibility involves
difficult questions, but the general truth is plain. The
race brings into existence persons; and a person, as we
have seen, is by the nature of his constitution responsi-
ble. Heredity modifies responsibility in the individual.


220


AN’ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


but does not destroy it. An inheritor of property is not
responsible for owning the property, but is responsible
for what he does with it : so a man is not responsible for
possessing inherited traits, but for all action of his own
by which he puts his powers into use he is responsible.
Heredity at once limits and opens his field of action, but
it does not prevent him from acting responsibly, as him.
self. Nevertheless, heredity introduces varieties and
shadings in degree of responsibility so delicate that God
alone, in his omniscience, can be a righteous judge of
men. We often have to say that whether some particu-
lar sin is chargeable to the man who committed it, or to
those who made him what he was, God only knows.

The principle of inheritance has perpetuated moral
evil in the world, but it is equally adapted to the perpet-
uating of goodness; indeed, it is perpetuating good as
well as evil. God has not created humanity capable of
inheriting only evil, with power to descend, but never to
rise. The stream of heredity bears both qualities; and
the strife between good and evil in mankind is carried on
not only in the field of individual wills, but with equal
vigor in the hidden field of hereditary influence.

(2) In the life that he lives, the race-connection influ-
ences the individual by involving him in a multitude of
relations.

From the race-connection springs the family, with all
the relations of marriage, parenthood, fraternity, and vari-
ous kinship. To the race-connection is due the certainty
of that deep, unmeasured, powerful influence from kindred
and friends which enters individual life in its earliest
stages, confirming or modifying the gift of heredity, and
laying hidden foundations for personal character.

From the race-connection comes that common interest
in life which makes political union possible; it founds
states, and gives significance to society. It develops into
human brotherhood, and makes of mankind one family.
Through these relations it makes life a school of love and
helpfulness, and thus becomes one of the holy teachers


MAJV


221


of mankind. These relations are indeed liable to abuse,
and sadly have they suffered it; but they are natural
messengers of God to men, and the virtue that men pos-
sess has come largely through their influence. No man
can be his best alone. The family is the proper school
of unselfish living. The home is the child’s first Bible,
teaching through parental love and self-sacrifice the first
lessons concerning God, and offering natural opportunity
for the growth of the spirit of religion. The neighborly
and social life, liable though it is to perversion, is God’s
own school of mutual fellowship and helpfulness. The
nation, which is an outgrowth of human unity, is the
educator of men in the holy art of living together for the
common good. Thus the race-connection is God’s help
to private and public virtue. The world-wide unity is
favorable to goodness in the individual.

It is true that these relations constantly bring trouble
and danger to men. No man lives to himself, or by
himself. The burdens of the race are shared and borne
in common, whether men are willing or not. No man
can prevent others from suffering on account of his
sin, or save himself from suffering on account of the sins
of others. It is a world of infinite complication and
involvement, where no one can extricate himself from
the common lot or shake off its burdens. This arrange-
ment is prolific of trouble, and is often complained of
as if trouble were almost all that we owed to it. But we
are all thankful for the benefits of the race-connection ;
we ought not therefore to complain of its burdens. The
one could not exist without the other. Moreover, this
involvement in the common pains and risks of humanity
gives deep moral quality to daily life, and opens at every
step some fresh opportunity of love and goodness. The
good of brotherhood in the common sorrows far outweighs
the trouble that it brings ; for this fellowship in suffer-
ings is one of the chief moral educators of man. Com-
mon suffering tends toward sympathy, sympathy toward
love, and love toward all goodness


222


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


4. The Origin of the Human Race. — The origin of
mankind is in God. So the Christian revelation always
affirms, and so observation of the powers of man teaches.
By this is meant that in God was the creative wisdom, love,
and power that produced the human race, and the special
creative design that ‘made it what it is. This genera]
statement is sufficient for the purposes of theology.

Advancing beyond this general statement, Christian
theology has always been accustomed to offer definite
statements concerning the time and manner of the origin
of the human race, and to consider such statements indis-
pensable to its positions concerning religion. With the
same view of its duty it has also been accustomed to
offer definite statements concerning the time and manner
of the origin of the earth, and to regard its own inde-
pendent view of the creation of the world as indispen-
sable to its religious teaching. But in our own time a
clearer view of the unity of all knowledge has begun to
be influential, and it is felt that there is no reason why
theology should not remand the question of the origin of
worlds and systems to the appropriate sciences of astron-
omy and geology, content with knowing — as theology
does know — that all is the work of God. Accordingly,
Christian theology no longer maintains that the earth
was created in six days, or at the date to which the
genealogies in Genesis lead back, but gives its assent to
the antiquity of the planet and the method by which
worlds generally have been formed. This wise and
happy course not only sets theology in its rightful place
in harmony with all sound knowledge: it also relieves
theology of the consideration of a question that is not
essential to its own sole work, the study of religion.
It is a very happy fact that theology can now accept the
world as science finds it, and lay down the burden, which
our fathers felt themselves obliged to bear, of maintain-
ing a certain date and a particular manner of creation for
the earth.

What is true of the earth is true of the human race;


MAN


223


and as we do with the first chapter of Genesis, so we may
do with the second. The time has come when theology
should remand the investigation of the time and manner
of the origin of man to the science of anthropology with
its kindred sciences, just as it now remands the time and
manner of the origin of the earth to astronomy and
geology, and should accept and use their discoveries on
the subject, content with knowing that the origin of man-
kind, as of all else, is in God. In the present study of
theology this course is taken, and the question of the
origin of man is referred to the sciences to which it
belongs.

To take this course is to make that candid acknowl-
edgment of the unity of knowledge which theology, as a
study of truth, surely ought most willingly to make.
Christian theology should be the first to give broad allow-
ance to the truth of its own proclaiming, that God is one.
If God is one, what he has taught in one place is to be
received as loyally as what he has taught in another.
The history of man, like the history of other denizens of
the earth, is to be learned through investigation of all
ascertainable facts; and it is impossible that God should
have intended ever to contradict the testimony of facts
by any utterance in words. Hence men are absolutely
free to investigate the origin of their race, and in this
field, as in others, truth must be accepted and admitted
to influence when it has been ascertained. The time has
come when there is a testimony from the sciences that
investigate the origin of mankind, so definite and well-
established as to demand recognition in the field of
theology, as well as in the intelligent world at large.

Moreover in this case as in the preceding, theology lays
aside an inquiry that is not essential to the study of relig-
ion. Religion does not depend more upon the origin of
man than it does upon the origin of the world. However
and whenever man may have been created, man is what he
is to-day, and theories of his origin do not change the
facts concerning him. He possesses certain powers.


224 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


He stands in certain relations of kinship to the Mind that
gave character to the universe. He has discovered a
genuine need of religion, because of his limitations, his
responsibilities, and his destinies. He has his inheri-
tance, and his blameworthy practice, of moral evil. He
has his position and standing among living beings, and
no theory of the manner of his origin can make him other
than he is. He will always be a dependent being, in
whose life religion is a normal and necessary element,
and who cannot attain to his full self without filial rela-
tions to the good God and Father. Some questions that
enter into theology will be differently answered, accord-
ing to the view that is held of the origin of man, but it
is too late in the history of man to claim that any theory
of his origin is essential to his being a religious creat-
ure, or to the work of theology in expounding the nature
and experiences of his religious life. If anything is cer-
tain, it is that man is a religious being and at the same
time a sinful being, and that the God and Father of the
Lord Jesus Christ is the God that he needs to know and
love.

If theology remands the question of the origin of the
human race to anthropology and its kindred sciences, it
will receive from them an evolutionary answer. Man, it
will be told, is a part of the one great system in which
the eternal creative power and purpose have been pro-
gressively manifested. Man is the crown of the system.

“ Nature has always been in travail,” perpetually bringing-
forth something higher than she had produced before,
and the end of this long course of production is man, a
spirit capable of communing with his holy and gracious
Creator. In the entire process the crowning conception,
man, has been always in view, and toward him the great
movement has steadily advanced. Man himself is not yet
complete, however, for his powers are still unfolding and
increasing, through the long course of experience. The
teaching is not that man is merely such a being as nature
could bring forth, but rather that nature is a system that


^rA^r


225


through the indwelling divine energy was capable of
producing man. Man is not lowered to an inferior level
occupied by nature, but nature is raised to a higher grade
by having man for its supreme outcome. Man, the crown
of the process, is no mere animal, but a spiritual being
of vast powers, high destinies and incomparable needs,
whose life in God is religion.

Many have felt that though this evolutionary account
of origins might hold true of the human body, it was
necessary to hold that special creation alone could account
for the human soul. So long as a true doctrine of the
freedom of God is held, special creation cannot be ruled
out as impossible. Only Pantheism has a right to reject
it from among the possibilities. But though there is no
reason against admitting it if it is supported by facts,
special creation, whether of the spirit of man or of other
new elements in the advancing order, may come to appear
improbable. The larger the sweep of one great progres-
sive method, the more probable does it become that the
method is universal. The idea of unity in God’s work
and method is an idea that tends when once it has been
admitted, to extend over the whole field. It may come to
pass that the intervention of some exceptional method at
some special points seems unlikely to have occurred, —
not because there is no need of God for the producing of
the human soul, but because there is so much of God in
the perpetual travail of creation that even this marvellous
addition to existence is sufficiently accounted for already
by his presence in the process.

Christianity can accept and employ this solution of the
question of origins, as well as the one that was formerly
received. Theology will be altered in some respects by
such a change, but not destroyed or even revolutionized,
for God and religion will remain the same. The second
chapter of Genesis will be regarded, as the first has come
to be, as the record of a human tradition or conception of
beginnings, and not as a literal narrative of occurrences.
In yariou§ larger matters, as well as in the interjHUtetiitSfi


226 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


of this chapter, the task of theology will be easier than
before. There is no ground whatever for foes to hope or
friends to fear that Christianity must retire if the evolu-
tionary idea gains entrance. God is still the Creator and
Lord, man is bound to him in obligation, sin is in the
human race, and the divine grace in Christ is still the
hope of the world.

“ HE HATH SHOWED THEE, O MAN, WHAT IS GOOD \ AND
WHAT DOTH THE LORD REQUIRE OF THEE, BUT TO DO
JUSTLY, AND TO LOVE MERCY, AND TO WALK HUMBLY
WITH THY GOD?”


PART III

SIN

The relation between God and man upon which religion
is founded is embarrassed and troubled by moral evil, or
sin, in man. Hence theology, unfolding the substance of
religion, needs to take cognizance of sin as it exists, to
discover what its nature is, and to examine into its rela-
tions both to mankind and to individucil men.

I. The Reality of Sin. — Without waiting for a defini-
tion or a theory of sin, it is well to look first at the facts
that observation offers respecting the presence of moral
evil in mankind. These facts form the proper basis for all
inquiry and theory on the subject.

I. The Christian revelation uniformly addresses man as
a sinful being. It represents the race as involved in moral
evil, and the individual as transgressing the law that he
ought to obey. The constant appeal of the Scriptures is
an appeal against sin, as against an existing evil It- is
needless to quote special expressions, as if the testimony
of the Scriptures depended upon them or could be repre-
sented by Aem. The fact is “ writ large ” upon the face
of the Christian revelation, that man to whom it is addressed
is a sinful being, individually and as a race. Never is he
otherwise represented, save as God has changed him. The
divine help that is offered to men, in the form now of for-
giveness, now of deliverance, and now of transformation,
is expressly adapted to sinful beings. Even where sinful-
ness is not dwelt upon, it is steadily implied as an under-
lying fact, too important to be disregarded. The Bible
bears one long testimony to human sinfulness.


228 AJ\r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


2 . What is recognized by the Christian revelation is
recognized also by the common moral judgment of men.

This common moral judgment has its general form, dis-
cerning and estimating moral qualities wherever they are
found ; and in this general form it has always declared that
life is not what it ought to be, and man is not doing his
duty or fulfilling his destiny. This defect has not been
regarded as wholly man’s misfortune, but as truly his fault.
Men of all ages and nations have united in this judgment.
The sense of fault, or moral failure and blameworthiness, is
general and abiding. Mankind has judged itself, and con-
demned itself.

The moral judgment has also its narrower range and
intenser action, in the form of conscience, self-judging. If
the general moral judgment has declared humanity sinful,
the sentence has been sharply confirmed when the judg-
ment ceased to be general, and became self-judgment.
Conscience often acquits in special cases, but it does not
acquit when it judges the general character of a man.
Conscience is ever declaring sin. It condemns single
actions, and the character from which wrong acts proceed.
All the world knows that conscience is no friend to the
general peace of mind. “ Conscience doth make cowards
of us all.” Welcome and delightful though the approval
of conscience is whenever it is experienced, the world
knows conscience mainly as an accuser, which is the same
as saying that the world knows itself sinful.

This common affirmation of the general sinfulness has
found expression in various ways.

(i) The religions of mankind have always recognized
human sinfulness. From lowest to highest, no religion
denies it, and the more thoughtful the religion, the pro-
founder the sense of sin to which it gives expression. The
religions of the world have had it for a chief endeavor to
rid men of the guilt of sin and the consequent evils; and
the sadness that pervades the great religions is due in great
measure to the fact that they know much of sin, but noth-
ing of forgiveness. Sin has darkened not only earth but


s/j\r


229


heaven: it has made penitence, deprecation, and propitia-
tion characteristic of the religions of the world.

(2) The governments of mankind have always regarded
sin as a fact that must be reckoned with. All thoughtfully
devised social arrangements imply that active evil exists.
When men have organized themselves for the common
good, it has always been found that there was need of pro^
tection against the waywardness of passion and the cun-
ning of selfishness. It has also been found that virtue was
imperfect throughout the community, so that it was never
possible to count upon universal fidelity to any good
arrangement. Governments have always reckoned upon
crime as certain to be committed, and provided penalties
for it, — a provision suggested not by theory but by ex-
perience. Penalties and reformatory institutions have been
forced into existence by the unfailing presence and activity
of moral evil.

(3) The literature of mankind has recognized and por-
trayed the common sinfulness. Religious literature might
be expected to dwell upon a fact so serious, but not there
alone is it recognized. Literature in general dwells upon
the fact of sin, and the most thoughtful literature the most
profoundly. The recognition of sin gave seriousness to
the drama of the Greeks. In modern ages the great poets,
dramatists, and writers of fiction are ever striking down
into the sinfulness of man, and there finding material for
appeal that never grows old. Literature that ignores this
deep reality may be entertaining, but is not profoundly true.
Sin gives to life its deepest tragic quality, and no portrayal
of life that leaves this out can hold a place in the highest
literature.

3. What is thus recognized by the Christian revelation
and the common moral judgment of men may be observed
any day and anywhere by any one who will look about
him. One need not be philosopher or theologian to find
out sin. Superficial observation discerns it, and deeper
study only deepens the conception of its greatness. It is


230


A.V OUTLIXE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


conceivable that the following facts might be thoroughly
ascertained, in detail and in total, and morally estimated :
the facts about money, regarded as a desirable possession,
and the passions and practices that are indulged for the
sake of it; the facts about untruthfulness, including dis-
honesty, fraud, slander, and detraction; the facts about
sexual passion, with comparison of the moral value that is
sacrificed for the sake of gratifying it; the facts about
intoxication, with similar comparison of moral values ; the
facts about profanity, with estimate of the moral degrada-
tion that is unthinkingly welcomed by those who indulge
in it; the facts about cruelty, whether thoughtless brutal-
ity or deliberate love of inflicting pain; the facts about
anger and uncontrolled passion in general, developing into
malice and into murder; the facts about moral shallowness,
irresponsibility, untrustworthiness, surrender of self-respect,
contentment with low and unworthy life ; the facts about
daily selfishness, as over against kindness, humanity, and
love. Such an investigation, though of course not practi-
cable, is quite conceivable, and the amount of evil that
such a study of familiar facts would bring to light is utterly
appalling. It is true that much good would also be found,
and that the responsibility of the evil is often divided
between him who commits it and the ancestors who have
made him what he is. It is true also that some part of the
evil that is commonly called sin is rightly chargeable to
imperfection or immaturity or ignorance ; nevertheless,
observation shows that sin is the abiding habit of the
human race, just as Christ and the consent of ages
testify.

Such observed facts as these form the basis of all sound
doctrine concerning sin. Beginning without theory or
special definition, we find moral evil characteristic of man-
kind. We find this before we approach the field of revela-
tion and measure sin by the standard of God. Even if we
never learned the origin of sin among men and were always
uncertain about the philosophy of it, these facts would
remaia Sin is an observed fact Theology encounters


S/M


231


it not as an element in some theory, but as a vast and
terrible reality. Many Christians think of sin chiefly as a
matter of doctrine or as a truth opened to us by revelation.
This is a mistake indeed: sin is an ancient and ever-
present fact.

II. The Nature of Sin. — In all this observed moral
evil, what is the determining and constituent element?
What is sin? No valid a-priori definition can be made
Theology needs, and can use, no definition of sin that is
not derived from the facts of experience, viewed in the
light of the Christian revelation.

I. There are some explanations of sin that are true as
partial statements but are insufficient to account for the
whole case.

(l) Sin cannot be adequately explained as the domin-
ion of the body over the spirit.

This is an ancient explanation, not unnaturally suggested
by experience. The bodily appetites lead to much evil,
and the spirit has often to resist them. Sometimes it is
unable to resist them. So strong is their dictation that we
often think virtue would be easy if it were not for the
body; and thus the body has often been thought the very
seat and source of sin. The badness of the body was
accounted for in early Christian thought by the assumption
that matter itself is essentially evil. The world in which we
live has often been thought capable only of hanging as a
clog upon the better life of the spirit.

It is true that the bodily appetites often oppose the
higher life and lead to sin; but it is not true that the
bodily appetites are essentially evil, for they are natural
elements in a normal bodily life. It is also true that the
intimate connection that is now recognized between soul
and body suggests a physical origin for many acts that
have been attributed to the spirit alone. But in spite of
all this, moral character inheres in the spirit of man.
Christ taught the true and deeper doctrine when, aftn


232 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


saying that bodily defilements of a ceremonial kind were
unimportant because they did not reach the heart, he gave
a list of sins, in which the bodily and the spiritual were
included together (Mark vii. 14-23). Sins of passion and
appetite are often visited by men with the heaviest con-
demnation, but the deepest sin is not sin of passion, but
sin of will, and God condemns evil in the spirit more
severely than evil in the body. Paul rightly ranks covet-
ousness with sins of the flesh.

It is true that man as we find him is struggling up from
animalism to the full life of a spiritual being, and that
much of his sin is accounted for by the survival of the
animalism that he is outgrowing. The brute in man is the
source of much of the evil that we observe. But this
important distinction must not be overlooked : that it is not
so much the brute in man that is sin, as it is the preference
of the man for the brute rather than for the spirit, or the
yielding of the spirit to the brute. The blameworthy and
corrupting element in sin resides in the fact that the higher
part in the man surrenders to the lower. The sin does not
dwell in the fact that man still retains a nature akin to that
of the animals below him, but in this, that the nature that
is akin to God yields to the nature that is common to man
and beasts. And yet this is not the whole of sin ; for the
spirit has subtle and dangerous sins of its own, in the life
that lies above the realm of the brute. The higher part of
man has capabilities of moral evil far greater than the
brute element ever possessed. The observed sin of the
world cannot be wholly defined in terms of animEiIism.

(2) Sin cannot be adequately explained as a mere
incident of growth, unavoidable and therefore blameless or
nearly so, or as a mere misfortune, like a disease that
involves no fault.

It may be true that abuse of free-will could not be shut
out from a world of free beings, but this does not deny the
guilt of such abuse, for this is only to say that free beings
could not be kept from doing wrong. It may be true that
in a complex being, made up of body and spirit and rising


from animal to spiritual life, conflict of higher and lower
was unavoidable, and the lower was liable, or even certain,
to prevail ; but this does not deny the guilt of the spirit in
yielding to the lower elements when once the strife had
become conscious and intelligent. Theories relieving sin
of guilt are easily formed, and in some moods we find
them attractive : the difficulty with them is that the deep-
est and abiding human judgment is against them. The
moral judgment of man affirms that sin, pitiable though it
is, is not merely pitiable, but blameworthy. It affirms this
universally, persistently, and unconquerably, in the face of
universal desire to have it otherwise, and though the
affirmation condemns those who make it. Doubtless con-
science sometimes morbidly or ignorantly overestimates
the guilt of special sins; but surely conscience has not
been utterly astray in its fundamental act of blaming man
for sin itself. If sin is not something different from a
blameless disease or misfortune, we have no moral cer-
tainties. The truth is, sin is a fault, for which there is
responsibility and just blame. It is the fault of the spirit
of man, or rather, of man as an intelligent and voluntary
being. It has various degrees of intensity and blame-
worthiness, but it is not adequately accounted for by any
theory that regards it as mere misfortune.

2. Turning from the negative to the positive side, we
must inquire concerning the actual nature of sin, the qual-
ity that makes it to be sin. But probably no one state-
ment can cover all that should be said. There are several
points of view, from each of which something helpful to
our knowledge may be discovered. Sin may be variously
viewed, and each view may yield a definition that is true
in its place. Five aspects of sin, at least, may make their
contribution to our knowledge of its nature.

(l) Sin may be viewed simply with reference to its own
character; we observe it, and merely judge its evident
moral quality. Then sin is badness^ unlikeness to what is
good in conduct and character. It is the condemnable^


234 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


that which ought to offend all men’s sense of what is good.
Apart from precise definitions, the word bad has this
plain meaning in morals, and sin, viewed simply in its own
proper quality, is the bad. This view is illustrated in
Paul’s language about Gentile sin, as in Eph. iv. 17-19: it
is the evil thing, the reprehensible ; it is shameful, dread-
ful evil, that ought to make men stand in horror at its
badness.

(2) Sin may be viewed in relation to the nature of man ;
we observe the being who commits sin, and judge what sin
is to that being, with his nature, powers, and destiny.
Then sin is the abnormal; it is the unnatural, the contra-
diction of nature, the opposite of the normal principle and
way of living. Man was made for virtue and godliness.
He is adapted in nature to the life of purity and love, in-
spired by filial love to the holy God. Such a life is indis-
pensable to the normal working of his powers and the
fulfilling of his proper destiny. Impurity, self-will, and
ungodliness are unnatural to man, contrary to his true rule
of life, fatal to the fulfilling of his end. Sin has become so
habitual that man considers it natural to himself ; but the
thought does injustice to his nature. What defeats his
destiny is surely contrary to his nature ; and in this view
sin is the abnormal, the unnatural, that for which man was
not created and to which he is not adapted.

(3) Sin may be viewed in relation to the standard of
duty that is possessed by the person who sins ; we observe
the person, and estimate his act by comparing it with his
knowledge of what he ought to do. Then sin is departure
from the standard of duty^ unfaithfulness to light, falseness
to requirement, lawlessness, transgression, deserting the
right for the wrong. In this view, any morally inferior
act is a sinful act. A man ought to choose and do the
best that is open to him. Between two possibilities, he
ought to take the worthier. Sin consists, in this aspect, in
choosing and doing something less good than the man
might choose and do. To sin is to do the lower thing, the
worse thing. Any act that is seen by the doer to fall be-


SI//


235


low his known standard of duty contains the elements of
sin, and the greater the defection from the standard, the
greater the sin.

This is the view of sin in privileged persons or peoples
that appears in the Epistles of Paul, as for example in
Rom. ii. To Paul, sin of Jews is unlike sin of Gentiles.
Sin of Gentiles is simple and deplorable badness. Sin of
Jews may have less of simple badness, but it has another
quality, for it is sin against light, treason to known law, ,
falseness to an acknowledged standard. The opportunity
of thus sinning varies with the standard of duty that is
possessed. The clearer and higher the standard of duty,
the greater is the sin that is possible. None can sin so
deeply as they to whom the greatest light has been given.

(4) Sin may be viewed with reference to its motive and
inner moral quality; we observe the evil, whether in act
or in character, and estimate it in the light of the principle
from which it springs. Then sin is the placing of self-will
or selfishness above the claims of love and duty.

Love, looking upward toward God and outward toward
men, is the true law of life : and such love, filial and fra-
ternal, will render it impossible for a man to be a selfish,
self-regarding, self-seeking person. It is true that there is
a self-regard which in its place is not sinful, but normal
and worthy ; and yet to a man in the right attitude, not
self, but God and men, will appear the chief end to be re-
garded, and the general claim of duty will appear more
urgent than all self-interest. Before God such a man will
be humble, reverent, and obedient, and toward men he will
be brotherly and helpful. Never will he put self in the
place of God as the lord of his life, or in the place of
humanity as that which he strives to benefit.

Against this right position, sin takes selfishness, or self-
will, as the final law of action. Under its impulse a man
says, “ I will act from myself and for myself. My own will
and not God shall be the source and law of my action, and
my own self and not humanity shall be the end to which
my action is directed. Nor shall duty itself be so strong


236 AN' OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


with me as the claim of my own self-will/’ This assertion
of selfishness, or self-will, as the law of action is the char-
acteristic assertion of a sinful life.

It is plain that this assertion instantly alienates a man
from God and from humanity, and places him in a false
position toward both, and toward himself He is not true
son to God or brother to man, for he stands for himself as
against either. He holds a wrong position toward God
and man, and equally with reference to himself. Toward
none is he what he ought to be. This one assertion of
self-will as the law of his action has unhinged all his vital
relations, and thrown his whole life out of joint. When
the action of life proceeds from self instead of regard for
God, and serves self instead of humanity, the life that is
thus directed is misdirected, and morally ruined. In this
light we see how true it is that sin consists at heart in
selfishness. Of course it is not true that conscious selfish-
ness must enter directly into an act, to make it sinful, and
hence this statement may appear less true than it really is.
It is a fact that the self-willed attitude is the characteristic
attitude of sin and of sinful living. If there were no sub-
stituting of self for God and humanity, there would be no
sinning. The twofold law of love to God and man would
render sin impossible. Sin, rejecting both forms of love
in favor of self, is well defined as selfishness.

This view of sin explains why we find it both in action
and in character. It is a mistake to say that nothing can
be sinful but actions. We may imagine that sin must
always imply volition, and infer that sin can be nothing
but an act ; yet we know, both in reason and by experi-
ence, that a character can be sinful. If we think of sin as
the placing of self above the claims of love and duty, we
see at once how sin may enter into character, and how its
ability to establish itself in the very character and being of
man is after all its most characteristic power. Thus viewed,
the seat of sin appears to be in the character or abiding
moral life of him who sins, and special acts of selfish alien-
ation are but expressions of this habit and abiding quality.


sm


237


(5) Sin may be viewed in relation to the moral govern-
ment of God, under which man necessarily lives. Then
all the qualities that we have observ’ed in it are seen again
in new light, for this all-comprehending relation reveals
new shades of meaning in every form of evil. In this
view, sin is opposition to the spirit and working of God's
moral government. In this new light we must look back
over the ground that we have just traversed.

If sin is simple badness, moral evil, it now appears as
assertion and choice -f what is diametrically opposed to
the character and will of God. His moral government is
holy, for he himself is holy, and therefore seeks holiness
as the end of all his dealings with men. The simple
badness of sin is the opposite, and implies the rejection
of that quality in life and character which God is always
seeking to establish. Sin is opposition to God as holy.

If sin is the abnormal and unnatural in man, it is the
rejection of God’s moral government as it is expressed in
man’s own nature. In making man to be what he is, God
has shown what kind of conduct he must require of him.
Sin is the attempt of man not to be governed by God
according to his nature. Sin is revolt against nature, and
so against God as the God of nature.

If sin is falseness to light, transgression of law, refusal
of duty, it is rejection of God’s moral government as it is
expressed in a man’s best light. It is disobedient rejec-
tion of God, not in theory, but in practice, not in the
abstract, but in dealing with concrete expressions of his
will. God’s moral government is represented to each
man by that man’s standard of duty, and sin is rejection
of that standard, through which God’s appeal is made.
Sin is opposition to God as right.

If sin is the placing of self above the claims of love and
duty, it is thereby a radical offence against God’s whole
spirit and aim in his moral government. His government
of men is the reign of his own holy love, seeking to
establish such love as. the ruling spirit in them; but in
sin man rejects that spirit for one of loveless self-will


238 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Assertion of self as against God and naan is the directest
opposition to the reign of God. Selfishness is treason-
able and rebellious in relation to God’s government of
men ; and sin, in this light, is rejection of God as love.

Of the five statements concerning sin that have now
been made, the first, second, and third are characterizing
statements, the fourth oflfers the best definition of sin in
itself, and the fifth sets forth the significance that it pos-
sesses in its most important relation. For a definition
we may well return satisfied to the fourth statement, that
sin is the placing of self-will or selfishness above the
claims of love and duty. This definition justifies the
other statements. The assertion of selfishness is morally
bad, unworthy, condemnable; it is abnormal, unnatural
to man, who was made for the life of love that he thus
rejects; it is a morally inferior act, false to man’s best
standard, and it is in every way opposition to God. This
is sin. Out of a ruling choice thus selfish, abnormal,
ungodly, and downward-tending, come forth by natural
affinity all manner of evil actions, making the whole life
like unto itself.

This view of sin from the positive side confirms the
conclusion that we reached from looking at it on the nega-
tive side, — namely, that sin is a fault, truly condemnable
because of what it is. In all the aspects in which we
have viewed it, sin is an evil thing in the world, and at
heart it is a blameworthy thing, because it has its seat in
the human will. If a man asserts the law of selfishness
as his law, he is not merely unfortunate, he is doing
wrong. The most Important relation of sin is of course
its relation to God, with whom and under whom man
must live forever, and no one who commits sin can avoid
blame in his sight.

In the light of this discussion it is interesting to note
that the account of sin that we find in the third chapter of


S/A'


239


Genesis contains all the principal elements of truth on
the subject. The picture of sin that is there drawn turns
out to be essentially a true one. We see sin portrayed
as the setting-up of human self-will for the supreme guide
in the place of God. This is of course rejection of God,
and is so represented. It is also represented as treason
to light, and wilful transgression of known law. It is
expressly represented as abnormal, unnatural to man as
God made him, and as forfeiting his destiny; and the
quality of wrong, evil, simple badness, was profoundly
impressive to the writer, and is plain to every reader.
Thus all the essential points in the true conception of sin
are present in the story. The passage is remarkable for
true insight concerning the meaning and relations of sin.

III. Sin in Relation to the Human Race. — Sin has
thus far been spoken of mainly as a personal matter, in act
or in character; but it is more than a personal matter, or
an element in individual life. It is in the human race.
So the Scriptures constantly declare and assume, and so
experience testifies. Moral evil has tainted that contin-
uous stream of life which we call humanity. Certain
questions concerning this race-influence of sin must next
be considered.

I. Upon the question how sin entered the human race
it is sufficient for the purposes of theology to say that it
entered through the early acceptance of evil by the free-
will of man.

This must be true, because no other way was possible.
The only possible beginning was the acceptance of evil
in some form by free-will. Only by such action could
evil become actual sin, possessed of the quality of sin;
but by such action evil became established in character,
whence in turn it influences will again. Whatever the
external conditions may have been, this was the inner
reality, — ’by his own will man placed self first and gave
a lower place to love and duty; and this wrong choice.


240


.•/A" OCTLIXE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


with its fruits, was, and is, the bad, abnormal, lawless,
and ungodly thing. This is enough to say. If we are
able to describe the entrance of sin as it occurred, well
and good; but if not, this is a sufficient account of the
matter. We understand the principle in the case, and
the description of the event is of less importance.

The question in what circumstances and by what action
sin entered is wrapped up with the question of the origin
of man. Two views must be stated.

(1) Christian theology, taking the third chapter of
Genesis as authoritative history, has always held that
man was created and began his career with such mental
and moral endowments that he could justly be subjected
to a decisive test of his virtue ; that he had no evil char-
acter, and no tendency whatever toward moral evil ; that
God subjected him to a test by means of a special pro-
hibition ; that he was tempted from without, and that he
immediately yielded to the temptation, transgressed the
prohibition, committed an act of sin, and so became a
fallen being, and the founder of a corrupted race.

(2) The history of man upon the earth, so far as it can
be traced, presents the moral career of the race as gen-
erally resembling the moral career of an individual. An
infant is bom with passions that are innocent while irre-
sponsibility continues, but become wrong and pass insen-
sibly into sin when the higher life of responsible age
comes on and they are accepted as dominant in preference
to what is better. So the race was bom with passions of
animalism and self-will that were not sinful until the
higher life of the spirit had become developed. But when
the estate of genuine humanity had been reached, animal-
ism and self-will were not normal to it, but were false and
degrading elements, fatal to the higher life unless they
were rejected; and through the consent of the human will
to the now abnormal rule of lower powers, what had before
been innocent passed into sin. Such is the course of the
individual, and such seems to have been the course of the
lac^ far back in the infancy of prehistoric life-


sm


241


According to the first of these views, sin entered by a
fall of man from original goodness; according to the
second it entered through man’s failure to rise into his
normal life. The two may seem very unlike each other,
but in moral significance .they are not far apart, for in
either case the crisis lay in the consenting of the spirit
to evil in the form of self-indulgence and self-will.
Either view teaches that sin, regarded as blameworthy
moral evil, entered the race through the early acceptance
of evil by the human will.

Those who hold the first view have always had difficulty
in finding a motive for the first sinful act. According to
this view, a being, mature and intelligent enough to be
fully responsible, and with absolutely no tendency to sin,
yields to the first temptation to wrong-doing, and sins.
From what motive he did this, and on what principle it
was natural, or possible, for him to do it, neither phi-
losophy nor theology has ever been able to tell. Here
has always been recognized a real and serious difficulty in
the current explanation. The second view renders the
entrance of sin more intelligible, and brings it nearer to
ordinary human experience. It is easy to understand how
evil, in the form of the inferior and unworthy choice,
might gain the mastery of a slowly rising race, such as
humanity certainly has been. If the third chapter of
Genesis is not authoritative history narrating the very
manner in which human sin actually began, this view is
in no way inconsistent with the teaching of the Scrip-
tures; and the third chapter ranks with the second, which
was spoken of in connection with the origin of man, as
the record of a human tradition and not of a divine de-
scription of events. As we have said, the third chapter
of Genesis gives a strikingly true picture of the real
nature of sin and the principle on which it entered to
mankind, and its value lies in the truthfulness of its
representation upon these points. The second view pro-
vides no date for the first sin or name for the first sinner;
but it explains the entering of sin tn the human race, and


242 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


accounts for the sinful humanity that has so long been
existing.

2. If we ask how sin has been perpetuated in the
human race, — how moral evil extended so as to become a
race-fact, — the answer is that the race-connection itself
has been the means of perpetuating sin.

By natural propagation human nature is transmitted as
it is. Great mystery attends the transmission of quali-
ties from generation to generation, but the fact is shown
by the results. Such is the race-connection that what
has come into the stock of the race is there to continue
and extend itself. Qualities spread in this interflowing
stream of life as color spreads in water. The race-
connection imbues each with quality that is common to
all, and may involve all in consequences from the action
of one. Both good and evil have in this stream of life
their opportunity of extension. When sin has once taken
hold of the race, the natural reproduction of life becomes
reproduction of life morally injured and faulty. With
evil once begun, the race is a succession of tainted indi-
viduals, — an organism that works toward continuance of
evil. Not but that good is transmitted at the same time,
for it goes along with evil. Any virtue or value that is
strong enough to live will pass from generation to genera-
tion, even while evil is making the same journey; and
thus have been perpetuated those fundamental qualities
that make society possible and life worth living from day
to day in spite of all the evil.

This double flow of good and evil in the common stream
of life is evidenced by history. Humanity possesses
upward tendencies, and has proved itself a slowly rising
race. Man does advance as ages pass. Gross forms of
evil are outgrown. Progress slowly removes some ills and
crimes from the general life; civilization banishes the
forms of cruelty that belong to barbarism; evils that
once were common have become impossible. Yet this
casts no doubt upon the persistence of evil in the race;


sm


243


All thoughtful observers know how disappointing human
progress is. Old evils wear away; but the new and
better conditions that follow develop new evils of their
own, which in turn must be slowly and painfully over-
come. Despite all changes, that central alienation of
man from God and from his brothers in which sin consists
has not come to an end. Its forms change, and the pass-
ing generations vary in their expressions of it, but it has
never yet been abolished. God has indeed imparted a
curative power to experience, but its working is slow,
and the stream of life still flows a tainted stream.

It should be added that the race-connection tends to
perpetuation of evil by means of the relations in which it
involves men, as well as by transmission. These rela-
tions are so various, and many of them so close, that char-
acter has abundant opportunity to impart itself by means
of them. Influence and example are powerful moulding
forces, and are freely at the service of any quality that
may be present. Good employs them, and so does evil.

So far as the race-connection works to the extension of
evil through transmission and social influences, it is the
nature of this process to continue indefinitely, in propor-
tion to the strength of the evil. It is destined to last as
long as the evil lasts : it can be stopped only by influences
that renovate the race and turn its powers to better use.
Sin has in itself no tendency to return upward: it is
essentially a moral gravitation, drawing downward ever.

3. What the race-connection perpetuates is depravity,
or corruption of the common stock of mankind.

The human nature that is passed from generation to
generation always possesses in itself the elements of the
old strife between the higher and the lower. It is also
depraved, or “baddened,” as the word simply means; that
is, it is so affected by previous evil in the race as to have
predispositions to the wrong. Depravity is the moral
badness that has been imparted to that common stream of
life out of which successive individuals are produced.


AX OUTLIXE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


It is corruption of the common stock, perpetuated through
heredity and the influences of life. In consequence of
this perverted strain in the transmitted humanity, chil-
dren are not born either wholly good or neutral between
good and evil, but with evil tendencies which grow into
sin when responsible life begins. This corruption of the
stock appears in various degrees, but experience finds it
everywhere, and confirms the testimony of the Scriptures
that all have sinned. The early appearance in personal
lives of the fundamental moral evil, grasping self-will,
gives evidence of the predisposition to it that dwells in
the common nature.

The corruption of the human stock which is transmitted
by race-connection must be carefully distinguished from
guilt. Guilt, of which more will soon be said, can be
neither transmitted nor transferred. Guilt is necessarily
personal, the sinner’s own. It is a result of sinning, and
can belong to no one but the one who has sinned. It is
impossible for one to be guilty of another’s sin, or to be
guilty in consequence of another’s sin, unless the other’s
sin first leads him to sin also. Hence there is no such
thing as inheriting guilt before God from the first sinner,
or from any other ancestor. Sin cannot be imputed to
the sinner’s offspring. Heredity conveys depravity down
the stream of life, but not guilt for sins already com-
mitted. If there could be imputation of guilt at all, it
should move in the other direction. An ancestor may
have some guilt for sins of his offspring, because he may
in part have caused them. Parents often scarcely dare to
punish faults in their children, feeling that the faults are
partly their own. On this principle there might perhaps
be some justice in laying the sins of humanity to the
charge of the man who first tainted the common stock
with evil, but it is not possible to bring his guilt down to
those who are bom of him. Partial guilt for sins of the
future may be assumed by transmitting life, but no guilt
for sins of the past can be contracted by receiving life.

Thus there is nothing arbitrary in the manner in whidi


sjir


245


sin has spread through the race. All has proceeded on
natural principles. Depravity is moral badness in the
common quality of mankind, and transmission of life car-
ries that badness on, varied but still persisting. No
interposition of God was required to bring depravity
down from the beginning of sin to later times. But help
from God is needed if the flow of evil in the race is to be
stopped.

It may be added that sin in the race has the same quali-
ties as in the individual. If the race may be conceived as
a comprehensive person, sin is to it what it is to individ-
uals, for here also, it is the self-willed, the ungodly, the
inferior, the abnormal, the bad. Especially should it be
held fast that sin is abnormal to the race, natural though
it may have come to seem ; for as the individual was made
for God and goodness, so was mankind also. The race,
like the individual, can fulfil the end of its being only by
godliness.

Here it is necessary to say again that the race-connec-
tion is adapted also to the extension of goodness. The
familiar saying that “blood will tell” means that im-
provement in the common stock of humanity will not be
lost Improvement of character in individuals tends to
improvement of character in the race. When a high
degree of goodness has prevailed for generations, children
will be born with better tendencies than they could inherit
in an inferior age. Humanity certainly is by nature a
slowly rising race, with a native tendency to outgrow
faults. Sin is of course a burden and a clog upon that
upward tendency, and one that might become so heavy as
to nullify all higher possibilities. But God has certainly
endowed humanity with a tendency to rise ; which is only
another way of saying that nature is favorable to goodness.

IV. Sin in Relation to the Individual before God. —
The most important effect of personal sin is, that it dis-
qualifies a man for that fellowship with God for which he
was created, and thus embarrasses and distorts that rela-


346 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


tion to God for which his nature calls. It does not alter
God, but it changes the relation between him and man.
This statement suggests several points that must be
considered.

I, The Nature of Guilt.

Guilt results from the commission of sin. From every
point of view sin is a dreadful thing, and it is dreadful
to have willed it and committed it. Guilt is the personal
blameworthiness that follows the commission of sin. It
consists in the fact that the person in question is the one
who has done the deed, and upon whom the blame of it
rests and must rest. Such is the guilt, for example, of
murder. It is not mere liability to the punishment of
murder; that is a misleading idea, and a very inferior
one. A trial in a criminal court is designed to ascertain
whether the accused is guilty, i. e., whether he is the man
who has done the evil deed in question. If he is, liability
to punishment follows, but it is not identical with guilt.
The guilt consists rather in the fact that the man, wher-
ever he is and whatever he is doing, sleeping or waking,
working or playing, following his favorite pursuits or
kissing his innocent children, is the man who has mur-
dered another, and upon whom the responsibility and
widkedness of the act abide. He is guilty of it: that is
to say, he has done it, and is to blame for it. Liability
to punishment is a mere circumstance in comparison with
this. Many a criminal, in fact, has welcomed punish-
ment, because it seemed to do some kind of justice to
the terrible and abiding fact that he is the man who has
done the evil deed and is unalterably guilty of it. It is
this meaning ia guilt, and not the inevitableness of pun-
ishment, that gives tremendous power to the portrayal of
crime as we find it in the work of dramatists and
novelists.

If we say that a man is guilty b^ore his own con-
science, we mean that he knows himself to be the man
who has done a sinful deed, and stands condemned in his


247


own sight as the one on whom rests the blame. If we
say that a man is guilty before God, the meaning is the
same, except that God is thought of as the one who knows
and judges. All sin obtains its most serious significance
from its relation to God ; it is alienation from him, oppo-
sition to him, ingratitude toward him, trifling with him,
breaking with the relations in which his wise love has
placed us ; and it is committed in his presence. To say
that a man is guilty before God is to say that in this
relation to God, from which he cannot escape, he stands
justly charged with doing this thing which is so wrong
in God’s sight. He is the man who has done it. Cir-
cumstances may increase or diminish the degree of his
blameworthiness, but so far as the wrong act is truly the
man’s own, so far the responsibility of having performed
it rests upon him, and his relation to God is embarrassed
by it. Sleeping or waking, working, playing, or pray-
ing, living, or dying and waking in another world, he is
the man who has done the sinful thing and is justly to be
blamed for doing it. Herein lies his guilt. This act,
containing less or more of the elements of sin, — self-
exaltation, opposition to God, rejection of God, aliena-
tion from God, treason to light, denial of duty, low
choice, abnormal action, badness, alienation from human-
ity, sin against man, unhinging his own natural relations,
wrecking his own life, — this act is justly chargeable to
this man, and he stands before God as the man who has
performed it. By the fact that he has done this thing his
relation to God is henceforth burdened.

Thus guilt is not something separable in fact or thought
from the sin to which it attaches. It should not be
defined by reference to law, as if it were dependent upon
statute for its existence or its degree. It is not liability
to punishment or exposure to suffering ; these are conse-
quences of guilt, but are not guilt itself. Guilt is insep-
arable from sin, as the resulting state. Being simply the
blamableness of the sinner for what he has done, it results
inevitably from sin. It requires no published statute to


2455 OL. ri.l.\i: UI-' C/fK/^iTlAN TJit.OLO(jr


make it, though it must be greater in case of sin against
a known divine law, and it requires no judge to declare
it. It can neither be prevented from following sin nor
annihilated by any act of the sinner after it has come;
nor can it be transferred to any other being whatsoever.
Its nature is to abide forever upon one who has committed
sin. From the time of sinning the just blame of bis act
is a part of the sinner himself in his relation to God, and
he has no power either to lay it down or to leave it behind
him. In all this there is nothing arbitrary. Nothing is
true concerning guilt but that which must be true.

2. The Nature of Penalty.

By penalty, in connection with sin, is meant the
various evil for the sinner which by God’s appointment
follows his sin.

No better word than penalty offers itself here; but this
definition shows how inadequate a word it is. Among
men “penalty” is a legal term, and in its strict usage has
reference solely to legal relations ; it implies law, and judi-
cial or forensic relations ; it is a word of the courts, and
denotes loss or suffering inflicted as retribution for viola-
tion of law. But sin is not to be viewed solely as violation
of law, for it has other significances; and that which we
call penalty does not come solely because sin is violation of
law, but because of all the various evil that there is in sin.
Hence "penalty,” defined from its usage, is too narrow a
word ; but for want of a better it must still be used.

Our definition tells of various evil for the sinner as fol-
lowing sin by God’s appointment. But the definition will
not be understood without a word upon the manner of
God’s appointment, and the relation of man to divine law.
God’s appointment concerning penalty must not be con-
ceived as expressed solely in statutes, or in threaten ings
accompanying them. Neither God’s requirement upon
man nor his threatening of penalty has been fully ex-
pressed in words. Man as man is not under a system of
divine statutes like the laws of a nation, or like tbe law


of Moses, with legal penalties for violation announcec
and administered. The only sense in which man as man
is under law to God is this, that the true law of his being
and life has been imposed upon him by God in his con-
stitution and the constitution of nature. Responsible
violation of this unwritten but real law is sin. In great
parts of mankind far more definite expressions of the will
of God have been given; and of course violation of these
is sin. Penalty is the evil that results to the violator oi
God’s requirement in either form. The appointment oi
God that various evil for the sinner shall follow sin has
been expressed in the nature of man and the world, and
reiterated and re-emphasized in revelation. It is a uni-
versal appointment ; and penalty is the universal outcome
of evil-doing. Every form of sin has its own. Sin
against love has its penalty as inevitably as sin gainst
law. Sin against self has its penalty as truly as sin
against the Holy Spirit. Secret sin has its penalty as
surely as open sin. Penalty is correlative to the entire
evil of sin, in any or all of its forms.

As to the manner in which the various evil for the
sinner is made to follow his sin — or, in other words, the
manner in which penalty is executed — the general truth
is that God works through the agencies that he has
created. He has so constituted the universe that sin
brings penalty. Penalty is the consequence of sin.
The normal and ordinary infliction of penalty is effected
by the methods that God has wrought into the constitu-
tion of the universe, — methods that are not less truly his
own because he has wrought them into the order of the
universe that he has created, and made all things worl
together in accordance with them. Even though it be
granted that he sometimes inflicts penalty by direct anc
special action for which the constitution of the worlc
contains no provision, still it must be said that such, tc
say the least, is not the rule. The great mass of punish-
ment consists in that which comes as the natural anc
inevitable consequence of the sin.


250 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOcy


These general views of penalty will be illustrated and
confirmed by the mention, which must come next, of some
elements in penalty.

(1) Guilt itself is an element in penalty. The state of
being the soul that has done evil comes as inevitable and
immovable penalty upon the sinner. Unawakened souls
are indifferent to this, and even an awakened conscience
knows only in part how terrible a thing it is; but whether
it is understood or not, in a universe of holy realities,
where a holy God reigns, guilt is of itself a punishment
more dreadful than words can describe.

(2) The sense of guilt, remorse, a condemning con-
science, is an element in penalty. Guilt and the sense
of guilt are not the same, and the sense of guilt is not
always present where it belongs. On the one hand, it is
sometimes banished by light-heartedness or preoccupa-
tion; and on the other, the extreme penalty of sin must
be a state in which the sense of guilt is lost through hard-
ening of the heart. Hence, we cannot say that the sense
of guilt as an element in penalty is always present. But
it is a normal element in penalty. Self-judgment is a
natural act of the human powers. Man is so constituted
that sin naturally calls forth upon him the condemnation
of conscience and the intolerable lashing of remorse. It
is normal that a wilful sinner should be rendered inwardly
miserable by feeling the blameworthiness of his sin.

(3) The disapproval of the holy and loving God is an
element in penalty. The disapproval of God follows
necessarily upon guilt. Sin is hostile to his character
and will, and ruinous to the creature whom he loves;
therefore he hates it. God’s deep, necessary, unalterable
opposition to sin is sometimes called in the Scriptures
his wrath. It has often been represented in terms descrip-
tive of human passion, — a manner of representation that
was doubtless unavoidable, and at some stages of human
life helpful. Yet it is in no sense a rage like human
anger, though the language even of the Scriptures some-
times presents it so; it is a profound and necessary disap*


251


proval, — a necessary recoil of his holy nature from what
is morally evil. It is the natural and irrepressible asser-
tion of his moral excellence as against sin.

This holy and dreadful disapproval rests not only upon
sin itself, but, in a just degree, upon the man who com-
mits it. Nothing annihilates the tenderness of God’s
heart toward his creatures, or his justice in making
allowance for their weakness, or his desire to save them;
and God must not be conceived as hating anything that he
has made; but while a man is, by record and by continu-
ing choice, one who has committed sin and is making it
his own, God is constrained to think of him in the light
of that fact. God cannot regard him as other than he is.
However patient he may be, and however eager to bring
better things to pass, still his holy disapproval abides
upon the man; and the consequences of disapproval take
the place of the freedom of love so long as the man
remains in the fellowship of sin. While this continues,
anything but disapproval on the part of God is morally
impossible. Even infinite love cannot alter this.

“ Disapproval ” may be thought too mild a word, when
words so much stronger have been used to represent God’s
feeling toward sin and sinners. But other words may
easily mislead us. Hatred, of course, is not to be thought
of here; for God does not hate sinners, though he does
hate sin. “Indignation,” “wrath,” “anger" are words
most easily shadowed by the faultiness of human passion,
and words that need some word of necessary moral sig-
nificance to account for them if they are to be applied to
God. The word “ disapproval ” is the word that these
words of passion need to interpret and justify them.
In itself it is profoundly true and appropriate. It is a
word of sadness, a heart-breaking word It appeals
where “wrath” repels. Disapproval accounts for indig-
nation. Disapproval, as it is interpreted from human
experience, is in no way inconsistent with the profoundest
love. Disapproval from God is surely enough for man to
bear; for as long as it remains the decisive element in


OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


God’s attitude it seals the loss of spiritual welfare and
the impossibility of attaining to the true destiny of man.

(4) Moral deterioration is an element in penalty. De-
terioration is certain when once sin has entered. The
touch of evil spreads from one part of life to another.
Habit tends to become strong. The powers suffer from
disuse on the side of the good, while in evil-doing they
are trained by exercise. Opportunities for the better are
gradually lost Love for higher good fades away; while
evil tastes grow by what they feed on. One who chooses
to be bad has no right to expect anything but that he will
become worse.

(5) There are various consequences of sin for the sinner
that form an element in penalty. Sin naturally works
nothing good, and brings in various evil. Many forms of
sin work physical consequences that abide long with the
sinner and limit or modify his spiritual possibilities. Sin
that leaves no bodily mark works equally abiding conse-
quences upon the soul. There are consequences of sin in
the sphere of social relations, consisting in the exertion of
evil influence on others, and the inability to be useful.
There are innumerable consequences in the complications
of practical life. All such consequences, with the evil that
they bring, are of the nature of penalty. The ancient
conception of Nemesis was no dream. “Evil pursueth
sinners.” Even when invisible, retributive working is in-
cessant In the order that God has ordained, sin works
retribution upon itself, — which is the same as to say that
God, by the order that he has ordained, works retribution
upon it.

(6) The tendency to permanence in the states that thus
follow sin is an element in penalty. So far as the nature
of sin points to the future, these penal issues tend to abide
forever. Guilt can never be annihilated, and relief from it
can be found only in God’s forgiveness. The disapproval
of God is unchangeable, so long as the conditions that
occasion it remmn unchanged. Moral deterioration has
no natural limit Natural consequences of sin are evil,


SIN


253


whether they ripen soon or late. There is no reason why
any of these results should be limited to the present life ;
rather must they continue beyond, so far as they are
spiritual in their nature, if sin continues as the decisive
element in choice and character. Life is continuous,
and tendencies continue. The evil that sin works for the
sinner tends to endless continuance; and the natural out-
come of a wilfully evil life is final ruin to man. In ordei
to this there is no need that God add anything to what,
under his government, sin must produce. He has made
penalty to be self-executing; and if sin goes on to its
natural end, loss both of worthiness and of welfare must
follow.

It may be that God sometimes adds penalty to the
natural outcome of sin. But the feeling that special inter-
vention of God is necessary for punishing sin rests upon
inadequate conceptions of the retribution that sin will
bring if it works out its consequences. If sin is left to
work out its own nature, it will effect complete and final
ruin for him who# makes it his own ; and it is difficult to
see why additional punishments should be provided. Sin
is such an evil that God’s necessary order provides the
greatest possible retribution for free beings who make it
their own.

It is a gfreat mistake to think that the principle of retri-
bution is of doubtful value, or needs to be apologized for.
The principle is both right and beneficent. Good ought
to work good, and evil ought to work evil ; this is a moral
axiom. Being right, the principle is beneficent. It is best
for all concerned that good should work good, and evil
evil. If there were no certainty that sin would be followed
by retribution, moral distinctions would be less clear, and a
necessary element in the guidance of practical life would
be wanting. Confidence in the naturalness and necessity
of retribution, certainty that whatsoever a man soweth, that
shall he also reap, is one of the fruits of the Christian
acquaintance with God, and one of the foundations of per-


AiV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


sonal and social morals. No one should wish retribution
out of the world, for all good moral judgment approves the
necessary advance from evil in will to evil in consequence,
as long as will remains evil.

That there is a kind intention in retribution, looking
toward the putting-away of evils, is rendered certain by the
history of retribution in this world. In the long run
retribution has worked toward moral improvement. Men
have learned from consequences what to avoid : they have
also seen illustrated in consequences the hatefulness of
what is wrong, and have somewhat learned to behold evil
in its true light. Systems of penalty have been adopted
by human society as aids to the reformation of criminals :
and the more intelligent the study of penology becomes,
the more prominent becomes the idea of a disciplinary
and reformatory end in all penalties that men ordain for
one another. That God intends at least a great part of
his penalties upon sin in this life to be disciplinary and to
bring sinful men to a better mind, is certain: no one
doubts it, or hesitates to appeal to this divine intention in
calling men to repentance. Much of God’s punishment is
certainly disciplinary.

Hence it is often inferred that all God’s punishment is
disciplinary, and has really no other intent than to accom-
plish reformation. Concerning this we may say that God
certainly desires the good of his creatures ; that the disci-
plinary intent in the retributive arrangements of this world
is plain; that God can never become indifferent to the
promotion of goodness in any soul; and that he will never
inflict penalty that can do no good anywhere. These facts
are favorable to the recognition of a disciplinary purpose
in retributive arrangements as such, everywhere and always.
Yet there is another thought to be added. Apart from the
purpose to reform the offender, there is in the retributive
arrangement an element of right, a claim of moral fitness,
an essential justice. The whole system rests, as we have
seen, upon a moral axiom : retribution is something that
ought to be. This rightness in retribution is the ground


sm


255


of its value as a reformatory agent: take this away, and
retribution would be deprived of all its moral power. But
this essential rightness is an element that would outlive
the disciplinary purpose, if this should ever cease to be
present. If it ever comes to pass that discipline has
proved vain and reformation is impossible, there will re-
main the eternal fitness that whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he also reap, demanding that confirmed and un-
conquerable moral evil shall receive according to its own
nature ; and this is a fitness that cannot change. Hence
it is not quite true that there can be no punishment with-
out a disciplinary purpose. Punishment is disciplinary in
its purpose as long as retribution can be helpful to
reformation: but if reformation had become impossible,
punishment would still be righteous.

Concerning threats of penalty that God may make, it
should be said that they are naturally conditional. They
are ground-d upon the nature of sin, and upon the pres-
ence of sin. They must hold good and be fulfilled if the
conditions remain unchanged. But if the sin ceases, or the
man’s attitude toward it is changed, God may forgive him
and thus withdraw the main elements in penalty, and may
introduce a new power of renovation to counteract and
finally terminate the process of retribution upon sin.
God’s holy disapproval may rest upon a man to-day and
cease to-morrow ; in which case God, to his own delight,
ceases to threaten penally, and becomes the promoter of
full deliverance from sin. No threat of penalty will stand,
if the occasion for penally ceases.

3. The Nature of Forgiveness.

If guilt is the state of one who has sinned, the opposite
of guilt is innocence, the state of one who has not sinned.
This, it might seem, is all that a creature of God could
wish for. But it is too late for this, and when once sin has
been committed the only available opposite of guilt is the
state of forgiveness, — or as the word means, forgiven-ness,
the state of one who is forgiven.


2S6 AJff OUTUNE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


What is forgiveness? To forgive is to say to one who
has done wrong (and to have it true), “ I do not think of
you or feel toward you as one who has done this ; I do
not hold it in my heart against you ; I leave it out of my
thoughts so that it does not embarrass the relation between
you and me ; it is bet\veen us as if it had not been.” The
word “ pardon ” is essentially the same in meaning, but
forgiveness is the deeper word. Pardon is the more fre-
quent official word, but forgiveness is the personal word,
expressive of more feeling than often finds its way into the
other. One who forgives does not cease to know the sin,
but he overlooks it in his action and his feeling. Such, for
example, is a father’s forgiveness toward his child. It does
not, as it cannot, cease to be true that the child has done
wrong ; nor does the father cease to know it, for he can-
not. But the father ceases to have his feeling and action
toward the child controlled by the fact of his wrong-doing ;
he overlooks that fact, and allows considerations of love to
determine how he shall feel and act. It is as if the wrong
had not been, save as natural memory remains, and save
as the father wisely remembers the sin, in order to guard
the child against repeating it So when God forgives, his
feeling and action toward the man are no longer governed
by his condemnation of the sin. Hence the strong lan-
guage of Scripture about blotting out transgressions, for-
getting sins, casting them behind him, casting them into
the sea. The sin has ceased to be a determiner of God’s
attitude. Of course he does not forget that it has existed,
for he cannot; and he so remembers it that he can help
his child against the danger of repeating it. A forgiven
sinner is not regarded by God as one who has never sinned,
for that is as impossible as any other contradictory thing.
He is regarded as a sinner toward whom God’s attitude is
no longer determined by his sin.

Forgiveness cannot bring innocence back, but it is the
unspeakably precious gift of God to guilty men. He can-
not undo the sin, but he can forgive the sinner, and thereby
open to him the free action of his own grace. Innocence


sm


2S7


is impossible, but the free work of God's grace leads to
results more precious even than innocence.

How far does forgiveness annul penalty, and put a stop to
its execution? In answering this question we must recall
the elements already mentioned as entering into penalty.

(1) So far as penalty consists in guilt, or personal blame
worthiness, forgiveness does not alter the facts, for nothing
can do that: but it alters the relation of the man to the
facts, and delivers him from having his destiny decided by
his blameworthiness.

(2) So far as penalty consists in the sense of guilt, for-
giveness does not alter the man's condemnation of his evil
conduct ; but the sense of forgiveness comes in, and alters
his sense of relation to the guilt of his evil conduct A
forgiven sinner's conscience is a conscience relieved of its
burden.

(3) So far as penalty consists in the disapproval of God,
forgiveness annuls it Forgiveness is the withdrawal of
God's disapproval, — not from the sin but from the man, —
and the gracious reception of the man to the sphere of
God’s free kindness.

(4) So far as penalty consists in moral deterioration,
forgiveness itself does not affect it; but forgiveness opens
the way for that free grace of God which works new life
and renovation, and which thus checks moral deterioration
and will finally overcome it

(5) So far as penalty consists in various consequences,
physical, social, and general, forgiveness does not affect it.
Some of these consequences are removed by the operation
of the new life, and some are not. Forgiveness does not
stop the flow of natural results from acts already com-
mitted.

(6) So far as penalty consists in the permanence of the
states that result from sin, forgiveness abolishes some of
these states at once, and others it does not abolish : but it
places the man where divine grace will at last bring him
out of them all. Forgiveness is not complete salvation,
but. opens the way to it It gives a man a clean record

II


258 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


with God, so far as condemnation is concerned, and the
opportunity of a new start in life under God’s own influ-
ence. It is the transition from a guilty past to a holy
future.

4. The Attitude of God toward Sinful Men.

There is nothing accidental, and nothing arbitrarily de-
termined, in the attitude of God toward sinful men. It is
the attitude that is rendered necessary and certain by his
perfect character. He has not taken it by his will, but by
his nature. It is the attitude that necessarily belongs to
perfect holiness and perfect love. Being himself, he could
hold no other.

All sinful men do their evil deeds in a world of which
God is the righteous and gracious Lord. Sinful men are
his creatures, in whom he has a father’s interest. To him
they and all their life are perfectly known. Their sin is
thoroughly wrong, and thoroughly ruinous. In describing
the attitude that he holds toward them, it is sometimes
said that God must be righteous and may be gracious, and
sometimes that he must be gracious and may be righteous.
Some think that the exercise of love is optional with God,
and others, that it may be possible for him in some way to
dispense with the action of justice. Neither position is
right. God must be righteous, and must be gracious.
Neither love nor justice is optional, and neither of them
can be dispensed with. God’s nature requires him to hold,
and he does hold, the attitude of perfect righteousness
toward sin and toward sinners, and at the same time the
attitude of perfect love toward his creatures, reaching out
in divine helpfulness. He never swerves from holiness, or
is unfaithful to love.

If we combine these two conceptions, we may call his
attitude toward sinners an attitude of disapproving love.
That he loves and has always loved this sinful world, is
the constant testimony of Christ and his gospel. God is
love, and hates nothing that he has made. God loves men,
and has gpven costly proof of it (Rom. v. 8). But this


SIN


259


very expression of his love is equally an expression of his
disapproval ; “ while we were yet sinners, Christ died for
us.” By virtue of that holiness which is his perfect con-
sistency in all excellence, he necessarily disapproves men
who are given to evil. He judges all such men in perfect
justice, not seeking to condemn them, but making all fair
and just allowance for their ignorance and immaturity:
but the result of his just judgment is disapproval and con-
demnation, in exact proportion to their real evil. Dis-
approval is not inconsistent with love, as all men know.
Disapproving love is a very frequent form of affection
among men, and a morally powerful one. As for God, he
can do what is for us so difficult, — he can love the sinner
while he hates the sin. All his love for men cannot alter
his hatred of their sin, and all the sin of the world cannot
turn him aside from loving men, though with a disapprov-
ing love that corresponds in its sadness and severity to
their ill-desert. He loves them, but cannot do for them all
that he would ; he cannot take them as they are into free
friendship with himself.

Yet from of old God, though hating sin and disapprov-
ing the world of sinners, has known that men could be
saved. When he has thought of mankind, he has thought
of it as a race in which a great act of saving mercy would
not be in vain. The certainty of God that he could save
sinners is one of the most important elements in his rela-
tion to the sinful world.

These elements combine in an attitude of helpful love.
Disapproving men whom he loves, God must desire to
abolish the cause of his disapproval. The Holy One de-
sires to conquer moral evil : the God who is love desires
to impart all good to men : and God knows that the salva-
tion of sinful men is possible to him. What can follow,
then, but such an approach of redemptive holiness and
love as God made to the world in Christ?


“WE KNOW THAT HE WAS MANIFESTED TO TAKE AWAY
OUR SINS.”


PART IV


CHRIST

Introductory. The Place of Christ in History. —
Christianity arose from a historical Person. Attempts to
explain away its founder as a mythical personage have failed,
and he stands as a living character in history. His name
was Jesus; his time, the latter half of the eighth century of
the Roman period, and the beginning of the Christian era ;
his race the Hebrew people ; his country, Palestine in Syria ;
the place of his death, Jerusalem ; the Roman procurator
at the time, Pontius Pilate ; the emperor, Tiberius. These
are the facts regarding his place in history. Even if it were
shown that myths had gathered about his memory, these
facts would stand, for they are as well attested as any facts
of the period. The founder of Christianity lived.

Having a place in history, he stood in certain historical
relations.

1. To the time preceding. He was connected with the
past, by fulfilling the Messianic hope of the Hebrew race.
In that race God had long been manifesting himself, and in
response to his progressive revelation there had risen the
hope of a still greater divine intervention and deliverance
yet to come. This hope, warranted by divine promise, had
come to be hope of a personal deliverer and king. In
Jesus this hope was fulfilled, and this line of prediction and
expectation found its end. Jews in our own day have
borne witness that if he was not the true Messiah, God
never afterwards sent a prophet to reprove men for believ-
ing in him.

2. To the time then present. Paul says (Gal. iv. 4), that
“ when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son.” This rich expression, “ the fulness of the time,” has
always been felt to mean that there was more in his coming


CHRIST


261


than a special and local fulfilment. It tells of a larger fit-
ness in the season of his entering the world. All things
were ready. By the political unity of the part of the world
to which he came, by the stage of its intelligence, by the
decay of its religions, by the combined despair and hope
that affected its people, the age w'as prepared to receive
and transmit his influence. The right time for his advent
had come, when humanity was ripe for his work.

3. To the time following. He was related to following
time as the source and founder of a great religion, the
fount of a new and holier life among men. From him
sprang at once the Christian religion. He has been the
inspirer of the Christian life of subsequent ages, and the
lawgiver and guide of the worthiest human conduct. From
the days of his apostles till now he has been known as
the Saviour of men, and the inspiration of all highest living
in the world. The best part of humanity has slowly ad-
vanced toward him in moral and religious life, but he still
moves on as leader.

Thus Jesus Christ has a real and vital place in history.
He fulfils the clearest hope of coming good that earlier
times had attained to ; he enters, when he comes, a world
providentially prepared for him ; and he is the source and
inspiration of all the best that comes after him. He is in-
wrought to the life of mankind. In the New Testament he
is earliest known as the Christ, the Messiah of the Hebrew
people ; but within the New Testament itself we can see the
name “ Christ ” growing beyond its original Hebrew limi-
tation, and coming to denote a relation to humanity. As
we follow its history, “ Christ ” soon becomes a proper
name, instead of an official title merely ; and in the latest
Scriptures (as in the First Epistle of John) “ the Christ ”
as a title has passed beyond Hebrew boundaries, and de-
notes the Messenger of God to mankind.

I. The Recorded Facts concerning Christ.

Before inquiring into the nature of his person and the
significance of his mission, we must view in outline the


262 AH OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


HISTORICAL INFORMATION that we possess concerning
Christ.

We know Christ primarily from the Four Gospels, which
give us four records of his life. No one of them is a com-
plete biography, nor do the four together make one ; but
we have four partial biographies. The three Synoptical
Gospels are generally alike in point of view: they narrate.
The Fourth Gospel has a character by itself : it both nar-
rates and interprets, but interpretation is the main purpose,
and with reference to interpretation the material is selected
and arranged. The Three portray Christ as he lived
among men; the Fourth is a special study of Christ in the
mystery and glory of his person. The Three sprang
directly from companionship with Jesus ; the Fourth sprang
from like companionship, but companionship transfigured
by the light of what he is, viewed in adoring reflection.
The Three come to us from the general circle of Chris-
tian life and thought, and represent what was the common
view of Jesus; the Fourth is more distinctly a personal
product, for the material that it contains has passed through
the medium of the writer^s mind, and received strong color-
ing from his personality. The Three minister to acquaint-
ance with Christ; the Fourth to spiritual knowledge of
him and high faith concerning him. The Jesus of the
Fourth Gospel is largely unlike the Jesus of the Synoptics,
but the Church has been right in regarding the differences
not as contradictory but as supplementary. From all the
four we obtain genuine information about Christ, and we
are justified in using them all in the formation of our
thought concerning him, taking only such care as the use
of the Scriptures always requires, to use each in the light
of its actual character.

In the Acts of the Apostles we have passages from the
history of the extension of the gospel and the founding of
the Church, first among Jews and then among Gentiles;
and we further possess letters of apostles and apostolic
men, that bear witness to the work of Christ and draw out
its spiritual meaning. These writings add little to our


CHRIST


26s


knowledge of his life, but they strongly confirm the essen-
tial testimony of the Gospels, and are of inestimable value
in our endeavor to understand Christ. We also have a
book of apocalyptic visions, which bears important testi-
mony concerning the position of Christ in the thought and
faith of the early Church.

The New Testament presents to us three main classes of
facts concerning Christ, i. It shows us the most impor-
tant elements in his Life. 2. It represents to us the pur-
pose of his Mission. 3. It informs us of the results that
followed from his Work. These classes of facts we must
consider.

I. THE MOST IMPORTANT ELEMENTS IN THE LIFE OF
CHRIST.

(l) A Miraculous Birth. — The first and third Gospels
contain narratives of the miraculous birth of Jesus. The
second Gospel omits it, and begins at the opening of his
ministry; the fourth omits it also, but opens with a doc-
trine of pre-existence that accords well with the idea of a
miraculous birth. The fullest narrative is in Luke, where
the story is exquisitely beautiful, full of a heavenly purity
and sweetness that has captivated the heart of Christendom.
The narratives in Matthew and Luke, which are independ-
ent of each other in source and substance, declare that
Jesus was conceived by his mother in virginity, by direct
operation of God. Yet it would be unfair not to say that
the most ancient but most recently discovered version of
the Gospels, the early Syriac, preserves the memory of a
time whpn a tradition of his natural birth existed in the
Church, side by side with the belief that his birth was
supernatural ; or on the other hand that what is probably
the oldest known fragment of the Gospels in Greek, lately
found in Egypt, is reported as a witness in favor of the
miraculous birth.

The idea of such a birth is of course rejected by those
who reject all that is commonly called supernatural : but


264 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


those who think of God as a free spirit greater than the
universe will not reject this story on account of its miracu-
lous element Believers in the living God can accept such
a birth, if only a fit occasion for such an event appears, and
the event itself Is sufficiently attested. If we become con-
vinced that in Christ there has been a genuine entrance of
God into humanity, the event will appear in the light of
that conviction, and will have a setting that commends it.
This is the true order : it is only of the divine Christ that
such a thing could be believed ; and we must believe in
him because of what we find him to be, before belief in
his miraculous birth can be to us more than an accepted
opinion. It is his Divinity alone that justifies belief in his
miraculous conception. If we follow the example of the
apostles and early Christians, we shall not build our doc-
trine of his Divinity upon this event, but upon the char-
acter and personality that became manifest in his life and
his saviourhood.

(2) A Human Life. — The life that follows is that of a
human being. The miraculous birth is not mentioned
^ain in the record, and Jesus is portrayed as a child
growing up in the family of Joseph and Mary. Glimpses
are afforded us of a humble and godly childhood, with one
flash that reveals most clearly his deep and simple piety.
Then follows a period, up to about thirty years old, spent
quietly at home and at work. He is spoken of as the
carpenter’s son, and as the carpenter (Mark vi. 3), which
probably indicates that he worked at the trade of Joseph.
These are years of simple human living, as man, citizen,
laborer, and child of God. In the more public life of his
last years he is still a man, a friend, a member of his nation,
mingling with men in the ordinary relations of life.
Tempted as a man (Heb. ii. 17-18), he repelled temptation
from the standpoint of a man (Matt. iv. i-io). Nothing
essential to genuine humanity was lacking to him .

The humanity of Christ has been obscured by the man-
ner in which his Divinity was believed in, and has some-


CHRIST


265


times practically been almost lost out of Christian thought
Yet it is the first fact that we encounter when we meet him
in history, and should never be lost sight of. First of all he
is a historical character ; that is, he was human. Reverence,
misjudging its duty, has often thought it necessary to modify
the idea of humanity in thinking of him : but the true doc-
trine of his person makes no such demand upon us. The
Gospels do not treat him so. The apocryphal Gospels
obscure his humanity by attributing to him a childhood of
senseless marvels ; but our four Gospels are true to nature
and reality, giving us a simple and modest picture of his
youth, and recognizing his true humanity, both in youth
and in later years. He has given us the basis for confi-
dence in his sympathy with us, by living a genuine human
life.

(3) A Unique Relation to God. — The Synoptics show
him living in closest devotional fellowship with God, and
representing God among men as no one else has done it,
— declaring forgiveness of sins in his name (Mark ii. 1-12) ;
claiming to be the only one who can make God known to
men (Luke x. 22) ; claiming to act as the judge of human
destiny (Matt. vii. 21-27; xxv. 31-46). In the Fourth
Gospel tiis unique relation to God is set forth more pro-
foundly. According to its testimony, he came forth from
God when he came into the world (John xvi. 28) ; he is so
identified with God in spirit, aim, and action, that he does
nothing separately, but acts always and only at God*s will
(v. 30; X, 27-29; xiv. 10); he is the true expression of
God and way to God (viii. 19 ; xiv. 6-9) ; he is the only-
begotten Son of God, standing thus in unique relation to
him (1. 18; iii. t 8). These various representations set
forth a peculiar quality in the human life that Jesus lived,
and in him as living it. Human as it was, that life differed
in relation to God from other human lives. In moral
quality he intended to bring other human lives to resemble
it : and yet our sources of information set it before us as
a life that can never be wholly paralleled by any other.


266 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Though it is not yet theologically defined and explained,
we behold in him a relation to God that we find nowhere
else, and one that will prove to be best accounted for by
the sublime doctrine of the prologue to the Fourth Gospel,
that God was in him as he never was or will be in any
other human being.

(4) A Ministry of Usefulness. — At about the age of
thirty, Jesus left his quiet life, was baptized by John who
was proclaiming the kingdom of God as at hand, and
entered upon a public ministry of usefulness, which con-
tinued through a period somewhat uncertain, but which
was apparently not more than three years and a half, and
was perhaps less. This ministry included several elements,
corresponding to different lines of purpose.

a. He went about doing good, seeking in genuine love
to bless men, especially by showing love to the sinful.
Helpful love was doubfless the main impulse to his active
work. He did not set out formally to do certain things
that were required and expected of him, but his ministry
was the outpouring of his heart. Loving men, he desired
to help them, and was inwardly moved to this life of use-
fulness. The striking and exceptional point in this min-
istry was the love that Jesus manifested toward especially
sinful human beings. In contrast to the religionists of his
time, he illustrated the impulse of genuine goodness to
seek and bless the sinful, not to despise and shun them.
This sprang directly from his heart.

b. He showed himself to the men of Israel, and gave
them the opportunity to recognize and accept him as the
Messiah whom they expected. Whether by implied claim
or by open assertion, or by simply being what he was, he
gave Israel the means of knowing that the true Christ had
come, and the opportunity to receive him.

c. He gathered disciples and trained them for future
service. From the circle that received him he drew about
him a group of men, to be left behind him in the world as
the nucleus of the future church. These men he kept with


CHRIST


267


him in close companionship; he taught them his truth,
trained them by association with himself, and by all means
prepared them for their future work.

Of these three elements in his ministry the first was the
immediate work of the time then present, the second was
the fulfilment of his relation to the past, and the third was
the needful preparation for the future. Thus the ministry
corresponded in its various methods to the position that
Jesus held in history; it fulfilled the past, served the
present, and laid hold upon the time to come.

(5) Teaching. — The utterance of truth from God was
essential to all these purposes, and in all its aspects his min-
istry was a ministry of teaching. By the prophets, in whose
line Christ followed, God had spoken of old in many parts
and in mamy ways, but now he was speaking in One whose
rank was that of a Son (Heb. i 1-2).

In its form, the teaching of Christ followed the method
of his age and nation. Much of it was occasional, consist-
ing in remarks, conversations, and applications of truth
suggested by passing occurrences. It was largely in para-
bles, using comparisons from nature and life, and illustra-
tive narratives invented for the purpose. In the main, so
far as we can judge, his method was conversational. He
moved among men, and talked with them. He illustrated
abundantly and powerfully. When he made continuous
addresses in synagogue or elsewhere, they would by cus-
tom of the age be brief. We mistake if we think of him
as a deliverer of sermons ; rather was he a daily converser,
with method more like that of Socrates than like that of a
modern preacher.

In its substance, the teaching of Christ corresponded to
each of the three aspects of his ministry.

a. Pouring out what was in his heart to bless men who
heard him, and all who might afterward receive his words,
Christ proclaimed the Fatherhood of God. Prophets had
touched upon this truth, but he proclaimed it with unpar-
alleled breadth, freshness, and power, as the heart of his


268 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


message ; and he uttered it with special reference to the
needs of men in their sinfulness. Prophets had spoken of
God as the Father of Israel his people, but with Jesus God
was Father to the individual soul ; and in the assertion of
this personal fatherhood lay the exceptional power of his
doctrine. He set it forth most vividly in the Parable of
the Lost Son, — or rather of the True Father ; and in the
Sermon on the Mount he made it the foundation of right
living for members of his kingdom. No student should
fail to study the fatherhood of God in the Sermon on the
Mount. In the Fourth Gospel the same truth appears in
forms of peculiar richness and beauty. In all the Gospels
Christ’s own filial relation to God is set forth as the type
of the sonship that God intends for men. But he specially
sought to make men feel that his own yearning and eager
care for sinful men was a true expression of the paternal
heart of God. As he welcomed the greatest sinners to him-
self, so, he taught, did God welcome home his prodigals ;
and his seeking for the lost was at the same time God’s
own seeking of men whom he had created for himself.
This most tender and practical truth concerning God,
Christ taught as a truth characteristic of his gospel. He
revealed God’s fatherly heart seeking to save sinners ; and
there is no more powerful teaching against sin than this.

b. Offering himself to Israel, he made plain the meaning
of his own mission, and the crisis that it precipitated. His
coming and purpose he presented in various lights. The
Fourth Gospel gives the profoundest view of it, represent-
ing his mission in the light of his pre-existence and his
unique relation to him who sent him forth. According to
all the Gospels he strongly asserted the inexpressible value
to men of his mission, and the terrible seriousness of the
crisis that it brought on. In them all we find him warning
men of the judgment and condemnation that his advent
must bring upon them if they do not discern and receive
him. In the Synoptics a great group of warning and
threatening parables urges this crisis home upon the men
of Israel. Jn the Fourth Gospel the present judgpa^nt ia


CHRIST


269


constantly proclaimed and illustrated. Thus a large part
of his teaching bore upon his Messianic advent and its
significance for men. He addressed his contemporaries,
but what he said of the significance of his mission for bless-
ing and for judgment is true for all time.

€• Training his disciples for future work, he uttered pro-
found and practical truth concerning the true life of man.
He reproved his friends as occasion arose, and corrected
their faults, and gave them positive, holy training. He
showed them the right spirit, and taught them the essen-
tial laws of the heavenly kingdom. He freed them from
formalism and legal methods, and taught them a personal,
spiritual religion of free, trustful love to God, and fraternal
love to men. In the Sermon on the Mount we have his
proclamation of the principles of his kingdom, for the
guidance of all men ; in his last conversation we have the
richest and divinest instruction in the life of faitlu In his
indications of the nature of the kingdom of God, his divine
law of love and self-sacrifice, and his promise of spiritual
help whenever men strive to follow him, we have utter-
ances for all time, — words of divine revelation and coun-
sel that can never grow old or lose their application.

Thus in every way Christ is a teacher of all ages. No
teacher has ever uttered so little that was temporary and
so much that was eternal and abiding.


(6) Miracles. — All the Gospels tell of works of power
apart from the ordinary course of nature, wrought by
Christ. None are recorded as occurring before his entrance
upon his ministry, but from that time they appear often,
singly and in groups. The records do not profess to
report them all. Some were acts upon external nature,
but more were acts upon the human body and mind in
healing disease. Thrice it is recorded that he gave life to
the dead. All but one of these acts were plainly works of
mercy; and the one (Matt, xxi- 18-19) really forms no
exception, for it is a kindly object-lesson of warning, an


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


acted parable. There is no sign of effort on the part of
Christ in performing these works, and no indication that
he ever looked upon them with any wonder. He evidently
regarded them as natural to himself, and was as simple in
spirit in performing them as ordinary men are in their
ordinary actions. He did not consider these works as by
any means the most important element in his life, but dis-
tinctly subordinated them to other expressions of his char-
acter and purpose, and spoke of faith that was founded
upon them alone as faith of inferior quality.

The miracles of Christ are commonly regarded as in-
tended to attest his divine mission : but there is another
light in which they should first be viewed. Whatever their
value for attestation, these wonderful works sprang first
from the heart of Christ. The record does not show that
his motive in performing them, usually at least, was the
desire of attestation. A simpler and more spiritual motive
is apparent These works were expressions before they
were evidences : they were works of love before they were
works of power. The miracles of Christ are best under-
stood when they are regarded first as deeds of kindness,
suggested by his compassionate heart. He had more than
human power, and more than human love ; and with this
combination, what so natural as that when he beheld the
needy superhuman works of grace should flow forth from
him? The sick and sorrowful not only touched his heart,
but drew out his healing and helpful power. That tender-
est heart was gifted with exceptional ability to help, and
exceptional works of mercy naturally followed. In this
light we understand the place that Christ’s miracles occu-
pied in his personal life : we perceive what they were to
him. They were expressions even more of character than
of power, and the spirit in which he performed them is a
clear and helpful example to adl men.

(7) Rejection by Israel. — The offering of the Messiah
S5 the nation that expected him resulted most sadly.
Israel, as a whole, was blinded by formalism and self-


CHRIST


271


righteousness, devoted to false ideals, and unable to discern
the One whom God had sent. Their ideal was political,
not religious, and their hope worldly, not spiritual. Jesus
was at first received with considerable popular favor : but
the steady opposition of the religious leaders turned the
tide; the approval was gradually withdrawn, and the multi-
tude was moved at last to demand that he be crucified,
disowning the Messianic hope (John xix. 15) while they
rejected the true Messiah. Israel handed over its own
Christ to the Romans to be killed. The nation had light
enough to make his advent the most joyful of events, but
it became the crowning tragedy of the world. He was too
good to be received by them, and his teaching was too
spiritual to be welcomed.

(8) Death. — As human, Christ was mortal ; for those who
are born die. But he met death while still a young man,
under thirty-five years old. His death was inevitable.
When the nation that looked for him had rejected him, no
other end could ensue. The multitude turned away from
him, enemies plotted, a friend turned false, Israel delivered
him to Rome, and the Roman governor had not the cour-
age to do him justice. His trial was a vain pretence, and
his condemnation was without show of righteousness. The
formal complaint was that of transgressing the Jewish law
by blasphemous claims. The real complaint sprang from
moral blindness, and from jealousy of his influence. His
death, by crucifixion, was the death that was commonly in-
flicted by the Romans upon criminals of the lower class,
and was therefore most shameful.

The narratives of his trial and death are profoundly im-
pressive, for his character shines out afresh in divine beauQr
in those dreadful hours. His suffering was not so much
bodily as spiritual. His bodily sufferings were less than was
usual in crucifixion, for he lived less than the usual time
on the cross ; but his spirit was suffering far beyond his
body. The agony of his spirit began before the cruci-
fixion, and would have come upon him though he had


Z72 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


died a painless death. We do him injustice and offer him
a compassion that he cannot prize, if we chiefly remember
his bodily injuries, and pity him for his physical suffering.

The spirit in which he met his death was the spirit of
constancy and devotion that had given character to his
life. Death confronted him in the way of fidelity, and
only through death could he reach the end that he was
seeking. He shrank from it, but he would not shun it. To
the last he maintained complete unselfishness, and perfect
submission to the appointment of his Father. The taunt
of his enemies was true in a sense that they thought not of,
“ He saved others ; himself he could not save,” — could
not, since it was not the best and holiest thing to do.

The reality of his death appears on the face of the
record. The narrators make no effort to prove it; but
they plainly mean to say that he really died, and that no
one thought of doubting it Theories of swooning and of
suspended animation have been devised to account for
what is said to have followed, but they are pure inventions.

(9) Resurrection — All the Gospels relate that on the
morning of the third day from his death Jesus came forth
from his tomb, and appeared alive among his friends. The
narratives are fragmentary, and the precise order of occur-
rences cannot be clearly traced; but the evangelists all
declare that his body disappeared from the tomb, and that
he returned from death to life, and was seen again and
again by his disciples. Yet it is not represented that he
returned to his former life. He did not dwell with his
friends as before, but appeared to them and talked with
them from time to time, and was unseen in the intervals.
Most of the time indeed he was unseen, and came to them
only in visits, about which they felt that there was a deep
mysteriousness. Bodily functions are represented as pos-
sible to him in his self-manifestations ; but plainly he was
independent of them, and his life during that period was
not of the bodily order. At the beginning of the Acts of
the Apostles it is said that for forty days this lasted, and at


CHRIST


273


the end of that time he was removed from them by an as-
cent into the open sky before their eyes. This vision of
ascension was evidently intended to mark for them the
ending of the relation in which he had stood to them since
his resurrection, and the opening of a new period, in which
visible manifestations of his presence were not to be ex-
pected. A little later, on the Pentecost or fiftieth day from
the Passover at which he died, came according to his
promise the Holy Spirit, opening the new age of spiritual
power. Such is the substance of the record.

No one can claim thoroughly to understand the resur-
rection of Jesus, for the whole event partakes in the
mystery that hangs over the world of spirits. With what
body he rose has been much discussed, and without much
profit, for the materials for a clear answer do not exist. If
we define the resurrection of Jesus according to the data
that the Gospels give us, we shall not call it a return to
bodily life in the old conditions, but rather a rising from
death into glorious, spiritual life, with power to mani-
fest himself at will to men in this world. According to
these data, he was alive, the same Jesus as before, and
showed himself in recognizable presence and spiritual
identity to those who knew him. That death had not
destroyed him, but that he lived unchanged, and with
new glory, and appeared among his friends to prove
it, — this is the testimony of the Gospels concerning his
resurrection.

There is every reason to believe that this testimony is
true. The narratives are fragmentary, but they present the
resurrection as an observed fact, and their fragmentariness
is precisely that of narratives that manifest no sense of the
need of evidence, the fact being regarded by the writers as
in no need of proof. Those who wish to discredit the res-
urrection will have to establish as the most probable ex-
planation of all the facts in the case, either that Jesus did
not die, or that, having died, he did not afterward manifest
himself to his disciples. The difficulty of explaining
Christianity with a fraudulent pretence of its founder’s death


AJV OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


as its starting-point is so great that we need not dwell upon
that hypothesis. The difficulty of explaining it with a
fraudulent pretence, or a fanciful belief, of its founder’s res-
urrection as its starting-point is scarcely less. After its
founder had been put to death as a common criminal, and
his friends had been scattered in despair, Christianity
sprang up almost in a day, a religion of holy power and
spiritual renovation, upon the belief that he had risen from
the dead and shown himself to men. The most natural
explanation of a confidence so sudden, surprising, strong,
and spiritually powerful is found in the reality of the event.
The early, gradually entering celebration of the first day
of the week as the Christian day of worship is strongly
confirmatory, for in this we have a historical memorial of
the event. Confirmatory in another way is the conversion
of Saul, after bitter opposition, to perfect certainty of the
fact, through a spiritual manifestation of the living Christ
to him, in the glory and power of life beyond this world.
Paul himself, some twenty-five years later, refers to the
testimony of numerous witnesses, some of them then dead,
but the most still living, who had seen Jesus after his
resurrection. Paul states as a well-known fact that more
than five hundred saw him at one time (i Cor. xv. 6.) By
Paul the universal institution of Christian baptism was in-
terpreted in the light of Christ’s death and resurrection
(Rom. vi. 3-6). Throughout the apostolic writings the
resurrection forms a part of the very substance of Christian
doctrine. The vitality of the Christian Church as a teacher
of truth and goodness is a powerful confirmation ; for the
Church was born of faith in the resurrection, and it is most
improbable that the gospel of genuineness and reality was
founded in a fiction or a fancy. The subsequent influence
of Christ’s resurrection upon the hope of immortality and
the highest spiritual life and prospects of man is another
confirmation of the reality of the event Faith in the res-
urrection has proved itself akin to the best that man knows.
And all this power has gone forth from it in spite of the
fact that the resurrection was very early carnalized in


CHRIST


275


Christian thought, and brought down from its spiritual
glory, so that for the most part it has been apprehended
as merely a revivification of the body. Paul understood
it differently (Eph* L i8-ii. 6; Phil, iiL 8-1 1; Rom. vi.
S-il ; I Cor. XV. 45-49).

(10) The Record of a Sinless Life. — This point is
placed last because it is best considered in view of the total
expression of character that was made in the whole career
of Jesus, living and dying. From study of the whole comes
the conviction of his sinlessness. It is true that the prov-
ing of a negative is as difficult here as an)^here, and dem-
onstration that he never committed a sinful act is beyond
our power. But he impresses us as absolutely honest and
trustworthy, incapable of a false claim or an insincere ap-
pearance. We hear him challenge his critics with, “ Which
of you convicteth me of sin?’^ (John viii. 46), and claiming
that the Father is with him, ‘‘ because I do always the
things that please him (viii. 29). We find in his words no
confession, or anything that bears witness to an underlying
consciousness of sin, or an)^hing that would in any way class
him with men of sinful record. His perfect freedom in fel-
lowship with the Father is that of one who is not separated
from him by any moral barrier, a transparent soul, stained
by no moral evil. This consciousness of an unbroken and
unembarrassed fellowship with God is a surprising and glor-
ious thing, such as we are not wont to find in the records
of humanity. His whole life, indeed, proceeds upon a
plane of moral excellence higher than any that the world
has known elsewhere, and it is hard to conceive of such
a life as lived by one whose character was touched by
sin. Defects in the moral character that is portrayed in
the Gospels are not often alleged : his goodness is a fact
agreed upon. His life, fairly interpreted, stands as a sin-
less one. His disciples evidently believed it to be sucb
(i Peter ii, 22 ; I John iti. s), and the better we know him,
the more do we agree in their judgment He is the only
human being for whom a claim of sinlessness has ever been


Alf OUTLmE OF CHRrsrrAN TITEOLOGY


intelligently made, and he stands in the world as the one
sinless man.

Such is the Christ of the Gospels, not yet doctrinally
interpreted, but historically presented ; miraculously born,
yet truly human ; related to God in a manner peculiar to
himself; doing good, offering himself as Messiah, and
training disciples, in a ministry of usefulness; revealing
God, inviting and warning, and teaching how to live;
working miracles of mercy; dying on the cross; rising
from the dead and showing himself to men ; and leaving
in the world the record of a sinless life.

2. THE PURPOSE OF CHRIST’S MISSION AS IT IS REPRE-
SENTED IN THE GOSPELS.

(i) Statements of the Synoptics. — John the Baptist
proclaimed the kingdom of God as at hand. John himself
was only the herald of that kingdom : he did not claim that
its characteristic energy accompanied his preaching, but
declared that its own spiritual power should attend the
ministry of his successor, the Mightier One who was
coming (Matt. iii. n-12). According to the first Gospel
(iii. 14), John received Jesus with reverence; but the
Synoptics do not say that he pointed him out in his
preaching to the people as the Mightier One, the Christ.

When Jesus entered upon his ministry, he topk up
John’s word, and declared that the kingdom of God was at
hand. The proclamation of this kingdom was not confined
to thebejpnningof his ministry; it was a constant element.
Teaching about the kingdom was especially prominent in
his parables (Matt. xiii. 24-52), and even more at the end
than at the beginning. The idea of a kingdom of God
was no new idea: it came over from the prophets, and
formed an element in the Hebrew hope. To Jesus, how-
ever, the kingdom was no national organization, no politi-
cal institution: it was the spiritual reign of God in the
actual life of men. Negatively, it involved the deliverance


CHRIST


2 ^^


of men from sin ; positively, the doing by men of the will
of God. The peculiarity of Jesus with respect to the king-
dom of God was that he recognized the king as Father,
and the Father as king. To him the spirit of the kingdom
was no other than the filial spirit, and the reign of God is
simply God’s rule over his family. To bring in such a
reign of God Christ had come, — to make known God’s
will, to reveal and impart his grace, to bring men home to
him, and to give such influence and inspiration of new life
that men should cease from sin and live the holy life in
divine fellowship. He would save men from sin, and bring
them into the kingdom of God, the realm of grace, holiness,
and right living as God’s own children. This is the purpose
that is expressed by the mention of the kingdom of God.

This comprehensive purpose finds various expression.
Sometimes it is a purpose of deliverance, as in the striking
scene of Luke iv. 1^30, where he quotes Isa. Ixi. i, as
descriptive of his purpose. Sometimes it is a purpose of
seeking, finding, and restoration ; “ The Son of man is
come to seek and to save that which was lost ” (Luke xix.
10). The parables of Luke xv. show his purpose in this
light. None were so lost out of their true place among men
or their right relation to God that he did not seek to save
them ; and this seeking he here vindicated as dear to God’s
own heart

From nothing that this saving mission involved did he
shrink. It was a lowly mission, and he said, “ I am among
you as he that serveth ” (Luke xxii. 27). It was a mission
in which he must suffer if he would save, and he went
through it in complete self-sacrifice, willing and glad to
suffer all that his purpose might require. To him the suf-
fering that helpful love must bear was joy, and “ for the
joy” of saviourhood “that was set before him, he endured
the cross.” In his mission death was inevitable, and
he voluntarily surrendered his life for men. “The Son
of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give his life a ransom for many ” (Mark x. 45) : that
is, he was the free servant of men, bora into the world for


278 < 4 ^ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


them and not for himself, and even unto death he would
willingly serve them : and the death which he would die
would work deliverance from their sin and bondage to those
for whom he suffered it, as a ransom works deliverance
to prisoners. In the same strain are his words at the
Last Supper, " This is my blood of the covenant, which is
shed for many unto remission of sins ” (Matt xxvi. 28) :
his impending death was to be endured for the sake of men,
that their sins might be forgiven. The phrase “ blood of
the covenant ” comes from Hebrew symbolism (Ex. xxiv.
3-8), and in the light of its origin it means, “ The blood
that I am to shed in dying is covenant blood ; it is poured
out in my death to seal the covenant of real mercy from
God, in which there is actual forgiving of human sins.”

(2) Statements of the Fourth Gospel, — According to
the Fourth Gospel, differing here from the Synoptics, John
the Baptist not only declared that the Coming One was at
hand, but pointed Jesus out as the Coming One (i. 29-34).
Nothing is quoted from him about the kingdom of God,
which is mentioned in this Gospel on only one occasion
(iii. 3-5). The characteristic word of the Baptist in this
Gospel is, “ Behold, the Lamb of God, which taketh away
the sin of the world ” (i. 29). This great saying, announc-
ing the removal of sin from men, implies the superseding
of the sacrificial system : for if the Lamb of God t^es away
the world’s sin, he accomplishes a real salvation, and brings
all foreshadowings to an end. The Johannine saying,
“ Behold, the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of
the world,” is parallel to the Synoptical saying, " Think
not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets ; I came
not to destroy, but to fulfil.”

In this Gospel Christ’s mission is viewed in the light of
his pre-existence, set forth in the prologue and throughout
the book. He came out from the Father to come into the
world. As to the purpose of his coming, the place that is
held in the Synoptics by the establishing of the kingdom
of God is here occupied by the revelation of God and the


CHRIST


279


imparting of life to men. Christ is the true light, revealing
God: he that sees him sees the Father. He is the light of
the world, manifesting the glory of the Father by the grace
and truth that he has in himself (viii. 12; i. 9, 14, 18). He
was born to bear witness to the truth (xviii. 37). But in
this Gospel the gift of light passes over into the gift of life,
" I came that they may have life, and may have it abund-
antly ” (x. 10). According to the great prayer of ch. xvii.
the work that was given Christ to do was the manifestation
of the Father’s name, — that is, the revelation of his real
nature and relation to men ; and of this knowledge of God
through the revealing messenger whom God has sent, he
says, “ This is life eternal.” Christ came to make God
known in his holy love, and to enable men to “ have in
themselves life” (vi. 53) > the true, divine, and eternal.
For this end Christ says that he will freely die (x. n, 17,
18; xii. 24).

The coming-forth of this mission from God is represented
as a matchless expression of his love. The characteristic
utterance of this Gospel is the familiar text, “ God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoso-
ever believeth on him should not perish, but have eternal
life.” Here a world-embracing love is the motive, and the
end in view is the giving of eternal life to men, who are
otherwise perishing. Christ’s mission of love and help has
come, for the reason that God’s heart is full of love and
helpfulness.

To sum up the purpose of Christ’s mission as the Gospels
set it forth; — Christ is the gift of the heart of God, who
desires to save the world. He comes to make known to
men the true God, to infuse spirituality into their being,
and thus to give them eternal life. In other words, he
comes to seek and find lost men, and gather them into the
kingdom of righteousness, where instead of living in sin
they shall do the holy will of God as his children. In
doing this he must die. This he will gladly do, laying
down his life as a shepherd does for his flock; and his


28o an outline op CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


death will seal the covenant of forgiveness, and complete
his work for saving men from sin.

The manner in which the death of Christ is to become
effective in accomplishing the object of his mission is not
wrought out in the Gospels in any degree of fulness. The
death appears as significant, but the language that describes
its relation to the end in view remains general. According
to all the Gospels, Christ predicts his own resurrection, but
does not explain it doctrinally, or tell how it will be related
to his purpose.

3, THE RESULT OF CHRIST’S MISSION AS IT IS REPRE>-
SENTED IN THE LATER SCRIPTURES.

The Acts, the Epistles, and the Apocalypse are called the
later Scriptures for the sake of convenience, because they
represent a later stage of history and doctrinal unfolding,
though they are not later in date of composition. The
Gospels tell of Christ’s lifetime : these writings give his-
torical results from that lifetime, and show the doctrine
that originated in his mission and work. These are there-
fore our authorities when we inquire what were the results
of his coming.

In these writings we find as result what we found in the
Gospels as purpose. Outcome corresponds to intention,
and what was proposed we find accomplished.

Christ stands in the sight of his Church as the full and
glorious manifestation of God, and especially of his saving
love. The text of the Fourth Gospel, “ God so loved the
world,” is the text of the whole New Testament. The
thought reappears in John’s Epistle, the companion of his
Gospel : “ Herein is love ; not that we loved God, but that
he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins” (iv. 10). It is no less clear in Paul: “God com-
mendeth his own love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners Christ died for us ” (Rom. v. 8 ). By the mission
of Christ, God’s love toward a sinful world has been shown,
and seen, and established forever as a certainty. So has


CHRIST


281


all God’s excellence. The gloiy of God is seen in the face
of Jesus Christ (2 Cor. iv. 6). In him God is love, and
God is light, the holiness as prominent as the love.
Through Christ’s mission God is known to men as he could
never be known before.

As to the purpose to save men from sin, the later Scrip-
tures ever3nvhere affirm that Christ has become a perfect
Saviour, able to satisfy all the need of sinful men. The
saying in the Epistle to the Hebrews (vii. 25), “ Ho is able
to save to the uttermost them that draw near unto God
through him,” is a thoroughly representative utterance,
expressing the abiding thought of all these writings. From
the preaching on the day of Pentecost to the latest page of
the New Testament, this teaching is everywhere. It is the
one theme of the book. No shadow of doubt as to the
saving power of Christ falls anywhere upon these pages.
The one thing certain is that he is the sufficient Saviour
for sinful men, in this life and in the life that is to come.
The salvation that he gives is not nominal but real. It
includes divine forgiveness of sins, which opens the way
for a new moral beginning (Eph. i. 7). It includes new
spiritual life, which makes of men new beings (2 Cor. v.
17). It includes gradual purification from sin and trans-
formation into the moral likeness of Christ (Tit. ii. 1 1-14).
It includes an ever-growing personal goodness, from which
proceeds all that constitutes right life and conduct (Gal. v.
22, 23). It includes power for love and usefulness, and
final and endless fellowship with God in the future life
(Rev. iii. 5, 21). Even now it includes such fellowship
with God as that men are regarded by him as fit to be
trusted with the work of his kingdom on earth, and as
capable of showing forth the Christian character (i Cor.
iii. 9). This great salvation is the free gift of grace in
God, and is appropriated by man through faith (Rom.
iii. 21-26) : God freely gives it all, and man freely ac-
cepts it all as his gift It is not dependent upon human
merit, but is a gift oC free kindness to the unworthy
(Eph. ii. 8, 9).


282 Af/ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


That Christ by his mission to the world has brought in
such a salvation and is able to make it real in all who trust
him, is the one “ new song ” of the New Testament. It
is the testimony of the later Scriptures that this perfect
Saviourhood of Christ has been proved and established
by experience (i Th. i. l-io). This is the glory of the
gospel, that it is not a mere doctrine; it is a fact of
life, which experience has established. The experience
did not spring from the doctrine, but the doctrine was
formed from the experience. Christ wrought salvation
for men and in them, and the doctrine of salvation was
the result of the work of salvation. The entire New
Testament is thus a living testimony to the reality of
the Christian religion: it gives proof that the gospel is
the power of God unto salvation, actually transforming
sinful men.

The later Scriptures also tell of the work by which Christ
became such a Saviour ; and they give the central place
in this work to his death and resurrection. It is uniformly
represented that “ while we were yet sinners Christ died
for us,” in our behalf, for our sake (Rom. v. 8). That he
rose again for us is asserted with equal clearness, though
less frequently: the dying and rising again formed one
action, which was “ for us ” (2 Cor. v. 15). Paul traces to
his death justification and reconciliation to God (Rom. v.
9-10), and “ redemption, the forgiveness of our trespasses ”
(Eph. i. 7). Both Paul and John call Christ the propitia-
tion for our sins, and John, the propitiation for the whole
world (Rom. iii. 25 ; i John ii. 2). They do not say that
he has made propitiation, or call his death a propitiation,
but they say that Christ himself is a propitiation, Paul
associating the statement with his death, saying (as the
connection probably is) that God set Christ forth in his
blood as a propitiation. Paul also assigns moral transfor-
mation as an end in view in the death of Christ : he “ gave
himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world,” or age (Gal. i. 4). Peter says, to the


CffRIST


283


same effect, that he “ bore our sins in his own body on the
tree, that we, having died to sins, might live to righteous-
ness;” that we might pass over from sinful living to a
holy life (i Peter ii. 24). The writer to the Hebrews, labor-
ing to convince his readers that what the ancient sacrifices
only foreshadowed was really accomplished in Christ, pre-
sents the Christian facts in terms of the Mosaic institutions,
and represents Christ now as priest, and now as sacrifice.
His death is the self-offering of the perfect Saviour to God,
and is the antitype or fulfilment of the Jewish offerings.
The effect of the offering of his blood to God is, according
to the statement that forms the turning-point of the argu-
ment, to “ cleanse your conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God ” (ix. 14) : a statement parallel in
general to the one just quoted from Peter, attributing the
purpose of moral transformation to the death of Christ
The apostle John attributes to the death of Christ a sancti-
fying influence : “ The blood of Jesus his Son cleanseth us
from all sin ” ( i John i. 7).

In all these statements the death of Christ is regarded as
the crisis of his redemptive effort, the point at which the
significance of his mission is gathered up into a single
action ; and his blood is a concrete name for the signifi-
cance of his death. All that was foreshadowed by earlier
institutions was here present as real fact : all that sacrifice
suggested but could not do was here done ; all that pro-
pitiations had been relied upon to secure was here offered
freely. Here sin was conquered, borne away, forgiven;
here men were justified from their sins and reconciled to
<'jod. Here, in a word, by an action of divine righteous-
ness and love, Christ saved men from their sins and brought
them into living fellowship wdth God ; and in his endeavor
toward this end his death was the turning-point, the act of
deepest self-sacrifice, and the event in which victory was
won.

The gifts of salvation are not represented in the New
Testament as purchased or in any way obtained from God
by Christ (Rev. v. 9, “purchased unto God with thy


284 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


blood,” not from God), but as given in and with Christ
by God himself. They come by means of Christ, but
Christ himself, as a gift, comes straight from God. “ He
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things?” (Rom. viii. 32). All comes absolutely on the
principle of grace and gift, nothing on the principle of
purchase.

The significance of the resurrection of Christ is ex-
pounded by Paul alone. To him it is a vital element in
the gospel. In the early part of i Cor. xv., he brings on
the testimony of witnesses to the event, because he deems
it important that the resurrection should be clearly and
certainly believed in: if it had not occurred, he says,
there would be no deliverance from sin. But with him the
resurrection that is indispensable to salvation does not
consist in that bodily return from death to which the five
hundred witnesses bore testimony. It is rather that rising
from death of which Paul himself had evidence in his vision
near Damascus. It is the rising of Christ from death to
the glory of spiritual life in the spiritual world, whence as
living and triumphant Saviour he sends forth spiritual
power to make new creatures here. Of this real resurrec-
tion Paul regards the visible manifestation to witnesses
as intended for evidence. In this saving resurrection he
considers Christ to have been released from all connection
with the flesh, from which in his view sin is inseparable,
and to have entered that realm of spiritual power in which
he is able to deliver men from sin. In Rom. vi. he com-
pletes his thought. A man is released from sin by union
with Christ in his death and resurrection. Christ's death,
taking him out of the flesh, released him from all connec-
tion with sin, and his resurrection set him free to all that is
holy ; and by faith a man dies with Christ out of relation
to sin, and rises to a life where Christ’s own holiness con-
stitutes his very nature. Such is Paul’s interpretation of
the resurrection, which is the only interpretation that the
New Testament contains.


CHRIST


285


II. The Person of Christ.

How a doctrine of the person of Christ arose in the
early Church has already been indicated under the head
of the Trinity. It may be added that this doctrine arose
in entire accordance with the nature of Christianity as a
historical religion: the foundation was laid in history,
and the doctrine was reached through experience in the
religious life. History gave to the Church the fact of
Christ’s humanity, and the evidence that he was more
than human; and the religious experience of Christians
soon led them to a clear recognition of his Divinity.

During his life the presence of something more than
human had made itself felt Those who watched him
asked, “ What manner of man is this ? ” “ Who is this,
that forgiveth sins also?” Peter had confessed, “Thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” Human
though he was, no other human being was like him.
After his death came the divine surprise of his resur-
rection, then his ascension^ then the Day of Pentecost.

On that day his friends recognized Jesus as exalted to
the right hand of God, and exerting divine power upon
men. The miracles of that age were referred to him as
acts wrought by his power through Christian men. His
disciples called upon his name, or prayed to him. The
first martyr died with “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit”
upon his lips. In the experience of Paul, a transforming
spiritual power which he recognized as the power of Jesus
flashed forth victoriously, and Paul thenceforth knew him
as a divine Saviour.

Jesus was no second God to them: they felt that to
pray to him was not dififerent from praying to the God
of their fathers. Their simple faith and straightforward
love found him more than human, and it came to pass
that they adored him with God, and God by means of
him. The New Testament does not connect this divine
honor to Jesus with belief in his supernatural birth. It


286 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


sprang rather from the recognition of divine qualities in
him, and from the sense of his living and reigning as a
Saviour which the Church had after Pentecost. There
was no theory of divinity in humanity: the loving Church
had seen the person of Christ, which is the wonder of
history, and felt the spiritual power that came forth from
him in the other world to transform men in this : where-
fore they adored him, and addressed him as the Divine
One that they had found him to be. With them, Chris-
tianity was faith in a divine Christ who was doing divine
work upon sinful men.

Thus the experiences of religion added the recognition
of Divinity in Christ to the recognition of humanity.
But such a faith would necessarily be followed by inquiry.
Confidence brought a problem. The question was inevi-
table, — Who and what is he who has been known as
human, but is now worshipped as divine.? Yet even
before the question came to be discussed, Christian
thought was answering it, bringing together the materials
for future doctrine.

The presence of humanity and Divinity in Christ was
accounted for in Christian thought by means of the Incar-
nation. Not that this word, or any single word of similar
meaning, was at once found or framed to represent the
fact. The word is not in the Scriptures, though the
thought is there. The word “ incarnation," like its Greek
equivalent, was suggested by the language of John i. 14,
“The Word was made flesh;” for incarnation is entrance
to flesh. The German language has a better expression
for the idea than we possess in English, in the word
Menschwerdung, becoming-man. Christian doctrine might
perhaps have been more spiritual if a word of similar sig-
nificance had been in use from the beginning till now.

I. The Incarnation in the New Testament. — The
first traces of a doctrine of Incarnation are found in sug-
gestions that Christ entered this life from another. Of
these the earliest are those of Paul, and the most definite


CHRIST


287


is that of Phil. ii. 5-9, Here it is said that “Christ
Jesus” existed “in the form of God,” or in God’s mode
of existence; that he did not selfishly cling to that state,
but left it and “took the form of a sen,’ant, coming to
be in the likeness of men;” that in doing this he
“emptied himself,” or deprived himself of what consti-
tuted or characterized the previous condition; that after
entering the human lot by this self-emptying he “ humbled
himself” still further, and “became obedient,” even as
far as to death upon the cross; and that in view of this
God exalted him to sovereignty over all realms of life.
Here is the assertion that Christ came into this life by
unselfish surrender of an existence in God’s own mode of
being.

This is Paul’s fullest statement; but parallel is the
briefer one in 2 Cor. viii. 9; “Who, though he was rich,
yet for your sakes became poor, that ye through his
poverty might become rich.” Similar also is that of
Gal. iv. 4; “When the fulness of the time was come,
God sent forth his Son, bom of a woman, born under
the law.” In Col. i. and ii. Christ, who is called “the
Son of God’s love,” is said to be “before all things” that
are created, the medium of creation, and the one “unto”
whom all is created; in him it was the Father’s good
pleasure that "all the fulness” should dwell, and in
him “dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.”
These statements are of similar effect with the one in
Philippians. The writer to the Hebrews, in like manner
(i. 1-4), traces Christ, whose rank is that of Son to God,
from original glory, through the work of making purifi-
cation of sins, to glory again. In i Cor. xv. 20-28, 47,
Paul traces him through the same course. These pas-
sages show what view of Christ was entertained within
thirty years of the crucifixion.

In the Fourth Gospel, latest of the great New Testa-
ment writings, the same doctrine takes more definite
form, and is characteristic of the book. If it had not
been for the thought of a divine origin and incarnation.


2 ^^


making che person of Jesus glorious, we may doubt
whether this profoundest of the Gospels would have been
written. This thought springs forth in the prologue
(i. I 1 8 ), and is the formative thought of the entire book.
The doctrine is summed up in these sentences : “ In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God. All things were made through
him. In him was life. And the Word became flesh,
and tabernacled among us, full of grace and truth, and we
beheld his glory, glory as of one only-begotten from a
father.” Here are two fundamental statements: There
is a divine Word, expression of God, medium of relation
between God and what he has made; and this divine
Word became flesh, or human, in Jesus, bringing and
revealing the moral qualities of God.

What is meant here by the Word has been discussed
under the head of the Triunity, and is summed up in the
expression just now employed. The statement concern-
ing the incarnation of the Word is brief but definite. The
Word became human, and dwelt among men in human
nature as God dwelt of old in a tabernacle. The glory
that was seen in Jesus because of this indwelling of the
Word was such glory as belongs to the unseen God. Jesus
revealed that glory, as an only son reveals the likeness of
his father. The qualities in which that glory of God shone
forth in Jesus were the grace and truth of which he was
full; his grace and truth were the grace and truth of
God, which men would not otherwise have known so
fully. Thus it came to pass that though “ no man hath
ever seen God,” yet “the only-begotten Son hath made
him known.”

Nothing is said here, or elsewhere in this Gospel, of
the manner or process by which “the Word became
flesh.” There is no reference to the supernatural birth
of Jesus; this Gospel views him apart from the events of
his birth. Not about him, or upon him, but in him, this
Gospel discerns the glory of God. Supernatural birth can
be nothing more than the means for the entrance of the


CHRIST


289


divine; this Gospel goes farther back and represents the
divine that enters. So in John’s Epistle (i. 2): “The
life was manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness,
and declare unto you the life, the eternal life, which was
with the Father and was manifested unto us.” Here
also is the fact announced, but nothing of the method.

Other statements in this Gospel concerning the Incar*
nation occur chiefly in the discourses attributed to Jesus,
and are of the same character with the statements of the
prologue. The words, “I know whence I came and
whither I go ” (viii. 14), are characteristic of the Christ
of this Gospel, and express a ruling thought of the book.
He seems to think of himself as differing from ordinary
men in this, that whereas they have to find a purpose
after they are born, he had a purpose even in coming into
the world at all. “I came forth and am come from God;
for neither have I come of myself, but he sent me. ” “ I

came forth from the Father and am come into the world ;
again, I leave the world and go to the Father.” “Before
Abraham was I am.” “Thou lovedst me before the
foundation of the world.” “Glorify thou me with the
glory that I had with thee before the world was.” He
speaks of himself as “he that is from God” (vi. 46),
The Christ of this Gospel stands among men in the
character that is expressed in such words as these.

The statements of the New Testament concerning the
Incarnation are completed by the narratives of the first
and third Gospels concerning the conception and birth
of Jesus without a human father. Though the Christian
doctrine of the Incarnation cannot be historically traced
to belief in such a birth, it is plain that such a birth cor-
responds to incarnation, providing as it does both a
human parentage and a divine. That a genuine entrance
of God into a human being could not occur except
through a virgin-birth, we must be careful not to affirm,
for we cannot be sure that it is true. It would seem,
indeed, that if God were coming to manifest himself as a
jpanj, k? Bjight employ either ordinary or extraordinai^


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


ways of entrance to humanity. Certainly the extraordi-
nary way would be open to him, and would seem to be
congruous to the greatness of the event.

If we wish to define the Incarnation, we must frame
our statement out of materials given in the New Testa-
ment; for an a priori definition would be of little value.
The Incarnation to which we find the New Testament
bearing witness is that entrance of God into humanity in
the person of Jesus Christ, by virtue of which Jesus
Christ was at once a divine and a human being. God
manifested himself as a man. This is the conception of
Christ that underlies and unifies the statements of the
New Testament concerning him, both in history and in
doctrine.

2. The Possibility of the Incarnation. — An incar-
nation of God in a human being would be a unique event,
and it is important to inquire whether we can conceive it
as possible. It may be said that as believers in divine
revelation we have only to take it on divine testimony,
and believe in it whether we can understand it or not.
But if we are to have a living and inspiring belief in the
Incarnation, it is necessary that the Incarnation itself
should be seen to stand within the range of possibility.
It is not necessary that all mystery should be removed
from it, — a thing impossible in the nature of the case, —
but it is necessary that an incarnation of God should not
appear to us to be a denial of nature, a thing essentially
incredible. If we think of it as contrary to all ascertain-
able possibility, our belief in its historical reality will be
formal, and easily overthrown. But what is true is
natural, and if the Incarnation has occurred, we shall at
least be able to see that it is not in itself incredible.

If we were to begin by assuming that God and man are
essentially unlike, that there is positive ^tithesis be-
tween the divine and the human, so that God and man
are separated by an impassable gulf of dififereuco. ift


CHRIST


291


nature, then indeed no incarnation would seem possible :
or if, yielding to authority, we admitted that an incarna-
tion had occurred, it would be wrapped in hopeless
mystery, or be to us at best a mechanical and lifeless
conception. Objections to the Incarnation usually rest
upon the assumption, expressed or implied, conscious or
unconscious, that God and man are thus held apart by
essential differences of nature. The difficulties with the
doctrine in the minds of those who hold it usually have
the same origin. Moral evil has made a profound sense
of separation between man and God ; and philosophy has
often held that the finite is radically unlike" the infinite,
and cannot hope for close relations with it.

Nevertheless, mankind has always been making the
contrary assumption, and acting upon it in the religious
life. The very existence of religion implies something
in common between the worshipper and the object of his
worship. That sense of the possibility of communion
without which man would never have worshipped, implies
that the One above is like the one below. The whole
religious history of mankind bears witness to the kinship
between God and man. In many religions the idea of
incarnation has constantly been struggling into expres-
sion, and the simple popular faith has at once craved and
accepted the manifestation of God in the likeness of
human kind.

When we come to the Scriptures, we find clear expres-
sion of the idea on which humanity has thus been acting.
Here is recognized an original kinship between God and
man. Man was created in the likeness of God, and sin
did not destroy that likeness. Converse in spirit between
God and man is possible. All through the course of
revelation God is seeking such unity between himself and
man as corresponds to the relation of father and child.
Man is constantly invited to call God father, and when
he takes his true place he takes the place of a child to
God. The Christian sonship, the most intimate relation
of man to God that has ever been proposed, is simply the


AN OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


fulfilment of man’s ideal and destiny, the crowning of his
nature. God’s relation to man is personal, spiritual, close,
paternal, and God and man are so alike that it can be so.

We can see where the likeness lies, and where the
difference. The likeness is in spiritual constitution ; the
difference is in greatness, range, extent of being. God
made thought, love and volition to be essentially the
same in man that they are in him. The life of God is a
life of intelligent volition, and so, upon his lower plane,
is the life of man. The powers that God has expressed
in the creation have their counterpart, upon a smaller
scale, in the powers by which man explores and under-
stands the creation. The holy virtue that resides in God
is possible to man, though in him it can never attain to
the glorious perfection that it has in God. The divine
and the human are essentially more alike than unlike:
for likeness in spiritual constitution is deeper and more
fundamental than unlikeness in range of life and action.
Even the difference between infinite and finite has no
power to annul the reality of the image of God in man
and the likeness that resides in kinship between Spirit
and spirit. It is by these two facts together, • the height
of the infinite above the finite, and the image of the
infinite God in finite man, — that religion is made
possible, and at the same time glorious.

This relation between God and man is not such that man
by growing can become God. Limits are set to man above,
in the very constitution of his nature, and he cannot pass
them. He may become a perfect man, but he cannot
transcend his nature and become infinite like God, Human
nature is essentially finite : limitations are a part of it But
it does not follow that God cannot become man. Barriers
that are impassable above to man may not be impassable
below to God. Man cannot transcend the limits and be-
come God, but God may conceivably enter them and
become man. The infinite does not need to go outside of
itself to find the finite: it has free entrance to the finite,
which it embraces. All God’s active relations with his


CHRIST


293


creation probably take place through some kind of self-
limitation ; and no reason appears why he may not so limit
himself as to enter into that humanity which he created in
his own likeness.

In the profound and helpful Logos-doctrine of the Fourth
Gospel we find an indication of the way in which this
might come to pass. According to this doctrine, the
Word, though nowhere called the eternal Son, forever sus-
tains an essentially filial relation in the Godhead. If there
is an eternal Word, a God-with-God, there is essentially an
eternal Son; and thus the Godhead appears to us enriched
and made alive by a relation of which we have some knowl-
edge. But when man was created in the likeness of God,
man was created in an essentially filial relation to God. Man,
too, was God's son. Thus man was created in the likeness
of the Word, the eternal Son of God, his relation to God
his Father being analogous to that of the Word in the
Godhead. It must be so ; a race of created spirits could
not come into existence without having the filial relation in
common with the eternal Son of God. The position of a
man, therefore, in relation to God would not be unnatural
to the Son of God ; it would be a lower position, but not
radically a new one. That is to say, there is in God,
according to the Logos-doctrine, an eternal adaptation to
entrance into humanity, or into any other race of created
spirits. Herein we can scarcely help seeing a predeter-
mined relation between the eternal Son and the created
race of sons, — a relation fitly fulfilled by his entering into
their nature and life, in order to bring them to full spiritual
fellowship with their Father.

Further, if God did limit himself with intent to enter a
narrower life, such is the likeness of humanity to him that
all limitation would bring him nearer to it He might
limit himself in less degree, and enter the life of some race
higher than man, but all self-limitation of God would bring
him toward humanity, which has powers like his, but in-
ferior in extent and range. If the Word ** emptied him-
self* of that which was peculiar and unshared in the divine


OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


mode of existence, that which he could not lay aside would
be the essential elements of constitution that are common
to God and man. If he ceased to exercise these essential
powers of a spirit in the manner that is exclusively divine,
he would be using them in the manner that is essentially
human. It is not true that man without limits would be
God, for man can never be without limits; but it is
true that God within limits would be man, and it is con-
ceivable that God, in the Son, might place himself within
the limitations of humanity. Moreover, the likeness be-
tween God and man which makes an incarnation possible
on the side of God makes it possible also on the side of
man. Humanity is created capable of receiving God.
Thus the incarnation which is possible from above, if God
chooses to descend to it, is possible below, in the humanity
which he created with powers like his own. God in man
would be the perfect man.

This is the ground, intelligible though not unmysterious,
on which we believe in the possibility of the Incarnation.
The Word, the eternal Son, entered by voluntary self-
limitation into the humanity that was “ created through
him and unto him,” with powers capable of receiving him
into himselfi.

We shall naturally ask how such an incarnation affected
the life of God. When we speak of incarnation do we
mean that God was withdrawn from the universe for the
time, and localized in Jesus? Do we mean that the Logos
was withdrawn from God and employed in human living,
so that God was divided and diminished? Or was God the
same elsewhere as if he had not been in Jesus?

Of course it is not meant that God was withdrawn from
the universe and localized in Jesus. Nor is it meant that
the Logos was withdrawn from God and occupied by the
Incarnation. We err if we think of the Logos as cap-
able of only one activity at a time. The Logos b
capable of all the activity of God. God was the same else-
where su% if there had been no incarnation, and the Logos


CHRIST


29S


was meanwhile as truly as ever the medium of God’s rela-
tion with the universe. It is needless to wonder what
would be left of God if the Logos were incarnated, or what
would be the medium of God’s communication with the
universe if the Logos were engaged in living a human life.
Such questions may be left aside. The Incarnation is not
a division of God. The truth is rather this : that the God of
infinitely varied activity added to his other self-expressions
the act of becoming man, — an additional form of activity
in which he could engage without withdrawing himself from
any other.

If we seek to understand more definitely the act of God
in entering humsmity, we find ourselves in a region where
analytical inquiry does not help us. Not by sharper intel-
lectual searching is the Incarnation to be better understood,
but by larger views of the greatness and spiritual perfec-
tion of God. The Incarnation was possible because God
and man are alike; yet it was rendered possible by the
greatness that belongs to God alone. The way was opened
by the constitution of man ; but the power to enter human-
ity dwelt in that greatness of God which man does not
share. To no one less than God would such an identifying
of himself with a race have been possible. And if his
entrance to humanity in Christ is ever better understood,
the advance will be made by clearer perception that it was
a genuine act of God as a spirit. It will be conceived less
technically, mechanically, materially, and more as a spirit-
ual action. The question of physical methods, how God
got himself embodied, is far less important than the ethical
and spiritual question, how God got himself so marvellously
expressed. Whatever God may have done, his action was
such as is normal to him as a spirit ; and we can understand
it only by thinking our way into the nature and meaning of
the action of a spirit.

Our human experience of spiritual action offers no par-
allel to the Incarnation; but it affords a suggestion that
is worth considering. While our personalily is similar to


296 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


God’s, he nevertheless is a free spirit, greater than the uni
verse ; his personality therefore is free from the limitation:
that bind ours, and has possibilities of which ours give bu-
faint suggestion. We find, however, that the higher anc
more nearly perfect the personality, the more can a humar
being go out of himself, as we call it, and enter into life
that is not his own. In one sense personality is an exclu-
sive thing, with lines of separateness drawn closely arounc
it; but in another, the largest personality is the least ex-
clusive. The closest relations of life, especially marriage
and the parental relation, when at their best, imply a rea'
and deep entrance into another’s life. Small and unde-
veloped personalities are but slightly capable of this ; bul
the personality that is nearest to perfection is free and com-
prehensive and most capable of these outgoings into the
life of others. Such outgoings from self and entrances
into other life are as far as possible, we know, from involv-
ing any division of personality, or any diminution of power
for other activities. On the contrary, the enlargement and
enrichment of life that makes such action possible is only
one part of a general enlargement and enrichment by which
all worthy activities are rendered stronger and more vital.

In this there is no parallel to the entrance of God into
humanity, and yet here is an analogy of deep suggestive-
ness. If the largest and richest human personality has the
largest possibilities outside of itself, what may be the possi-
bilities of the perfect personality of God? If the most
nearly perfect of men can enter most fully into life that is
not their own, without suffering alteration or division of
themselves, it may well be that God, the perfect being,
could place himself within humanity which he made in his
own likeness, without dividing himself or withdrawing
himself from any relation or activity in which he was
concerned.

Moreover, the most nearly perfect personality is found,
among men, to be most capable of sacrifice, self-abnega-
tion, self-limitation, for love’s sake. The man of highest
type can “ empty himself” of what is natural to him, and


K.JtKXAT


ay?


take upon him the form of a servant, and live within self-
imposed limits for the sake of doing good. It is true that
even the man of highest moral and spiritual type can do
this but imperfectly : but all real progress toward spiritual
perfection moves toward the attainment of this possibility.
Then how great a possibility of sacrifice, self-abnegation,
■self-limitation for love’s sake, must exist in God, who is the
original type of all excellence that is possible to man ! The
Infinite has infinite resources, even for self-limitation, and
for self-expression within limited ranges of life. God is so
great that he is not a slave to his own greatness. For the
sake of his own great motive of holy love, the Greatest
may limit himself as he will, and manifest himself to his
kindred creatures in their own forms of being.

It is in this general direction that we may hope to find
the Incarnation growing gradually plainer to us. If it was
not a natural action to God, it did not occur ; and its nat-
uralness to him must be found in the infinite richness of
his nature, and the vast possibilities that attend his perfect
spiritual existence. All things are possible to God except
contradictions, intellectual or moral : and the Incarnation
is wonderful, but involves no contradiction.

3. The Person that resulted from the Incarnation. —
The Incarnation produced the person of Jesus, who was at
the same time truly human and truly divine. The unique-
ness of such a person has called out many theories. Hap-
pily, faith in Christ does not rest upon such theories,
though it has often been supposed to do so. Multitudes of
men have found divine life in him, who held no theories,
hut knew him only as the true messenger of the saving
grace of God. Nevertheless questions concerning what he
was are irrepressible, and some of them at least can be
satisfactorily answered.

(i) Concerning Jesus we can certainly say that he was
a genuine person, possessed of a consciousness and a will j
not two consciousnesses and two wills, but one.


298 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


It is often assumed that an incarnation of God into human-
ity must produce a person (if such the product could be
called) possessed of two consciousnesses and wills, a divine
and a human. Accordingly many believers in the Incar-
nation have supposed that Jesus carried through life a
double consciousness, acting sometimes from one and
sometimes from the other ; so that he knew some things,
said some things, and did some things as God, and other
things as man. But this is contrary to the record. If
there has been an incarnation in the case of Jesus, it has
certainly produced a genuine person, a true Ego, having
like other persons a single consciousness and a single will,
and capable of living a genuine personal life. Such is the
testimony of the record of his life, and a priori assumptions
as to what an incarnation must accomplish, even if they
were much better grounded than this one, cannot stand
against it.

If we ask whether this one consciousness in Jesus was
divine or human, the answer is that strictly it was neither.
It was unique, partaking of both qualities, human and
divine. The unique person that was constituted by the
Incarnation must necessarily have been unique in his per-
sonal consciousness. His consciousness was neither that
of God nor that of man exclusively, but was that of the
unique God-mzui who was constituted by the Incarnation.
No other personal consciousness was ever wholly like
his.

At the beginning of his life, his consciousness was cer-
tainly human. The life was lived within human limits, and
the child Jesus certainly knew himself as a human child,
and cannot have known himself as more. To suppose that
he had, or could have had, in the cradle the thoughts that
he expressed in the Sermon on the Mount, is utterly to
destroy his reality as a living person. At twelve years old
he manifested an intense religious feeling as a child of God
(Luke ii. 49), which we cannot call divine consciousness,
but which was the feeling out of which divine consciousness
blossomed. At some time, perhaps gradually with the


CHRIST


299


coming of maturity, there came to him the consciousness
that although he was living the same life with others, he
was related to God as others were not. This consciousness
appears to have received a strong accession of clearness
and power at his baptism. Doubtless this higher con-
sciousness grew up out of the human childlike fellowship
with God as the heavenly Father in which he had always
lived. He appears in the record as a human being who
fulfilled the ideal of the human religious life in fellowship
with the Father. This life of perfect sonship was but the
life of the Word, the eternal Son, continued upon a lower
plane in human nature : and into such a life a conscious-
ness of his own identity with that eternal Son (John xvii. 5,
24) would enter only to enrich it, not to confuse it or to
break it up.

Consciousness that he was divine is to be carefully dis-
tinguished, however, from the eternal consciousness of God
not incarnate. The two are not one, and the eternal con-
sciousness of God he did not possess. Divine conscious-
ness in Jesus was necessarily the consciousness of divinity
within human limits ; it could be nothing more. It was
such divine consciousness as is possible within humanity.
As Jesus was not omnipresent in his earthly life, so neither
was he omniscient or omnipotent, nor had he any sense of
possessing these attributes. He had more than ordinary
human knowledge and power; but omniscience and omni-
potence belong only to the mode of being of God as infinite,
and could not be employed in the experiences of a human
life. In respect of power and knowledge he was “ made
like unto his brethren,” instead of continuing like unto his
Father. To think of him as knowing the substance of the
sciences, and the events of all ages, and the occurrences of
his own time in distant lands, is to think of a non-human
being, who could be to us neither brother nor Saviour.
But all that can be taught to the purest and most open
soul by perfect communion with God, he knew : and this
is more than any other ever learned from the heavenly
Father. All that he needed for the purposes of his mission


300 AJir OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


he knew, and all the spiritual insight that comes from
heavenly fellowship he possessed. He had the true and
holy point of view for all his knowledge; he saw things as
they are; and how much that lies beyond the ordinary
human knowledge this simple secret opened to him, no
man can tell, though it is what every truth-loving soul is
aspiring to possess.

{2) What can we say if we search back of the mani-
fested consciousness, and inquire into the actual constitu-
tion of the unique person? What in him was divine, and
what was human? Can the question be answered, or is
it vain to seek? Too close defining has often failed to
satisfy, and many may feel that it is best to leave the ques-
tion reverently unasked. Yet we can scarcely avoid the
inquiry.

In accordance with the view of the relation between
divine and human that has now been proposed, it is most
satisfactory to say that in Jesus the divine provided the
spirit, and formed the material of normal humanity so far
as the spiritual nature is concerned; and that his human-
ity further consisted, outwardly, in his possession of a
human body and human relations, but not in this alone ; it
consisted inwardly, and more significantly, in the human
limitations which restricted the action of that divine which
constituted his spirit. While he was divine in spiritual
nature, he was human in range of life and action, and hence
in experience. The spirit that constituted his personality
was divine : the fact that that spirit was living within human
limitations, spiritual as well as physical, rendered the per-
sonality human.

It may be felt that this statement, while it gives promi-
nence to the divinity of Christ, does not do justice to his
humanify, since it does not make of his humanity a sepa-
rate and independent thing. It does not provide for the
existence of a separate human Jesus, who would have
been bom and lived if there had been no entrance of God
into him. But it should be remembered that in no case


CHRIST


301


does the doctrine of a supernatural birth provide for a sep'
arate hunaan personality into which the divine might enter.
According to that doctrine in all applications of it, the
humanity of Jesus was as miraculously produced as his
divinity. It was not originated out of the common stock
at all, but the entire Jesus, human and divine, came into
existence by the immediate act of God. The doctrine of
supernatural birth, therefore, would almost require to be
accompanied by some such interpretation as has here been
offered, making the personality essentially divine, and find-
ing the humanity in the conditions of existence to which
the divine subjected itself. If this view were not finally
satisfactory, and it were held that a separate human Jesus
must be admitted to a place in our thought, the alternative
is not doubtful. The doctrine of supernatural birth pro-
vides for no such person. It would then be held that the
separate human Jesus, into whom the divine entered, was
born of the common stock in the natural manner, and that
the divine element in him consisted in the extraordinary
fulness of God imparted by the indwelling Spirit, and
making his life and character to be a unique expression
of God to men. If Christian thought does not take
some such view of his person as is presented in these
pages, it will adopt the alternative that has now been
mentioned.

According to the view that is here presented, Jesus was
not such a human being as human parents could bring into
existence, but, by virtue of being divine, was the normal
and ideal man ; for surely God, coming into human per-
sonality, would constitute such a man. He was not only
more divine but more human than any other; for the
normal and ideal man is most human of all. This view
shows why Jesus did not inherit human depravity, and
was not born to human sinfulness. Instead of being pro-
duced out of the vitiated common stock, his humanity
was divine, initiated by divine act, constituted by divine
indwelling. It was a clean humanity because it was a
divine humanity.


302 A^r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


This view avoids all questions about double conscious'
ness and will : it shows a single personality, neither wholly
divine nor wholly human in consciousness, but partaking
in both qualities: it shows why Jesus differed in con-
sciousness from ordinary men, and why from God unin-
carnate : it relieves us of all question about his acting now
as God and now as man : it makes his sinlessness appear
reasonable. It does not solve all the difficulties in the
case, but it solves more than other views, and corre-
sponds better than others to the conditions that we find
in the Scriptures.

4. The Place of the Incarnation in the Plan of God.
— The Incarnation is known to us as an element in God’s
work of salvation from sin. “ Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners,” and we easily infer that sin was the
suggesting cause of the Incarnation. But questions arise.
Was sin then an indispensable antecedent to this closest
approach of God to mankind? Was this manner of ap-
proach to his creatures suggested to God by the perversion
and ruin of humanity? or was it an original thought of
God, a part of the very idea of creating man in his own
likeness ? Would God have entered humanity if there had
been no sin, simply because it was humanity? The ques-
tion may perhaps be called a merely theoretical one, since
we do not know that God thought of humanity as a com-
ing race, without thinking also of sin as the coming act and
character. Yet we may fairly ask whether, so far as we
can judge, we may hope to understand incarnation better by
associating it with the thought of sin, or with the thought
of humanity in its relation to God. If we associate it with
sin, it will stand in our thoughts as purely a remedial work.
If we associate it with the relation of humanity to God,
vistas of larger significance will open to us, inspiring though
they end in mystery.

The Scriptures do not directly answer the question, and
we cannot give an answer in which speculation has no part
But Christian thought does not seem to rest satisfied with-


CHRIST


303


out recognizing a purpose of entrance to humanity in the
original thought of God concerning man. God made this
act possible when he created man, and it is hard to think
that the very idea of man in his mind did not include it.
If we contemplate the Incarnation until its rich spiritual
significance is deeply felt, it will seem to be the crown of
glory that humanity is by its very nature fitted to wear ;
.and it will be hard to believe that this nearest and divinest
approach of God would never have occurred if man had
been what he ought to be. When once this great work of
God has taken the place in our thoughts that it deserves,
we can scarcely rest without acknowledging that it was a
part of the counsel of God for man as man.

Once accepted, this thought will color our entire view of
the Incarnation. If it is not wholly a remedial device, but
rather the predestined crown and glory of a race of his
creatures, incarnation cannot of itself be thought to involve
humiliation to God. If in conceiving the human race God
intended to enter it and raise it to higher fellowship with
himself, the entering cannot involve humiliation. If there
were no sin, incarnation would be the crowning of his crea-
tive work, and the bringing of mankind to its destiny and
to his ideal. It would advance humanity to its highest
estate, by giving God more intimately to it, and binding it
more vitally to God. It would crown his work upon the
earth, and mark the opening of the ideal life. Instead of
humiliation in any sense, it would bring joy and glory to
God, as well as to man.

The difference between such an incarnation and the one
that occurred is due to sin in mankind. Incarnation of
God into a perverted and wilful race could be only terrible
in its effect upon the incarnate One. As a fact^ sinful men
hated him when he came, and murdered him. Incarnation
subjected God to insult most shameful. But if God in-
tended to become man because man was man, his fulfilment
of this purpose and actually becoming man in spite of all
that sin would do to him gives most overwhelming expres-
sion to his love, and affords the clearest manifestation of


304 OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


his spiritual glory. Nothing else could show so clearly
that he still considered the human race his own, in spite of
ail its evil. Any but the perfect Friend and Father would
have turned away; but he fulfilled his purpose to enter the
race, though it had forsaken him.

It may easily be supposed that if the idea of evolution
were admitted to a place in Christian thought, the idea of
the Incarnation would drop out of it. This does not fol-
low, however, if evolution be regarded as the method of a
free God who is above it The doctrine of evolution
represents the stream of existence as continuous, each
stage being the outcome of what has gone before it. To
a Christian, it only shows how long and steady has been
the purpose of God. The acceptance of such a view of the
world only enlarges our conception of that “ fulness of
the time ” in which “ God sent forth his Son, born of a
woman,” that through him men “ might receive the adop-
tion of sons.” God made the world for life, he made all
inferior terrestrial life for man, and he made man for him-
self. The closest approach of God to mankind, by incarna-
tion, thus appears as the fulfilment of a purpose that can
be traced back to the very be^nning of the long work of
creation. For the sake of the higher spiritual life to which
this act is the introduction, all things have come to pass.
The Incarnation is a free act of the free but indwelling
God, crowning the long course of unfolding, amd open-
ing to mankind great spiritual possibilities not otherwise
attainable.

If there are other races of creatures that bear the like-
ness of God, he may have entered them in like manner. It
may be his good pleasure thus to enter, in the fulness of
time, every race that he has created in his own image. If
there are sinless races, he may thus have crowned them
with their predestined glory; if there are other sinful
races, he may have entered them as he entered ours, seek-
ing to save. It may be that Incarnation is his chosen
manner of bringing his intelligent creation to spiritual
completion.


CBJ^IST


30s


III. The Unity of Christ with God and with
THE Human Race.

The Incarnation resulted in the existence of Jesus Christ,
a unique Person. With the nature of his personality in
mind, we must consider the relation that such a person
sustains to God on the one hand, and to humanity on the
other ; for these relations must be as unique as the person
to whom they belong. When such a person as Jesus
stands in the world, new things will be true of him, and
new possibilities will be open.

The relation of Christ to God and to the human race was
on both sides A VITAL relation. Both with God and with
humanity, Christ was vitally one.

To say this is only to re-state the fact of the Incarnation,
We have told how Christ was related to God, when we
have said that he was divine. In him God had become
man ; God was in him as he never was in any other, for in
him the Word had become flesh, and he was united to God
by identity of spiritual being. And we have told how
Christ was related to mankind, when we have said that he
was human. He was born into the human race, son of a
human mother, a genuine man, heir to the normal human
experiences, living a human life; and he was united to
mankind by identity of personal constitution and expe-
rience, so that nothing that is human was foreign to him.
Thus the unique person was united to God and to human-
ity by ties of life. With both Christ was vitally one ; by
living naturally he lived in perfect unity with both, and
from neither could he be separated. Hence there was no
need of any special arrangement or appointment to bring
him into closest relations with God or with men. By his
very nature he had community of life with both, — a com-
munity of life that was not imaginary but actual, not ar-
bitrary but natural. Born into the human race, he shared


3o6 an outline of Christian theology


in its life, while yet he had a solitary and unique com-
munity of life with God. He literally united God and
humanity. Between the two he was the living link.

These relations are represented by the two titles, Son of
God and Son of Man. Both sprang from the Old Tes-
tament, but came to richer meaning in the New.

Christ rarely spoke of himself as Son of God, but Son of
Man was the title that he oftenest gave himself. In this
favorite name we cannot fail to trace his deep sense of his
oneness with mankind, and his full purpose to cast in his
lot with his human brethren. His preference for the hu-
man title is profoundly touching, while yet it is only what
we might expect from his simplicity and sincerity in cast-
ing in his lot with men. Nevertheless even the human
title bears its exceptional testimony when applied to him.
The prophet Ezekiel was constantly addressed by God as
“ son of man,” a name that emphasized his human frailty
and his sharing in the common lot of mortals ; but Christ
called himself the Son of Man, — a name that marked him
as different from others, even while it classed him among
them. The Son of Man was THE MAN, the one special
man, sharing the common lot, indeed, in weakness and
mortality, and yet a man whose very humanness had a
significance in itself.

By his disciples after his exaltation, the title Son of Man
was naturally disused, in proportion as his Divinity grew
upon them. It appears on no lips but his, except in the
dying testimony of Stephen (Acts vii. 56), where there is
a reminiscence of his own words in Matt. xxvi. 64. After
his exaltation his disciples thought of him more and more
as Son of God. Accepting this as a Messianic title given
of old to the Coming One, claimed and accepted by Jesus
himself (Mark xiv. 61-62), they apparently felt no need of
defining it theologically ; but they used it, as in Rom. i. 4,
Gal. iv. 4, and throughout the Epistle to the Hebrews, to
express their sense of Christ’s unique relation to God, of
his oneness with God, and of the special dwelling of God


CHRIST


307


in him. In the Fourth Gospel he is “ the only-begotten
Son,” The Christians called themselves also “sons of
God,” and regarded their sonship as similar to his in spir-
itual significance (Gal. iv. 4-7; Rom. viii. 17, 29) ; but they
adored him as having in himself a Divinity that they never
expected to possess ; he was divine as they were not and
could not be, and this they recognized and this they meant
when they called him the Son of God.

One who is both Son of God and Son of Man is a unique
person, more divine and more human than any other. He
is bound to God by exceptional unity with him, and yet is
himself the ideal and typical man, the truest man that ever
lived. If there was an incarnation of God in man, cer-
tainly the resulting person must be more divine than any
other; and if God showed himself as a man, in the human-
ity that was made in his likeness, surely the resulting per-
son would be the truest man, truest to the type of man, of
all that ever lived, and thus more human than any other.
In fact, the perfect idea of man would now first be man-
ifested, and this would be the first perfect and typical
human being. If man by nature bears the divine likeness,
this follows ; the divine man will be the one in whom the
true nature of man first finds full expression. In this way
Christ is represented as the second Adam, the head of a
new and true humanity, more genuine than the historic
humaniQ^ itself (i Cor. xv. 45-47). Men often fail to dis-
cern their nature in this light, and suppose that the type
of humanity is revealed in ordinary human nature. It is
not true. The historic qualities of humanity give hint and
promise of the normal man, but the full idea of humanity
is divine, and can be learned only from above. God is the
type of humanify, and the God-man alone is the ideal man.
Vl^en the Word becomes flesh and tabernacles among us,
then the human appears as God conceived it in creating it.
The genuine and type-giving Man is from heaven.

Plainly the advent of such a person, more divine and
more human than any other, and standing in closest unity


3 o 8 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


at once with God and with man, is the most significant and
hopeful event in human history. To God, he is God’s very
self; to men, he is God-with-us, even while he is The Man.
To a sinful humanity needing reconciliation with God, he
is the captain of salvation. Hope hangs upon him. From
his advent, since he stands as a living link between God
and man, the sinful race may well take courage, being sure
that the approach of so wonderful a person, God in man,
cannot be without its gift of the highest good.

From the Vital Oneness of Christ with God and with
man there followed certain important consequences, rich
in blessing.

I. In his person there was genuine Revelation of God,
and genuine Revelation of Man. This also is a re-state-
ment of the fact of an Incarnation, true if only such an
event has occurred.

(1) Revelation of God. — In living his human life,
Christ gave expression to the character of God, so truly
and fully that men who knew him well had no need to say.
“ Show us the Father.” “ No man hath seen God at any
time : the only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he hath declared him” (John i. i8). His char-
acter is the character of God. In particular, Christ showed
men what attitude of mind and heart God held toward
them, and consequently, how they should feel toward
him. How God felt toward them was what men needed
to know ; and Christ informed them that God felt toward
them as he himself felt : God’s attitude was correctly rep-
resented by his own ; consequently, they might feel toward
God as they would feel toward him when they had rightly
understood his mission and responded to his holy love.

( 2 ) Revelation of Man. — As the typical human being,
Christ illustrated what man was intended to become. The
normal human relation to God was illustrated in him, and
so was the entire normal character and quality of man.


cssisr


309


By knowing him men might learn their ideal and their
proper destiny: and from him, in fact, more than from any
other, mankind has learned to know itself from above, and
to estimate its own best possibilities. At the same time
he revealed not less impressively the actual moral state of
men. This he did by contrast. The most effective way
‘to throw light upon sin is not to illustrate its nature by
living a life of exceptional sinfulness, but to live a sinless
life among the sinful. As a matter of fact, from no other
source has light so strong and searching fallen upon the
actual state and character of men as from the life and
character of Christ. His moral greatness has shown men
their defects. He has done more at once to humble
human pride and to lift up human aspiration than any
other, for he has shown men what they were and what they
ought to be.

This fact that God and man are both revealed in one
life is so important as to deserve special attention here.
If it is possible for one life to express God and man at
once, then we are right in saying that God and the normal
man are morally alike ; character means the same in God
and in man; words of moral significance have the same
meaning in the two realms of application ; moral standards
are the same in both ; goodness and virtue are identical in
the two, with only such difference as difference in field of
action makes. This is a most important fact for us to
know. If good and evil were one thing with man and
another with God, we could have no certainty in morals :
but the appearing of the real character of God and the
right character for man in one life proves that there is no
uncertainty here. Christ is the living proof of the single-
ness of the moral standard. By expressing true Divinity
and normal humanity in one, Christ has borne witness to
the necessary and eternal quality of morality, and laid
ethical foundations that can never be removed.

This truth is instructive in theology as well as in ethics.
It strengthens our confidence in the fundamental moral
convictions of our nature, and leads us to expect that the


310 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


most characteristic acts of God will be morally intelligible
to human minds. If normal human character is identical
with God’s character, then in proportion as we approach
to the normal human character God’s ways will grow plain
to us. We may be sure that God will approach us in ways
that right-minded humanity can understand, and that his
method of coming to save us, however deep the mysteries
that it may involve, will not be at the heart of it contra-
dictory to our moral sense. The presence of normal hu-
manity in Christ is a most encouraging fact to all students
of theology, for it gives us assurance that Christ has done
only what humanity may reasonably expect to find morally
intelligible.

2. From his Vital Oneness with God and with Man
there resulted, in the heart of Christ, Perfect Sympathy with
God, and Perfect Sympathy with Men. This again is
scarcely more than a re-statement of the fact of the
Incarnation. And through this vital oneness reconciliation
between God and men was accomplished.

(l) The Sympathy of Christ with God. — The like-
mindedness and common feeling with God that must be
found in a Person so constituted became manifest especially
in regard to the attitude of God toward men in their sin-
fulness. Christ had perfect sympathy with God’s estimate
of sin, and with his desire to save men from it

God’s estimate of sin is that which is natural to perfect
holiness. God’s holiness is the simple and unalterable
consistency by virtue of which he insists upon his own
character as the standard for his own action and for that
of other beings. Sin is the deserting of that standard,
and the setting-up of human self-will in place of it. Holi-
ness therefore condemns sin. God, being holy, can pass
no judgment concerning it but that of condemnation,
proportioned to its badness. With this adverse judgment
of (^d concerning sin Christ had perfect sympathy. This
sympathy was not merely silent assent, for it came forth in


CHRIST


3n


utterance. He stood among men as the messenger of
God, uttering the thought of God; and upon human sin
he expressed the judgment of God in the presence of men.
He passed God’s judgment upon sin by giving a deep and
true account of sin, as against current definitions that
minimized the evil ; by bringing sin to the light of spiritual
truth for revelation of its nature; and by pronouncing
God’s unequivocal condemnation of it. In the Sermon on
the Mount, and elsewhere in his teaching, he defined,
specialized, and reproved sin, particularly in its more
spiritual and subtle forms, with such power as was never
known among men before. What he uttered was indeed
the voice of his own heart concerning sin, but it was God’s
judgment also, for he felt with God so truly that in speak-
ing his own mind he uttered the eternal judgment.

Not only by his words did Christ pass God’s judgment
upon sin and show his perfect sympathy with God con-
cerning it, but by his life. He left sin out of his life. His
living confirmed his teaching, for he condemned sin in the
most practical way, by having nothing to do with it for
himself. No one convicted him of sin, nor did he convict
himself of it. Temptation came to him from the very
conditions of his life and mission, but he never yielded to
it. The temptation in the wilderness is only a sample of
the perpetual temptation from without that followed him
all his days : but he felt with God concerning the sin that
sought a place in his life, and by perpetually rejecting
temptation he was always acting out the divine estimate
and condemnation of moral evil. All who have under-
stood him know that as God hates sin, so he hated it with
the hatred of holiness, and condemned it with the judg-
ment of righteousness and truth.

At the same time Christ had equal sympathy with the
desire of God to save men from sin. We know that in
God hatred of sin and desire to put it away are equal,
being simply two forms of one affection ; and so it was in
Christ. His mission to the world gave expression to God’s
desire to save sinners, and into this desire he perfectly


AJ<f OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


entered. His desire to save men from sin was expressed
in all his life, and in his death. It inspired in him the
spirit of self-sacrifice, and made him rejoice to suffer and
die for the saving of sinners. Apostles speak interchange-
ably of the love of God and the love of Christ, and they
have the right to do so, for the two mean the same.
Christ loved with the love of God, and was impelled to the
cross by God’s desire to save, which was also his own.

(2) The Sympathy of Christ with Men. — It is plain that
Christ had that sympathy with the common lot of man
which comes by experience. He was born a man, and
lived a human life. He knew what childhood, youth, and
manhood, home, love, labor, pain, patience, faith, and all
the ordinary human experiences mean, by going through
them. He knew temptation, and victory over it. He
knew human piety, having deep experience in the life of
godliness. He understood courage, and tests of courage.
The Gospel of Luke and the Epistle to the Hebrews are
the parts of Scripture that most vividly set forth his shar-
ing in the common lot. We are quite right when we think
of him as our brother in human experience.

We see, further, that the person who was constituted by
the Incarnation had in himself the secret of a great and far-
reaching sympathy with men, a human sympathy touched
with a quality divine. As the One who was more human
than any other, he could feel with men in all that is truly
human; for the highest personality is most capable of
entering into other life. At the same time the divine in
him carried with it the moral penetrativeness of divinity,
the power that God has of entering into all life of created
spirits and knowing it as it is. Submission to the limita-4
tions of humanity set limits to this power in Jesus, and yet
he had this power, and could enter beyond all others into
the life and experience of other souls. He possessed full
human ability, and more than human ability, to know and
feel what men know and feel. Humanly, and with an in-
sight finer than human, he, “knew what was in man”


CHRIST


313


(John ii. 24-25). The largeness and richness of his per-
sonality enabled him beyond all others to take human
burdens upon his heart.

How far did this power extend? Certainly to all that is
normal to humanity; for he was the normal man, and all
doors of normal humanity must have been open to his
sympathy. But could it extend farther? Had Christ any
sympathy with men regarded as sinful? At first sight we
might answer No, thinking the question sufficiently dis-
posed of by the fact that he had no experience of sin. But
this answer does not satisfy us, for we know that he did
somehow feel with men in their sinfulness ; we cannot deny
it without knowing that we do him injustice. And it is
possible for us in some degree to understand it

We can see that Christ could understand the terrible
meaning of human evil as no one else could unders>tand it.
The normal man is the one who can most profoundly feel
the sad significance of the abnormal. If the normal man
further is gifted with something of the moral penetrative-
ness of divine sympathy, he surely must be able to feel
with men in abnormal living, even more profoundly and
correctly than they can feel for themselves or with one
another. In order to the truest sympathy with men under
sin, there is need of the truest insight into the moral qualify
of sin, and apprehension of what it means for men. The
truest sympathy is that of a pure being, for no other can
rightly understand and estimate moral evil. Are there not
here the elements of a real s}mipathy in Christ’s heart with
sinful men?

Further, he was not without what we may rightly call an
experimental knowledge of sin. He had an experience
that would draw a heart like his into deep sympathy with
sinful men. Through his whole life he saw the work of
sin. He heard its suggestions to himself, plainly and per-
sistently offered. He felt the limitations that it forced
upon him in his work. As the end drew on, he exper-
ienced the worst that it could do to him from without
He knew by experience the bitterness of its opposition to


314 OUTLINE OE CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


the good, and the intensity of its murderous passion. Sin
was indeed outside of himself, but it raged about him
like the waves of the sea. He had intelligent personal
experience of its evil, and could feel, in the intensity of
his love for men, the full meaning of the fact that they
were impelled by such passions and held fast by such an
enemy.

If Christ is shut out from sympathy with sinful men
because he was not sinful, so too is God. Upon such
ground he can have no sympathy with men as sinful, or
even as imperfect or as finite, for he has no common ex-
perience with them in these characters. Indeed, has God
in any case that common experience with men on which we
are wont to assume that sympathy must depend? Yet we
are taught to recognize in the divine heart a genuine feel-
ing with men, — not a mere sight of their lot from afar and
estimate of it from without, but a true feeling with them, a
compassion, a sympathy, both in their imperfection and in
their sinfulness. It is exactly the divine, in its spiritual
purity and inreaching tenderness, that is capable of this
which seems to us so paradoxical. This divine was in
Christ, limited indeed by incarnation, but morally un-
altered, and capable of all sympathy that springs from
goodness. Living a divinely human life, he could feel
with men even as sinful.

Thus by his normal humanity, his unselfish and penetrat-
ing sympathy, his holy understanding of sin and his ex-
perience in contact with evil, Christ was able to feel with
men in their various life. If the Incarnation ensured him
perfect sympathy with God, it also brought him into
perfect sympathy with men.

This twofold sympathy inevitably brought upon Christ
one tremendous and indescribable consequence. Upon
his consciousness there came THE SENSE OF THE WORLD’S
SINFULNESS, as it never came upon any other conscious-
ness, before or since. Vital unity with God and man
wrought vital sympathy with both, and both sympathies


CHJilST


3IS


wrought directly toward bringing upon his soul this burden,
the unparalleled sense of the greatness of human sin.

On the one hand, he lived in fellowship with God : he
loved holiness and hated sin, and upon sin he passed God's
own judgment, in his soul and in his life. Such fellowship
with God could only throw a dreadful light upon the sinful-
ness of mankind. How vast and deep and dark it is, no
one can know who has not such fellowship. Feeling with
God, he could never forget this one dark fact, or lay it off
from his heart. God never forgets it, or lays it off from his
heart. On the other hand, he was living in the deepest sym-
pathy with men. He knew them through and through, as
they were and as they ought to be, and rightly estimated
the greatness of their evil. His pure and tender heart made
their needs his own. He loved them so warmly as to care
with deepest personal anxiety for their moral state- Thus
he knew full well the “ burden of souls,” for he loved souls,
and longed to save them. But the better he knew and
loved them, the more deeply did he feel how sinful they
were, and the more did the burden of souls become a
burden of sins. He bore the fact and the weight of the
world's sin perpetually upon him, as a burden that he could
not lay down. Christ is the only one who ever carried
that burden in any such degree, bearing in bis conscious-
ness an adequate and unchanging sense of the dreadful
meaning and immeasurable greatness of human sin. Vitally
joined to God and man, he was born to this abiding load :
his very nature kept it upon him. As long as he felt with
God and felt with man, the great sense of human sin could
not leave him. We see his feeling expressed in his weep-
ing over Jerusalem. There, in a striking and solemn
moment, the pent-up sorrow of his soul broke forth, and we
learn from the voice of his weeping how heavily the burden
of human sin and its significance pressed upon his spirit.

(3) Reconciliation between God and Men. — Here we
approach that special work for the good of a sinful world
which the Scriptures attribute to Christ : for this work was


3i6 an outline of Christian theology


accomplished on the basis of the vital oneness of Chris!
with God and with men, and by means of it. Various
names are given in Scripture to this work, among which
this one, reconciliation, seems best suited to serve as a
general title.

Christ is often called our Saviour, and that which he
effects is czWtA salvation (Acts iv. 12; Eph. i. 13); but
this name is too broad for a title, being so comprehensive
as itself to need defining. Other names set forth some
aspect of the means or process by which he accomplished
salvation. The name redeinption is thus used (Rom. iii. 24;
Eph. i. 7) : Christ is said to have redeemed men, that is,
to have bought them, for God (Rev. v. 9), from various
evils (i Peter i. 1 8), as by a ransom, or purchase-price
(Mark x. 45). The name propitiation is used by Paul
and John (Rom. iii. 2$ ; i John ii. 2; iv. 10), but is ap-
plied by them not to the work of Christ but to Christ him-
self : they do not say that he has made propitiation, but
that he is the propitiation. Only in Heb. ii. 17 is there
any different use of the word, and there it is simply said
that the sympathy of Christ with men qualifies him for the
priestly work of making propitiation for the sins of the
people. Thus there is no sufficient basis for selection of
the word propitiation as the comprehensive name for the
work of Christ. Both in theology and in common Chris-
tian speech the name atonement has been the favorite des-
ignation for Christ’s work, but it is never applied to that
work in the Scriptures. It occurs in the New Testament
only in King James’s version of Rom. v. ii, where the
Revisers have rightly abandoned it and substituted recon-
ciliation, the word that corresponds to the original. No-
where in the Bible is the work of Christ called an atonement,
nor is he said to atone for sins. The name reconciliation is
used by Paul in Rom. v. 1 1, — “ We have now received the
reconciliation,” and at 2 Cor. v. 18-20, where God is said
to have been in Christ reconciling the world to himself, and
in Christ men are said to be reconciled to God. This
name seems the best for a general designa'Gon of the


CHRIST


31;


work of Christ; for the reasons that it sets forth what he
accomplished, rather than the means by which he accom-
plished it, and that it contains less of the figurative element
than the other names. It is possible that we may seem to
limit ourselves in advance and miss the true point of view
if we select a comprehensive name at all. Nevertheless
we shall do best if we study what Christ accomplished as
RECONCILIATION BETWEEN GOD AND MEN, and on the
whole we shall find the name a help rather than a hind-
rance to clear understanding.

The fact that in the New Testament itself we have vari-
ous names to choose from, presenting various views of the
work of Christ, is suggestive and important It invites us
to think of the relation of Christian thought upon this sub-
ject to the original Christian reality.

In studying the work of Christ, we are following the ex-
ample of the apostles and the early church. They had
before them for contemplation the great fact that in the
life and death of Christ a great salvation was accomplished ;
and this salvation they sought not only to possess but to
understand. Before us stands the same fact, for our exam-
ination. The whole meaning of what was done by Christ
has never been gathered into a single expression, in creed
or in Scripture. The various names that we find applied
in the New Testament to the result represent various ef-
forts of various men to express the one meaning to various
minds, for various purposes, and in various lights. These
expressions differ among themselves, and differ in precisely
the manner that is natural and desirable. If the represen-
tation of the work of Christ were rigidly uniform through-
out, we should suspect that the New Testament had not
grown up in real life, but was the result of study in some
cloister or elaboration in some school. The variety is that
of life and reality. Peter, Paul, and John, like their suc-
cessors to this day, were laboring to set forth the meaning
of the Saviour's work, in such forms as the thought of theii
age allowed and the exigencies of their ministry required


5i8 outline op Christian theology


In doing this they naturally and necessarily used figurative
forms of speech ; and they were of course the ones that
were familiar and enlightening to the men of their own
time. By no other means could the doctrine have been
effectively illustrated and enforced. Many of the figurative
forms that were then familiar and enlightening, however,
have since passed out of real life, and are now known only
in history. Since that time, systematic methods of study
have come in, and what the first teachers expressed in the
New Testament in experimental and practical forms has
been systematized in the modern manner. Such methods
have often given to the apostolic statements a more formal
definition and rigid treatment than their authors can have
had in mind. The figurative forms in which men of the
first century illustrated the work of Christ have been taken
to be of the very substance of the doctrine, forever indis-
pensable to the right understanding of the gospel. But it
is both our duty and our privilege to remember that the
work of Christ itself lies back of even the most ancient and
sacred illustrations that set it forth. Our proper calling as
students of theology in the present day is, not only to
study the various forms of speech which apostles used (as
redemption, propitiation, priesthood, sacrifice) for setting
forth the meaning of what Christ wrought, but also to see
whether we cannot penetrate behind them, and learn what
that actual reality was which has been thus variously pic-
tured. That reality is not fully set forth by any metaphor,
even in Scripture, and we cannot be sure that it is fully
represented by them all. If we could find it we might be
surprised at its simplicity ; we certainly should wonder at
its divine beauty and naturalness. And Christian men of
all ages have equal right and equal duty to search for it.

It will be well to glance at the various stages through
which Christian thought upon this subject has passed. It
is experimentally known that Christ has brought God and
men together in fellowship, and it has always been held, in
accordance with the testimony of the Scriptures, that he did


CHRIST


319


something, in his life and especially in his death, by which
this establishment of fellowship was rendered possible.

(1) The earliest Christian literature contains only gen-
eral statements concerning the reconciling work of Christ,
reproducing the expressions of the New Testament, but
not developing them into any definite forms of doctrine.
The experimental interest is here greater than the philo-
sophical or the systematizing.

(2) The earliest definite theory on the subject was, that
Christ delivered men from sin by offering a ransom in their
behalf to Satan, who was their rightful or actual lord. This
doctrine took various forms, but this more than any other
was the current and orthodox doctrine in the Church for
nearly a thousand years.

(3) Anselm, in the eleventh century, introduced the
worthier idea that the ransom or satisfaction was paid by
Christ not to Satan but to God. He argued that the
enormity of sin required an infinite satisfaction to God if
he was to release the sinner ; that this satisfaction was due
to God from man, and could be justly offered by no other;
that nevertheless it could actually be rendered by no one
inferior to God himself ; and that for this reason God be-
came man, in infinite mercy, in order to enable humanity,
in the person of Christ, to satisfy him for its sins. This
explanation proceeds upon the analogies of civil law, and
views the satisfaction due to God as debt.

(4) At the Reformation, this doctrine was modified by
the introduction of the analogies of criminal law. In this
view, the satisfaction that was due to God consisted in
punishment. It was now held that Christ actually took
the place of sinners in the sight of God, and as their sub-
stitute suffered the punishment that was due to them, in-
cluding, as many of the Reformers taught, the sufferings
of hell. Upon him fell all the punishment of all the sins
of all the men for whom he died ; against them, therefore,
penal justice could have no farther claim.

(5) By way of improvement upon the theory of penal
substitution, which seemed to leave no room for genuine


320 Atr OVTUNE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


forgiving (since what is punished is not pardoned), came
the Governmental theory: which held that Christ was
not actually punished for the sins of men, but that he
endured suffering that God, as a righteous ruler, could
accept as a substitute for punishment. The sufferings of
Christ thus sufficiently vindicated the honor of .God’s law
and government, and forgiveness was made consistent
with the maintenance of his righteous order.

(6) From the Middle Ages on till now, there has often
appeared, by way of reaction from other systems of doc-
trine, the Moral Influence theory of the work of Christ.
According to this, that work was a revelation of the
heart of God, not intended to remove obstacles to for-
giveness on God’s side, of which there was no need, but
designed to bring sinful men to repentance and win their
love to himself.

(7) In addition to these, which are all the great
theories that have been developed, there has been a great
variety of individual views, opening one aspect or another
of the subject. Many of these have been of little value,
but some have been rich and helpful. Christian students
have done valuable service by thinking for themselves on
this high theme, even though their views have not gained
general acceptance. Reverent study, if it is manly and
sincere, cannot fail to bring some real contribution to the
knowledge of Christ.

(8) The modem study of Biblical theology tends at
once to clearness and to freedom of thought upon this
subject. It makes plain what has commonly been over-
looked; namely, the fact that the New Testament does
not contain a single and uniform explanation of the work
of Christ, but rather exhibits the various thoughts of
various apostles and apostolic men, whose minds were
full of the fact of salvation, but who did not possess so
uniform a theory of it as we have often supposed. Such
study will gradually teach us to distinguish between the
permanent and essential elements in their doctrine, and
the temporary forms of thought which it was both neces-


ClfRIST


321


sary and useful for them to Employ. It will help modem
students to grasp the divine reality in its simplicity, and
confirm them in the conviction that they are at liberty to
express that reality in forms that are suited to the life of
our own age. The Scriptures, rightly understood, will
always favor independent Christian thought concerning
Christ and his salvation: and our confidence in God
encourages us to believe that, though much may remain
mysterious, an essentially true explanation of the work
of Christ is possible to us.

IV. The Reconciliation of God and Men in Christ.

Employing the Scriptural name that seems most exact,
we call that which Christ has effected Reconciliation
between God and Men. By this is meant, that the mis-
sion of Christ has been the means of bringing God and
men into moral unity and practical fellowship, and that
the work of Christ in his mission tended directly to this
result. All Christian experience bears testimony to this
gracious outcome of the work of Christ, and it is the
endeavor of Christian theology to show, as far as pos-
sible, how Christ’s action tended to produce it. We may
not find full answer to all our questions ; but we shall do
well to note the conditions in which reconciliation was
needed, to study the manner in which Christ brought it
to pass, and to record what we know of the resulting state
of reconciliation.

I. The Conditions of this Reconciliation. — Men are
living in sin, and are exposed to, or already involved in,
the various evil that sin brings; they are guilty of sin,
and defiled by its evil. Right and satisfactory life of the
spirit they do not live. They need to be brought to God
in penitence, to be forgiven by him, and to receive new
disposition and power to live in goodness. They need to
take toward God the attitude of penitence and trust, and
that he take toward them the attitude of pardon and


322 AN- OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


fatherly acceptance. This is the only way of exchanging
the life of sin for the life for which man was made. In
the experience of such reconciliation there will be three
elements : on the part of men, penitent turning from sin
to God ; on the part of God, pardon and fatherly accept-
ance of men; in the mutual relation that follows, the
imparting by God and the receiving by men of the spiritual
quality and power by which they can live in fellowship
with him. Such bringing-together of God and men, with
the inestimable good that must follow, was the object of
Christ’s coming. Since sin was in the world, it is cor-
rect to say that he came for this, — that sinful men might
turn to God, and that God might forgive them and give
them power for holy living.

The intensely personal nature of this reconciliation has
not here been overstated: scarcely, indeed, can it be
represented in too strong a light. The personal element
has often been lost sight of in the idea of legal or govern-
mental relations, and the significance of the gospel has
thereby been obscured. The reconciliation is not a
matter of relation to law or to government : it is primarily
and essentially a matter of the relation between persons,
God and men. The thing that Christ sought was, to
bring morally separated persons together in the right
relation. Peter spoke to the heart of Christ’s purpose
when he said that he “suffered, the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us to God.” We shall misunderstand
Christ if we lose sight of this. Back of all relations to
the government of God is the genuine personal relation
to God himself. It has often been held that right rela-
tions with God must be sought through right relations
with his government. But the truth moves in the oppo-
site direction. It is the personal relation that needs to
be set right, and it is through being right with God that
men are to be made right with the government of God.

If we think of Christ as seeking to bring God and men
into personal fellowship, we naturally ask, and are justi-


CHRIST


323


Bed in asking, whether God and men are willing thus to
tome together : whether both are willing, or if not both,
whether either one is willing. If both are willing, there
is little to be done, for reconciliation is virtually accom-
plished already. If neither is willing, both have to be
made willing, and some third person will be needed, to
influence both. If one is willing and the other is not, it
is natural to expect that the willing will seek the unwill-
ing in order to bring him into reconciliation and fellow-
ship. How is it in the case of which Christ takes hold ?
Are God and men willing to be brought into fellowship?
or are both unwilling? or is God willing while men are
not? or are men willing while God is not? These are
all the possibilities concerning willingness. How stands
the fact ?

Christ and the Scriptures give a uniform answer to this
question, and always represent God as willing to enter
into the needed reconciliation and fellowship, but men
as unwilling. God has always desired it, for he has
always hated the sin of the world, and loved men in spite
of their sinning. He has been grieved and indignant at
their hardness of heart, and has longed for their love.
This has been his perpetual and consistent attitude. His
appeal through his prophet Ezekiel is true to his heart
(Ezek. xxxiii. ii): “As I live, saith the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live.” To the same effect is the
entire teaching of the prophets, and of Christ himself.
Men, on the contrary, are unwilling. Their sinful life
has resulted in this, that they are inwardly alienated from
God, and disinclined to moral unity and practical fellow-
ship with him. Reconciliation with God would require
a spiritual awakening and a moral transformation to
which they are either indifferent or opposed. The disin-
clination does of course vary in degree ; in many cases
the question is embarrassed by the fact that God has
never been known in the character in which he desires
men to know and love him; beneath all the disinclina*


324 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


tion there is often a secret and half-understood longing
for the very fellowship from which the heart holds back ;
and, as we would expect where many persons are con-
cerned, some are found who are far nearer to God than
the rest, and more ready for the divine fellowship that is
offered to them. All this is true, and yet on the whole
the sin that is in men, which renders reconciliation with
God their only hope, makes them unready and unwilling
to enter it. This is the attitude as it is represented all
through the Scriptures, — God willing and men unwill-
ing. Reconciliation is proposed between two parties, of
whom one has a heart for it and the other has little or
none. And this testimony of the Scriptures is confirmed
by the experience of spiritual religion in the world.

Hence, just as we should expect if one party was willing
and the other was not, we find the willing taking the
initiative. According to the Scriptures, the initiative in
seeking this reconciliation is with God, from so long ago
that no man can ever get it for himself. It is represented
that God, foreknowing men as sinful, entertained an
eternal purpose to bring them to himself (Eph. iii. 8-ii ,
I Pet. i. 18-21); that he loved them first (i John iv. 10,
19) ; that he loved them while they were yet sinners, ana
sought through the death of his Son to reconcile them tc
himself while yet they were enemies (Rom. v. 6-10);
that Christ was the messenger of the love whereby he
sought to save the world that was perishing (John iii.
16) ; that Christ was in the world like a shepherd seeking
a lost sheep (Luke xv. 4-7) ; that God’s own attitude was
the same as that of Christ whom he thus sent (Luke xv.
1 1-33) ; that the gift of Christ as Saviour came straight
from God, and is the sure pledge of all other gifts that
may be needful (Rom. viii. 32); and that even the “pro-
pitiation for our sins” was not offered to God by the
sinners who had offended him, but proceeded from God
himself (Rom. iii. 25; i John iv. 10). Such references
might he largely multiplied, for the Scriptures bear but
one testimony on this subject. Language could not make


CHRIST


325


plainer God’s willingness and strong desire for personal
reconciliation between himself and sinful men, existing
when he sent Christ into the world. But in his action
Christ himself expresses the heart of God more plainly
than language could, and by the whole meaning of his
mission and gospel he shows that such willingness was
the very cause of his coming and the very burden of his
message. Christ has made it impossible for us to doubt,
if for any reason we were tempted to doubt, the perfect
and transparent sincerity of God in thus cherishing
and expressing to sinful men his desire for the great
reconciliation.

When Christ represents that God takes the initiative
in seeking reconciliation because he is the one who has
the heart for it, he teaches us that men need to be made
willing, but God does not. This willingness of God is
implied, or rather is expressed, whenever the Scriptures
tell us that God is the source of the reconciliation and its
blessings, or that salvation is by grace, or that salvation
is of the Lord. They always assert that all came from
God because God had the heart to give it. “ Herein is
love; not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. ” That
the willing God seeks to bring unwilling men to his holy
fellowship is the uniform teaching of the Scriptures, and
the heart of the gospel. To this free grace of God,
which is the glory of our hope, we are nowhere required
or ad'nonished to set limits. It is uncontradicted by
an 3 rthing in himself, and his proclamation of it in the
gospel is simply and unqualifiedly true.

Concerning this plain Scriptural position certain ques-
tions arise which must be considered. They arise mainly
in view of the governmental relations that we conceive as
existing between God and men. In view of these rela-
tions, it often seems that such statements of willingness
in Go 1 as we have now made must be too strong. Can
he ha’ e been really and actually willing? Ought we to


326 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


say more than that he was favorably inclined toward sav>
ing men when he sent Christ into the world, and willing
to be made willing? Was not God so bound by his own
law that we can call him willing for reconciliation with
sinful men only in this conditional way? Must not his
law receive some satisfaction before he could be actually
willing ? By law, in this question, is meant such expres-
sion of God’s will in statutory form, by way of require-
ment with penalties annexed, as is foimd in the Old
Testament. The law of Moses, or law similar to it, is
often assumed to be a permanent element in the relation
of God to men as men, and to be a barrier to God’s real
readiness for reconciliation with them.

We must not forget that law is not a fetter upon God,
but an expression of God. The truth is, further, that
nature, law, and grace are co-ordinate and harmonious
expressions of one and the same reality in God, — namely,
of his opposition to sin and his desire that his creatures
may be free from it. This truth we must unfold.

(1) The central fact is that, by his necessary moral
nature, God loves goodness perfectly, and therefore is
necessarily and absolutely opposed to sin. Moral evil
he hates and must hate. He could not construct a uni-
verse in which it should be treated with favor, or be
indifferent to its dominion over his creatures. By his
eternal nature he is its unchangeable opponent, both in
spirit and in action.

(2) This eternal nature of God, which we shall .do
better at present to call his character, has found an
expression in what we call the nature of things, the uni-
versal order, according to which sin is inevitably followed
by penalty. V'e have seen that this law of retribution is
universal and unerring. It is not a law in words, but a
law in operation, self-executing and sure. Sin is pun-
ished. This natural law of retribution is an expression
of that character of God by virtue of which he is forever
the opponent of moral evil. It is intended to serve as
warning and safeguard against sin to all intelligent


CHUIST


327


beings. It is not rightly understood, either in its ter-
ribleness or in its value, until it is thus traced to its real
origin in God’s hatred of sin and desire that his creatures
may not commit it.

(3) All divine laws or statutes against sin, established
for the guidance of men, are further expressions of that
same eternal nature. When God specifies sins and for-
bids them, he expresses his hatred of sin and his desire
that men may be free from it. Thus all divine prohibi-
tion and denunciation in the Mosaic law derived its
existence and significance from the fact that by it God
was expressing his necessary hatred of sin. That law
was a law in words, not self-executing as the law of
nature is; but it had tremendous moral power in the fact
that it traced the condemnation of sin straight to God
himself.

If it be objected that according to Paul (Rom. v. 20),
“the law entered that the offence might abound,” it
must be answered that of course Paul did not mean that
God gave his law because he desired men to sin. He
meant that in the providential movement toward Christ
the Mosaic law served so to illustrate the inability of
men to avoid offences as to prepare the way for a real
salvation.

(4) The mission of Christ to a sinful world to save
sinners is not the result of a new motive, but another
expression of the same eternal character in God. He
sent forth his Son because men were precious to him,
and he desired to bring them away from the sin that he
hates, to his own holy fellowship. This is a fuller and
richer expression of God than either of the others, for it
gives the chief prominence to the love that he bears to
men, even in their sinfulness; but it is only a richer
expression of the same divine character that finds expres-
sion in nature and in law.

(5) Thus nature, law, and grace, in reference to sin,
are one in motive. They all have their fount in one
God, and all express the same nature in him, — namely.


328 AJ/ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


the character or moral nature that hates sin and desires
that men may not commit it or live under its sway. Law
and grace differ in method, but there is no antagonism
between them in motive. To men they look unlike, but
in God they are parallel utterances, one higher than the
other, of the same divine thought.

(6) Thus viewed, no law of God against sin can, in the
reality of his own being, be a restraint upon his willing-
ness for reconciliation between himself and men. That
character in God which is expressed in such law is only
more adequately expressed in the desire for the great
reconciliation. Paul says (Rom. viii. 3) that in deliver-
ing men from the sway of sin Christ accomplished that
which was impossible to law: law sought it, but grace
alone accomplished it or could accomplish it. Whenever
this is done, the ultimate object of law is attained, and
plainly law is satisfied. Divine law is directed against
sin, and is satisfied when sin is made to cease. What
more does it ask than that men should not sin — for to
this end both its prohibitions and its penalties have
always been directed. It is thus that the law is fulfilled
in the gospel. All law against sin indeed, whether
natural or special, is in this sense fulfilled in the gospel ;
that is to say, its end, which is the defeat of sin and the
deliverance of men from it, is gained by the gospel. God
fulfils the design of his own law by his own gospel, and
the spirit of his law is satisfied. In Gmd’s mind the
two are never in conflict.

Or more concisely : We may read the following state-
ments as representing three expressions of the moral
nature of God, and see whether any one of them is incon-
sistent with the others.

a. God so constituted the order of things that sin
should be visited with punishment. This is Nature.

b. God specially and urgently forbade men to sin,

warning them of the inevitable punishment. This is
Law. t

c. When men had sinned, God sought to bring them


CHRIST 329


out of sin into reconciliation with himself. This is
Grace in Christ.

Here is perfect harmony, for one motive is apparent
throughout. If the final endeavor is successful, the
object of the previous endeavors is thereby attained.
If sin is conquered and made to cease, no statute of God
asks more, nor has the natural law of retribution any
further demand to make. Neither statute nor natural law
was established for the sake of punishing sin : both were
ordained for the higher purpose of discouraging and pre-
venting it. Punishment is just, and must come if sin
comes, but the promotion of goodness, not the infliction
of punishment, was God’s real end in view. If grace
brings an end of sinning, the end sought by law has been
attained. It cannot be, therefore, that in the sight of
God there is any need of satisfying law before grace can
save sinners. Grace satisfies law by saving sinners.

Certain expressions of Paul are often taken to teach
that Christ performed for all men a work of deliverance
from the Mosaic law : as, “ Christ redeemed us from the
curse of the law” (Gal. iii. 13). But Paul caimot have
meant that Christ delivered from the curse of the Mosaic
law those who never lived under that law or were held by
its authority; and the Mosaic law was never universal.
According to the context, “us” in this passage means
“us Hebrew Christians.” When Jews, living under the
ancient law, believed on Christ, their union with him set
them free from all connection with the law and all obli-
gation to it : in him they went out as into another world,
where that law was nothing to them. In thus delivering
believing Jews from the law of the Old Covenant, Christ
performed in their experience a work that he never did for
any one else, in that age or any other. It is a mistake
to read Paul’s language as if it were universal, when it
is limited in its application by the subject that he has
in hand. That Gentiles, or the great mass of mankind,
never were bound by the Mosaic law, was one of Paul's
great points of contention.


330 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Governmental relations between God and men suggest
another form of the question concerning God’s real wil-
lingness for reconciliation. Is it not a moral necessity
with God that all sin should be punished? It is often
thought that God must absolutely require this, and can-
not be really willing for reconciliation between himself
and men until due punishment has been executed upon
human sin. The “ethical” demand of the divine char-
acter is sometimes represented as a demand for the full
punishment of all sin. In view of this demand, it is
asked whether all sin must not be punished before the
sinner can be forgiven. Influence from this view of the
case, which has been very powerful in the theology of
the past, often remains, even where the view itself is no
longer held.

But the same sin cannot be both punished and forgiven.
This appears from either of two possible definitions of
punishment. When it is said that all sin must be pun-
ished, the thought perhaps most frequently is that
punishment is a just infliction on the part of God, repre-
senting and conveying to the sinner in his own person
the evil that is due to his sin. But it is plain that such
punishment is incompatible with forgiveness. Forgive-
ness is the withdrawal of such punishment, and the inflic-
tion of such punishment implies that forgiveness has not
occurred. The two acts, of punishing in this sense and
of forgiving, imply opposite attitudes on the part of God,
and cannot coexist with regard to the same person. If on
the other hand we think of punishment as the bringing-
forth upon the sinner of the evil that bis sin contains or
implies, — the unfolding of consequences, — we shall
reach the same conclusion. The central element in the
penalty of sin is the disapproval of God, and the heart of
penalty is taken out when this is withdrawn. But for-
giveness implies the withdrawal of this element in
penalty. Other elements may continue till they are
removed in the new life, but the forgiven man is no
longer under the penalty of divine disapprobation. If


CHRIST


331


forgiveness thus stops the action of the chief element in
penalty, it is plain that the same sin cannot be forgiven
ctnd fully punished. There can be no moral necessity in
God, therefore, that sin be punished in the persons of
those who have committed it, if he is to have mercy upon
them. There can be no need of this because there is no
possibility.

Moreover, it is equally impossible for punishment of
sin to be visited upon any one else than the one who has
committed it. Punishment is absolutely untransferable,
and no one can possibly be punished for the sin of
another. Others may suffer from it, but their suffering
is not penal. From its very nature, punishment can fall
upon the sinner alone. Even if punishment be regarded
as an external infliction measuring the just desert of sin,
still the infliction is not punishment but something else,
if it falls on some one else instead of the sinner. But
punishment, most truly, is not external infliction; it is
the bringing-forth of the evil that resides in sin, on the
principle that “sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth
death.” Of the elements in penalty that have already
been enumerated, not one can be transferred from the
sinner to any other. The idea that punishment could be
transferred could never have been entertained if there
had not been an external conception of punishment,
derived from human practice rather than from divine
reality. Human laws provide external and arbitrary
penalties, and it may appear that these can be endured
by one instead of another. Yet even here that which is
endured by the second party in the case is not punish-
ment, but a substitute for punishment. Punishment is
really as untransferable among men as it is with God;
and how absolutely untransferable it is with God, its
nature shows us.

Thus it appears that sin that is forgiven cannot be pun-
ished in the person of the sinner, or in the person of any
one else. The necessity of punishment, then, certainly
cannot be present to God as an obstacle to his willingness


332 Air OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


for reconciliation between himself and sinful men. Grace
does not wait for punishment to be inflicted.

It is good to know that in his approach to men God is
not embarrassed by complications of law or necessity of
punishing before he can forgive. It is good, because we
thus find ourselves free to think of God directly in his
personal relation, and to welcome his direct endeavor in
Christ for personal reconciliation and unity between him-
self and human kind.

2. The W ork of Christ in effecting this Reconcilia-
tion. — We are called to study the work that Christ per-
formed, using the aid of the Scriptural statements and the
light of the large truths that he has contributed to human
thought. This is a large undertaking, in which the best labor
will still leave much to be desired. We pray that unrealities
may go out of our thought, and the divine reality may
come in with power, so that we may attain to a true percep-
tion of what Christ has done for us. If our prayer is
answered, we may come to see that work in the light of
eternal verity. We may be sure that in that case the work
of Christ will appear to us essentially intelligible, and
appeal to us by its genuine rationality, as well as by its
spiritual satisfactoriness. Yet the divine is great, and the
nearer we come to the divine thought, the simpler it will
be, indeed, and yet the vaster and the more full of the
mystery of life and light. Right thinking will not wholly
banish mystery from this field, though it will help us
to the right point of view, and make many matters clear
that once seemed mysterious.

Two general statements may be made, to prepare the
way for the doctrine of Christ’s work that will follow.

(«) The work of Christ is to be interpreted in the light
of his Person,

This we may hold for certain, that whatever was done in
this great divine work was done straightforwardly. The
Person who was active did what as a person it was


CHRIST


533


and natural for him to do, and the work was a true expres-
sion of him. In that person, Jesus, we recognize both the
divine and the human, and discern God in humanity. We
are sure, therefore, that the simplicity and sincerity of God
will be manifest in his work, when we rightly understand it.
All was genuine. There can have been no fictions or un-
realities in it, and no transactions that were not expressive
of eternal verity. Christ was not regarded by God as any-
thing that he was not, nor are men, in their relation to
Christ, viewed as anything but what they are. There is no
unreal changing of places, or imputation to any one of
character that does not belong to him. Christ, working
straightforwardly from his own person, acts according to
truth. Nor would it appear that such a work was done
in pursuance of some special plan or device, an invention
of the divine mind or an expedient of the divine administra-
tion to serve some special purpose. When God has come
into humanity for the broad purpose of rendering effec-
tive his saving grace, we may be sure that he will simply
act out his eternal nature, in ways that are normal to him.
God's work is not the fruit of special device or planning,
but proceeds from the inner necessity of his character.
Christ acted out his real self, never doing anything that
did not correspond to the real state of his mind and affec-
tions, and always simply following the motive with which
he began.

With this view of the reality and directness of the work of
Christ in mind, we may recall more specially the constitu-
tion of his person, Christ was in humanity, a man, and
yet with God so expressed in him that he was truly divine.
What he did, therefore, was at the same time work of God
and work of man. Herein lies the unique and solitary
character of what he did : it was not work of God alone,
unshared by humanity, and it was not work of humanity
alone, unshared by God. In spirit and meaning, what
Christ did was God's own work ; and yet it was work that
depended for its significance upon its proceeding from
within humanity.


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


This double statement needs no proof, if the significance
of the Incarnation is rightly appreciated ; but we must not
fail to notice how much it means. If God was in Christ by
a genuine incarnation, then, so far as concerns the spirit,
purpose, and meaning of it, Christ’s action was God’s action.
In Christ’s teaching, for example, God was intentionally
teaching men. In Christ’s deeds of grace, the kindness
that was expressed was God’s kindness. In Christ’s hum-
ble service to men, the spirit of service was God’s own. In
Christ’s submission to death, God in Christ was yielding
himself to that experience. Since Christ was in the world
by God’s own act, it follows that whatever Christ’s action
as a whole meant, God meant that meaning, and the action
was significant as action of God himself. If God was in
Christ, Christ was an expression of God, and his work was
a work of God.

At the same time it was a work of God within humanity,
and of him who was the one perfect man. The life of Jesus
was lived within human limits, and his action had signifi-
cance also as human action. In his teaching, for example,
he uttered truth that he had appropriated by human
thought; his sympathy was human sympathy, growing out
of human experience; his service of love was so truly
human as to be a plain example to men ; his death was the
death of a human being, humanly endured. The action of
his life and death as a whole, though it proceeded from
God, took place within humanity, and had significance as
human action. So both statements are true, — that what
Christ did God did, and that what Christ did was humanly
done. All his action was natural action for one constituted
as he was, and had a true meaning in both his characters,
human and divine. The importance of this statement will
appear as we proceed.

It may be added here that Christ, if he acted according
to the constitution of his person as thus described, surely
did not set himself to obtain something from God. If God
was himself in Christ, and was acting in Christ, so that
Christ’s work was God’s very own, it is impossible that the


CHRIST


335


aim of the work was the obtaining from God of something
that he was not ready to give. Indeed, since God was
working in Christ, there was nothing in God for Christ to
overcome. It was no part of Christ’s work to make God
willing. Even the word “ propitiation,” when Christ is
called the propitiation for our sins, must obtain some
meaning unlike that which it has borne in the common
speech of the world, for it is declared that God himself has
given Christ to be a propitiation; and a God who will him-
self provide a propitiation has no need of one, in the sense
which the word has ordinarily borne. Some richer and
nobler meaning must be present, if the word is appropriate
to the case.

( 3 ) The work of Christ is to be interpreted as work of
a single motive in God, namely, the motive of free grace.

To this statement the New Testament offers abundant
support and no contradiction. The thought here is that
this one motive dominates the entire work, not only dic-
tating the end in view, but determining the method also,
and manifest in all stages and elements of what was done
by God in Christ That the end is a gracious end has
never been doubted; but that the methods are all purely
gracious methods has not always been perceived.

When God took the initiative in seeking reconciliation
and sent his Son into the world, the motive from which he
was acting, and which in Christ he consistently acted out,
was grace, or free and undeserved love to men. God
came into humsuiity in Christ in order to accomplish what
grace desired. This motive, unmerited love, dominated
the whole work of Christ, not only in its end but in its
course and its means. Without contradiction or incon-
sistency anywhere, the work of Christ was work of grace.
It was work of grace, and not work of law. In no sense
was the work of Christ a legal transaction intended to influ-
ence the law-relation between God and men. In all its
parts and aspects the work of Christ for men consistently
follows the method of free grace, or giving.


336 OUTimE OF CffR/SriAIV THEOLOGY


Law and grace, though as we have seen they are har-
monious in their ultimate aim, are opposite in their
methods. The method of law is that of doing and deserv-
ing : if man does what law requires, he is rewarded for his
works. Grace is free and undeserved favor on the part of
God. Grace does not inquire about merit, but imparts by
simple gift of love : the question of deserving does not
arise, but all is unpurchased.

The teaching of the New Testament is that the gospel
of Christ is from first to last a gospel of grace. Paul’s
noble doctrine of free grace is but the amplification of
Christ’s own teaching. Paul declares that to seek justi-
fication, or acceptance with God, by law is to be severed
from Christ (Gal. v. 4), the principles of the two systems
being mutually exclusive. The two methods differ, he
again declares, by complete opposition : since law works
by debt and grace by gift, the two are irreconcilable, and
if salvation comes by the one, it cannot come by the other
(Rom. iv. 3-5). The justification of men in Christ, he
says, is " apart from law,” that is, on another principle ;
and this other principle is that of gift, by grace, for men
are justified “ freely,” that is, gratuitously (Rom. iii. 21-24)*
In keeping with these statements, all thought of justifica-
tion on the principle of law is ruled out (Rom. iii. 20;
Eph. ii. 8-9). It is ruled out not only on the ground that
men can never attain to a law-righteousness acceptable to
God, but also on the ground that law-righteousness, or
favor of God on the principle of merit, is not the true
righteousness. In no circumstances is God’s favor earned.
God is always a lover and giver.

This motive of free grace to the undeserving was God’s
motive in sending Christ to the world, and to this motive
every part of Christ’s work corresponds. His gospel is not
veiled legalism. Christ did not work out for men a law-
righteousness which they could not have obtained for them-
selves, in order to make it over to them. If grace comes
simple and whole-hearted into the world, it does not come
to satisfy legal demands or win law-righteousness. Neither


CHRIST


337


with God who gives it nor with men who receive it, nor
yet with Christ through whom it comes, is the Christian
salvation a salvation by satisfaction of law. It is not pro-
cured, imparted, or received on the terms of law; that
is to say, it is not procured by works or earned by merit,
whether of men or of Christ. Men are not saved by pay-
ment of debt, or by legal satisfaction, or by transfer of merit
from Christ to them. God does not deal with men through
Christ in the character of lawgiver, or judge, or in any
special character, but in his real character as God, his own
very self, in personal relations with his creatures as their
very selves; and the method of his saving work is that of
grace, which does not wait for any one's merit or earning,
but freely gives.

Indeed, the element of relation to law does not belong to
what is universal and permanent in the gospel. Christian-
ity was cradled in Judaism, and had to make its way out of
Judaism into the wide world; hence the relation that it
bore to the law of Judaism was one of the earliest matters
of inquiry. But that question was never important to any
but men who were trained in Judaism. The apostles them-
selves judged that it was no vital question for Gentiles of
their own time (Acts xv.), and Paul labored to prevent it
from being regarded as a vital question for Gentiles in any
age. There is no need that theology consider the relation
of men in general to the Mosaic law. We need to warn
men against the legal spirit, but for this purpose the gospel
of grace itself is the strongest argument and appeal.

We are justified therefore in interpreting the work of
Christ as a consistent action in pursuance of God’s original
motive, the motive of free grace. If his method with men
is not that of giving his favor only when it is earned, surely
we cannot think that the work of Christ for men consisted
in earning it for them. Christ wrought directly toward
personal reconciliation of God and men.

With these two satisfactory convictions in mind, there-
fore, we come to the immediate study of the work of Christ


338 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


— it is to be interpreted as genuine, normal, straightfor-
ward work of the Person who performed it, and in all its
parts it is work of free grace in God toward the undeserv-
ing. With these points fixed, we now inquire what it was
that Jesus did for sinful men.

What view of the work of Christ is to be presented here?
Not exactly any one of the great historic theories. Not,
of course, the ancient theory that Christ offered a ransom
to Satan ; not that Christ paid to God a satisfaction equi-
valent to the sins that God was to forgive ; not that Christ
was punished for the sins that God was to forgive ; not
that Christ dealt with God as moral governor, and set right
the governmental relations of men ; and not that his work
was intended exclusively to bring men to repentance. It
is out of the two convictions above recorded that the pres-
ent approach to the subject is made. The work of Christ
has been described by various adjectives. It has been
called forensic, commercial, vicarious, substitutionary, penal,
vice-penal, governmental, ethical, moral. But the adjec-
tives that lead most helpfully into the subject are “direct”
and “ vital.”

When it is said that the work of Christ is direct, it is
meant that the end in view was sought not indirectly but
directly, by a work of the same kind with the result that
was to be accomplished by it. The end in view was the
great reconciliation, or the establishment of moral and
spiritual fellowship between God and men; and toward
that end Christ wrought directly. His work was not a
transactional ground for the desired fellowship, but the
direct and reasonable way into the fellowship itself And
when it is said that the work of Christ was vital, it is meant
that by his vital unity with God and men he was the means
of effecting true union of men with God. His personality
is the meeting-point for the great reconciliation.

The adjectives that were lately cited have been applied
to the work of Christ mainly to express in some form the
transactional idea. That work has been regarded as a
transaction to which God and men might afterward refer as


CHRIST


339


the basis of their reconciliation, and has been called sub-
stitutionary, penal, and the like. According to this idea
Christ justified God in saving men : according to the idea
that is here presented, Christ is God’s direct means of sav-
ing men. One view makes Christ the ground of reconcili-
ation ; the other makes him the way of God to men and of
men to God, the meeting-point of God and men, and the
starting-point of the saved humanity. In the latter view,
reconciliation is not regarded as an agreement or a settle-
ment of differences, but as a spiritual union of persons, a
meeting of God and men in genuine spiritual fellowship.
That the Christian reconciliation is thus personal and spirit-
ual when it becomes a matter of experience, all Christians
know. What is now asserted is that the work of Christ as
Mediator and Redeemer was of the same order with the
result that it brought about, — not something different
from it on which it might be based, but something like it
in which the result itself might be realized; and further,
that this work proceeded from the divine-human consti-
tution of Christ himself, to the divine-human experience
of spiritual reconciliation and fellowship.

What is to be said on the subject may be summarized
as follows. The action of God in the work of Christ was
self-expression with reference to sin, — expression of God
as hating sin, as Saviour to sinners, and as sin-bearer.
The twofold object in making this expression was to win
men and to satisfy God. In Christ this expression of God
was made within humanity: thus the human joined with
the divine, man with God, in making the expression, and a
new humanity was provided for and established, in which
men are reconciled to God.

I. The action of God in the work of Christ was self-
expression with reference to sin, as hating sin, as Saviour,
and as sin-bearer. God was in Christ, and God is like
Christ. What Christ expressed, God meant In the atti-


OUTLINE OF CHRISTLAN THEOLOGY


tude of Christ with reference to sin, in these three re-
spects, God was expressing his own.

(1) God’s attitude toward sin is that of one who hates it
and condemns it : and this truth he expressed in Christ

We have already seen how sharp a condemnation of sin
was made in the character and life of Jesus. The effect of
his presence in the world was to leave among men an un-
paralleled testimony as to the reality and evil of human sin-
fulness. His strong words of self-evidencing truth declared
the greatness and depth of human evil. His personal purity
put evil to shame, and revealed a standard of opposition to
it such as had never been known before. Jesus claimed that
this estimate of the evil of sin was not some detached and
unimportant judgment of his own, but was the judgment of
God himself. In the life and character of his messenger,
and through his words, God was uttering to men his own
condemnation of evil. Even more profoundly and power-
fully he did the same in the mission and work of Christ as
sin-bearer, as we shall see farther on.

(2) God’s attitude toward sinners is that of one who
desires to save them: and this truth he expressed in
Christ.

That Christ is Saviour, all Christians most joyfully
declare. But God was in Christ, and God is Saviour. It
is God’s saviourhood that Christ expresses. This should
not need proving, it should suffice to assert it. When the
Word was made flesh, God himself came into the world.
His was the motive, and his the act. Hence it was not
Christ alone that came to save us, but God. So Christ
said when he taught that he could do nothing apart from
the Father, that to know him was to know the Father, that
God felt as he did about the sinful, and that his work ex-
pressed the heart of God. So Paul taught when he wrote,
“ God commendeth his own love toward us, in that while
we were yet sinners Christ died for us,” and John when he
wrote, “ We have known and believed the love that God


CHRIST


341


hath toward us.” The spirit of sacrifice, or willing self-
surrender for our sake, was not a spirit that God desired
Christ to act upon but did not act upon himself. It was
God who gave himself for us to save us. Christ was
Saviour because God is Saviour, and it was God’s own
saviourhood that found expression in Christ.

That God is Saviour is a great fact in the invisible realm
of existence which men greatly needed to know. It is by
no means an obvious fact. A sinful world, under the in-
fluence of conscience, would not find it out, and finds belief
in it very difficult. Even Christians trusting Christ for
salvation, have not done justice to it, but have often found
the love and saviourhood of Christ far more real to them
than the love and saviourhood of God. Sometimes they
have even thought that Christ was saving them from God.
But it was God’s purpose in Christ to declare that he him-
self, the God who hates sin, is at heart a Saviour for sin-
ners, and that his innermost life is expressed in his desire
to save us. Only very slowly are we learning it We
have long said that Christ is like God, but now we are
beginning to see that God is like Christ, and is at heart a
Saviour. The saving love that shone in Christ was no
other than God’s own love.

In God this was of course no newer transient sentiment
In God there are no new or transient sentiments, for his
character is eternal. The life and cross of Christ express
not what God appointed Christ to feel, but what God felt,
and not what God felt newly or temporarily, but what he
feels because he is the God that he is. It is thus that the
cross is revealing God : the cross shows God as Saviour.
The familiar and enlightening words, He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father,” might have been truly uttered
by Jesus upon the cross itself, for there the great revelar
tion of the Father’s saving love was made.

(3) God is the great sinrbearer: and this truth he ex-
pressed in Christ.

A sin-bearer is not one who bears the punishment of sin.


342 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGl


for no one but the sinner can bear that. If we would
understand, we must accept the very meaning of the words,
that God is above all others the one to whom sin is a
burden, which he bears in the spirit of holy and righteous
love, in order that he may put sin away.

In two ways does God become a sin-bearer. He bears
sin first by way of endurance, as a hater of sin and a lover
of men. Since he hates sin as genuine evil, it is necessarily
a burden upon his heart. He feels toward it as one must
feel in contact with something hateful. And since God
loves men, it is evident again that sin must be a burden
upon his heart, for it is spoiling his beloved. It is impos-
sible for any human being to be a sinner without casting
upon the heart of God this double burden. His holiness
is offended, and his love is grieved. The men who commit
sin suffer for it, but they do not suffer alone, for they im-
pose upon God the infliction of evil upon good, and the
grief of love when it is sinned against. The sinful world
keeps God constantly in this attitude of bearing and endur-
ance by its sin. This is no new statement in our discus-
sion: it has been implied already, when we said that
the sympathy of Christ with God brought upon him the
burden of human sin with force unparalleled. If sympathy
with God brought it upon Jesus, then upon God himself
it already was. If it came thus upon the consciousness
of the Son, the burden of endurance was already upon the
consciousness of the Father.

Yet in another way does God become a sin-bearer,
namely, by way of endeavor. He is a Saviour. Holiness
and love conspire to make him such, and a Saviour, while
he bears the burden of endurance that has just been
spoken of, has to bear besides a burden of endeavor. A
sinful world throws upon God the burden of a Saviour’s
work.

Without irreverence we may draw an illustration. One
who seeks to know a Saviour’s sin-bearing may find help
by making the endeavor to save some soul from evil, — to
reform a drunkard or a gambler, or to cure a man of deep


CHRIST


343


dishonesty. It is because we know so little of such work
that we see so little a way into the heart of God. Who-
ever sets himself to such a godlike undertaking will find
what it is to bear sin. Of course to him sin will be hate-
ful and dreadful. He will be compelled to face the evil
that he hates, and to feel its presence. He must work
on beside it, biding his time, until his object can be
accomplished. He must endure meanwhile, and inces-
santly labor. He must put up with evil. He must
stand by while it goes on, and behold it, and suffer the
disgust, the grief, the weariness, that sin in one whom
he is seeking to save must produce. He must be willing
to be despised and rejected, ignored and insulted, while
his chosen work of saving waits, and while it proceeds.
If he cannot bear, he cannot save. It is because God's
children cannot bear, that they have so little power to
save.

It is the glory of God that he can bear: and upon God
comes all that burden of endurance and endeavor that sin
casts upon a Saviour. Upon him it comes from all the
sin of the world, and all the time. All that the pure
One must feel in contact with evil he is made to endure,
and upon him is laid all the burden of endeavor against
it that a Saviour-God can bear. The sinful world never
suspects that it is keeping God in this position, and lay-
ing upon him a burden vaster than man can possibly con-
ceive, yet it is plainly true. Sin burdens God.

In this we do not deny the perfect blessedness of God.
Sin-bearing would indeed be utterly destructive of his
blessedness if it consisted in a self-centered and inde-
pendent calmness.. But we need to remember, or to
learn, the great truth that the endurance of redemptive
suffering is the highest bliss. To a holy being there is
no worthier or more welcome joy than the enduring of
whatever may be necessary for the deliverance of souls
from sin. God alone knows to the full that noble glad-
ness, and he knows it perpetually ; but even we can see
that it is a real joy. As the Son, “for the joy”, of


344 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


saviourhood “that was set before him, endured the cross,”
so does the Father, filled with the same joy, bear the
burden of the sins of the world, and count it bliss to feel
the pain that must be borne if his creatures are to be
savei

The truth is, that God would wish to substitute redemp-
tive suffering for all other suffering that comes from
sin, and let it succeed in bringing all other to an end.
Penal suffering comes uncalled, except by sin itself,
according to God’s own order, and is sure to follow sin.
Love’s suffering for the sake of salvation comes when
some one is willing to bear it, as God is. If this gladly-
endured pain of saving love could render needless all
penal suffering by bringing sinners out of sin, the thing
dearest to God would be done. His nature calls for pun-
ishment and suffering upon sin, but this other suffering,
borne by one for another in seeking to save, satisfies him
best of all. If he can bear the sins of men, and make
the world know that he is doing it, and enlist created
spirits to endure with him the suffering of redemptive
love, so that sinners are won out of their sin into his holy
fellowship, he will be only too glad that no suffering for
sin but redemptive suffering is needed. Here is a sub-
stitute for punishment which God is offering, and in
which he will forever delight His true heart is willing
that the pain of sin-bearing should be borne by himself
and by all whom he can win to join him ; for he does not
desire the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his way and live.

We have called sin-bearing an expression of God’s love:
it is also an expression of his righteousness. By such
endurance and endeavor he gives expression to the judg-
ment of his moral excellence concerning sin. There are
more ways than one to express one’s measure of the evil
of sin, and one’s holy and righteous condemnation of it.
Dne way is to punish sin, bringing evil upon him who
makes it his own, in true and right proportion. This
jod does, and with this method we are familiar. Some-


CHRIST


345


times we imagine it the only method. But another W’ay
to express one’s measure and condemnation of the evil of
sin is to work against it, laboring to save men from it,
and willingly enduring all that such labor may involve.
So a physician expresses his measure of the evil of disease.
So the great Physician expresses his judgment upon sin.
With this method concerning sin men are less familiar,
not having in themselves the character to choose it joy-
fully. But this is God’s method as well as the other,
and this is the way that pleases him best. Because he is
righteous in his judgment upon sin, thinking, feeling and
doing toward it the very thing that ought to be done,
therefore it is that he bears the sins of the world. If he
would not bear it as he does, he would be like us, weak
and yielding, wrong toward evil. Being right forever,
he bears the burden, in order to conquer the sin and
deliver the sinful. His sin-bearing is the expression of
his righteousness.

All other sin -bearing is typical of his or expressive of
it. In Isa. liii., it is written of the Servant of Jehovah,
the true and righteous Israel within the larger and un-
worthy Israel, that he is a great and amazing sufferer.
He was despised and rejected of men, a patient but
almost unpitied sufferer, for whose pain there seemed to
be no cause unless it were that he deserved it all. But
the secret was that he was suffering for others. “ Surely
he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; the
Lord hath made to meet upon him the iniquities of us
all.” It was for the salvation of Israel that he was bear-
ing sin. All this is true in history, and at the same
time typical, leading us up to higher truth concerning God
and concerning Christ. As upon the redeeming Servant
the sins of many met, so upon the redeeming God meet
the sins of all.

Through this typical sin-bearing in the history of men
we come to the sin-bearing of Christ, to which the
ancient chapter has rightly been held by Christians to
bear witness. He, like no other that ever li'ved on earth.


346 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


has home the sins of the world. But Christ’s sin-bearing
was not a separate thing, having its significance wholly
within itself. It was not a service of his own offeree
to God who had no share in it. Here, as everywhere,
God was the original and Christ the Word. Christ’s sin-
bearing was the expression of God’s. As God’s hatred ol
sin and God’s saviour-heart found expression in Christ, sc
in Christ did the fact of his eternal sin-bearing find an-
nouncement and illustration. The sufferings of Christ
were the true representative s3nnbol and proclamation oi
what goes on perpetually in God. From them God wished
the world to learn that sin is put away only through the
redemptive suffering of holy love, which he himself is
gladly bearing, and which Christ, his representative and
expression, endured before the eyes of men.

The sufferings of Jesus, like those of the great Servant,
looked like punishment, and men have wondered how he
could suffer so if he were not guilty, either in fact or by
supposition. But he himself has taught us, in his divine
interpretation of life, that we are not compelled to explain
suffering as punishment, and to himself we should apply
the lesson. Love suffers in saving, and God bears in
order that he may save, — this is the key. In seeking
to save us Christ offered and submitted himself to endure
the closest contact with the moral evil that he abhorred ;
to feel all the grossness, selfishness, blindness, ingrati-
tude, violence, of the sinful hearts of men; to live, love
and labor and see no adequate result or return; to be
regarded with indifference, suspicion, contempt or abhor-
rence by those whom he was living for; to be despised,
rejected and murdered by those over whom he yearned in
undying affection; to suffer the shame of a criminal’s
position and the agony of a disgraceful death; to die
with scarcely a soul firmly believing in him, and so to
seem utterly defeated in his effort to reach the heart o(
mankind. He came to his own, and his own received
him not; he endmredthe contradiction of sinners againsf
himself ; he suffered the death of the cross. He sacrificed


CHRIST


347


himself to live, with all the suffering that life involved
for him, and to die, with all that was meant by death at
the hands of those whom he was seeking to save. In
all this he was subjecting himself, in such measure as
human life allows, to such treatment as sin offers to God,
and was showing forth the spirit in which God endures
that he may save. In all this God was representing and
expressing to men the fact of his own sin-bearing.

2. The twofold object in making this self-expression
of God in Christ was to win men, and to satisfy God.

( I ) The work of God in Christ through self-expression
was intended to win men out of sin to God. This we put
first, because it is obvious and unquestioned. The New
Testament constantly declares that Christ came to call
sinners to repentance and bring wanderers home God
showed his heart of saving love toward sinners in order
that they might know him and come to him. The Moral
Influence theory of the work of Christ is often thought to
be inadequate, but no Christian can doubt that it is true
in its place, or fail to cherish the truth that it contains.
"I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
unto me,” is a true word of the gospel. The winning
power of the man of sorrows, the hold of him who wore
the crown of thorns upon an endless dominion, the heart-
breaking victoriousness of his sin-bearing love, — these
are familiar realities. Suffering borne for salvation’s
sake is at once heart-breaking and winning to the one for
whom it is endured. It is the impulse of a true heart to
cry in shame and wonder, “ Any suffering that is home
to save me from my sin ought to be borne by me, but art
thou bearing it, O my God ? ” And when once it is seen
that God, in his inflexibly righteous abhorrence of sin, is
satisfied if redemptive suffering swallow up all other
suffering for sin by bringing sinners to himself, who can
resist the drawing of such love and righteousness as we
here behold? To draw men to himself by such appeals


348 AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


as these God sent forth his Son and expressed himself to
the world in him.

(2) The work of self-expression in Christ was further
intended to satisfy God.

There is no question here, as we have seen elsewhere,
of satisfying law, or punitive justice. But there is a
question of satisfying God himself, the same God who is
ever bearing sin that he may save sinners. Such a God
could not be satisfied without opening his heart to those
whose sin he was bearing. God is eternally satisfied
with the suffering of love for sinners, and desires that it
may take the place of all other suffering for sin. It
would seem plainly essential to his complete satisfaction,
in his relation to sin, that this fact should become known
to men. In reality, God himself was doing and bearing,
in his own heart, all that was necessary on the divine
side to the saving of the sinful. If we choose to employ
the word atonement, eternal atonement was made, and is
made, in the heart of God. Such truth God could not be
willing to keep unexpressed or unexhibited : he could not
be satisfied without expressing it most vividly and impres-
sively to men. Such expression is an essential part of
his work in the interest of salvation.

Here light falls upon the use of the word "propitiation "
in reference to Christ. The word has its history in the
Old Testament, and in the religions of the world; but
the only approach to a definition of it in the Scriptures is
at Rom. iii. 25, where Paul says, “Whom God set forth
as a propitiation, ... for exhibition of his righteous-
ness.” Here the thought is that whatever exhibits God’s
righteousness, or rightness of character and conduct
respecting sin, has the character of a propitiation. It is
a profound and suggestive definition, bringing into har-
mony the various uses of the word. Men might attempt,
and make, in their measure, such exhibition of God’s
righteousness. They might set forth their sense of his
rightness respecting sin, as against themselves, by various


CHRIST


349


forms of sacrifice, confessing that he was right and they
were wrong. This they have done in all ages, by propi-
tiatory offerings. But such exhibitions of divine right-
eousness, being made by men, can be only tentative and
partial. God alone can set forth his righteousness in a
full and satisfactory exhibition. This he may do, and if
he does this, it may be said that propitiation proceeds
from him. This is what in Christ has actually occurred.
Through the life and death of Christ God has given
expression, for his own satisfaction as well as for the sake
of winning men, to the truth that by voluntary and per-
petual sin-bearing he is doing all that his own demand
requires for the saving of sinful men. The work of
righteousness toward sin is the same as the work of love
in bearing sin. This work in which love and righteous-
ness unite God is perpetually doing, and his doing of this
work he exh'bits and commends in the work of Christ.
It is thus that when Christ is called a propitiation he is
said to have been made such by the act of God. God’s
own sin-bearing satisfies God, and his exhibition of it in
Christ completes his satisfaction. Now he has opened
the way for his saving grace to be received as freely as he
offers it.

3. In Jesus Christ this self-expression of God respect-
ing sin was made within humanity. This fact signifies
that in the making of it the human joined with the divine,
man with God; and that in Jesus Christ a new humanity
was provided for and established.

(1) In Jesus Christ the human joined with the divine,
man with God, in making the great expression of God
respecting sin. Now at length within humanity itself
there was One who was taking hold with God to bring
God and men together.

Jesus Christ was competent to join with God in such
an action. He was truly a man: he did the common
work of a man, living in a home and sharing in the com-


350 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


mon burdens of humanity in toil and sorrow, love and
need. His temptations were human, and so was his
victory over them. His way through the world was the
way of a man, and his death was the inheritance of his
humanity. Moreover, he was the one acceptable man.
He lived the acceptable life and bore the acceptable
character. He lived in unbroken fellowship with the
Father, unembarrassed in his relation with God by any
faintest suggestion of evil in himself. He was acceptable
to God in himself, and not less in his relations to the
race in which he was found. As no man liveth unto
himself, so no man can be perfectly pleasing to God as a
man apart, without reference to his feeling for other
beings. But Christ was altogether acceptable. He
loved men with a redeeming love that was God’s very
own love humanly cherished, and he joined in the judg-
ment of God concerning human sinfulness. Yet he had
such fellow-feeling with men in their weakness that he
could plead for mercy on them, praying for his murderers,
“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”
In all this he was a right man, thinking and feeling with
God as a right man ought, and loving his fellows as God
would have him love. He was the first right man that
had ever looked into the face of God. One who stood in
humanity now met God on God’s ground in moral judg-
ment, choice and love; and thus Christ was the acceptable
man.

It was in and through this acceptable man that God’s
work of self-expression was done. Jesus, the acceptable
man, “offered himself without spot unto God,” for the
purpose that God was fulfilling. By this is meant that
in Christ the human perfectly joined with the divine,
man with God, in the endeavor to bring God and men
into spiritual fellowship. The medium for God’s self-
expression was human. The divine man Christ Jesus,
the one acceptable man, perfectly offered himself to God,
and put himself at the disposal of the divine will for the
saving of men. Within humanity the divine love and


CHRIST


351


purpose found full acceptance; Jesus was possessed by
the love and animated by the purpose, and surrendered
himself to do and suffer all that the divine work might
require. At all cost of suffering, in life or death, he was
the willing performer of the will of God. In him the
human spirit of sacrifice blended perfectly with the
divine, so that the divine self-offering was consummated
within humanity, and through human action. This was
done, not in the special action of some day or hour stand-
ing out as separate from all the rest, but in his whole
career, including life and death. In both he acted in the
spirit of sacrifice, and joined with God his Father, by the
contribution of all that he was, in the endeavor to save
sinners. This action, which began when he entered
humanity, culminated in the death of the cross, and
reached its completion in that supreme self-sacrifice.

Death is human, and it was because he was human that
death entered into the lot of Jesus. When we seek to
xmderstand his death as an element in the work that he
accomplished, we are reminded of his own words, “ I am
the good shepherd: the good shepherd layeth down his
life for the sheep.” The shepherd does not regard his
life, but exposes it to all risks, and gives it up, if neces-
sary, for the welfare of his flock. So Christ knew no
reservation, but accepted death itself to save sinners.
Death is the farthest point to which one could go in a
human career. "Greater love hath no man than this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends : ” one cannot
do more than die, — except to die in the saddest, darkest
way, as he did. Here the cross is wrapped in mystery,
because we cannot follow the course of his inner experi-
ence. But the mystery is only that which attends this
one clear fact, that Christ on the cross was at the deepest
and darkest point to which the road of incarnation could
lead him.

Not merely in his dying did he come to that dark
extreme, but in the experiences darker than death that
befell him on the cross. Since he was divine and human.


352 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


he felt at once with God and with men ; and, as we have
seen, from both sides there came upon him as an intoler-
able burden the consciousness of the sins of the world.
Now, upon the cross, he felt his unity with the sinful
race so profoundly as to lose his sense of unity with God
his Father, and cried out in the agony of desolation, “ My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” It is in
this indescribable experience of identification with the
race to which he had come, that we are able to obtain
the clearest glimpse into the meaning of Paul’s deep say-
ing, “Him who knew no sin he made to be sin on our
behalf” (2 Cor. v. 21), — a passage that is to be under-
stood ' through spiritual sympathy, rather than through
definition and analysis. Yet even here, in the bodily
agony, the mental anguish and the spiritual desolation,
his soul held fast to God in all holiness and loyalty, and
he was faithful unto death, clinging in spirit to the
Father whom he could not see; and by virtue of this
immovable fidelity his sacrifice was well-pleasing to
God.

It is plain that in giving himself to such a death he
was giving himself “for us,” and “died for us” (Gal. ii.
20; i Th. V. 10). It was all in our behalf, for our
advantage, that we might be blessed by it. It was not in
any technical sense “in our stead,” but it was for our
sake. It is for the sake of the sheep that the good shep-
herd lays down his life. If he dies in defending them,
his life may in a true sense be said to be given instead of
theirs. So in a broad sense we may say that Christ
suffered in our stead, if we carefully remember that the
significance is spiritual, not legal or technical. We must
not think that he endured the same evils that sin natur-
ally brings upon the sinner, for that is impossible: no
one but a sinner could do that. Bearing sin does not
mean that. To say that his death was a substitute for
our death, and that he died that we might not die, is to
use the words “die” and “death," in two senses, and to
speak misleadingly. He died for us ; his “ feet were nailed


CffRIST


353


for our advantage on the bitter cross;” and we do not
need a closer definition than this of the sense in which
he died “for us.” In a sense equally plain, he died “for
our sins.” Our sins had brought him thither, and it was
to put our sins away that all the sin-bearing was endured.
His death was necessary, because nothing short of death
could represent, in a human career and effort, the spirit
of self-sacrifice with which God bears sin that he may
save. By going to this extremity God sufficiently declared
his condemnation of sin (Rom. iii. 26), and sufficiently
manifested his redeeming love (Rom. v. 8).

The vicarious element in this life and death is that
real vicarious element which comes from community of
life, depth of sympathy, and intensity, of love. It was
not appointed to him, but natural to him. It is that
vicarious element which is involved when one enters heart
and soul into another’s lot for that other’s good. Love
is vicarious in its impulse: love says, “Let me take your
burden.” God is love. Love is willing that the chas-
tisement of another’s peace should fall upon it, and that
by its stripes another should be healed. Christ loved us
in this spirit, and in seeking to save us entered into our
lot as only the divine and human Saviour could. He
bore our sins in his heart and in his sufferings, not by
some arrangement that might conceivably have been
different, but in tender and inevitable reality. The
vicariousness of his sufferings is of a kind that is possible
to any one that loves with his love, but the degree of it
is beyond our reach, because of the divineness of his
sympathy.

It is not strange that such a death as his, being the
uttermost of the divine sacrifice, is constantly spoken of
as representing the whole endeavor of his saving love.
So it appears in Rom. v. 6-10; 2 Cor. v. 14, 15, and in
many other places. His blood, which was shed in his
death, is spoken of in the same way, as gifted with the
efficacy of his work for saving sinners (Rev. v. 9) ; and
^fee .same prominence is given to his cross (i Cor. i. 17),


334 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


which was the implement of his death and the vivid
symbol of all its meaning. His bloody death upon the
cross was the culmination of the divine-human endeavor,
and therefore stands for the whole of it, with all its
meaning and all its efficacy.

Nor is it strange that such an action as the work of
Christ should supersede all sacrificial offerings from men
to God. It so exemplifies the true meaning of sacrifice
as to settle the question for all time. On the one hand,
it shows God as having no need of sacrifices from men to
win him to kindness toward them, since he is already
expressing such kindness as men never dreamed of, by
incarnation that ended in death. On the other hand, it
shows Christ as offering the only sacrifice that can be
acceptable to God from humanity in view of sin, —
namely, the sacrifice of self-offering to him, confession
of the evil of sin, consent to his holy will, and self-
sacrificing fellowship with his redeeming purpose. Thus
Christ showed how needless sacrifice in one sense is, and
how indispensable in another; how needless in the sense
to which the world was accustomed, and how indispens-
able in the sense that he illustrated; and thus he opened
the way for men to join him in offering such sacrifice as
God accepts, while he taught them how worthless ah
other sacrifices are.

(2) Jesus Christ is such a meeting -point for God and
man that in him a new humanity is provided for and
established, which is the true and ideal humanity.

In Christ God has expressed himself, making known
his holiness and love in saviourhood. Christ stands in
the midst of our humanity, near, knowable, lovable,
accessible, where his humanness brings near to us the
divine character to which we need to be conformed. Into
his character men can enter : and he is such a person that
to come into moral and spiritual fellowship with him is
to come into fellowship with God. The divine endeavor
that caused the mission and work of Christ is now QOti*


CHRIST


35S


tinued in bringing men into fellowship with Christ. He
thus becomes the Head of a New Humanity, into which
all his people enter, and which is the true humanity, the
ideal of God for man.

It is a most significant fact that when God sought to
save the world he first brought into existence a human
being in perfect fellowship with himself. The result of
the Incarnation was the perfect and acceptable man, and
thenceforth there was one standing among them into
whose likeness all men might well seek to be trans-
formed. To be saved is to be delivered from sin, — that
is, from sinning and the spirit that will sin, — and
brought to righteousness, — that is, to the spirit that is
right and will do right. If men, however sinful, can be
brought into inner acquaintance, fellowship, and moral
unity with Christ, all this will be accomplished. Noth-
ing more is needed for reconciliation with God than that
men should come to think and feel with Christ, and noth-
ing more is needed for complete salvation than that this
unity with him should be complete. And no man is
reconciled to God except as he does come to think and
feel essentially with Christ, nor can any man be com-
pletely saved except by becoming like him. There is no
successful existence for any being except in bearing his
character.

In Christ this divine standard is brought near. The
divine Christ is human. He is humanly near to men,
humanly knowahle, humanly lovable. The divine stand-
ard is expressed in terms of human life and character.
Christ was made perfect through sufferings, and learned
obedience from the things that he suffered; he was made
in all things like unto his brethren, and can be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities. In him the divine
character is placed where men can perceive it, and see its
fitness to their own state, and learn to use it as their own
standard. As they draw near to the Christ who shares
in their humanity, they find human sympathy and help in
him, even while they find the divine love and holiness


356 AI^ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


and the saving energy of God himself. As God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, so in Christ
reconciliation with God may now be consummated.

And in Christ God is still seeking to save. We must
not think of the divine action of saving love that sent
Christ into the world as ending with his life. It was not
spent in the Incarnation, or in the life that followed, or
even in the death of the cross. The cross represents the
deepest point to which God went in seeking to save, but
not the farthest point. After Christ came the Holy
Spirit; and God’s action of love is continued in the work
of the Holy Spirit, and in the entire endeavor to bring
men into moral unity with Christ. The same love that
endured the cross now calls men to Christ, and seeks to
transform them into his likeness by joining them to him
in spiritual union. Union with Christ is salvation.

Accordingly, Christ himself speaks of personal union
with himself as the means by which his blessing is
received. In John xv. i-6, we have one of his richest
and most characteristic utterances ; here he tells of union
with himself as indispensable to the true life, and illus-
trates it by the union, real and vital, of branches with the
vine upon which they grow. This is a union of life, and
what it illustrates is a vital, personal unity between him-
self and men. In like manner, in his final prayer, by
the profound saying “ I in them and thou in me ” (John
xvii. 23), he declares that his disciples are joined to him
in a unity of life, even as he is joined to his Father.
Throughout the Fourth Gospel Christ appears as the
giver of life, spiritual and eternal, and as giving it not
indirectly, as if by action outside of himself, but by
direct and vital impartation. The Father has life in
himself, and gave to the Son to have life in himself, and
they that eat his flesh and drink his blood, or make him
inwardly their own, have life in themselves also (v. 26;
vi. S3).

Parallel to this teaching of Christ is the teaching of
Paul in Rom vi. Here it is represented that deliverance


CHRIST


357


from sin is obtained through union with Christ ; and the
union of which Paul speaks is so deep and vital, so oppo-
site to all that can be imparted or described from with-
out, that readers have found no other name for it so good
as “mystical union.” This union is invisible, spiritual,
and undefinable, and yet personal, constraining, purify-
ing, and everlasting. It is as truly vital, a union of life
with life, as the union of vine and branches. Paul’s
favorite phrase “ in Christ ” denotes the same deep and
vital union : it means in Christ really, not by supposition.
“If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature,” because
from Christ a new power of creative life flows into him.

This vital union with Christ is entered by faith ; and
faith is the soul’s trustful recognition and acceptance of
the divine grace. The efficacy of faith is not something
magical or mysterious, for the meaning of the act is
plain. The act of faith is an act of moral unity and fel-
lowship with Christ : for in performing it a man assents to
Christ’s testimony concerning his own sin and need, and
the reality of God’s saving mercy; he turns his back
upon his own past, and identifies himself with Christ for
the future; he joins himself to Christ in reliance upon
saving grace for his own soul, and in fellowship with
Christ’s saving love and service toward other souls. It
signalizes the man’s change of view and entrance with
Christ upon God’s way; and thus faith is the initial act
of a life in union with Christ the Saviour.

When this has occurred, God knows the man as “in
Christ,” and in his unity with Christ he knows that there
dwells the secret, power, and promise of the holy life.
There is every reason, therefore, why he should overlook
the past, and view the man in the light of what the new
life means. It is “in Christ” that sins are forgiven:
“God in Christ forgave you,” says Paul, in Eph. iv. 32.
The power of the new life is a power that sets free from
sin (Rom. viii. 3), and all righteous claims are satisfied
if sin is done away. Thus it is that " he is faithful and
righteous to forgive us our sins, and to purify us from al?


3s8 an outline of Christian theology


unrighteousness” (i John i. 9). It is true that the new
life is but just begun, but God sees in the man the prin-
ciple and power by which it will be brought to comple-
tion, and freely acts toward him as toward a man redeemed
from sin. The new life, proceeding naturally from its
beginning, works more and more that moral unity with
Christ wherein is found the perfection of the human
soul.

This is a real salvation. There is here no need of a
doctrine to teach that the quality of Christ as acceptable
to God is imputed to sinful men, and accounted to them
as if it were theirs although it is not. No doctrine of
imputation that implies a transferring or charging-over of
merits is taught in Scripture, or is in harmony with the
gospel, or can possibly be true. Nothing is ever said in
Scripture to be imputed to a man for righteousness except
his own faith (Rom. iv. 1-25) ; and it is not taught that
Christ acquired a merit or a righteousness that was to be
set to the account of sinful men. Nor is there need of
such a doctrine, for Christ actually makes men right and
imparts a real salvation. By spiritual union with him a
man is delivered from sinning and the spirit that will
sin, and made possessor of the spirit that is right and
will do right, and is thereby saved. In Christ he is a
new creature, “ created in Christ Jesus unto good works ”
(Eph. ii. 10); and toward this new creation the whole
work of God, from the Incarnation to his own renewal,
has directly tended.

The men who are thus “in Christ” do truly constitute
a New Humanity. Christ, the first perfect man, was the
first in whom God’s idea in creating mankind was fully
realized. To come into spiritual fellowship and moral
unity with him is to enter into that ideal humanity which
fulfils God’s design. Christ is thus the beginning of a
new humanity in fellowship with God, and when he
brings men to himself he brings them into this humanity.
Every soul that is joined to him thereby enters it. That
Christ is truly a new Head for mankind is the teaching


CHRIST


359


of Paul in i Cor. xv. and in Rom. v. There has been a
natural humanity, but now there is a spiritual humanity,
to which Christ is “the second man,” and “the last
Adam,” the new Head. As the first man was founder of
humanity, so the man who “ is from heaven, ” the Saviour,
is founder of a new humanity, to which all who are
“ in him ” by spiritual kinship belong. The natura’
humanity bears in one aspect the likeness of its earthly
head, and in another it bears the likeness of God in
spiritual constitution; but the spiritual humanity bears
the likeness of God in spiritual character, and thus ful-
fils God’s desire and intention for his creatures (Eph. iv.
24; Col. iii. 10). The ties of this humanity are not carnal
but spiritual, and its life is the holy, eternal life which
is in Christ. This humanity is reconciled to God, and
lives in fellowship with God. Its peculiarity is the pos-
session of the character of Christ. Those who belong
to it are not of this world, even as he is not of this world;
they are new creatures in him; they have his love of
holiness, his hatred of sin, his acquaintance with the
Heavenly Father, and his willingness to sacrifice self
for the saving of others. Their life is a divine life, and
lasts forever in unending progress. It is the true and
ideal life of humanity that God had in view throughout
his long process of creation. No man yet possesses it in
perfection, but it exists in every human being who is “ in
Christ.”

The crowning glory of the new humanity is that when
it comes to its own true character it is a redemptive
humanity. How could it be otherwise, when it is formed
by spiritual union with a redemptive Christ, who is the
expression of a redemptive God? The new humanity is
one that joins with God in sin-bearing. Like him it
seeks to save, and is willing to work and wait and suffer,
that the great end may be gained. Union with Christ
delivers a man from that selfish isolation in which the
sins and burdens of his human brothers are nothing to
him, and brings him into the fellowship of saviourhood.


360 A// OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


It is true that the reality of this character in the new
humanity is learned but slowly, but this does not alter
the fact. In proportion as Christ has his way with his
redeemed people does the world come to be filled with
companions of the order of salvation, who will “make up
that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ ” for the
saving of men.

The outcome of Christ’s mission and work may be
made plain by the Christian answers to three questions :
how God thinks of the world, how God thinks of men
who are in Christ, and how men should think of God.
In all these relations Christ stands as the point of
reconciliation and of unity.

(1) God thinks of this world as a world in which he has
done his supreme work of grace to bring men from sin to
himself. He looks upon it through the medium of Christ,
in whom he has come to save the world. He has expressed
himself in it, and made himself known to men. He has set
Christ forth as a propitiation for its sins, — that is to say, he
has shown that he has the ground of mercy in himself ; he
has revealed the divine sin-bearing in which his heart finds
righteous satisfaction. Already has God in Christ been
reconciling the world unto himself, not reckoning unto
them their trespasses. Therefore he regards and addresses
this world as a world to which he is ready to impart a full
salvation, in the only way in which salvation can be im-
parted, — namely, in experience, by means of faith in him.

(2) God thinks of men who are in Christ as men in
whom he is accomplishing the purpose for which he came
in Christ to the world. He sees them in Christ, — looking
through Christ as it were, to behold them, — and views
them in the light of what Christ is. They are men who
have joined in fellowship with Christ with respect to sin
and salvation; therefore they are accepted and forgiven,
and God’s attitude towards them is that of gracious and
joyous fatherhood. In Christ they have peace with God,
and are at home with him. Viewinc them in Christ, he


CHRIST


301


sees not only what they are, but what they are destined to
become. He estimates their value and their future in the
light of that new humanity to which Christ has introduced
them. In Christ he can see in them as real what to other
eyes would seem unreal and impossible. Perceiving the
harvest in the seed, the man in the child, he estimates
them in view of Christ’s perfection, in which he foresees
them clothed. If he beheld them without reference to
Christ, he would see them in their sinfulness and alienation
from himself: but the truth about them is that they are in
Christ, and in view of this high truth he thinks of them.
Hence to his mind all the successive elements that are
enumerated in Rom. viii. 28, 29, are present at once: fore-
knowledge, foreordination to likeness to Christ, calling,
justification, and glory are all comprehended in his single
thought concerning them. All the fulness of blessing for
men is included in this fact, that God beholds them in
Christ.

(3) Men should view God in Christ It is at once our
privilege and our duty to think of God wholly in the char-
acter in which Christ has revealed him. In Christ he has
come into living and true expression, on purpose that he
may be known as he is : therefore we are both permitted
and required to leave behind us all conceptions of his char-
acter except those which Christ has revealed or confirmed
to us, and to accept in its fulness the truth that the only
living God is the God whom Christ makes known to us.
In Christ God is good, holy, rich in all moral excellence,
free and fatherly in heart, abounding in love and helpful-
ness and worthy forever to be loved, adored, and trusted
by all that he has made. In Christ we come to genuine
acquaintance with him : here is true knowledge of God,
and in this is eternal life (John xvii. 3). Here, in the char-
acter of God, is the gospel. Here is the way to peace
when we think of our own relations with him. Here is
the secret of strength for moral endeavor. Here is hope.
Here is the key for solving the mysteries of the universe.
This truth — that Christ is the genuine revelation of God,


362 AI\r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


and that therefore there is nothing in God that differs
from Christ’s character, spirit, or purpose — is an element
in the Christian revelation that the Church has been ex-
tremely slow to perceive and accept. Yet this truth is the
heart of the gospel, and the light of the world, and the
Church of Christ ought to be living in the solemn joy of it,
and proclaiming it as glad tidings to all mankind.

Here is the reality of Christ’s Mediatorship. Christ is
between God and men, as it were, as a medium of vision.
God looks toward the world, and sees it as the world that
Christ lived and died to save. He looks toward the men
who are trusting Christ, and sees them in Christ, and Christ
in them ; and in Christ they possess the full blessing of his
fatherhood and fellowship. Men look toward God, and
what they see is the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ: looking for God, they cannot see any God but the
One whom Christ has manifested, for the reason that there
is no other; and in him they find peace and newness of
life. Thus in Christ God and men find genuine reconcilin'
tion, and live in abiding fellowship : God freely loves and
helps men, and men freely love and trust God. Here is
real unity, the very relation for which man was created ;
and all is initiated and sustmned IN’ CHRIST.

V. The Present Activity of Christ.

The Resurrection of Christ, which followed his death,
was helpful to salvation through its evidential value. By
manifestation of the triumphant Jesus it showed men that
he was a Saviour whom they could trust The mode of
his rising from the dead is not vital to Christianity: he
might manifest himself with physical or spiritual body, so
far as we can see : but the resurrection itself was vital, as
Paul asserts. It was vital because it afforded evidence
that Christ who died did not thereby cease to exist or lose
his power to bless the world, and that his realm of gracious
operation includes the unseen life as well as the seen.


CHRIST


363


Beyond death is the unknown : if Christ had not returned
thence, men would not have been sure that in that unseen
world to which all must go he had power, or even exis-
tence. The resurrection set the divine seal upon what he
had done in this world by showing him victorious and
powerful in the other. If it had not occurred, no swift
blossoming of timid love into enthusiastic Christianity
would have been possible. It was by his rising from the
dead that a Christianity of glowing and permanent faith in
him was introduced, and by it he founded a church against
which the gates of Hades could not prevail

As we have seen, however, that resurrection which Paul
declared to be indispensable to the salvation of men was
not merely the reappearance of Jesus on earth after his
death. Rather did it include, or imply, his departure from
the earth to another life. It was not mere release from the
grave ; it was entrance to the eternal world and attainment
to the possession of divine spiritual power. In Eph. i.
19-22, all this is included under the name of resurrectioa
Without this release from all that is earthly and admittance
to the position of spiritual freedom and control, Paul asserts
that he would not have been the mighty renewer that he is.
But he has thus risen, and is now the Lord of all, and the
centre and source of holy life for men. Though invisible, he
lives in believers, and they live in him. How magnificently
ring out the words of Rev. i. 17-18: “Fear not; I am the
first and the last, and the Living One ; and I was dead, and
behold, I am alive for evermore, and I have the keys of
death and of Hades.” Other evidences of his immortal
reality and power have since been added, but they have
not rendered superfluous the evidence of the resurrection.

The resurrection of Christ was followed by his Ascension,
or withdrawal from life on earth to life in the unseen
spiritual world. This was the natural sequel of the resur-
rection, or rather, this was the abiding fact to which the
resurrection was introductory. By this withdrawal it came
to pass that the relations of men to him were exclusively
spiritual. No longer limited by bodily presence, or by any


364 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


conditions of space, he could enter far more freely anc
broadly into the life of mankind than if he had remainec
visibly among them. It was because he was thus depart-
ing that he could say, “ Lo, I am with you alway ; and
the results have abundantly justified the assurance that he
gave to his disciples, It is expedient for you that I gc
away.” The spiritual presence outranks the bodily ir
value, and surpasses it in power.

The ascension of Christ introduced him to the state thal
is spoken of as his state of exaltation, and was preparatory
to the activity in which until now he is engaged. It was
followed, after a very brief interval, by the great outburst
of spiritual power that occurred on the Day of Pentecost
That event consisted in a fresh movement of the Holy
Spirit, who then entered upon a larger and more effective
work in men, not temporary but continuous. So far as it
concerns this world, the present activity of Christ is repre-
sented by the activity of the Holy Spirit That Spirit was
recognized on the Day of Pentecost as the gift of Christ
(Acts ii. 33), even as Christ himself had promised that the
coming Spirit should take his place and carry forward what
he had begun. The work of the Holy Spirit is the con-
tinuation of the work of Christ Through this unseen but
mighty agency the divine endeavor that appeared in the
Incarnation is continued, and the Saviour of the world is
accomplishing his purpose.

Back of this activity which is manifested on earth, there
is a present activity of Christ in the unseen life, concerning
which we are constantly craving definite knowledge. But
that spiritual world is so far beyond our experience and our
power of clear imagining, that definite knowledge does not
come and we are compelled to be content with terms quite
general, if we attempt to speak of the Present Activity of
Christ

The New-Testament writers represent the present ac-
tivity of Christ in the spiritual world mainly under two
aspects, the kingly and the priestly. Both conceptions


CHRIST


365


rested upon the basis of Old-Testament imagery, familiar
as household words to the first Christians, but unfamiliar
as elements in actual life to us. Both representations are
figurative, but they afford us glimpses of the unseen
reality.

I, Christ as King. — It was natural that the ascension
of Christ should be represented as an enthronement, for
such in real significance it was. The language of Ps. cx. i,
“ Jehovah said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until
I make thine enemies thy footstool,” quoted by Christ
himself (Matt. xxii. 44), made a profound impression upon
the early church: it colored the thought of the New
Testament (Acts ii. 32; Heb. i. 3; viii. i; i Pet. iii, 22;
I Cor. XV. 25; Rev. iii, 21), and entered into the abiding
thought of Christianity. Christian prayer and hymnology
have always been full of adoration to Christ as Lord of all,
enthroned and reigning. The meaning of this ever-present
conception must of course be sought, not in something
strictly analogous to human kingship, but in some divine
reality which human royalty only illustrates as best it may.
The meaning is that Christ, the Word in humanity, having
become to the world the expression of the saving heart of
God, the one Mediator between God and men, and the
head of the new humanity, is therefore the administrator
of the reign of God over men. All human interests are in
the hands of him who has given himself for men. The
Lamb is exalted and adored (Rev. v. 6-14), and is on the
throne with God (xxii. 3) : that is, the sway of God over
mankind is exercised in the spirit of the cross; God rules
men to save them; sacrificing love is administering the
world, and is exalted that men may adore it in God and
cherish it in themselves. God was truly expressed to men
in the divine-human Christ, actor of his own holiness, love,
and sacrifice, and in the same Christ, because in the same
spirit, he now conducts the providential government of the
human race. The work of the present age of human his-
tory is the accomplishment of the ends for which Christ


366 A/V OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


came: in Christ, therefore, God is conducting human
history.

Under such a statement as this there are large unan-
swered questions which meet us, especially if we call for
close definitions. But we may well be content with know-
ing that the spirit of Christ’s living and dying is the spirit
of the administration of the world, — if only we can remem-
ber that they who adore the Lamb upon the throne must
welcome the fellowship of his sufferings.

a. Christ as Priest. — In all its priesthoods, mankind
has been groping after Christ. Men have longed for one
to stand between themselves and God, representing each
to the other and reconciling the two. In their priesthoods
they have pictured such mediation, but in Christ what
they desired has been done. Christ is God’s way to man,
and man’s way to God. Christ therefore “ fulfils ” all
priesthood; he is the true expression of all that priest-
hood ever meant, and accomplishes all that it ever sought.
He became as a high-priest to humanity, representing
God to man and man to God, and standing as the meet-
ing-point where reconciliation is accomplished. Not, of
course, that he was literally and properly a priest, in his
life and death : the writer to the Hebrews, who is so full
of the thought of his priesthood, takes pains to declare
that he was not this (vii. 11-13 ; viii. 4). Nor is his per-
petual priesthood in the unseen world, upon which that
epistle dwells, a literal and proper priesthood : there is no
literal temple in heaven with Christ as ministrant, any
more than there is a literal throne with God and Christ
seated upon it. When the Epistle to the Hebrews attri-
butes to Christ a perpetual priesthood, the meaning that
underlies the imagery is expressed by such words as these :
that his work in uniting God and men was not temporary,
but is abiding and eternal ; that as in the days of his flesh,
so now and forever, he is the living link and bond of union
between God and mankind ; that he lives in the glory of
the Father as the undying, unfailing, unforgetting friend


CHRIST


3^7


and Saviour of man ; that he still represents God to men
and men to God, so that in him God and men are united
in a living peace ; that men on earth, thinking of God,
may still think of Christ, although unseen, as the one in
whom they stand before him, and by whose mediatorship
they are able to find their way to him.

What is called the Intercession of Christ is the same
reality under another name. The Greek words that re-
present it in the New Testament do not tell of speech, but
of helpfulness. The intercession of Christ does not consist
in speech or pleading. He is not, as it were, an attorney.
There is no need of conversations, transactions, or in-
fluence between Christ and his Father, to keep God gra-
ciously mindful of his children. Christ himself told his
disciples that there was no need that he should pray for
them, because the Father loved them (John xvi. 26-27.)
The unspeakably precious doctrine of the gospel is that
God is such a friend and father as to need no influence or
entreaty even from Christ in behalf of his own children.
The reality that is represented by the figure of priestly
intercession is the same as that which is represented by
priesthood itself, — that the work of Christ is forever, and
that he is perpetually making it effective in the bringing
of men to God. The figure of an interceding priest in
heaven has been profoundly impressive and very helpful
to the Christian people in all ages : not so much, however,
because of the priestly imagery itself, as because the truth
to which it gives expression is a truth of real salvation.
The priestly imagery has helped to keep Christians
assured of their own safety in the hands of Christ.

When, as in our own time, priestly imagery has ceased
to rest upon anything that is familiar and instructive to us
in actual life, we shall hold the benefit of such imagery if
W'e remember that the way to God is open as Christ
showed it to be, cuid that he has made all priesthoods
needless.

We are often asking what is the precise relation ol
ChrisFs human nature to his present activity in the unseen


368 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


world. It is easy to make assertions on the subject — as,
for example, that he now wears a human body: but this
one illustration is enough to show that our assertions only
call attention to our ignorance, — for who knows what a
human body is, in that world? That Christ still holds his
relation to humanity, and is still one with mankind as he
is one with God, we can believe without the shadow of a
doubt. But over the whole subject of his present person
and activity there hangs the same veil that separates us
from our own departed. The region is unseen, and unre-
vealed. The statements that have now been made relate
to the spiritual reality and significance of the present work
of Christ, and seem to be grounded in the certainties of
the gospel ; but minuter details, however eagerly we may
wish for them, must await the revelations of the future
life.

“ THOU ONLY, O CHRIST, WITH THE HOLY GHOST, ART
MOST HIGH IN THE GLORY OF GOD THE FATHER.” —

AMEN.


PART V


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE
IN MAN

The study of the Holy Spirit naturally follows the study
of Christ and his work, for it is by the Holy Spirit that the
work of Christ is carried on to its application and the ful-
filment of its purpose. The study of the Holy Spirit, in
turn, naturally passes over into that of the divine life
which is produced in man by his agency. Christ, so far
from being in any sense a substitute for personal goodness
in men, has the producing of it for the very object of his
mission, to which his entire work, in life and death, was
ultimately directed. Accordingly, our thoughts are led
naturally on, from Christ himself and the work of his per-
sonal mission, through the Holy Spirit, his invisible but
living representative, to that experience of divine life in
man in which the purpose of his mission is fulfilled. From
God, through Christ, by the Holy Spirit, it comes to pass
that men become new creatures in holiness. We must
seek to conceive rightly of the Holy Spirit himself, and
must then consider his work in the world, in the Church,
and in individual men.

I, What is Meant by the Holy Spirit.

The practical definition is, the Holy Spirit is GoD IN
Man; God working in the spirit of man, and accomplish-
ing the results that are sought in the mission and work of
Christ.

This simple definition is the one that the New Testament
affords. It is common in theology to speak of the Holy
Spirit as the third person in the Trinity. We should

*4


370 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


remember, however, that the Trinity that came first to
Christian thought was the Trinity of manifestation, or of
operation. Before there was any recognition of three in
one, there was distinct knowledge of three manifestations
or activities of God ; the first in his general relation to the
world and men, the second in the mission, person, and
work of Christ, and the third in his dwelling and working
in the human soul. In this third manifestation or opera*
tion God approaches as a Spirit to the spirit of man for the
purpose of holy communication and influence ; most ap-
propriately therefore was he named the Holy Spirit. The
name occurs in all the Gospels and in most of the Epistles,
and is surrounded by a rich group of equivalent or similar
titles, all representing in some way the activity of God for
a holy purpose in the soul of man. This Spirit, as he is
conceived by the writers of the New Testament, is not a
mere influence, but is rather God himself as a Spirit, in con-
tact with human spirits ; although from the relations in the
case the representations vary somewhat in their form, as
we shall see. God thus working in men for the accom-
plishment of his purpose in Christ is the Holy Spirit of
the New Testament.

Of course the presentation of this simple definition in-
volves no denial of the inner Trinity in God. That deep-
lying reality is the basis of the threefold manifestation.
Recognition of the divine Triunity did not come till later
than the time of the apostles, but it entered with abiding
power to Christian thought, and it completes and enriches
the simple but powerful doctrine of the Scriptures. If we
have interpreted the Triunity aright, the Third in God is
God returning upon himself, establishing and perfecting
the unity of his conscious personality. If the Second, the
outgoing Word or utterance, performed a characteristic
work in coming forth to reveal God and save men, the Third,
the Spirit of unity, is doing equally congenial work when
he reunites alienated souls to God, and establishes the
rightful and blessed fellowship between them and him.
The Spirit that stands for unity in God delights no less in


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 37 1


working unity with God, while at the same time he effects
the normal completeness in the soul of man.

As the one who carries to completion the saving work
of the Father and the Son, the Spirit is called in Scripture
by such names as ‘‘ the Spirit of God,*^ “ the Holy Spirit
of God,” the Holy Spirit which ye have from God,” “ the
Spirit of his Son,” “ the Spirit of Christ” In view of this
relation, the office of the Spirit is often spoken of among
Christians as a subordinate office, and his work as the low-
est, because the last, in a series. In a certain sense the
work evidently is subordinate : ‘‘ he shall glorify me,” said
Jesus of the Spirit: and yet the subordination is more
apparent than real. Doubtless it is true that that which
is first in conception is last in execution,” and on this prin-
ciple the latest work is the original and highest work. The
bringing of men into fellowship with God in actual life is
the end for which Christ came and died, and for which God
designed the entire work of salvation ; and so it may just
as fairly be said that the Spirit performs the highest work
of all, since he is completing and crowning the long work
of divine love and wisdom.

We may well be thankful that this simple and practical
doctrine of the Holy Spirit is all that the Scriptures offer
us. We know the inner relations of the Godhead so im-
perfectly that we should find it difficult to form a strong
and living doctrine of the Holy Spirit, if vre were obliged
to wait until we could construct it out of clear conceptions
of the divine Triunity. But the doctrine of the Holy Spirit
as the living God in the soul of man was already strong
and vital before the Triunity in God was known, and is
still full of life. If we teach this, we announce a living
reality, not a speculative or dogmatic truth, and we touch
men in the very life. If we teach this, we have no need to
argue for the divinity of the Holy Spirit, nor are we depen-
dent for the personality of. the Holy Spirit upon the suc-
cess of our endeavors to distinguish persons within the
Godhead. The ambiguity of the word “ person ” does not


372 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


trouble us. The Holy Spirit is divine since God is divine,
and personal since God is personal. The Holy Spirit is
no mere influence, derived, secondary, impersonal, and
vanishing, but is no other than God himself, in vital con-
tact and communication with the spirits of men whom
he has made. This doctrine was sufficient for power in
the early days of the faith, and is sufficient for power
now.

We should do scant justice to the New Testament, how-
ever, if we merely set out to expound its doctrine of the
Holy Spirit. What it contains is not so much a doctrine
as a consciousness, and a consciousness of indescribable
richness and power. The early Church lived and moved
and had its being in the living sense of the Holy Spirit as
a present force. The wonderful rush of fulness and power
that appears in the experiences of the day of Pentecost is
a fair symbol of the characteristic experience of the age
that gave us the New Testament When we read the
Epistles and observe how many works of grace and power
are attributed to this divine agent, and how incidentally
and informally they are mentioned, and yet how glowingly,
we see how impossible it is to formulate the doctrine that
such expressions imply, and to classify the manifold oper-
ations of the living Spirit of God as they are there repre-
sented The Epistles were written in the very atmosphere
of power. One who wishes to know what the Holy Spirit
was to the early Church should read them rapidly, noting
how various and how glorious are the epithets that are
employed, and yielding himself to the free spirit of reverent
and joyful intimacy that breathes on every page. This is
a subject regarding which we can understand the New
Testament only by breathing its life. It was glorious to
live with such a sense of present divine energy, a conscious*
ness that God dwelt graciously within and was moving
omnipotently without ; but there is no good reason why
the Church of our own age should not do the same, for
the Holy Spirit is as real, as near, and as mighty as
of old.


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AHH THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 373


II. The Holy Spirit m reiation to the Work
OF Christ.

In relation to Christ, the Holy Spirit appears in the
'New Testament as a gift promised by him, and then as a
gift imparted in accordance with his promise. Prominent
among the words of hope and guidance that he addressed
to his disciples in view of his impending departure, pre-
served to us in John xiv.-xvi., stands the promise of the
Holy Spirit. The rich and various contents of this prom-
ise must now be set before us.

Christ promised to his friends a new presence, different
from his own, yet really his own. He spoke of another
Paraclete, — a word, of which “Helper,” or “Friend in
need,” is the best translation, — implying that he had been
one Paraclete to his friends, but promising another to take
his place (xiv. 16). He was promising a personal pres-
ence (“he, the Spirit of truth,” xvi. 13), and yet he spoke
of himself as present in that presence (xiv. 18; xvi. 22).
It was to be such a presence that for the sake of it it was
best for his friends that he should leave them (xvi. 7). It
was to be no passing presence, but permanent, to abide
indefinitely on (xiv. 16). The promise therefore was not
limited to the apostles, or to the men of the first Christian
age, — a most important fact to be treasured up in our
thoughts. This presence was coming to remain.

Christ thus foretold a permanent presence, essentially
his own, and most precious; but a presence of whom?
He said that the coming Paraclete was to be, —

A Spirit of truth, to act upon men unlike the world, who
alone could receive his full influence, and to abide with
them (xiv. 17).

A Spirit of remembrance and enlightenment concerning
Christ, to keep his teachings in the mind and memory of
his friends, to fill those teachings with new light and mean-


374 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


ing as time brought new applications of them, and to
glorify Christ in the thoughts of men (xiv. 26; xvi. 14).

A Spirit of progress toward and to the full truth of
Christ; a guiding Spirit, leading gradually on, whose influ-
ence would result in fair and true views of the full truth of
Christ and his kingdom, with true previsions of the future
(xvi. 12-13).

A Spirit of filial intimacy with God, by whose influence
he should be truly known, and prayer should come to
be the breathing of a beloved and trustful child into the
father’s ear (xvi. 22-27).

A Spirit of testimony, who should himself bear witness
concerning Christ, and should make of Christ’s friends
ready and joyful witness-bearers to his grace (xv. 26-27).

A Spirit for action far beyond the circle of Christ’s
friends : a Spirit of conviction to the world, bringing home
to men the threefold convincement respecting sin, and
righteousness, and God’s judgment which marks the eternal
difference between sin and righteousness : a Spirit of in-
struction, thus, to men in general concerning the funda-
mental moral truths (xvi. 8-1 1 ).

Christ was to send this Spirit (xvi. 7) ; at the same
time, this Spirit was to proceed, or come forth into the
world, from the Father (xv. 26) ; Christ would send him
from the Father (xv. 26) ; the Father would send him in
the name of Christ (xiv. 26), and at Christ’s request
(xiv. 16). In all these forms is the manner of his coming
presented.

It was in contemplation of this coming presence that
Christ looked joyfully to the days which his friends could
only dread, and regarded the future as his own. By such
a Spirit of truth and power his own designs could be
accomplished and the world could be renewed. To open
^he way for so mighty an agent of blessing, it surely was
advantageous for his fiiends that he should depart.


According to this promise, the Holy Spirit was coming
to carry Chrisfs work on to the fulfilment of its purpose.


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 375


But Christ did not mean to say or to imply that the Holy
Spirit was a new gift to men. He had himself already
spoken of God’s giving the Holy Spirit to his children as
his dearest gift, encouraging his friends even then to ask
that gift and hope to receive it (Luke xi. 13). The words
of John vii. 39, “the Holy Spirit was not yet given” (lit-
erally “was not yet”), “because Jesus was not yet glori-
fied,” mean simply that the Spirit had not yet become that
mighty element which at the time of writing he had long
been in the Christian circle of life and thought. It is true
that the Pentecostal turning-point in the spiritual history
of man was followed by a new era of power, but it is also
true that the agent of spiritual life was not new to the
world. God’s work in men has been essentially the same
in all ages. The faith of Abraham, the penitence of
David, the brave endurance of Jeremiah, the inspiration of
Isaiah, were wrought by the same Spirit that dwelt in Paul
and John, and gave gifts of love and wisdom to the early
Church, and is still working conviction and renewal in the
world. Indeed, in so far as God has anywhere or ever
dwelt and wrought in the soul of man, he has done it by
what we call the Holy Spirit. Therefore we may joyfully
affirm that the Holy Spirit has never been wholly absent
from the world; rather has he always brooded over the
humanity for which God cares.

Yet the name Holy Spirit (or, more properly, holy
spirit, without capitals), thrice occurring in the Old Tes-
tament (Ps. li. 1 1 ; Isa. Ixiii. lO, 1 1 ) was not used in any trin-
itarian sense, in the intention of the writers. At that time
it could not be. From God’s side, however, the spiritual
agency that was thus mentioned was no other than that of
the Holy Spirit known in the gospel. God in man was the
same in Israel as in the Church, the same in prophets as
in apostles. We may read the full meaning in such pas-
sages as Isa. xi. 2-3 ; Ixi. i ; Zech. iv. 6 .

The difference after Christ was mainly one of relations.
Now the great work of God in Christ had been done ; now
therefore the way was open for a great advance in God’s


376 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY

direct working upon men. The time was ripe for a fresh
sending-forth of power, and a larger, steadier application
of divine energy to the immediate work of renewal. Now
there was a Saviour to be presented, a Christ to be glorified,
a free salvation to be made actual, a great store of fresh
motives to be brought forth, an open world of possibilities
in touching the conscience and winning the heart of man.
Now therefore the Holy Spirit, God in man, might work
as he had never wrought before, for conviction and salva-
tion. This is what came to pass in the great action of the
Day of Pentecost, and in the time that followed. The
period that then opened, and in which we are now living,
is often called the dispensation, or age, of the Holy Spirit.
The name is appropriate, not because the Holy Spirit
never wrought before, but because the work of God in the
soul of man, for which Christ opened the way, is the char-
acteristic divine operation of the age, and because the pos-
sibilities of the Holy Spirit are present possibilities.

III. The Work of the Holy Spirit in the
World.

The work of the Holy Spirit that is most prominent in
Christian thought is the work that he performs in the indi-
vidual soul ; but before approaching this it is best to con-
sider his wider work, first in the world, and then in the
Church.

Christ promised, “ He shall convince THE WORLD con-
cerning sin, and concerning righteousness, and concerning
judgment; ” and it was specially in view of this promise
that he said to his friends, “ It is expedient for you that I
go away.” He thus predicted for himself, through the
Spirit, a broad and general influence upon mankind, a con-
vincing of the world itself; and this he regarded not only
as impossible to him while he remained in bodily presence
among men, but as more to be desired than anything that
his continued bodily presence could accomplish. If his
friends knew how much this meant they would rejoice in


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE INMAN 377


his departure, he said, however tenderly their hearts might
miss him.

We have no reason to wonder that Christ looked beyond
his disciples, and proposed a work directly upon the w^orld.
The dearness of the world to God we know already. We
already know that God so loved the world^ that he gave
his only-begotten Son,” that men might have eternal life,
and that '‘Jesus Christ the righteous ... is the propitia-
tion ... for the whole world.” We are not surprised,
therefore, to hear that the Spirit is to “ convince the world
concerning sin and righteousness and judgment.” If God
loved the world with a saving love, and Christ is the pro-
pitiation for its sins, it is nothing strange that a world-wide
work is predicted for the Holy Spirit. Such a work is the
appropriate sequel of divine love and redemption.

Especially is the proposed work natural, since the themes
of convincement that are attributed to the Spirit are the
very ones to which God’s love and Christ’s mission lead
up. “ He shall convince the world concerning sin, and
concerning righteousness, and concerning judgment.” It
was in sin that men were perishing when God loved them
and gave his Son that they might not perish ; it is in view
of sin that Christ stands forth as propitiation, or manifes-
tation of God’s righteousness in saving sinners ; and it is
respecting sin that the Spirit is first said to convince the
world. Righteousness, on the other hand, is the opposite
of sin ; it is the ideal of God, illustrated in Christ’s char-
acter, life, and saving work, and offered in him to men who
are perishing for want of it ; and it is concerning righteous-
ness that the Spirit is next said to work conviction. Be-
tween sin and righteousness, since they are moral opposites,
there is a true and unerring judgment of God ; a judg-
ment of his necessary nature between good and evil, now
expressed in Christ, and to be applied now and hereafter
in his dealings with his creatures ; a judgment upon which
the action of God is founded and the destiny of men de-
pends ; a judgment so true and necessary that men ought
to join in it, and adopt it as their own ; and this judgment,


378 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


finally, the Spirit is said to bring home to the consciences
of men. The great convincing thus relates to the supreme
moral issues of human existence, and the duty and destiny
that correspond to them. Plainly such a work of the di-
vine Spirit upon the world is the suitable accompaniment
and sequel of the love of God to the world and the death
of Christ to save it from sin. This is itself a fresh expres-
sion of God’s love, and a step toward the end for which
Christ laid down his life.

The nature of this convincing should be specially
noticed, inasmuch as it is easy to misjudge it Starting
with conviction respecting sin, it is easy to think almost
entirely of convicting in a forensic sense, which consists
in showing or declaring that men are guilty. “ Convic-
tion of sin ” is popularly identified with consciousness of
guilt, wrought by the Spirit. But this sense of the word
“ conviction ” fails when we come to speak of righteous-
ness and of judgment, and we need to find for conviction
a meaning that will apply to all the three subjects.
Happily, our common speech provides us with this. We
know what we mean by a man’s convictions, — they are
his accepted and settled certainties. Such certainties
upon these great themes the Holy Spirit imparts. He
convinces, or imparts abiding convictions to the soul;
he urges home as true the great realities with which he
deals ; he implants among the settled convictions of men
the conviction of what sin is, and what righteousness is,
and what is the judgment of God, and what should be the
judgment of men, between them. In this work convic-
tion of personal sinfulness in the individual is of course
included, and in producing this the Spirit renders a ser-
vice as healthful as it is painful to him who receives it.
But he also performs the broader work of impressing
large, true views of the real facts respecting sin and
righteousness and judgment, and imparting to men pro-
found spiritual convictions concerning all of these great
spiritual realities.

This opens the broadest view of the Holy Spirit’s


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AHH THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 379


work; for Christ here introduces him as the teacher of
humanity concerning good and evil, right and wrong,
and the relation between the two. While the age-long
struggle of mankind concerning sin and righteousness
and judgment goes on, the Spirit of God moves upon the
face of humanity. The general evil is brought home to
the general conscience, the ideal of righteousness is
made clearer to the general mind, the right judgment
between the two great opposites is made plainer, and the
higher goodness, as over against the common sin, is
slowly brought to its place in human life. This is the
moral progress of humanity as it goes on, age after age,
with varying degrees of rapidity and effectiveness. Men
may think that the process is entirely their own, and
may pride themselves upon the success that attends it.
But we should not forget that Christ foretold the Holy
Spirit, who was to perform this very work upon the world,
and we ought not to imagine that in the moral progress
that we behold that Spirit has no part. It does not go
on without him. As ages pass it is he that convinces
the world, and leads it to a better judgment concerning
the supreme moral issues.

If we are asked how widely this work of the Spirit in
the world extends, we must answer that we cannot draw
the limits of it. We cannot tell just what part of the
better action of mankind is due to powers that God im-
planted in the soul of man, and what to the present action
of the Holy Spirit working in and with those powers.
We cannot tell, because it is the way of the Spirit of God
to work so largely out of sight. It is a wonderful fact
that God in man is so thoroughly self-effacing : he seems
to have no desire that we should be able to distinguish
his action from our own. Hence we cannot select the
acts of the Spirit, and be sure that we are right in sing-
ling out what belongs to him. Observation cannot
directly show us to what parts of mankind his enlighten-
ing and convincing work extends at some given time, or


38 o an outline of CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY ,

in how many of the questions and struggles of humanity
he is taking part. But if we knew all, it is probable that
we should see the Spirit of God doing his own work
everywhere, in proportion to the ability of men to be
benefited by his help. It is not probable that God has
ever left the world, in any part of its great life, entirely
uninfluenced by his Spirit. It is not probable, in view
of the character of God as Christ reveals it, or in view of
the relation of Christ to the human race that is involved
in the Incarnation.

The difficulty of defining the Holy Spirit’s work in
the world should never prevent our recognizing the reality
of it. It is a great fact. Good does not grow up without
God. All good that appears in men grows up under the
fostering care of the Holy Spirit. Awakenings of public
conscience, deepenings of conviction concerning right
and wrong, higher and truer views of good and evil,
reforms and changes for the better in actual life, quicken-
ings of religion, the unquestionable moral progress of the
race, — these are works of the Holy Spirit, God in man,
acting in and with the powers that he has given to human-
ity. To deny this activity would be to be blind to God.
To see it is simply to perceive that God is consciously
working out in history the holy and gracious design that
he set forth in promise by the words of Christ.

Scepticism concerning this great reality of a present
Holy Spirit, however, is only too common. It is often
thought incredible that the Spirit of God is as great in
the world to-day as in former times. Even Christians
too easily overlook the great fact. Many suppose it
irreverent , to believe that the Holy Spirit is as great in
the world now as he was in the days of the apostles : in
order to maintain the greatness of his former activities,
they feel constrained to class them by themselves, and
expect them never to be equalled. But by such thoughts
we do injustice to God, impoverish our own life, and
render our faith ineffective. Confidence in the living
Spirit — that is, in the present living God — is the indis-


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AHD THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 3 S' I


pensable secret of power. When the Church believes
that the promise of her Lord concerning the convincing
Spirit is now in course of fulfilment, and lives in prac-
tical recognition of the present God in man, convincing
the world concerning sin and righteousness and judg-
ment, the day of joy and power will have come.

IV. The Work of the Holy Spirit in the Church.

The Church is here used, not as the name of an organi-
zation, but as a comprehensive name for the Christian
people, the men and women in whom the spiritual work
of Christ is going forward. Many maintain that it should
be used as the name of one great organization, into which
it is Christ’s desire that all his people should be gathered,
and through which alone he purposes that his Spirit shall
go forth to do his work upon men. The promise of the
Spirit, it is claimed, was made to the Church as an
organization; hence the Spirit and his graces are official
gifts of the Church, dispensed through sacraments, which
can be administered only by a priesthood. But the early
church contained no priesthood ; and Christian history is
very far from showing that the Holy -Spirit has come to
men wholly through the mediation of any ecclesiastical
body, or of all ecclesiastical bodies together. Direct is
the way of the Spirit of God to the spirit of man.

If we wish to speak correctly of "the Church” as it has
historically appeared, with reference to organization, we
shall be obliged to define it in a very catholic and com-
prehensive manner, as including the sum of those organi-
zations which have been formed to serve as organs of
Christ, for the expression and promotion of his religion.
If we accept a definition that applies to some one of these
alone, we leave unincluded much of the organized fruit of
Christ in the world, and thus do injustice to the facts
that we are considering. It does not appear to have been
the providential purpose that all Christians should be
gathered into one great organization, and it does not


382 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


seem probable that such a purpose will hereafter be mani-
fested by the fulfilment of it. Organization, helpful as
it is, is a very different thing from that inner life of the
soul in God in which religion consists, and cannot properly
be counted as a part of religion. But it certainly is the
divine will and pleasure that Christians should be together,
united in some practical order for mutual benefit and
common service to their Lord. Any company of Chris-
tians gathered in his name for his purpose has the promise
of the Master’s presence (Matt, xviii. 20). Any group
of Christians that offers itself to Christ is an organ of
Christ, through which he may express himself in his own
activities. The Church, regarded as the sum of all the
actual organizations, has been a powerful help to the
Christian purpose in the world. No organization has
promise of perpetuity, apart from its fitness for the
Master’s use, and Christianity may yet express itself in
new forms, if the old prove insufficient or unadapted to
its growing needs.

But for the present purpose the Church is not an
organization, but the Christian people, regarded as con-
tinuous from age to age. The broadest work of the Holy
Spirit is done in the world, but in the Church a deeper
work of the same Spirit is performed. Between these
two activities of the Spirit we may not be able to distin-
guish perfectly, but the general distinction is plain.
The Spirit’s work in Christians differs from his work in
the world, vei^ much as Christians differ from the world.
There is a sense in which “the world cannot receive ” the
Spirit, while ^he believing people can. To Christ’s dis
ciples and their successors the more characteristic gifts
of the Spirit could be imparted: “Ye know him,” said
Jesus: consequently to the Church, or the believing
people, the Lord’s promise has been fulfilled in its richer
and more intimate meanings.

That Spirit whom the world cannot receive, Christ
specially speaks of as the Spirit of Truth. By this he


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 383


means that the Spirit will specially teach and impress
truth for which the world in general is not yet prepared,
ministering instruction for which his friends alone are
ready. Truth, we know, is that which accords with
reality; it is that which really is; and in the realm of
high reality that experience has opened to Christians,
the Holy Spirit does his most characteristic work. In
the region of the Christian realities the Spirit is mighty
with the Christian men. He reveals and glorifies Christ,
he brings to remembrance what Christ has taught, he
guides the Christian people into the full Christian truth,
he calls out testimony from men to Christ, and by all
means he quickens piety in fellowship with God.

The work of bringing Christ’s words to remembrance
began in the life of the first disciples. The words of
Christ that had thus far entered but slightly to their
souls came back to them with new freshness, power, and
significance under the teaching of the Spirit. Out of
his reminding sprang the Christian life and impulses that
made the first age great. From it came forth the noble
early preaching of the gospel, and the great writings that
compose the New Testament. These writings are the
worthy first-fruits of the Spirit in the Christian men.
But the work of reminding did not end with the first dis-
ciples. In all ages the Spirit brings the words of Christ
to remembrance, by reviving forgotten or neglected Chris-
tian truths in forms suited to the new times, thus never
suffering what he taught to pass out of life. In the time
of Luther, and of Wesley, for example, the Spirit brought
to remembrance forgotten or neglected truths that were
Christ’s own, and reinstated them in power. In bring-
ing out the meaning of the truth that Christ is the
genuine revelation of God, and in unfolding the meaning
of love toward men, he is doing the same work to-day.
Other remindings still await their time. There is enough
in Christ to enrich all ages, if it can but be brought to
mind in living forms at the hour when the Church is able
to appropriate it; and the Spirit is the unfailing remem-


384 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


brancer, taking the things of Christ and showing them
to his people.

By this means, and by other modes of teaching that
harmonize with it, is fulfilled the promise, “When he,
the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all
the truth.” Of course this is no promise of perfect
knowledge in all realms of truth, as in science, philosophy
and history. The Church is not here assured of unfail-
ing correctness in thinking, through divine enlightenment,
or of supernatural gifts of information on all subjects.
It is the truth that is in Christ, the eternal verity con-
cerning God and man, to which the promise refers.
Toward the perfect truth in this highest and most prac-
tical realm, the Holy Spirit is steadily leading the
Christian people.

This statement means that the Spirit abides with the
Christian people in their thinking about the things of
God, and in the spiritual life that renders their thinking
upon these themes effective. It means that in the appre-
hension of truth by the Christian people at any given
time, however imperfect it may be, there is an element
that the Spirit has contributed, by virtue of which the
thought of that time takes its place in a sure and steady
movement toward perfection. It is the glory of the
Spirit that he is not restrained from this progressive
guidance into truth by the imperfectness of the people or
the views with which he has to deal. We often fancy, it
is true, that nothing but what is perfect can come from
God, and that therefore the Holy Spirit can have no
share in imparting partial and imperfect views of truth.
But this is a sad misjudgment. God is so great that he
can make much of imperfect agencies. His Spirit can
have a helpful share in imperfect works. He cannot do
the whole at once, and lead in a moment to perfection,
but he can take men just where they are, and lead
them on toward truth and holiness, bearing with their
weakness and ignorance, and waiting his opportunity to


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE INMAN 385


correct their faults. Accordingly, the promise is not,
shall open to you an instantaneous vision of all
truth,*’ but, ‘‘He shall guide you into all the truth;” and
guiding is by its very nature something gradual and pro-
gressive, adapted to the capacity of those who receive it.
The Spirit is limited by the material that he works upon,
and like Christ must constantly be saying, “I have many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.”
But he is a helper whose help is not less real in the first
stage of holy growth than in the last, and in the step of
true progress that is farthest from perfection he guides
the Christian people as truly as in any other.

All through Christian history such a guidance by the
Spirit has been going on. The movement has at no time
been faultless, and has suffered irregularities, alterna-
tions, and reverses ; inevitable complications with human
habits of thinking and products of thought have caused
apparent pauses and retrogressions ; and yet the Spirit of
truth has always been the leader of a genuine Christian
progress. Able to work through imperfect agencies, and
to influence the next step even when it could go but a
very little way toward the full truth which is the end, he
has steadily presided over the slow and uneven progress
of the Church in truth and piety, and has so fulfilled the
promise of Christ. This work of the Spirit still con-
tinues. He has not left the Christian people, but is still
leading them toward the full truth and the perfect char-
acter in fellowship with God. He is the present guide
of the Christian experience and the Christian thought.
His leading has never imparted infallibility to men, for
an obvious reason; men could not receive it sufBciently
to become infallible. He did not render early Councils
infallible, nor does he free individuals or churches from
all error now; and yet both then and now his leading is
real and divine. It is the privilege of Christians to
recognize this guidance as a present fact, and to trust it
as the hope of the Church : a privilege often overlooked
and never fully utilized, but very precious.

H


386 AN - OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


V. The Work of the Holy Spirit in Individuals.

As the circle is narrowed from the world to the Church
and from the Church to the individual, the work of the
Holy Spirit becomes more specific and intense. In indi-
vidual human beings is done the fundamental work. Here
there is A divine life, which the Holy Spirit makes
real in men, and in which he sustains, educates, and
perfects them. Various inquiries concerning this Divine
Life in Individual Men must next occupy us.

In studying the divine life in men we have two gen-
eral sources of information, — Scripture and experience.
While we have the life itself to consider, as it exists in
ourselves or in others, we also have in the Scriptures the
original account of the verities and agencies upon which
the life depends. Each of these sources is important.
If we studied experience alone, we should probably fail
to understand the experience itself, for it needs the
record of the gospel for its explanation. The Scriptures
lay the foundation for our knowledge of the divine life,
and the life itself proves its own reality, simplicity, and
flexibility. And, in the wisdom of God, the Scriptures
do not chiefly describe or define the life, but illustrate it
in many forms, so that our written source of knowledge
is as really living as the one that is wholly experimental.

I. The Nature of the Divine Life. — The divine life
in men is life in fellowship with Christ. It is a life in
which God’s own life, flowing into humanity through
Christ, gives quality and character to a man. It must
therefore consist, at the heart of it, in the moral and
spiritual quality that makes Christ what he is : which is
the same as to say, that it consists in the man’s partak-
ing in the character of God. The New Humanity lives,
through Christ, in fellowship with its heavenly Father.

Hence, the divine life in man consists in holy
love.


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE INMAN 387


This statement is confirmed by all that we know of
Christ, his character, and the inspiration of his conduct ;
for holy love was the very substance of his spiritual life
and character. It is confirmed by his new and special
commandment, resting upon his own example of love
(John xiii. 34 ~ 3 S) > by his summary of God’s requirement
in the ancient law, superior to every law in the world
except this new commandment (Matt. xxii. 34—40) ; by
his representation of the rule of judgment in his king-
dom, which is simply the law of love in actual practice
(Matt. XXV. 3 1-46) ; and by the testimony of his apostles
(Rom. xiii. 8-10; i John iv. 7-21). In the last of these
passages the intimate relation between love in God and
love in man is exhibited and insisted upon, and God is
presented as the standard, inspiration, and example for
Christian men : God is love, and therefore men must be
love also. If God is love, plainly the life that flows
from him to men through Christ will be a life of love;
and since God is holy, all love that resembles God is
holy love. If God lives in men and imparts to them his
own quality, they will certainly live, in consequence, a
life of holy love.

Holy love enters into the divine life in two forms.

(i) It is love to God. Christ’s human life was a life
of the strongest and most joyful love to God; we can
judge therefore what human lives in fellowship with him
will be. God loved us first, and in the divine life an
answering love springs up ; we love because he first loved
us. This love corresponds to our obligation and ground
of gratitude toward God; it is awakened by his boundless
grace. It corresponds also, in proportion as it becomes
intelligent love, to God’s infinite worthiness; we love
him because he is completely good, and because in him
we find unbounded satisfaction. Thus the answering
love that we bring to our divine Friend is at the same
time a holy love to the perfect goodness. Grateful love,
when directed to him as holy Father and Saviour, is holy


388 OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


love also; and in the Christian life gratitude and holiness
are perfectly at one.

Love to God is not mere approval of his goodness, — or
rather, mere approval of goodness is something less than
love. Love is by nature a self-sacrificing impulse. In
the divine life love not only approves God’s goodness, but
desires to be conformed to it and to do its pleasure, and will
seek these ends even at the cost of effort and self-denial.

(2) It is love to men. Christ declares this second
element to be “ like unto ” the first (Matt. xxii. 39). It is
like because it is love, outgoing and unselfish. The love
to men that belongs to the divine life is not mere affec-
tion for the congenial. It is not simply delight in the
Christian brethren, though this is one form of it. It is
helpful interest in men, whom God loves as he loves us,
who need his best gifts as deeply as we, and who are
within the reach of our love and help. If the divine life
is life in fellowship with Christ, what can it be but self-
sacrificing love for men? Christian love includes sym-
pathy with all workings of that holy love whereby God
desires to make men holy. Such love is no mere senti-
ment ; it is a power, — an unselfish affection that leads to
helpfulness, as it led Christ to live and die for men.

Such a life of holy love is divinely simple, and yet it
is not bare of variety. All graces and virtues are com-
prehended in this one grace of holy love. Love to God
includes all the convictions and impulses that make up
personal holiness, and love to men includes all that con-
tributes to usefulness and renders a personal life valuable
to the world. God’s life in man is love ; and a godlike
love is the fount of all godlike virtues. Love is the
fulfilling of all duty to one’s neighbor (Rom. xiii. 10),
and the bond of perfectness (Col. iii. 14), binding all
graces into unity.

We have defined the divine life in men by reference to
its central quality as Christ himself has represented it;
but this is not to affirm that it appears always the same.


riTE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 389


The divine life i far from appearing always the same,
for it exists in all imaginable degrees of strength, intelli-
gence, and consistency. It is often so limited by inward
defects and outward conditions as to reveal itself most
imperfectly. Wherever it appears in the world, it appears
in imperfection. Men are not sure judges of it, either
in one another or in themselves; only God can uner-
ringly judge it. Much that men take for the divine life
is probably something else in his sight, and much that
they do not recognize he sees to be genuine. Neverthe-
less the true conception of the divine life is that which
has now been given. The life that God awakens, nour
ishes, trains, and perfects through Christ by the Holy
Spirit is no other than the life of holy love. However
imperfect the manifestations of it that we see, we should
never think of it as at heart anything else than this.

Moreover, our experience of the divine life, notwith-
standing all its imperfectness, confirms this definition.
The Christian life has been found to be a life of the heart,
beginning in faith, and having love for its substance.
The graces that we find in the Christian character can
all be traced to this one affection toward God our holy
Saviour and men our brothers. Growth in the Christian
life, as experience leads us to define it, is growth in love
toward God the holy Friend and Saviour, in appreciation
of his character, in aspiration toward his holiness, in
desire and power to do his will, in loving interest in
human beings and purpose to do them good. Of all the
activities and services of the Christian life love is the
most effective inspiration; and the activities that are
most distinctly Christian are purely activities of love.
When love has been greatest in us we have been most
Christian, and when least, least Christian. Thus experi-
ence confirms the teaching of Scripture, that the divine
life in man consists in holy love.

2. The Freeness of the Divine Life. — In whom is
God willing, free, and ready through the Holy Spirit, to


390 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


produce the divine life? Is that life free to all, a gift
that God will impart to any one? Or are there some
fixed limitations in God’s mind by which he confines the
range of this gracious action of the Spirit, and restricts
the possibility of divine life to some part of mankind ?

From the offers and invitations of the gospel any
hearer may infer, and hearers generally do infer, that the
gift of divine life is free to all (Matt. xi. 28; John iii.
16; Rom. iii. 22-23, etc.). To the same effect

are God’s gracious utterances in the Old Testament (Isa.
xlv. 23 , Iv. 1-7, Ivii. 1$; Ezek. xxxiii. ii). Accordingly
the Christian people are sent everywhere, to declare that
men should immediately repent, believe on Christ, and
be saved (Matt, xxviii. 19-20). No preacher is instructed
or authorized to put any limitations upon the freeness of
this invitation. If we doubt the sincerity of God in
these free invitations, our interest in the gospel is gone.

Nevertheless a doctrine of election, or divine choice
among men, runs through the Scriptures. From Abraham
down to the Christian people, the Scriptures show a
line of chosen men, — first a man, then a family, then a
nation, then a kingly family within the nation, then
prophets, finally Christ, a band of apostles, and a mass of
believing men, including all Christians. All these are
spoken of as chosen of God, or elect (Deut. vii. 6; John
XV. 16; Eph. i. 4; I Pet. ii. 9, etc.). Though grace is
free, God’s actual operation in the history of his kingdom
appears in the Scriptures to have proceeded upon a
method of selection. His right to follow this method on
the widest scale, subject only to his own judgment, is
vindicated by Paul against Jewish exclusiveness, in Rom.
ix.-xi.

From these two classes of facts have sprung two oppos-
ing doctrines. One starts with the free invitation, and
claims that if God is sincere in this, there can be no
limitation in his mind upon the gracious activity of the
Holy Spirit, and the divine life must be free on equal


THE HOL Y SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 39I


terms to all souls. The other affirms that a choice of
God among men lies back of the whole matter, and deter-
mines the result. It holds that God has made his choice
by his own will, or upon independent grounds, known to
himself alone; that the number of the elect is so fixed
that it cannot be increased or diminished, and that only
upon God’s chosen ones will his Spirit work for the
imparting of the divine life. According to this view
plainly the divine life is not free to all men.

To the question whether God in his own mind is will-
ing to produce the divine life in any man, one as much
as another, there is but one answer, when once we per-
ceive the nature of the divine life, as consisting in the
reproduction of God’s own character in men. It is
inconceivable that the good God should be unwilling to
impart this gift of character, and transform his creature
into his own moral likeness, in any case whatever. The
idea that salvation is fundamentally a release from
penalty on a legal basis has greatly obscured this simple
moral certainty ; but when the proposed gift is perceived
to be goodness, which is the glory of God himself and of
all spiritual beings, it is quite impossible to think that
God draws lines among men by his determinative will,
and independently marks ofif a certain part of mankind to
whom alone the gift shall be available. In the mind oi
God there can be no independent grounds upon which he
is radically and decisively unwilling to make any of his
creatures good. We cannot be wrong if we affirm in
Scriptural language that God “desires all men to be
saved” (i Tim. ii. 14). The better we know the God
and Father of Jesus Christ, and the richer and more
spiritual is our idea of what it is to be saved, the more
certain do we become that God must hold the gift of sal-
vation as equally free to all men, without decisive
distinctions of his own will.

What then is God’s election? We must remember
that the biblical doctrine of Election grew up from the


392


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


history of God’s working among men, and must be under-
stood in the light of the history. It is not to be con-
structed out of a few statements, clear though they may
seem; it must be gathered from the history of God’s
choice of men as it is recorded in the Scriptures. It
cannot be learned from the New Testament alone, for it
is grounded in the Old Testament, where indeed it is
chiefly illustrated. We must find the truth on the sub-
ject by inquiring how and for what purpose God is
recorded to have chosen the men who have been men-
tioned in the Scriptures as his elect.

If God’s choices of men recorded in the Old Testament,
by which the Christian doctrine of Election was sug-
gested, are examined, they prove to have been choices of
men to his service; selections of persons to do certain
works for him and accomplish certain purposes; elections
of men not so much for their own benefit as in order that
through them certain ends of God might be wrought out.
Thus Abraham, whose case the Scriptures represent as a
typical one, was chosen and called out for the sake of the
world and the future; Jacob was chosen that through him
the line of blessing might proceed; Joseph, that the way
of his family into Egypt might be prepared ; Moses, that
Israel might be brought out of Egypt ; Aaron, that Israel
might have the benefit of priestly service; Joshua, that
Israel might be led into Canaan ; Israel itself as a people,
that the nations might have a witness to the living God
among them, and the future divine salvation might be
brought by means of it into the world; Saul, that a king-
dom might be founded; David, that the kingdom might
be strengthened and brought to a worthier character; the
royal house of David, that the national covenant might
be embodied in lasting institutions and be developed into
a royal hope; the prophets in long succession, one by
one, that God's various messages of love and righteous-
ness might be home to men, though often in agony for
the men who uttered them; the suffering Servant of
Jehovah, as conceived by the great prophet of the Exile,


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 393


that Israel might be brought back to God and preserved
to its destiny through the patient suffering of the true
Israel, the church within the church; Christ himself
(Luke ix. 35), that through him God’s eternal purpose
of salvation for men might be accomplished ; the apostles,
that the Church might be founded, and the word of salva-
tion be borne to the world; the Christian people, that
they might show forth the excellences of God who saved
them (i Pet. ii. 9). According to the teaching that runs
through the Bible, no one was chosen primarily for his
own sake and advantage, but all were chosen for service.
The words attributed to the exalted Christ concerning
Saul of Tarsus describe them all : “ He is a chosen vessel
unto me, to bear my name” (Acts ix. 15), — a vessel
chosen for its uses, and precious for the sake of that
which it contains and carries.

It would be a mistake, however, to separate such elec-
tion from the character and relation to God by virtue of
which alone a man could properly fulfil it. In Christ
the two blessings are united, — salvation and service.
The relation to God in Christ that implies one implies
the other. Hence Christians are spoken of as elect some-
times to salvation (2Th. ii. 13), and sometimes to obedi-
ence (i Pet. i. 2). If a man is selected to stand for God
in Christian service, he is thereby called to be a Chris-
tian, and through union with Christ to be saved. Never-
theless, the idea of "election” that runs through the
Bible refers to God’s choice to service rather than to
salvation.

The Scriptural doctrine of Election is summed up in
the words of Christ to his disciples, " Ye did not choose
me, but I chose you, and appointed you, that ye should
go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should abide”
(John XV. 16). The choice, which is a divine act, is a
summons to the side of God, to be fitted for his service
and to be used therein. The elect of the New Testa-
ment, like the elect of the Old, are chosen and called
of God that he may use them for the good of other


394 OUTLINE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


men. Like Israel, the Christian people are chosen of
God for the good of the world. Instead of holding
that the elect are the only ones who can be saved, it
is more accordant with the Scriptures to hold that the
elect are elect for the sake of the non-elect, — that is,
they are chosen by God to serve for the saving of those
who have not yet been brought to God as they have
been. The non-elect in God’s own time may become
elect.

According to the New Testament, the Christian people
are successors to Israel in this calling to God’s work.
The men of Israel had been only too well aware of their
election, but had missed the divine idea in it ; for they
supposed that they alone were the elect, and that they
were elect for their own sake and advantage. They sup-
posed that election meant favoritism, and that they were
the favorites. This error was quite in opposition to the
teaching of the prophets (as Isa. xlix. 1-12), but it grew
up as a fruit of the legalism and exclusiveness that fol-
lowed the Exile. Paul maintained, in opposition to the
Jewish feeling on the subject, that God was absolutely
his own master in his choices and callings of men; he
was by no means obliged to limit himself to Israel, but
might reject Israel if he would, even after all that had
passed, and choose men for his purposes from wherever
he pleased, and no man would have a right to complain.
The field for his choice and calling was as wide as man-
kind, and his freedom was complete (Rom. ix.-xi.). The
argument of Paul in these famous chapters was not in-
tended for the establishing of a doctrine of Election:
there was no need of that, for the Jews were already rest-
ing in a doctrine that was only too strict and exclusive.
The argument was intended to release the doctrine of
Election from the bondage of exclusiveness and spiritual
pride, and present it as a doctrine of divine freedom, ful-
filling the purpose of divine love. To Paul the choice
had its aspects of mystery, but they were glorious, not
perplexing.


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AHD THE DIVINE LIFE INMAN 395


This simple doctrine of Election is the one that the
Scriptures yield when they are read naturally, in the
light of their own history. It is a welcome substitute for
more elaborate doctrines. This doctrine draws no hard
lines among men; it is accompanied by no parallel doc-
trine of reprobation ; it suggests no exclusion of any from
the very possibility of grace; it raises no doubt of the
sincerity of God; it asserts his sovereignty in choosing,
while yet it awakens no question as to the freedom of
man; it lends itself perfectly to the uses of a free gospel,
proclaimed to all mankind. Of course it is not main-
tained that this doctrine removes all mystery from life.
It does not explain why one man is actually brought to
trod for present service and welfare, while another
remains thus far uninfluenced by any divine calling. It
still is true, as Paul insisted, that God is sovereign
in the administration of these gifts and callings, and
that the grounds of his providential action must be
left with him. But the mystery is no longer a heart-
breaking mystery, when we can thoroughly believe in
the sincerity of God and the universality of his grace.
Grant this, and his sovereignty is a source not of per-
plexity, but of rest, for it gives assurance that all is
right. The mysteries of life are not solved as yet
by explanations, but they are relieved by acquaintance
with God, whom when we know him aright we can trust
forever.

3. The Beginning of the Divine Life. — How is the
Divine Life in Man begun? In what does the initial
experience consist ? and by what agencies is it wrought ?

The very conditions that render close defining impos-
sible here have caused it to be much desired, and have
given rise to many theoretical definitions. Y et it remains
a fact that the region is one in which we cannot make
precise definitions, and that if we confine ourselves to
what we know our statements may seem vague and insuffi-
cient Nevertheless, if we are content with such definite*


396 AJ\r OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


ness as the nature of the case admits, we can come to
reasonably true and clear conceptions.

So far as the beginning of the divine life is described
in the Scriptures, it is described in figurative language,
as doubtless it must be. It is a begetting by God (i Pet.
i. 23; I John iv. 7); a birth (John iii. 3; James i. 18);
a creation (2 Cor. v. 17); a resurrection (Eph. ii. i).
From among these expressive metaphors that of birth has
been selected for prominence, and the beginning of the
divine life is oftenest spoken of as regeneration . The
presence of the others should warn us against thinking
that this is the only allowable name : yet there is good
reason why this should be the favorite name for describ-
ing the beginning of the divine life from the divine side.
The same change viewed from the human side is popularly
called Conversion.

There is no difficulty in seeing what the nature of this
experience must be. The beginning of the divine life,
being an entrance into personal union and fellowship
with Christ and so with God, is a moral change ; it is a
change of character and ruling disposition. It is not a
gift of new faculties, or a creation of something addi-
tional in a man, but an awakening of new dispositions
which prepare him for fellowship with God. And since
the new life of divine fellowship is a life of holy love,
the beginning of the new life consists in the awakening
of holy love in the soul. But this thought must be
added, — that this change is wrought by God, and consists
in his own impartation of his own character. Here
appears the fitness of the name regeneration. God by
his own action produces another like himself : he brings
into being one who is in the spiritual sense his offspring,
his child. A man is “born again,” made a new creature
by a new beginning in the soul’s life, whereby God
produces a life morally similar to his own. We can well
understand that the direct agent in effecting such a
change in a man is God in man, the Holy Spirit

Hence regeneration may be defined as that work Qt


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AHD THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 397


Holy Spirit in a man by which a new life of holy love,
like the life of God, is initiated.

If it be objected that this definition does not define the
act of the Holy Spirit by telling just what he does, the
reply is that that is what no definition can do. Beneath
all definitions, there remains the mystery of life, and the
mystery of the action of Spirit upon spirit. What this
spiritually vivifying touch of God is, no man will ever
know. Probably regeneration itself is never a matter of
actual consciousness to a man. It is apparent in its con-
sequences, but is not discerned in itself; hence we have
no opportunity of examining it. The region lies deep in
us, and the agent, the Holy Spirit, acts unseen, not
calling attention to himself, and apparently not desiring
to be seen in his inner working. Thus we have no mate-
rial for a definition of regeneration from within. But this
obscurity need not trouble us, for it is only the obscurity
that hangs over all inner spiritual processes ; we may trace
their preparations, and follow out their consequences, but
they lie too deep to be examined in themselves.

But we can see what regeneration is in its relation to
God, and to Christ. In relation to God himself, the
regenerating act is the fulfilling of his original intention
that man should be in the fullest sense his son. Man
was created as the child of Grod, and the sonship that was
established by the creative act could never be destroyed;
but it has been vitiated by sin in man, and thus rendered
incapable, without a radical change in character, of ever
coming to perfection. In regeneration the Father touches
one who never ceased to be his offspring, and so changes
his character that he becomes to him a true son. On
God’s part therefore this is the restoring and completing
of that filial relation to himself for which he created man
at first. In relation to Christ, it is equally true that the
regenerating act is performed in fulfilment of his pur-
pose. It is the carrying into effect, in an individual
case, of Christ’s reconciliation. By the awakening of
new affections and the initiating of new character the


398 AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


man is brought into that moral union and fellowship with
Christ in which salvation consists. To bring this to
pass Christ lived and died, and for this he stands as the
meeting-point of God and man, the channel through
which the holy life flows from God into humanity. The
Spirit brings men into Christ, where the power of regen-
eration meets them.

It is not so easy, however, to define the position that
Christ must hold in the conscious experience of men in
the new beginning. In the more intelligent forms of
Christian experience, occurring where there is a good
degree of knowledge, Christ is perceived, and consciously
and intentionally accepted, as the medium through which
the new life that is desired comes from God into the soul.
This may fairly be called the typical experience, since it
is the experience that corresponds to the nature of the
divine life. This is the experience that is celebrated in
the hymns of faith and in the most intelligent testimony
of Christians. But not all experience of regeneration is
typical : none of it, indeed, is fully so, and much of it is
very far from typical, because the conditions in men
are so far from ideal. In many cases that are known
among Christians there is good evidence of spiritual
renewal, while there is little conscious recognition of
Christ as the source of the new life. Men seem some-
times to be brought into moral union with Christ without
knowing that it is to Christ that they are brought How
far this may extend, it is difficult to judge; but expe-
rience varies so widely as to caution us against dogmat-
ically limiting the possibilities of grace by theories too
strict. God certainly cares more for the result than for
the process, and it is quite possible that Christ, in his
universal relation to humanity, may be able to pour his
new life into open hearts, even when there is complete
ignorance concerning the facts of his history and work.


There are genuine antecedents to regeneration.
There is such a thing as preparation by the Spirit. . Some


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 399


maintain, indeed, that the first touch of the Spirit upon a
sinful soul is the touch that regenerates, all that seems
like preparation being due to some other source than the
Spirit; but it is not so. There are preparatory dealings
of God with the soul. We speak of what is real when in
our preaching we tell of the Holy Spirit as convincing of
sin, pleading with the soul, drawing, seeking to save,
calling, presenting Christ. This indeed is the part of
the great experience of which men are most distinctly
conscious. Before the new and holy life is actually
begun, God is leading the soul up to readiness for enter-
ing it. To these inward influences must of course be
added whatever helpful influence comes from without.
By Christian surroundings, by the help of friends, by the
experience of life in all its forms, God is long preparing
a soul for regeneration, and the actual new beginning
comes when all things are ready. The new beginning,
which often seems at the time a sudden and unprepared
event, is seen afterward, when viewed in the light of
riper knowledge, to be the bursting of a flower which
God had long been preparing in the bud.

The main element that we can trace in this preparation
is the use of truth. The Spirit, invisible and silent,
brings truth to mind, and quickens its suggestions of
duty. In this work the Spirit is not limited to the
employment of any single class of truths. It is a mis-
take to suppose that he is confined to Christian doctrines :
he may use any truth that can influence a soul in the
right direction. A man may be drawn to the new begin-
ning by any true view of life, personal or general ; by any
genuine conviction respecting his own character or need;
by any worthy conception of God or Christ. Conviction
of personal sinfulness and offering of Christ as Saviour
are common means of leading ; and this is so natural and
right a way that many take it to be the only way, and
try to trace all Christian experience over this path. But
experience shows that there are other forms of prepara-
tion, and that many come to the new life by other ways


jiN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


than this. The truth that is employed need not be com-
plete in the man’s mind; it maybe incomplete, one-sided,
partial, inadequate to the subject that it represents.
Indeed, many a man has been led into the new life under
influence from what seemed to him to be truth, but after-
ward appeared to be truth largely mixed with error.
Whatever has the vitality of truth to the soul at the time,
the divine Spirit seems to be able to use for the soul’s
good. At first sight we may wonder that this is so, but
we have abundant reason to be thankful for it.

This wide range of possible influences is accounted for by
a fact that is often overlooked, — the fact that the Spirit
leads into the new life less by the way of thinking than by
the way of feeling. We easily overestimate the intellectual
element here. We often suppose that truth benefits a man
chiefly through his thinking about it : whereas it does not
bring him its richest benefit at all until he begins to feel in
view of it. It is in the heart, not in the head, that regener-
ation is wrought, and the way of feeling, the heart, the
emotional or affectional life, is the Spirit’s way of approach
to it. Hence the prominence of emotion in the history of
religion, and the indispensableness of a warm emotional
life in all effective and triumphant Christianity.

These facts show that there is no one form of experience
that alone is normal in entering the new life. God, not re-
quiring perfect means through which to work for good,
employs any means that a soul can profit by ; and men are
so various that- uniformity in experience is impossible.
Christians often err in setting up some single type as the
one to which all experience must conform ; and God re-
futes the error by the variety of his operations.

The figures that represent regeneration would teach, if
they were pressed to perfect consistency, that God is the
sole actor in that work, and man is passive. The same
conclusion has often been reached by reasoning. But this
cannot be the whole truth. Under the veil of mystery that
hides the act of God in regeneration there may be a part


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 4OI


of the experience in which man is wholly passive and re-
ceptive, for we know that God does a work that is truly his
own; but in the beginning of the divine life so far as men
can see it, man is not wholly passive, but performs a very
important part. Man’s part in the establishment of the
divine life is as important as that of God, and the result
cannot be obtained without the one, anymore than without
the other. The divine life is of such a nature that man must
be active in initiating it. Surely a life of holy love cannot
be begun without action on the part of him who is to do
the loving* Effect of truth upon the soul implies activity
of the soul. Feeling and volition are the man’s own, how-
ever they may be affected by divine influence. So there is
certainly a human part in the beginning of the divine life.

When we inquire what constitutes this human element,
we find two actions that are evidently normal to a soul that
is entering the new world in Christ. To a sinful person,
repentance is a normal and appropriate act, and a true part
of this new beginning. Repentance alone, however, is in-
complete, and suggests its correlative and complement
faith.

Repentance and faith are the human acts in which
the divine life is begun. These acts make up what is
often called, as a human experience. Conversion. This
word, in its modern sense, can scarcely be called a Scrip-
tural name for this experience, but it has come into com-
mon use, and represents very well the beginning of the
divine life, viewed from the human side. Through repent-
ance and faith a man is converted, or turned, to God, and
brought into fellowship with him.

These acts have their place and value, not by any special
appointment of God, but because they are the natural and
only suitable acts for one who wishes to turn from sin to
God and goodness. Both are acts of fellowship with
Christ, in which a man asserts, and confirms, his moral
unity with the Saviour of sinners.

Repentance, in the ^ew Testamen<' change of mind;

26


402


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


such is the meaning of the original word. Repentance is
the turning away from a life of sin, the breaking off from
evil, because of a change of mind in which a new and
better standard of life has been accepted. It is the practi-
cal sharing in Christ’s view of sin. Some better influence
strikes upon the soul after its course of sinning; the
old standard of judgment and choice that has ruled the
life is seen and felt to be wrong; and the attitude of. the
man toward his God, himself, and his own conduct is
thereby altered. The old way of living can no longer be
followed, for the soul, now joining with Christ, demands a
new and worthier way. So the man turns in regret and
aspiration from the life that he has been living, and with
changed mind stands ready for a better. The change
may be comparatively a calm and quiet one, or it may
be accompanied by sharp mental pain. The man may
abhor himself, and be in an agony of sorrow before God
in view of his sins. A man who knows himself a sinner
may well find penitence painful. But the sharpness of
sorrow is not what constitutes the repentance : the repent-
ance consists in the change of mind, resulting in change of
life, and the sorrow for sin is its accompaniment A man
repents when at last he begins to feel as Christ feels about
evil in himself, and to act accordingly.

Repentance, thus defined, is something that may occur
again and again in a man’s experience. The Christian life
is not only entered by the gate of repentance, but is char-
acterized by repentance through its whole extent. Every
rejection of a lower life as unworthy is of the nature of re-
pentance, for it is just such a change of mind as that name
denotes ; and Christian progress consists in perpetual break-
ing-off of lower ways, that higher ways may be accepted.
The Christian life is a way of repentance, for personal salva-
tion consists in that comprehensive change of mind and life
of which repentance is the earlier half. If repentance were
viewed merely in the ordinary way, as a hard and painful
duty, this might be a discouraging aspect of the Christian
life ; but repentance is glorified when It is seen in its re-


THE BOL y SPTRITy AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 403


lation to Christ. Perpetual repentance is simply perpetual
fellowship with Christ in his estimate of evil. Performed
once or a thousand times, it is a most precious act of moral
unity with Christ the Saviour. The ability to make a
lifelong repentance is the surest sign that a man is in the
way of salvation. Repentance is in fact to any man an in-
estimable privilege. To a sinful man, the opportunity to
break off his sins by righteousness is an unspeakable boon,
the first great blessing that lies within his reach. To a
Christian, repentance is no less a privilege, for it means
that in fellowship with his Saviour he is forgetting the
things that are behind, that he may reach forth to the
things that are before.

Repentance looks back and forsakes. Faith looks for-
ward and accepts. Faith is trustful recognition of unseen
reality. Christian faith is trustful recognition of the unseen
but living God, especially as he is revealed in gracious char-
acter in Christ the Saviour of men.

It is unfortunate that the English word faith has no
cognate verb, but is dependent for such companionship
upon the dissimilar verb believe.” If the second syllable
of the word “ confide ” were in use as a separate word, so
that one could say, “I fide in Christ,” we should be richer
for the purpose of expression ; but as it is we have only
one word for more than one idea. The consequence is
that it is easy to confound faith with inferior forms of
believing. There is a belief that is mere intellectual assent,
founded on evidence that satisfies the mind, or, if direct
evidence is wanting, on the testimony of some one who
knows. When the act of believing is represented as a
Christian duty and privilege, these inferior forms of belief
are too easily accepted as sufficient. But faith is not mere
intellectual assent; it is not mere belief on evidence, or on
testimony. It is not even the intellectual acceptance as
true of what God has said. Faith is not faith without the
element of personal confidence, self-commitment, trust A
man might accept all known truth concerning God and


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Christ, and believe it on the authority of God himself, and
yet be destitute of faith. The nature of faith is nowhere
better illustrated in words than in the eleventh chapter of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. Here both elements appear,
the perception of the divine spiritual facts as real, and the
hearty committing of soul and life to them. Here are found
most living and beautiful illustrations of that trustful recog-
nition of divine reality, by virtue of which Moses “ endured
as seeing him who is invisible,” and the patriarchs greeted
the promises from afar ; and this is faith.

These acts of faith are not less instructive to us for hav-
ing been performed under the old dispensation, for the
nature of faith is the same in all times. Faith in Christ is
of the same nature, but the revelation that supports it is
richer and more helpful. Faith in Christ is trustful recog-
nition of the saving love of God in Christ, with humble and
willing acceptance of the forgiveness and holy life that it
offers. By faith we perceive that Christ is the Saviour that
we need, and venture upon him with all our sinfulness and
all the needs that it implies. By faith we are sure that the
divine grace is sufficient for us, and entrust ourselves to it,
and accept what it offers us, and know that our confidence
is not in vain. Faith is thus, as we have seen in another
connection, the necessary correlative to grace. Grace is
the free and undeserved kindness of God, which freely
gives us what we need; and faith is the free and active
acceptance of that which grace presents. Free grace is
the source of salvation, and faith receiving the gift is the
means of salvation to us. There is no other way, and
hence there is nothing arbitrary in God’s demand for faith ;
for as human giving cannot be effective except through the
receiving of the gift, so divine grace cannot bless and save
men except as faith trustfully recognizes and accepts the
salvation of God.

How truly faith is an act of fellowship with Christ,
wherein a soul acts in moral unity with him, we see at
once. Repentance joins in Christ’s estimate of sin; faith
joins in his estimate of God and eternal life, of the right


THE HOLV SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 405


way to live and the only way of salvation. Faith agrees
with Christ concerning the eternal realities ; it appreciates
his work of grace ; it gives him the desire of his heart in
the reconciliation of a man to God. Even in the first act
of faith a man enters into Christ’s idea and spirit, and stands
joined to him in the fellowship of inner life.

The question how much knowledge, or intellectual under-
standing of divine things, is indispensable to an effective
faith, is one that we cannot answer. Experience shows
that a very slight knowledge may often be a sufficient in-
tellectual foundation for a strong and efficient faith. Dis-
cernment of truth is one thing, and willingness to accept
truth is another ; and strength of faith is governed more
by willingness of heart than by intellectual discernment.
Often we find clear perception with little faith, and faint
perception with strong faith. Since faith belongs more to
the heart than to the intellect, intellectual understanding
often avails less than we expect. Knowledge of theories
concerning salvation helps but little, and explanations re-
garding divine things often prove disappointing. Efforts
to clear the way for personal faith by imparting such
knowledge fail as often as they are successful. There is a
simplicity in divine things, by virtue of which the gospel
of God’s love needs little explanation ; and the perception
of this simplicity is the knowledge that is most helpful in
the encouraging of faith. Faith is most helped at its
beginning by seeing that God gives, and man has but to
receive. Even this may be intellectually apprehended with-
out spiritual profit, but faith springs up as soon as the heart
perceives this with its own peculiar insight.

In repentance and faith the new divine life in Christ is
begun. These acts may vary greatly ; but that breaking
with the old life which is repentance and that trustful
acceptance of God’s gift which is faith, are of the substance
of the new experience. If we cannot define the relation of
this human action to the divine, we may thankfully remem-
ber that we have no need of definition. It is enough to say


406 an outline of CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


that God works in a man, and the man takes these new
steps in spiritual action, and begins to live the new life.
Close definitions of the process are put to shame by the
endless variety that we encounter in actual life ; but the
reality, in a thousand forms, is constant evidence of the re*il-
ity of the unseen Spirit.

Paul uses the word JUSTIFICATION to set forth one
aspect of the divine life, and of its beginning. Justification
and righteousness are translations of words that have one
root and express essentially the same idea ; yet both seem
to be required for the expression of Paul’s thought. God
is said to justify (Rom. viii. 34), and man to be justified
(Rom.v. i): justification therefore is an act of God, and
a state of man, so that when God performs the act man
enters the state. It might be thought, since justification
and righteousness represent words of a common origin,
that the meaning would be expressed by saying that God
makes righteous and the man is made righteous, the only
fact in view being the moral change in the man, from
wrong character to right : but we find that this does not
precisely express the thought of Paul. But neither is it
sufficient to say that God accepts a man as one who is ac-
counted righteous, and the man is so accepted, without
reference to any moral change in the man himself. The
conception is partly forensic and partly moral, — forensic
in form, but moral in substance.

Paul evidently thinks of justification as a divine act that
affects the man’s standing in the sight of God. A justified
man, with him, is an accepted man, whom God regards as
sustaining toward himself the relation that men ought to
sustain. Justification, in the thought of Paul, is the act of
such acceptance on God’s part, and the state of such
acceptance on man’s part. It is not equivalent to acquittal,
for acquittal declares that the man has not done wrong. Jus-
tification is rather the acceptance of a man by God, although
he has done wrong.

But it is plain that God, with whom there are no fictions,


THE HOLY SPIRIT, THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 407


cannot thus accept a man as sustaining to himself the right
relation, unless the right relation exists. If justification is
an act in which God affirms the right relation, it implies
the existence of that relation. Hence justification implies
and rests upon the beginning of the new divine life in man.
The renewing touch of the Holy Spirit is put forth upon
the soul; the soul commits itself in trustful faith to the
saving grace of God. When these two acts have been per-
formed, one divine and the other human, the man does
occupy the position before God that it is right for a man to
occupy. He has accepted the divine influence for his sal-
vation, and is doing toward God exactly what every sinful
soul ought to do, for he is trusting God and welcoming his
gracious help. He is not perfect, but he is a new creature
just born, and a filial, trustful creature as he ought to be.
He does not by this earn acceptance, and obtain it on the
principle of merit, nor is he saved by works, for all this is
intrinsically impossible and out of the question. But when
the man has come by God's grace to be in relation to God
where and what he ought to be, God, whose judgment is
according to truth, recognizes the reality and looks upon
him as an accepted man.

Justification thus viewed may be said to be attained in
any one of several ways. We may say with Paul that we
are justified by faith, since the human trust in God's grace
is on man's side the way to acceptance. Or we may say,
as the Christian experience suggests and as theologians
often assert, that justification is the first result of regenera-
tion ; acceptance with God is the natural lot of the new
creature that the Holy Spirit has made. If the beginning
of the new life is viewed from the human side, justification
is the natural result of faith; if from the divine side, it
naturally follows regeneration. Or we may say, with
Paul, referring to Christ, that we are ^‘justified in his
blood," since it is by the saving work of Christ, represented
by his death, that this Christian experience has been brought
to pass.

It will be seen from these statements that justification is


408 AJ\^ OUTUNE of CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


not a separate element in the work of salvation, wrougnt
by God independently of other elements. It is a result,
rather than a separate work. It is something that follows
when faith and new life are present. It is not to be sought,
therefore, as a separate gift of God, and is not conferred by
him as a distinct bestowment. When justification is thus
regarded as the natural and intelligible result of the new
beginning, it will cease to be an occasion of perplexity in
the experience of Christian people.

The state of justification, or acceptance with God, is said
by Paul, in Rom. v., to be the state in which the Christian
life is lived and its characteristic blessings are enjoyed.
This acceptance with God is at every moment of life a
gracious acceptance, and however richly goodness may
increase in the accepted man, it never passes over into an
acceptance by merit on legal grounds. Yet it is never an
acceptance on false or unreal grounds. The new life is the
true life, well-pleasing to God because of its spiritual qual-
ity, and it is always as a new creature in Christ Jesus that
a man is justified. The rich and manifold gift of new
life and divine acceptance is a real and solid gift of holy
character, and is bestowed by grace, never on the principle
of merit or deserving, but solely on the principle of gift.
It is bestowed upon faith, not because faith is a work to
which reward is due, but because faith is the stretching-out
of the hand to receive the free offering of grace.

The beginning of the divine life, having a divine side as
well as a human, is often perplexing, and many earnest
souls have stumbled at the mystery of it. Christian
preachers should not allow its perplexing aspects to re-
main prominent with their hearers, but should overbear
their perplexities by the force of the free gospel of God’s
grace. We must make it too plain to be doubted that
God is always ready with saving grace, and that no man
will seek the new life in vain.

We must also make it plain that there is no need of
fcrcing Christian experience into forms that do not pos-sess


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 409


reality in our own time. We must allow the utmost large-
ness and liberty to the renewing Spirit, who works in each
age according to the life of each age.

4. The Progress of the Divine Life. — The work that
the New Testament calls SANCTIFICATION is the carrying-
on of the divine life toward perfection. It is the main-
taining and strengthening of that holy disposition which
God imparts in regeneration, and the permeating of the
entire person and life with the character that was then
brought in. It is to regeneration what growth is to birth.
Sanctification, in the New Testament, does not mean per-
fection reached, but the progress of the divine life toward
perfection. Sanctification is the christianizing of the
Christian.

In this work is found a rich fulfilment of the promise of
the departing Saviour ; for in the process of sanctification
the Holy Spirit who initiated the divine life is the ever-
present agent. The Holy Spirit nourishes and strengthens
the holy love that he has awakened. He makes Christ
ever more truly known, taking what is his and manifesting
it to the soul. He constantly calls out new faith in Christ,
new love toward God and men, new hope of further
blessing and progress. He brings home to the heart the
truths that are helpful to the growth of holiness. He
turns the various events of life to their sanctifying use, and
teaches to the child the Father’s lessons. He awakens the
spirit of prayer in the heart, and suggests such desires as
accord with the Father's will. He confirms and educates
the Christian virtues, and extends the field of goodness in
the life. He tenderly broods over the entire soul and its
living, ministering silent but effective help to all that is
holy. His invisible presence is sometimes unperceived,
and his work, with its precious fruits, is attributed to nat-
ural causes, as if natural progress were enough to bring
Christians to perfection. But the glory of the Christian life
is the indwelling of the living God as a guiding and sanctify-
ing Spirit. The inner Christian life is not merely human :


410 /!liV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


it is divine, both in its origin and in the source from which
it is perpetually maintained. The presence of the sanctify-
ing Spirit is the Christian’s hope.

The Spirit glorifies Christ in all parts and stages of this
holy progress, for it is always into deeper moral unity and
truer fellowship with Christ that he guides the child of
God. How truly the divine life is the life in union with
Christ, no one learns except through the sanctification of
the Spirit. The mind that the Spirit causes to be in a
Christian is the mind of Christ. As a Christian advances
under the Spirit’s leading, he simply comes more and more
to Christ’s point of view concerning all things, and is con-
strained more and more by the motives that controlled
Christ himself. Likeness to Christ is the goal of the
Spirit’s leading and increasing conformity to Christ’s char-
acter and life is the way through which he leads.

There are various HELPS TO the divine life, acts and
influences that are adapted to strengthen that life and
advance it toward perfection. They are sometimes called
Means of Grace, but it is better to call them helps to the
divine life. It is impossible to mention them all, but some
of them may be enumerated.

(i) Religious acts and exercises, or acts that spring
from the new life and are characteristic of it on its dis-
tinctly religious side. Among these are prayer and per-
sonal communion with God ; worship, private and public ;
the use of the Scriptures, as guide to the knowledge of
God and duty, and as theme of devout meditation ; study
of the Christian realities, and reflection upon them; the
cherishing of the Christian ideals, hopes and purposes;
the various habits and experiences of devoutness; the
various experiences of fellowship with other Christians;
observance of Christ’s ordinances; participation in local
church-life, and in wider Christian interests. The Church
itself as a Christian institution, though it has a calling and
value beyond the helping of individual Christians, is one of
the strong and inspiring helps to the personal divine life.


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 4I I


(2) The discipline of life: for the divine life affects the
entire man, and is aided by other influences than those
that touch directly the religious nature* It is served and
strengthened by all that deepens the spiritual significance
and suggestiveness of life. Hence among its helps are the
relations that bind human beings together in families and
other social groups; the joys and satisfactions of life; the
necessity of labor, and the habits that this necessity de-
velops; the uncertainty of human things; the sorrows
of life, sickness, losses, disappointments, bereavements;
the intellectual life, with the education that it requires ; the
progress from youth to age, with the successive changes
in point of view and spirit of living that it involves. The
entire human experience is a school for the training of the
divine life in man.

(3) The activities of divine love, — a class of helps not
wholly distinct from the others, yet worthy to be mentioned
by itself. The divine life is best helped by its own char-
acteristic activities; and they will best help and enrich it
when they are no longer put forth by special effort, but
have come to be natural and instinctive expressions of the
soul. The most valuable help to the divine life is its own
operation, the healthful and unstudied working of its own
normal powers. It gains strength at the best advantage
when It is going out at its own free impulse, unconscious
of effort, to do works of divine love in the world. The
divine life of the good Samaritan grew best, surely, when
he was giving it no thought, being intent upon the deed of
love that he performed. Thus all works of love, done not
with a view to self-improvement but for love’s own sake,
are helps to the divine life in him who performs them.
That life grows strong and fine through exertion of the
Christian energies ; practice in all graces ; the shining-out
of character; self-forgetful labors for the salvation of
others, or for their good in any form ; missionary work ;
humanitarian efforts ; patriotism ; interest in mankind, with
the sense of human brotherhood ; loving care for humanity
in its sins and woes; sympathy with the poor, the op-


412 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


pressed, and the sorrowful; taking counsel and making
effort for the bettering of the lot of man; actual exercise
in any form of that compassionate love which is character-
istic of God and therefore of his children. All these are
helps to the divine life, — and happy Is he who is so in
fellowship with Christ that he can use them not in order to
be helped, but in order to be helpful to his brethren.

It is a frequent mistake to assume that the divine life is
to be helped only, or mainly, by the conscious and inten-
tional use of appropriate means. When this thought is
present, the employment of the “ means of grace often
becomes formal and perfunctory, as if the opening of cer-
tain external channels could be relied upon to bring the
flow of divine energy. In this way there often comes to
be an unconscious sacramentalism in the employment of
the spiritual and private means of grace, like prayer and
the reading of the Bible, those acts being performed with
a kind of expectation that of themselves they will convey
divine influence. The intentional and deliberate use of
many of the external helps is indeed both valuable and
important. Regularity, and even routine, is not in vain,
and strength comes to the inner life from many a source
that must be sought by will. Nevertheless, it is true that
the divine life moves most directly toward perfection when
it has obtained free course in its natural activities, and
that external acts and regularities best serve their purpose
when they help to train the soul to spontaneous piety and
love.

Concerning one of these helps to the divine life a few
words may well be added, and that one is PRAYER.

The nature and purpose of prayer mark this as the right
place to speak of it. Prayer is communion with God; it
is the souFs address to him on all subjects concerning
which God's child may need or desire to commune with
his Father. It includes not only petition, but the expres-
sion of adoration, gratitude, penitence, and aspiration, and
the opening of the heart to God with all that the heart


THE HOL Y SPIRTT, AND THE DIVINE LITE IN MAN 41 3


may contain. All confidences enter into it, and no gen-
uine speaking to God is excluded from its range. Nor is
all this without an object dear to the Father. Prayers
often have their special objects which they seek; bui
prayer has for its object the doing of the will of God. By
communion with God his child becomes acquainted with
him, and by learning his will becomes more able and ready
to join in doing it. Moreover, by lifting his soul to God
the child grows into the divine fellowship, and becomes
more receptive of God’s inward working; whereby il
comes to pass that God is more able to accomplish his
own will in him. God can do more in a praying soul thar
in another, because that soul is more open and responsive
to his grace. Prayer is thus the most direct of all helps
to the divine life, — both because it is the freest action o‘
the divine life in the highest realm, and because it prepares
the way for God to do his own pleasure in the soul thal
prays.

When prayer is petition or direct request, even then the
end in view is not the substitution of the child’s will foi
the Father’s. The proper object is not the securing ol
something that a man desires simply because he desires
it ; still less is it the obtaining of something that a mar
wishes but God does not approve. God’s child is right ir
having strong desires, and God wishes such desires to be
frankly expressed to him. Prayer is the opening of the
heart with all its desires to him, in the filial freedom thal
he always wishes us to enjoy. Whatsoever we are in-
terested in he desires to hear. All desires that are 0;
such character that we dare express them to him with
urgency and pleading, he wishes us so to present, and he
gives us assurance that it will not be in vain. The genuine
filial freedom, however, is always accompanied by the filial
submission, and true prayer contains in spirit the clause,
“ Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt.” “ Ask whal
ye will, and it shall be done unto you,” is not an uncondi-
tional promise, and ought not to be. It is preceded by the
condition, “ If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you,’


414 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


— that is to say, if we “ dwell deep ” in Christ by spiritual
unity with him, and his words of divine instruction dwell
deep in us to guide our petitions, then our requests will be
granted. This means that the better our desires are, and
the more like God’s own, the more certain are the prayers
that express them to be affirmatively answered. “ The
Spirit maketh intercession for the saints according to the
will of God” (Rom. viii. 27), suggesting such prayers as
he can answer as his child desires ; and from this agree-
ment of the human desire with the divine comes the cer-
tainty that the human desire will be fulfilled. This cer-
tainty is all the assurance of fulfilment for our requests that
we ought to ask.

In thinking of that sanctification through which the
divine life advances toward perfection, we need to pay due
attention on the one hand to its nature as a process, and
on the other to the events or crises that mark its course,
and the various stages through which it proceeds. Yet
these two aspects can scarcely be treated separately or in
succession, for each is essential to the meaning of the
other.

Plainly sanctification is not an event, but a process.
Being the progress of the divine life toward perfection, it
is a movement, an advancing. It is a double process, — or
rather, it may be viewed from the negative side or from
the positive. Negatively, it is progressive deliverance from
sin, in action and in character. Positively, it is progressive
training of the powers and development of the possibilities
of the soul in its divine life. These two processes are but
one; for the development of the divine life gradually
banishes sin, and deliverance from sin is the way to fresh
development of the divine life. Of these two aspects the
positive is the primary one, though it is not often so re-
garded. Popularly, sanctification is spoken of as consisting
mainly in deliverance from sin. But in fact it consists
mainly in the development of a divine life that conquers sin
and grows the more freely In proportion as sin is gone. And


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 415


in either aspect, the negative or the positive, sanctification
is a process, not an event. Never at a stroke is sin en-
tirely conquered, and never by a step is perfection in the
divine life reached.

Plainly the process of sanctification must pass through
unnumbered stages. It is often asked whether there is a
higher Christian life. The answer is. Yes, and a higher
life beyond it, and a higher still beyond. The Christian
life is ever higher and higher. It must pass through all
stages between its beginning and its perfection.

Plainly also the process includes innumerable events.
Many of these are ordinary and simple, but some are pro-
foundly significant, decisive of large issues, immensely
helpful to the progress. Sometimes a single experience
or crisis in life will bring a great advance in sanctification,
releasing the soul from some old bondage, or adding new
power to some godlike quality, or opening the way for
mightier operation of divine influences. God uses expe-
riences of every kind as elements in this holy progress,
and the best progress is made only by loyally accepting
the benefit of the experiences through which he leads.
Every day’s life should be in some way significant for
sanctification, for every inch of the road to perfection
has to be travelled, — whether slowly or rapidly, still
travelled.

We are often asking how soon sanctification is to be
completed. That depends upon two considerations, — how
much there is yet to be done, and how rapidly men are able
to receive and utilize the gifts of the Holy Spirit. The end,
we should remember, is moral likeness to God in a human
being. When we fairly consider how much there is yet to
be done, we learn that it is vain to look for perfection soon,
A man is not a thing, to be acted upon, but a free spirit, to
be transformed from within; and to say this, remembering
what the end is, is to say that the end is not in sight. Per-
fection in the divine life is far remote, even from the best
-men, and even the higher stages of imperfection are far


}I6 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


may. Nor does the end seem nearer when we ask how
toII able men are to make full use of the Holy Spirit’s
sanctifying influences. The best men are able to learn the
iivine lessons but slowly, and there is no man who can
'eceive the fulness that the sanctifying Spirit might impart.
aod cannot sanctify men through anything but experience.
Even to the end, sanctification will be a process of exper-
ence; and if once we see what perfection in the divine
ife means, we shall never think that the present life, at the
ongest, is long enough to bring a beginner up to it
Janctification is growth up to such likeness to God in
:haracter as a human spirit is capable of attaining; not
nerely toward it, but up to it in its full moral glory; and
)y no process of growing can that result be attained in a
luman lifetime. Even negative sanctification, or deliver-
ince from sin, is so great a work that he who best knows
limself will not be the one to think it near.

Expectations of a speedy completion, and claims of com-
)letion already attained, are founded upon insufficient sense
)f the greatness of the work. Usually there is an inade-
quate definition of sin, according to which sin can easily be
nade to seem a thing of the past. Often there is a shallow
lense of sin, and often there is a quick and enthusiastic but
indiscriminating appreciation of divine grace. Usually it
s assumed that sinlessness is perfection. But ‘sinlessness
s not perfection; it is the indispensable condition for the
ittainment of perfection. When a soul has become sinless,
hen the movement toward the full perfection of a soul may
JO on more freely. A truer knowledge of divine realities
lot only tempers rash claims, but postpones our hopes.
Doubtless God will sanctify his children as rapidly as he
:an, but even God cannot accomplish it without long time,
X is a great work to sanctify a soul.

In fact, not even with death can sanctification end.
Death is undoubtedly the most significant of all the crises
n the soufs history, with the exception of regeneration,
md it certainly brings in new elements that must be highly
nfluential in the progress of the divine life. The new


rhE HOLY SPIRIT, AHO THE DIY/irS LIFE IJY MAH 417


vision of God and of Christ must be mighty for good, and
other strong helps may doubtless then be brought to bear
upon the soul. Yet there is no evidence in Scripture, and
no assurance elsewhere, that death has power of cleansing
upon the soul, or that then in a moment by special act of
God sanctification is completed. Still must sanctification
be accomplished through experience. The sanctifying
process is one to which an immortal soul is introduced, and
it is a process of the soul’s immortality. Death can be
only a step in it, though an important step, and the process
must continue in another world. The heavenly life is pro-
gressive. If the divine life ever comes to perfection, it
will be in the ages to come.

But probably there is no such thing as bringing the
divine life to such completion that no further progress shall
be possible to it. The goal of sanctification is perfect
goodness like that of God, and that goal lies far beyond
deliverance from sin. Even if perfect goodness were
reached, there would still open before the soul the living of
the perfect life that then first is possible ; and in that life,
with its high experiences inconceivable at present, a finite
spirit must still be gaining in richness of spiritual quality
and power of holy service. If an end of the progress of
• the divine life in accordance with its qualities is possible, it
lies far beyond the reach of human thought. Sanctifica-
tion is a work of the Holy Spirit, begun here, to be carried
on hereafter, and destined to endless continuance.

Objections to the idea that sanctification is endless
usually arise from the confounding of sanctification with
deliverance from sin. If we say that sanctification will
never end, the answer is, “What! never cease sinning? ”
But sanctification, the progress of the divine life toward
perfection, can go on for ages after sin has ceased. Indeed,
it often seems that free and unhampered progress can
scarcely begin till sin has been left behind.

Meanwhile, great are the present possibilities of sanctifi-
cation. No sense of the greatness and length of the divine
process should make us sceptical as to what the Holy


1 8 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


pirit can accomplish now. By the power that is working
1 us already, our Saviour is able to do exceeding abund-
ntly above all that we ask or think (Eph. iii. 20). No
hristian has yet tested by experience how much the Holy
pirit of grace can do.

5. The Permanence of the Divine Life. — Is the
>ivine Life in Man destined in every case to come to
erfection? Yes. Not, indeed, that there is an absolute
letaphysical impossibility of failure, for this is something
rat we cannot affirm. Human freedom is not bound,
ven to the good. Yet because of God and his grace we
re justified in saying that the divine life, once begun,
destined in every case to be continued and carried
n, through its own characteristic processes, to perfection,
ince they are moral in their nature and aim at reality
3 the result, these processes are necessarily slow, and
re sometimes disappointing in appearance ; but the work
never abandoned by him who has undertaken it, and
owever slow their growth may be, God’s children all
row up.

Perhaps the following statements may lead to a satis-
ctojy conviction upon this subject, which has been at-
:nded by many perplexities. The destiny of the divine
fe in man can be rightly foreseen only through a true
nowledge of that life itself, and the means by which it
m be advanced toward its perfection.

(i) The progress of the divine life that is begun by the
ew birth consists in moral transformation, or the growth
r holy character.

Regeneration is a moral change, initiating a new char-
:ter in fellowship with Christ; and the progress of the
jw life, or sanctification, consists in the development and
srfecting of that character. The Holy Spirit transforms
sinful man into a holy being in the likeness of the holy
hrist; and the present inquiry relates to the com^feljng
' this moral transformation.


THE HOL y SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 419


(2) God, the author and conductor of this moral trans-
formation, is pledged in veracity and love to complete it.

This is the Christian teaching as we find it in the Scrip-
tures. According to John vi. 39-40, and x. 27-29, Jesus
asserts the steadfastness of the divine purpose for the salva-
tion of those who belong to Christ, and the certainty of the
result. Paul, in Rom. viii. 29-39, represents the saving of
those who are in Christ as one single work of God, begun
and completed at once in the divine mind, and therefore
certain of accomplishment, and declares that nothing can
separate God’s people from his love in Christ. To the
same effect are many other Scriptural expressions. When
Paul said, “ Being confident of this very thing, that he
which began a good work in you will perfect it until the
day of Christ” (Phil. i. 6), he expressed the confidence
that the gospel warrants. Certainly the whole gospel is a
declaration of God’s intention to do a complete work.
Why, after his endurance and endeavor in sin-bearing,
should he do any other? The Christian revelation of
God’s character confirms all special affirmations to this
effect, and would enable us even to be sure of the result if
they had not been made ; for the Christian revelation not
only enables us to trust God where he has promised, but
assures us of what manner of things he will do where he
has not spoken, and teaches us to trust him where he has
never promised. Moreover, these assurances of Scripture
and faith are supported by the Christian experience, in
which the divine life, in proportion as it rises to a fair con-
sciousness of its own significance, inwardly attests its own
imperishableness. Faith knows that it is taking hold of
abiding realities, and discerns the deliberate and unalter-
able purpose of God, steadfast as the eternal love. All
deepening of experience brings fresh evidence that here is
a life born to be made perfect. The progress of moral
transformation foreshows the end, and convinces us that
God will carry it to completion. Confidence in this result
is one of the most effective means for obtaining it. A
Christian who is sure that God will not leave his work in


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGV


him unfinished is the one who is most encouraged to work
with God for his own perfection. There is no inspirer like
hope.

(3) This moral transformation cannot take place, except
by the co-operation of man with God in promoting it.

Salvation is not merely a work of Omnipotence. God
cannot perfect a man alone. As soon as we clearly see
that the progress of the divine life consists in moral trans-
formation, it is impossible to think any longer of a man as
saved in spite of himself, or as so fastened as if by a chain
that there is no escape from salvation. The perfecting of
a man is the training of his thought, affection, and will to
right action and character; and this can be done only
through his own action. If heaven were a mere place, a
man might be carried thither in spite of himself ; but no
man can be morally transformed, or endowed with a new
character, except through his own co-operation with God
who is seeking it. Here appears the fitness of Paul’s ex-
hortation, “Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that worketh in you both to will
and to work, for his good pleasure" (Phil. ii. 12-13).

(4) God places renewed men in the world to live a
life of trial, that they may learn by experience to live in
holiness.

There is no other way, — men must be sanctified through
their own honest endeavors and genuine experiences or
not at all. Here appears the wisdom of our Saviour’s
prayer, “ I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of
the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil ’’
(John xvii, 15). The means that are relied upon for sanc-
tification include all the divine helps and encouragements,
but they also include all the varied experiences of life, —
joy and sorrow, temptation and victory, success and failure.
Life is the field of battle that it may become the field of
victory.

(5) Renewed men are still free, and final failure is meta-
physically possible; but God seeks to render it morally
impossible.


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 42 1


Not even a Christian is compelled to co-operate with
God for his own perfection. VVe cannot say that the divine
life in a man is necessarily indestructible like God. Paul,
in spite of all the confidence of Rom. viii. 31-39, did not
think of himself as unable to fail (i Cor. ix. 26-27). We
cannot affirm that a Christian is unable to forfeit his divine
life, in the sense in which we say that a man is unable to
fly. But God is seeking to render him unable to forfeit his
divine life, or to do it any injustice or despite, in the sense
in which Peter felt that he could not go away from his
Master (John vL 66-69), which, in spite of all his

weakness, he could not permanently go away. This is the
end in view, that a soul shall be morally unable to yield its
virtue, and practically capable of nothing but faithfulness.
When he has rendered a Christian too good ever to sin
against his divine life, God's intention will be fulfilled.
Over the painful road of ability to fail, God leads to the
noble end of moral inability to fail.

(6) The situation thus described is one in which warn-
ings against sin and danger are appropriate, and are
needed.

It is a case in which cautions and warnings are as ap-
propriate as the promises of God. The means of sanctifi-
cation would be visibly incomplete if either of these were
wanting. A child of God is placed, his new life still young
and weak, in a world of sin and temptation. He is placed
there by his Father’s "wisdom, for his own good. The kind
Father who has given him his new life is supporting it;
but the same kind Father warns him, and should warn him,
to be on his guard, — to look out for sin, to regard it as the
deadly enemy that it is, to treat it as an enemy that would
ruin him if it had its way, and to understand that final vic-
tory cannot come except through his own endeavors in
co-operation with God.

Thus it comes to pass that Christ warns those who are
in him as branches are in the vine against danger of failing
to abide in him, lest like dead branches they should be
cut off (John XV. 6 ). In like manner Paul feels it nece^


422 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


sary to remind the Corinthians of the failure of Moses’
flock to enter the land of promise, and to add, “ Let him
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall” (i Cor.
X. I-I2). Thus the writer to the Hebrews, finding his
readers in utmost temptation to give up their new and
higher faith, warns them of their peril by sharp and terrible
reminders, and tells them that if they give up Christ they
will have no Saviour (Heb. vi. 4-6; x. 26-29). -A-H this is
right. When a free but feeble child of God is in sore
temptation, it is the part of kindness in his Father to warn
him sharply, in order that instead of yielding he may join
with God and triumph. Christ has laid hold of him, and
therefore he may well be reminded of the absolute need
that he lay hold of the good that Christ intends for him
(Phil. iii. 12).

(7) By the very act of heeding the warnings, men in-
herit the promises, and advance toward perfection of holy
character.

The sharp warnings are directly helpful to the fulfilment
of the gracious promises. The sin that a Christian is
warned to shun as fatal is really fatal in its nature to all
divine life in men ; and when he repels it and does the will
of God, he takes a real step toward perfection. Tempta-
tion is an opportunity not to sin. Every right act per-
formed when a wrong one was proposed adds a solid
advance in the moral transformation. So the warnings
and the promises work together for the perfecting of Chris-
tians in the divine life. By his promises God says, “ I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee ; ” and by his warnings,
“ Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God.”

(8) Such is human nature, and human sinfulness, that
the progress of the divine life is often very slow, and
pauses and apparent cessations are not to be wondered at.

When we understand that salvation consists in moral
transformation, we shall not wonder if the progress is often
very slow. Men are hard to save. We shall not be sur-
prised, indeed, if God often has to wait a man’s time iia


HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 423


leading him onward from the new birth to the farther
stages, and is able only gradually to cure him of his unwill-
ingness and unreceptiveness. We need count it nothing
strange if long pauses in the movement seem to occur, or
if our eyes sometimes lose sight of the work of grace
altogether. With human nature as it is, it is nothing won-
derful if divine life once well begun appears to cease
entirely, and we are left to mourn over what seems to be
utter failure. Such things have occurred a thousand times,
and when we are well acquainted with our own hearts we
wonder that they do not occur far oftener.

(9) God has abundant time for the finishing of his work,
for the progress of the divine life is not limited to this
world.

Sanctification, as we have seen, goes on indefinitely be-
yond our present range of vision, and divine life that is
begun here is to be perfected elsewhere. It is an immense
relief from perplexities to learn that it does not have to be
completed here. God has the influences that belong to
another world to employ upon the children of his grace,
born again but not grown up in holiness. No one is made
perfect here, and in all his children much remains to be
done when they leave this world ; what wonder if in some
of them it looks to us as if all remained to be done here-
after? Where was the dying robber to be Scuictified?
Whether here or there, the work will be accomplished.
Whether much or little of their growth is visible here on
earth, God’s children, born again by his Spirit, are destined
all to grow up, through the characteristic processes of the
divine life, to the Christian perfection.

Out of the varieties of the Christian life and the various
expressions of Scripture on this subject, there have very
naturally sprung up two doctrines; a doctrine of absolute
and inMlible perseverance, and a doctrine of the possibil-
ity of falling away from the divine life to perdition. Be*
tween the advocates of these two doctrines there has often
been intense controversy-* and no wonder, for each side


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


seemed to the other to deny and sacrifice something that
was absolutely essential to Christian truth and life. But if
the progress of the Christian life be viewed as the moral
transformation of a free being, through experience, by the
gracious Saviour God, there will be no need of sharp con-
tention, or of heart-breaking perplexity. The promises
are true, and the warnings are appropriate. Man is able tc
fall, and God is able to keep him from falling; and through
the various experiences of life here and hereafter God will
so save his child out of all evil that he shall be morally
incapable of falling. Human freedom always implies risks ;
but when God has begun his work in a man by regenera-
tion, human freedom in his case is thenceforth included in
the broad sweep of a divine purpose, and God who is able
to guide men from above their freedom will progressively
influence his child into that holiness which is perfection.

VI. A Group of the Holy Spirit’s Works.

Certain works of the Holy Spirit, important in Chris-
tian history, may here be brought together and briefly
mentioned.

I. To the Holy Spirit are attributed, in the New Testa-
ment, certain special gifts and operations, regarded in the
early church as supernatural, that were prominent in the
apostolic age. The earliest of these was the power of
speaking with tongues (Acts H. 4; x. 42-44). With this
was associated the power of healing, in the case of the
apostles (Acts iii. l-io), and apparently of others, and still
more closely, the gift of prophesying, or speaking in one’s
own language under the divine influence (Acts xix. 6). In
I Cor. xii. 8-10, 28-30, Paul enumerates these gifts as they
were found among the Christians in Corinth. He assumes
the reality of them, without fear of contradiction. He
represents them as distributed largely through the Church,
and as intended not for show, as the Corinthians were
tempted to think, but for the general edification and spiri-
tual improvement Just what some of these gifts were, it


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 42 S


is impossible to tell from the data at our disposal; but
the New Testament represents that in the first age the
Holy Spirit imparted to Christians certain powers which
for some reason did not continue beyond that age.

It is held by many that the cessation of the miraculous
gifts of the Spirit was due to spiritual decline in the Church,
and that they would return if faith were revived, and become
the general and permanent endowment of the Christian
people. To many the idea of miraculous endowments is
attractive, and they think the Church would be spirit-
ually richer for possessing them. But the best progress
leads away from them, toward a life so full of high spiritual
quality and power that miracles are not felt to be needed.
Paul himself, standing in the midst of these gifts, regarded
them as temporary, and as distinctly inferior to the abiding
graces of faith, hope, and love (i Cor. xii. xiii.). We are
safe in judging that he was right. Gifts in the realm of
character far excel all powers that appeal to the senses.
The greater works ” that Christ’s friends may perform
(John xiv. 12) are spiritual.

2. To the Holy Spirit is attributed in Christian doctrine,
though the fact is not mentioned in the New Testament
itself, that inspiration by which the New Testament was
produced- Certainly the statement is true, for the divine
in the' New Testament was the fruit of the Holy Spirit
working in the Church, and especially in the men who
sent forth these sacred writings. That which makes the
New Testament different from other books is due to the
work of the divine Spirit in the life that it records and in
the men who recorded it. We need not be troubled at our
inability to frame an exact definition of this inspiration, and
to assign some precise portion of it to the activity of the
Holy Spirit. We know, and it is enough to know, that
there was a mighty uplifting of spiritual life and thought
under the Spirit’s impulse, and that the abiding result was
the New Testament, — a result worthy of the Spirit of God,
and of incalculable value to the world.

Whether inspiration continues through Christian history,


426 AJ/ OVTLJNE OP CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


is a question often asked, and oftenest answered in the
negative. It is largely a matter of definitions, however, for
no one questions that the mighty uplifting influence of the
Holy Spirit continues; and whether that influence is the
same in method and effect as when it brought the New
Testament into being, our inability to define the earlier
influence prevents us from knowing with accuracy. On
general principles we must say that inspiration is more
likely to be permanent in the Church than miracles ; for it
is a more spiritual gift, and more in unison with the abid-
ing quality of Christianity. At any rate, our belief in the
inspiration of the New Testament must not interfere with
our faith in the present greatness and power of the Holy
Spirit. Great and noble utterances bear witness in every
age, and not least in our own, to a presence and work of
the Holy Spirit for which we cannot be too thankful.
Even if the inspiration of the New Testament be found
unique, still it is certain that something very like it has
been given in all the periods of Christianity.

3. To the Holy Spirit are attributed, by Christians
generally, those large movements of spiritual life that are
called revivals of religion. These form a part of the
Spirit’s work of convincement and renewal, but they con-
stitute so important an element in the spiritual progress
of Christendom as to be worthy of separate mentiofl here.
The moving of an individual to the right spiritual activ-
ity is a great and good thing, but the work now in ques-
tion is the moving of a community, or a great portion ot
a community, to such action as Christianity requires.
To accomplish this larger result the Spirit employs
truth, experience of every kind, Christian influence, holy
example, emotional inspirations, and all means that are
adapted to the end, and often effects a large simultaneous
movement of spiritual activity in a great mass of people,
resulting in salvation to many and in the permanent
elevation of the standard of Christian life. Sometimes
the movement is confined to a single locality ; but some-
times, when the requisite conditions exist on a wider


THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND THE DIVINE LIFE IN MAN 427


scale, it sweeps over a great territory and affects vast
multitudes. Such was the Wesleyan revival of the eigh-
teenth century, with its companion-work, the great awak-
ening in New England; and such was the great revival
of 1857-58. No such work of grace is free from imper-
fections, since the human actors are never perfect: but
these are genuine works of the Holy Spirit in the world,
timed according to the readiness of the necessary condi-
tions, and helping to bring in the kingdom of God with
power. The Christian people should never cease to
count upon such large movements of the gracious Spirit,
as most helpful elements of the divine work of renewing
the world. It would seem indispensable to that end, not
only that individuals be renewed, but that masses of men
be moved to godliness ; and the power that alone is ade-
quate thus to move them is that of the Holy Spirit.

The inexhaustible richness of the Scriptural teaching
about the Holy Spirit is but faintly indicated in these
pages. But he is himself the living teacher: may he
perform his own work, and so fulfil the promise of
Christ, —

“HI SHALL GUIDE YOU INTO ALL THE TRUTH.”


PART VI


THINGS TO COME

It is the aim in this Part of Christian Theology, com-
monly called Eschatology, to obtain the light of the
Christian revelation, so far as light has been given us,
upon events that are yet to occur and destinies that are
yet to be unfolded. We inquire concerning the unfold-
ings of the kingdom of God in this world, the nature of
the events that mark the removal of men to the unseen
life, and the destiny of men in the world beyond. In
this work we study the Scriptures, and seek to draw out
all clear and final testimony that they may bear concern-
ing these subjects. We also seek, in loyalty to the mind
of Christ, to learn what may be taught us by the great
principles that are made known in Christianity. Upon
these themes of undying interest we are impelled to seek
and welcome the Christian teaching in all its forms.
Christ who has taught us by his direct and special utter-
ances has taught us also by his coming and his mani-
festation of the Father; and we cannot refrain from
considering the large questions of destiny in the light of
this general teaching concerning God and man. But we
have to confess that the study of the future is as difficult
as it is fascinating, and we must not wonder if on many
points we are compelled to end with confession of our
ig^norance. There are many things that we can learn
only by meeting them as we go upon the inevitable jour-
ney that awaits us all.

It seems most convenient to treat of Things to Come
in two divisions; the first including things to come in
this world, and the second treating of things to come
beyond this world.


THINGS TO COME


429


i. Things to Come In this World.

Here we meet many familiar questions, such as, —
What are to be the fortunes of the Kingdom of God in
this world : whether it is to conquer and fill the world or
not ; how long the present order is to continue, and how
it is to end; what is meant by the Millennium; what is
meant by the second coming of Christ, and when we
ought to expect it. In this Part of Theology, theologians
are accustomed to give answers to all these questions.

I. The Conditions of Study. — Before we promise to
answer all these questions, however, it is well to consider
the Conditions of Study concerning things that are yet to
occur in this world. If we learn the conditions under
which our inquiries must be conducted, we shall be better
able to judge how far we can expect definite and positive
conclusions. We may find some of our expectations
disappointed, but we shall also find our responsibilities
limited, and our difficulties lessened.

(i) These inquiries relate wholly to the future of
human life, of which we are by nature ignorant.

Our ignorance of coming events in the world needs no
proof; but evidently it makes us dependent upon revela-
tion for all knowledge of them. Christian theology has
no concern with coming events on earth, unless the
Christian revelation has foreshown them. It is of course
legitimate to infer what will follow from the working of
known powers and principles, but such inferences must
be taken only for what they are worth : they can afford no
certainty, and can properly extend only to general fore-
casts, not to specific foresight of events. If such human
forecasts should prove to be all that we have, the just
conclusion would be that theology has no occasion to dis-
cuss things yet to come in this world. If we are to have
definite knowledge of future events, God must give it


430 AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Prediction is the only means of information that is open
to us.

(2) God has not given us by prediction a map of com-
ing time.

The contrary is often assumed, and Scriptural prophecy
is studied as containing a map of the future. Many
Christians hold this view of prophecy, and apply it with
greater or less consistency to the study of what is yet to
come. But there are several facts that discourage this
assumption, and confirm us in the conviction that God
has left us mainly in our natural ignorance regarding the
events of which history is hereafter to be made up.

a. The most Scriptural conception of the nature of
prophecy discourages the idea that the Bible contains a
map of the future.

Prophecy, like other elements in the Biblical history,
has been more thoroughly studied in recent times than
ever before, and has received much light from its histori-
cal setting. As the purpose that prophecy was meant to
serve becomes more clearly known, the predictive ele-
ment, Tvhile it does not disappear, occupies relatively a
less prominent place. It was once thought that prophecy
was mainly prediction ; it is now perceived, from closer
study of the life and work of the prophets, that prophecy
was preaching under divine influence, with a predictive
element to aid its moral purpose. The prediction that
it contained was occasionally precise, but was oftenest
broad and general, giving outlooks rather than descrip-
tions, glimpses rather than details. Prophecy enkindled
hope; it awakened and justified large expectations; but
only in rare instances did it give minute indication of
coming events. Moreover, the prediction oftenest looked
forward from the prophet’s own time, and pointed out
what was to come from powers and principles then at
work; the main object being instruction and inspiration
for the time then present, rather than information to
future generations. Still further, the event was not
always as the prophet had conceived it. Sometimes the


THINGS TO COME


431


fulfilment of his vision never came, and sometimes it was
larger, richer and more spiritual than he had expected.
Even Messianic prophecy was far more ideal than specific,
and no one beforehand could have pictured Jesus as time
revealed him, from the materials that prophecy provided.
After the fulfilment, true foreshowings could be traced
(Acts viii. 26-35; xiii. 27; Rom. xvi. 25-26): but that
no full portrait of Christ had been drawn in prophecy is
plain from the fact that even the devout souls who waited
for redemption were not looking for One like him. Not
even now, with all the Christian knowledge, can any
detailed picture of Christ’s life be drawn from the pre-
dictive Scriptures, without much aid from arbitrary and
untenable exegesis.

This quality, having been found in prophecy on that
great occasion, is likely to be found in prophecy always.
It accords with God’s general method in Providence, for
he generally leaves the future to be found out in the
natural way, when it becomes the present ; and unless he
gives express assurance to the contrary, it is safe to
expect that he will act thus regarding the future of his
kingdom. He gives large outlooks in abundance, as he
did of old, but reserves the details to be unfolded in the
course of nature. Intelligent study of the nature of
prophecy tends to the conclusion that there is but little
prediction in Scripture awaiting fulfilment, and that what
there is consists in large outlooks, without minute
details.

b. After all the study that Christians have devoted to
the Scriptures in hope of reading there the future of the
world, the results are mot such as to commend the method.

Study animated by this hope has been long and dili-
gently pursued, and has yielded two results, — not one
but two, — the premillennial and postmillennial theories
of the coming of Christ. Both theories find in Scripture
a period known as the Millennium, which both take to
be a period of triumph for Christ on the earth ; but one
holds that he will come to the earth before that period


432 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


and make it a triumphant age by his personal presence,
while the other holds that he will come to the earth only
after that period of triumph, which will be brought on
through the existing agencies. These two views do not
differ merely as to what they understand the Bible to
contain: they differ widely in spiritual and practical
quality, in their view of the method and power of the
gospel, and in their estimate of the efficiency of Christ
in the present time. The present Christianity, as an
agency for saving the world, one regards with hopeless-
ness and the other with unbounded hope, — so wide is the
difference. If divine revelation had given a map of com-
ing time, we might reasonably expect the outline to be
more distinct and unmistakable than this twofold result
from long study would indicate.

Both this double result and the methods by which it
has been reached tend to show that the Bible does not
contain the materials for a clear and consistent outline of
things to come. If we listen to the defenders of the two
theories, we feel that neither is doing justice to the whole
Bible. Each school is partial in its use of Scripture, and
each answers the other by doing in this respect what the
other has done. Each draws its conclusions from a class
of passages, and fails to find an adequate place in its
system for the passages that are relied upon by the other.
Each runs its line through the Bible, but neither makes
use of all the material that both admit as relevant to the
subject, — that is to say, each school leaves certain
biblical material unassimilated, because not easily assimi-
lated to its own thought. But this is the same as saying
that the Bible as a whole does not yield either of these
theories. If it can yield any consistent theory of coming
events, into which all its supposed testimony on the sub-
ject shall be harmoniously wrought, it certainly is neither
of these two, nor is it any theory that has yet been
framed.

Moreover, the more closely the map of the future is
drawn, the less satisfactory does it prove to be. Post-


THINGS TO COME


433


millennialists usually leave the outlines large and unfilled,
expecting no minute indications; but premillennialists,
from the nature of their view, look for exact designation
of coming events, and have often ventured to foretell the
immediate future. But the more accurate the prediction,
the surer thus far has been the disappointment. None of
the schemes of the future that have been confidently
drawn from Scripture have been confirmed as time un-
folded. So numerous have been these failures as to sug-
gest the real cause of them. Failure is not due to some
one’s miscalculation, which may be corrected in a later
venture, but to the fact that the Bible does not contain the
material for successful prediction of coming events upon
the earth. The entire labor of forecasting is misplaced.

c. One main element in theories of the future eludes
us as we study it, — namely, the Millennium. All the
common discussions have for one of their fixed points
this period, measured either literally or figuratively, of a
thousand years, in which Christ is victorious on the
earth. This period enters into all theories as an abso-
lutely certain part, so important as to be the name-giving
element. But when we seek to understand it better it
escapes us. The only allusion to it in Scripture is in
Rev. XX. i-io. The passage occurs in the great book of
symbols, where every literal thing that is mentioned
stands as illustrative symbol of some spiritual reality.
This fact of itself casts doubt upon all literal interpreta-
tions and applications of imagery that is found here.
Moreover, the meaning of this single passage depends of
course upon the nature, scope, and meaning of the book
as a whole. This passage does not promise a period of
Christian victory yet to come, unless the book gives an
authoritative outline of the events of coming time. But
there is not sufficient reason for explaining the book as
one that foreshows events that are still to occur. Both
at the beginning of the book and at the end (i. 3 ; xxii,
10) it is declared that the fulfilment of its predictions
was near when the book was written. It was once sup-


434 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


posed that this book stood alone, without companions
resembling it and throwing light upon its meaning ; but
it is now known that it is the noblest sample of a consid-
erable class of apocalyptic writings, produced before and
after the Christian era. It is also known that these
apocalyptic writings were intended for immediate cheer
in the midst of trials, and that they served this purpose
by giving large symbolic pictures of the current strifes,
and splendid outlooks of victory. Their language, how-
ever, was pictorial and vague, neither intended for exact
fulfilment nor capable of receiving it. Such a book is
our Book of Revelation ; its pictures of conflict and vic-
tory were intended to cheer the early Church. It glori-
ously exalts Christ and foretells his victory, but it was by
no means intended to describe his victories in detail, or
to enable its readers to foretell events of the future.
The millennium of the twentieth chapter, therefore, is
not a period concerning which time-calculations can be
made; and since this is the only mention of such a period
in the Scriptures, it follows that there is no ground for a
question of premillennial or postmillennial advent. The
whole discussion has proceeded upon grounds that have
no proper existence. The ascertainment of the character
and scope of the Apocalypse ends the whole dispute by
abolishing its chief material. Of course the question of
the future of Christ’s work on earth still remains, but not
as a millennial question.

d. Very much of the language out of which pictures of
future events have been made is language that ought
never to have been taken literally.

The language of apocalypse, as we have said already,
was not intended for literal fulfilment, and is generally
incapable of receiving it. Of this kind is much of the
language in which the coming of Christ in his kingdom
is pictorially set forth in the Gospels and Epistles.
Much of this language is borrowed directly from the
prophets of the Old Testament, who applied it to events
on the earth, in which of course it could not be literally


THINGS TO COMB


435


fulfilled. The darkening of sun, moon, and stars in
Matt. xxiv. 29, is borrowed from Isa. xiii. 10, and Ezek.
xxxii. 7, where it enters into predictions of the downfall
of Babylon and Egypt. The coming of Christ on the
clouds of heaven is taken from Dan. vii. 13, where “in
the night visions ” one like unto a son of man came with
the clouds of heaven to the Ancient of days who was sit-
ting as judge of the world, and received a kingdom ; and
in the interpretation of the vision (verse 27) the event
that is symbolized is declared to be the giving of the
kingdom “to the people of the saints of the Most High.”
Upon such symbolic pictures it is impossible to build
definite expectations of future events. If we look for
disturbances in the starry heavens or a visible descent
from the clouds in fulfilment of these predictions we shall
be disappointed, for no such thing is meant by them.
As for the coming of Christ on the clouds of heaven, the
Biblical usage does not warrant a literal interpretation of
the language in which it is foretold. It is true that even
until now the Church has looked for an event that is liter-
ally described in this figurative and apocalyptic language :
nevertheless the fact remains that the language was never
meant to be taken literally, and could not have been so
taken if the history of its Biblical usage had been con-
sidered. Thus the ordinary expectation regarding the
manner of Christ’s coming departs from the real meaning
of the Scriptures on which it is supposed to be founded,
and has no valid foundation.

These facts certainly seem to justify us in saying that
God has not by revelation given us a map of the future.
Rather has he left the future of this world to be in gen-
eral as he made it, — unknown until it becomes the
present. General forward glimpses he has given us ; but
our natural longing to foresee precisely what is coming
is destined to remain unsatisfied. Such are the condi-
tions of study concerning things to come in this world,
— i we are naturally ignorant of the future, and revelation
has not opened to us the knowledge of its details.


435 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


If the Study of things to come is to be prosecuted in
such conditions as these, it is evident that many ques-
tions concerning the future must retire from their ancient
prominence, and some from the field of study altogether.
There is no millennium to be considered, and the field is
not to be studied as one in which a well-filled scheme of
events may be looked for. But there is one subject thu.
remains for investigation.

2. The Second Coming of Christ. — Christ himself
predicted that after his departure from among men he
would return ; and his apostles with eager interest took up
and amplified the prediction. There would be a farousia
(i Th. ii. 19; 2Th. ii. i). The word means “a presence,”
and obtains the sense of ^ coming from the idea of the
beginning of a presence, a becoming-present. If we can
learn what is properly to be understood by this promised
coming of Christ we shall learn the most of what revela-
tion has taught concerning things to come in this world.

(i) Christ’s own predictions of his coming, — first in
the Synoptics, and then in the Fourth Gospel.

According to the Synoptics, Christ, soon to leave the
world, spoke of coming back (Matt. xvi. 27, xxiv. 29-31,
»n!'. 31). In the character of Messiah he spoke of return-
ing in the glory of the messianic kingdom. In these pre-
dictions the kingly position is always an element in his
thought ; he will have the glory that his Father gives
him, and will act as king. The special office that he
speaks of executing when he comes is that of judge; he
will be the judge of men, render to them according to
their doings, and assign to .them the destiny to which
their actions entitle them. He says nothing of resurrec-
tion in connection with his coming, but only of judgment,
which is regarded as the means of gathering into the
roessianic kingdom those who are found worthy to enter
it. The current Jewish doctrine of the messianic king-
dom included the expectation of such a judgment


THINGS TO COME


4-17


As to the time of his coming, he is recorded to have
said expressly that it would occur within the lifetime of
the generation that was then living (Matt. x. 23, xvi. 28,
xxiv. 34). He also said with equal clearness that noth-
ing more definite than this was to be known concerning
the time, and declared that he did not even know it him-
self (Markxiii. 32; Matt. xxiv. 36, Revision). His com-
ing was thus represented as near, but of unknown date.
It was also associated in his discourse with the impend-
ing troubles of the Jewish people, especially with the
destruction of Jerusalem and the removal of its sacred
institutions. He said, in fact, that immediately after
the tribulations that introduced that great event his com-
ing would occur (Matt. xxiv. 26-30). This is the same
as to say that he would come in connection with that
event.

As to the manner of his coming, the Synoptics quote
him as describing it in glowing apocalyptic language,
borrowed, as we have seen, from the prophets of the Old
Testament. The first and second Gospels are much alike
in language; the third gives apart of the same apocalyptic
language, but adds other elements of description not
apocalyptic. The apocal)rptic tone in this prediction is
unlike an)rthing else in the recorded discourses of our
Lord, and has been variously accounted for; though there
are some who feel no need of accounting for it, since they
look for an event that literally corresponds to it. Some
think that this peculiar tone was imparted to the record
in the Synoptics by the writers or the preservers of the
tradition of his sayings, and not by Christ himself, whose
plain speech concerning what was then future was thus
translated, as it were, into the current apocalyptic lan-
guage. Others think that just as the time of his coming
was imknown to Christ in the days of his human limita-
tion, so also the manner of it was not opened to him, as
being a matter that he did not need to know for the pur-
poses of his earthly work, and that he therefore conceived
of it in the apocalyptic form that prevailed at the time.


438 AN- OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Still Others think that he knew perfectly well how thor-
oughly apocalyptic the prophetic language that he quoted
was, and used it with no intention of predicting an event
in which its highly-wrought imagery would be literally
fulfilled. Whatever explanation of these peculiarities
may be accepted, it is the growing opinion among stu-
dents of the New Testament that the utterances of Jesus
show him to have expected in some form an early return
in his kingdom. These synoptical passages describe his
coming in language familiar to Jews, and descriptive in
the Old Testament, whence it is taken, of national over-
throw and the inauguration of a kingdom.

There are two rich utterances of Christ in Matthew
which, though found in one of the Synoptics, are more
nearly akin to the predictions of the Fourth Gospel, —
“Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them ” (xviii. 20), and “ Lo,
I am with you alway, even unto the end of the age”
(xxviii. 20).

In the Fourth Gospel the prediction of coming again is
not less real ; but the tone is different, and the coming is
of another kind. Here our Lord is represented as speaking
of a spiritual presence with his people and with the world.
Sometimes it is the Holy Spirit that is to be present (John
xiv. 16), sometimes it is himself (18), and once it is the
Father and himself (23). This spiritual presence was im-
possible, he declared, so long as he remained in the earthly
life; only after his departure could it begin. He was
going away ; but he said, “ I will not leave you orphans ;
I am coming to you.” “That day,” in xvi. 23 and 26,
which was coming after "a little while,” was to be the
time of his new personal relation with his friends, ■ — “I
will see you again;” “Ye shall behold me.” He spoke
also of coming to his disciples at their death, to take
them to himself (xiv. 3). He spoke of himself as the
judge of men (v. 22), by whose word they should be
judged at the last day (xii. 48) ; but this Gospel repre-
sents him as really the present judge of men, just as truly


THINGS TO COME


459


as the future judge (ix. 39). At the last day he would
“ raise up ” those who believed on him (vi. 40) ; and he
spoke of a future resurrection of life, and of judgment or
condemnation (v. 28-29). But his coming is nowhere
connected with the last day, or with the resurrection. In
the Fourth Gospel the coming of Christ is altogether
invisible and spiritual, and is to occur as soon as the
coming of the Holy Spirit occurs.

Thus in the Synoptics the coming that Christ predicted
appears as kingly and judicial, near in time, associated
with the fall of Jerusalem; audit is described in apocalyp-
tic style, in terms of visible appearing. In the Fourth
Gospel it appears as still nearer, but as invisible and
spiritual, and destined to pass over into a spiritual abiding
with his people and the world.

(2) The manner in which Christ’s predictions of his
coming were understood.

The prediction of the return of the Messiah was quite
in accordance with the expectation that prevailed among
the Jews. The idea was current among them that after
the Messiah had come he would depart, to return in the
glory of his kingdom and destroy the hostile powers of
the world. This is the thought in Luke xxiii. 42, —
“Lord, remember me when thou comest in thy King-
dom.” The disciples of Christ were Jews, and the
inherited ideas of their generation were influential in
their thinking. After he had taught them, their concep-
tion of the kingdom that he would found was lifted above
the plane of ordinary Jewish thought, for he spiritualized
their minds, really though imperfectly; and yet it was
inevitable that their conceptions of his kingdom should
retain the form to which their early training had accus-
tomed them. However he may have meant his predic-
tions of a speedy return, they naturally understood him
in the light of their familiar inherited ideas.

Accordingly the expectation of the return of Jesus
became immediately a large element in the thought and


440 AJV OVTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


life of the Church. To the early believers his speedy
return seemed most desirable, both because they loved
him, and because the messianic hope looked forward to
the completing of the messianic kingdom. The Hebrew
Christians imparted this hope to the Gentiles. The first
generation of Christians, and the second which grew up
under its influence, understood that he was coming soon,
and had no doubt that he would come within their life-
time. The apostles and their companions entertained
this expectation, as their writings show (Acts iii. 19-21 ;
I Th. iv. 13-17; I Cor. vii. 25-31; xv. 51-52; l Pet. iv.
7; Heb. X. 37). The reality of this expectation has some-
times been denied, largely under the influence of the
•% priori belief that the apostles cannot have entertained
an expectation that was not realized; but the language
is perfectly decisive, and a large section of the New
Testament thought corresponds thereto. We cannot
doubt that at first the Christians generally thought the
Lord was at hand, quickly to be manifested among them.

As to the nature of the event that the first Christians
were looking for, the expectation still bore the familiar
Jewish form. It was expectation of a visible return of
Christ, still described in language of the apocalyptic type.
The expectation was freed by the spiritual quality of the
Christian faith from much of the narrow and carnal char-
acter of the Jewish hope, and was filled with a heavenly
quality never known before ; but it continued to be the
expectation of a visible return soon to occur. Both
points, the nature of the event and the time of its occur-
rence, appear in i Th. iv. 13-17, where Paul represents
the advent most vividly in apocalyptic style, and makes
it plain that he expected it soon, — not so soon, indeed,
as his Thessalonian readers understood him to mean, and
yet so soon that Paul could speak of the destined wit-
nesses of the event as “we,” in contrast to the Thessa-
lonian Christians who within the preceding few months
had “ fallen asleep. ”

Thus Christ’s predictions of a return were interpreted


THINGS TO COME


441


in the light of the current thought of the age. The inter-
pretation that was thus reached was not surprising but
inevitable, for critical knowledge of the literary quality
of the ancient prophecies had then no existence, and
apocalyptic literature was an influential element in the
religious thought of the time. But the interpretation
that was thus inaugurated under the influence of Jewish
thought was not temporary : it has held the field in gen-
eral till now. In all ages the apocalyptic language has
been literally interpreted, and has given form to the
expectation of the Church regarding Christ’s return.
The Church generally still looks for a literal fulfilment
of the details of the ancient apocalyptic visions.

(3) The manner in which Christ’s predictions of his
coming were fulfilled.

These predictions were not fulfilled according to the
Jewish expectation. The event that the apostles and
their fellow-Christians expected did not occur, and has
not yet occurred. If an early visible appearing of Christ
was really promised, the promise has not been fulfilled.
The unquestionable expectation of the early Church, re-
corded in the New Testament, was unquestionably disap-
pointed. But before we decide that the promise of our
Lord has failed, we should inquire what did occur, and
whether in any proper sense Christ after his departure
returned as Messiah in his kingdom.

The invisible and spiritual return of which the Fourth
Gospel speaks took place almost immediately. The
spiritual presence of Christ in the Holy Spirit became
manifest on the Day of Pentecost, and was thenceforth
an abiding presence, fulfilling the great promises of the
parting interview. This presence was joyfully recognized
by the apostles and their brethren as the secret of life and
power for the Church: of this the entire New Testament
gives evidence. The “ Lo, I am with you alway ” then
began to be fulfilled, and has been in course of fulfilment
ever since. Through all these ages Christ has been the


442


AJV OUTLINE OF CHEISTIAN THEOLOGY


actual king of the messianic kingdom in the world, exalted
to the right hand of God, and reigning in the interest of
the salvation for which he died. It is true that neither
in the apostolic age nor afterward was this reign of Christ
recognized as fulfilling the prediction of his return, nor
has it withdrawn the attention of the Church from the
apocal3q3tic visions. Nevertheless, if we ask what would
constitute a return of our Lord in the work and glory of
the kingdom that he left unfinished when he left the
earth, we cannot think of a more genuine fulfilment than
is found in the coming and abiding of Christ by the Holy
Spirit. It was by this that the Saviour of men carried on
the messianic work for which he died, and established the
kingdom for the sake of which he came. His kingdom is
not of this world, and his method of founding it was not
such as the Jewish training had led his friends to expect ;
it was more spiritual and inward than they thought; “the
kingdom of God cometh not with observation ” (Luke xvii.
20). In this spiritual coming, so characteristic of him-
self, the real Messiah returned after departure, to do the
real work of his kingdom.

But something more occurred. Our Lord’s prediction
of doom upon Jerusalem (Matt. xxiv. 2) was fulfilled.
The old dispensation had rejected its own Messiah and
set itself against the true kingdom of heaven, and its end
soon came. The great event of a. d. 70 is commonly
known as the destruction of Jerusalem, but it was not
merely the destruction of a city; it was the ending of the
old and hostile organization that still claimed the name
of God and the providential vindication of the claim of
the true Messiah to the world. With this event, which
was not long to be delayed, Jesus associated the predic-
tion of his own entrance to his kingdom. In this there
was a true fitness, in spite of the fact that the Christians
of the time did not so interpret the event when it oc-
curred. The destruction of Jerusalem may be called his
advent on its negative side. He came positively in the
Holy Spirit of power establishing his kingdom; and his


THINGS TO COME


443


coming was providentially accompanied by this removal
of the apostate church which had still claimed to be the
true representative of the true God among men.

A spiritual advent, though it may be introduced by a
striking event, is not itself an event, but a process. The
coming that the Fourth Gospel describes is a perpetual
advent, in which Christ comes ever more fulty into the
life of the world, — and this is the coming that has oc-
curred and is occurring. The destruction of the hostile
Jerusalem may well be regarded as one event out of many,
significant of divine judgment or victory, by which the
ever-advancing advent is accompanied.

Thus the two fulfilments of the first age promise more,
and indicate that the real coming of Christ is not an event
by itself, but a spiritual process, long ago begun and still
continuing.

To sum up these statements: Christ foretold a coming
in his kingdom; the prediction was understood by his
disciples to promise a visible coming at an early day,
with startling manifestations of visible glory; but the
prediction was fulfilled in the spiritual and invisible
coming by means of which his spiritual work in the world
has been carried forward.

Or, to state more fully the view of Christ’s coming
that the Scriptures seem to warrant ; —

a. When he left the world, the work of Christ for the
world, far from being finished, was only begun, and he
was expecting still to carry it on toward completion. His
prediction of a return, and an early return, was a true
prediction, not destined to fail.

b. Christ came again, in that spiritual presence with
his people and the world by which his kingdom was con-
stituted and his work upon mankind was done. This
presence is such that his friends are not in orphanage,
deprived of him (John xiv. i8); or, to use a figure fre-
quent in the Scriptures, his Church Is not a widow but a
bride (Rev. xxi. 2-4). The New Jerusalem pictured at


444 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


the end of the Apocalypse as the bride of Christ is not
the symbol of the future life, but, as a careful reading is
enough to show, represents the ideal Church of Christ in
this world. To the production of this ideal state the
spiritual coming of Christ tends, and is essential.

c. Christ’s coming was not accomplished in any one
event. In reality, the event in which it was announced
and introduced was the gift of the Holy Spirit on the day
of Pentecost; and its first great providential accompani-
ment in history was the overthrow of Jerusalem. But his
coming is not an event, it is a process that includes in-
numerable events, a perpetual advance of Christ in the
activity of his kingdom. It has continued until now, and
is still moving on. Christ came long ago, but he is truly
the Coming One, for he is still coming, and is yet to
come.

d. No visible return of Christ to the earth is to be
expected, but rather the long and steady advance of his
spiritual kingdom. The expectation of a single dramatic
advent corresponds to the Jewish doctrine of the nature of
the kingdom, but not to the Christian. Jews, supposing
the kingdom of the Messiah to be an earthly reign, would
naturally look for the bodily presence of the king : but
Christians who know the spiritual nature of his reign may
well be satisfied with a spiritual presence, mightier than
if it were seen. If our Lord will but complete the spiritual
coming that he has begun, there will be no need of visible
advent to make perfect his glory on the earth.

The picturing of Christ’s coming as a single event dra-
matic in its splendors and terrors, attended by resurrection
and judgment, has served a useful purpose in keeping the
thought of the unseen Christ fresh and vivid to the Church,
in times when no other presentation of him, probably,
would have been so effective. But at the same time it has
been hurtful. It has led multitudes even of Christian
people to regard the advent of their Saviour with more of
terror than of desire. That great but terrible hymn, the


THINGS TO COME


445


“ Dies Irae,” has been only too true an expression of the
common feeling. The Church has been led to regard her-
self as the widow and not the bride of Christ, and pre-
vented from perceiving the power and love that were already
abiding with her. This misapprehension has made it com-
mon for Christians to speak of the absent Lord; whereas he
is the present Lord, reigning now in his spiritual kingdom.
It has also led to a habitual underestimate of the intrinsic
value of the present life and its common interests. Placing
the reign of Christ mainly in the future, it has drawn atten-
tion away from his desire to fill all life now with the fulness
of his holy dominion. Christianity has by no means been
the friend to the family, to the nation, to commerce, to
education, and to the common social life of man that it
might have been if Christ had been recognized as the pre-
sent reigning Lord, whose kingdom is a present reign of
spiritual forces for the promotion of holiness and love.

The present need is the need of living faith and love, to
perceive the present Lord. It has long been common to
call him the absent Lord : but after so long quoting his
word of power, Lo, I am with you alway,’' it is high time
that the Church heard her own voice of testimony, and
came to believe in him as the present Lord. The prevail-
ing non-recognition of the present Christ amounts to un-
belief. What is needed in order to awaken a worthier
activity in the Church is a faith that discerns him as actually
here in his kingdom, and appreciates the spiritual glory of
his presence in the world.

This view of the coming of Christ implies that the
apostles grasped the spiritual idea of his kingdom but im-
perfectly, and that they expected what did not come to
pass ; and to many this seems inadmissible. Misapprehen-
sion on their part was of course a constant thing during his
lifetime, but many think it cannot have existed after the
Day of Pentecost, when they were taught by the Spirit of
God. But it must be remembered that the Master told his
disciples that “the times and seasons*' were not for them
to know (Acts i. 7), and that no man knew the time of his


446 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


coming save that it would fall within the life of that gene-
ration (Mark xiii. 32) In this matter they were not to be
helped by revelation. But apart from all theories of what
the apostles were, we have to deal with the plain fact that
the writers of the New Testament did expect an advent
that did not occur. Wonderful indeed was the clearness
of vision, and the trueness of perception, to which Christ's
influence raised the disciples who knew him best ; but we
do not understand them if we overlook the fact that they
were men of their own age, who received his truth into
minds in which the thoughts of their age had influence.
Here indeed was their power: for this enabled them to in-
fluence their own age, and send the influence on to ours.
The glory of the first disciples lay not in the infallible cor-
rectness of their conceptions, but in their spiritual fellow-
ship with Christ their Master.

This doctrine of Christ’s coming leaves some questions
unanswered.

As to the length of future time on the earth, this doc-
trine leaves us in ignorance. According to this the Chris-
tian revelation does not show how long the present order
of things is to continue. If science offers any light upon
the question we are free to receive it; and from this source
we learn that God’s processes are very long, — so long, in
fact, that when once we have gained the point of view for
the long perspective we wonder that we ever thought of a
speedy ending for the great process of human existence.
Life as we find it came out of the past, and is moving on
to the future, and the end is out of sight. We find our-
selves on the stream, but see neither the fount nor the
ocean, nor can we tell how far away either is, except that
both seem far remote. After all, what need have we of
seeing either? How should we be better for knowing how
long the earthly future of humanity is to be?

As to the question whether the kingdom of Christ is
ever to gain complete possession of the world, this doctrine


THINGS TO COME


447


of Christ’s coming leaves us dependent upon other sources
of information. If the millennium drops out of our com-
putations, and there is no single event in the future around
which earthly destinies manifestly gather, we are left to
general Christian considerations in judging the future of
Christ’s kingdom in the world.

When we look about us for light on the question whether
Christ is ever to conform the entire life of this world to his
likeness, what we behold is an unfinished conflict. An
observer might say that there is a great reign of evil in the
world, and a great resistance to this evil from God in Christ.
A man of faith may say that there is an original and eter-
nal reign of the holy God, a great resistance on the part of
evil, and a mighty exertion of the forces of God’s holiness
and love in Christ to conquer evil. This is the truer inter-
pretation of what we see. But there is a world-wide and
age-long conflict, and the good can win only by fighting;
and we eagerly desire to know what will be the outcome.

On the one hand, we are reminded that this world is
only the cradle of souls, the earliest school in endless life,
where nothing comes to perfection ; that life is short, and
generations are ever changing, so that individuals are here
as it were but a moment of their duration, and are imperfect
during their entire stay; that there are evil tendencies
deeply implanted in the race, to be eradicated only by
inward grace and long practice in goodness; that life is
complex, comprising many interests, and requiring the
victory of the good to be won in a thousand forms ; that
the conversion of all the individuals in the world to Christ,
so far from ending the work, would only open the way for
the long work of renewing the life of mankind ; that as yet
the Christian conflict is but just begun, since to the vast
majority of men Christ is still unknown. These facts teach
us that if Christ is to win a complete triumph in the life of
mankind his victory is in the far future. On the other
hand we are reminded that God is avowedly and visibly
working toward victory for Christ’s kingdom; that his
providential and spiritual movement is in that direction ;


448 -iiV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


that his agencies are powerful, — more powerful than they
have ever yet been shown to be, even by all the successes
they have won ; that Christ has bidden us pray, “ Thy
kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven,”
and pray in hope; that we gather faith for such prayer
from our instinctive Christian confidence that God must
conquer and conform to his own will the world for which
he gave his Son; that the kingdom of Christ is in the
broadest sense a missionary kingdom, working forth from
man to man and from company to company ; that God is
constantly bringing to his help more and more of renewed
and consecrated human energy; that human experience
is disciplinary, and the strifes of good and evil train the
world in conscience and in preparation for the best ; that
new times develop new methods and open the way for
large advances toward the desired end ; that Christ is here
as the present king, the Holy Spirit is here to convince
and renew, and the gospel is the power of God unto salva-
tion to every one that believeth. These are the elements
in the unfinished conflict, in which the friends of the holy
cause m,ay say to one another, “ Greater is he that is in
you than he that is in the world.”

Here we must leave the question of the future of our
Saviour’s kingdom in this present world, glad to work
with God and trust the victory with him. The main
motive to holy effort is not that so much depends on us ;
it is not that we have but a scrap of time and must make
all speed to use it. Nor is the main motive drawn from
results. The main motive is that the kingdom of Christ
is the glory of God and the crown of humanity, — that
what is holy is good for men, that God is love and power,
that Christ is the captain of salvation, and that labor for
divine ends can never be in vain in the Lord.


II. Things to come Beyond this World.

In this vast and fascinating field of thought it is difficult
to be faithful to our own ignorance. So deeply interesting


THINGS TO COME


449


are the themes of study here that we are strongly tempted
to assume that we know much more about them than we
really do. Positive teaching about a great variety of mat-
ters in the unseen world has long been common, and
Christian people generally suppose that they know many
things concerning which real knowledge is not attainable.
In this region it is important to remember that we are
dealing with subjects that lie wholly beyond our experi-
ence, and to feel neither shame nor disappointment in con-
fessing our ignorance. If we are to observe the actual
limits of our knowledge, many matters on which definite
statements are constantly made must be left in some in-
distinctness. Nevertheless the Christian revelation shows
us some clear and solid realities, and our own moral nature,
taught by Christ, makes some inextinguishable assertions ;
so that we are not wholly in the dark.

I. Death, and the Continuance of the Spirit. — Death
is the cessation of the physical life, — the stopping of that
unexplained vital process by which the physical organism
is maintained in action. In death the material of the body
is released from the control of the vital principle or power,
whatever that may be, and left to the control of the com-
mon forces of nature external to itself, which proceed to
effect the disintegration and decay of the organism. Death
thus ends all, so far as living in the body is concerned. It
closes life in earthly environment. All earthly and visible
activities and labors, joys and sorrows, interests and possi-
bilities, are ended when death occurs.

The event which thus ends the earthly life effects the
removal of the living person to a life beyond. The spirit
leaves the material body, but lives on, and enters new
scenes of action. If one looks back, death is the end of a
career; if forward, it is the beginning of a career; but in
reality death is neither end nor beginning, but an event
in a career, an experience of life. It closes life in one
scene, and opens life in another; but what we often call
two lives are but parts of one life of the spirit, which


450


AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


moves on through both unaltered by the change. Ip
this single and continuous life of the human being, death is
only a change of scene and conditions.

In these statements it has been assumed that all men
continue to exist after death. The grounds of this belief
have been briefly given already, and need not here be
dwelt upon- It is true that there is no demonstrative proof
of universal immortality, or indeed of any immortality, for
the region of the unseen life is one concerning which strict
demonstration is impossible. Some assume that if there is
no demonstrative proof there is no proof at all ; but this
assumption is contradicted by the fact that men have
generally believed in immorteility, without stopping to ask
whether they had demonstration of it or not. The reasons
for regarding man as an immortal being are cumulative, and
have the greatest force when the mind that ponders them
is in its highest states. Conviction of the general immor-
tality is a conviction that grows as we grow in depth of
nature, in richness of experience, and in appreciation of
the capacities and possibilities of man.

In consequence of Christ’s own influence, Christianity
has been in general from the beginning a faith of immor-
tality, afHrmingwith no uncertain sound that man is an un-
dying spirit Yet among Christians there have been some
departures from this belief, especially in the doctrines of
annihilation for the wicked, and conditional immortality.

According to the doctrine of annihilation, the penalty of
sin consists, or terminates, in the extinction of personal
existence. The less intelligent view has been that God by
power and fiat will annihilate the wicked, inflicting the
penalty himself by direct judicial action. The more
thoughtful view has been that extinction of being, or loss
of personal existence, is the natural end of a life in which
sin runs its full course and brings forth its full fruit : a man
sins on, and gradually reduces himself, by the disuse and
extinguishment of power after power, to nonentity. The
law by which this comes to pass is God’s law, but it is a


THWGS TO COME


451


iaw practically self-executing, so that a man has but to sin
on in order to become extinct, regarded as a personal
being.

This doctrine overlooks the distinction between char-
acter and personality. Sin makes havoc of character, and
tends to annihilate the possibility of goodness, but it is not
the fact that sin, as sin, tends to the extinction of the essen-
tial elements of personality, the powers of thought, feeling,
and volition. The worst of men think, feel, and will, as
really and vigorously as the best. There are certain forms
of physical indulgence that weaken the will for the purposes
of present action, by corrupting or disintegrating the phy-
sical organism through which it must act ; but even in such
cases there is no positive evidence of destruction of the will
itself. As for the more subtle and spiritual forms of evil, it is
certain that they strengthen the will by use, as effectively as
the virtues that are opposite to them, and that they imply
vigorous thought and feeling as necessarily as any forms of
action. Sin consists in the perversion and misuse of the
essential powers of personality, but it is contrary to all
experience and observation to afhrm that it tends to the
extinction of those powers. It is absurd to imagine that
sin as we know it in this world produces any atrophy of
the will or paralysis of the general energies of the spirit.
Until in this world bad men generally are known as defi-
cient in will and gradually fading in personal force, there
will be no reason to think that hereafter a sinful life wfll
naturally end in extinction of personal being.

The doctrine of annihilation in its popular and less
thoughtful forms makes constant appeal to the Scriptures,
but interprets them wrongly, by a crude and mechanical
literalism.

The doctrine of conditional immortality approaches the
subject from another side. It holds that man was created
not immortal, but capable of receiving immortality as a gift.
Left alone, he would become extinct, at death or later ; im-
mortality is a gift of God, conferred only through Christ
and received only in the Christian experience. The adv9*


AJV OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


cates of this doctrine quote some expressions of Scripture,
and argue from the silence of Scripture regarding the natural
immortality of man, and from the uniform association of
“ eternal life ” with Christ. Another form of the doctrine,
not Christian in its origin, is seeking a place in Christian
theology. It is a doctrine suggested to some Christian
thinkers by evolution, to the effect that continuance of per-
sonal existence beyond death is not the portion of all men,
but only of those who have attained to some higher grade
of personality. Human beings who have risen high
enough to lay hold on personal continuance live on be-
yond death, while the others, apparently the great majority,
fall back into nothingness.

In estimating the practical force of these doctrines and
their value it should be remembered that annihilation and
conditional immortality have entered into Christian thought
as objects of hope rather than of fear, and have been wel-
comed for the relief that they offer from the thought of
endless punishment. Annihilation may seem a dreadful
thing when life is felt to be a blessing, but it would come
as an angel, many have thought, if the alternative were
unending misery. These doctrines thus possess a power
of appeal and a hold upon popular acceptance that are
largely independent of the reasons upon which they rest.
Argument will not very easily vanquish beliefs that have
been welcomed from such a motive. Nevertheless these
doctrines will probably prove unsatisfactory and untenable.
The best human thought, springing from the best experi-
ence, recognizes more and more the intrinsic value of man,
and tends constantly to the assertion of immortality as a
universal human endowment. In spite of questions that
must arise, belief in the permanent continuance of all
human beings is the belief that seems certain to hold the
ground. The reasons for this faith, however, though they
always have force, do not always have power, and con
fidence,in the expectation of endless life is liable to suffer
eclipse. Belief in immortality, if it is to be more than a
cool opinion, depends somewhat upon the spiritual quality


THINGS TO COME


45 J


of the man who holds it, and is thus partly a matter of
growth, which beyond a certain degree cannot be hastened.
We do well to keep the reasons forward, but not to be
disappointed if they do not at once convince all men.
When death has ended all in this world, men will wake
to find themselves alive, whether they expected it or not,
and of this it is wise and friendly to warn them. But if
those who pos-sess faith in immortality will live as immor-
tals, whose citizenship is in heaven, and who desire all men
to be their fellow-citizens even now, they will thus best
illustrate and commend the hope that they cherish.

2. Resurrection. — The doctrine of the resurrection of
the dead was not originated by Christ or peculiar to
Christianity, for it existed already in the later Judaism
(Dan. xii. 2; Acts xxiii. 6). The Pharisees held it,
though the Sadducees rejected it. Christ himself testified
clearly and positively to the reality of the resurrection
(Matt. xxii. 23-33), though he never entered freely into
details of description concerning it. His own rising from
the dead instantly fastened the idea of the resurrection in
a position of the utmost prominence in Christian preach-
ing and thought. Paul, trained as a Pharisee, and thor-
oughly familiar with the doctrine from his youth, fixed his
gaze with intense interest upon the resurrection of Christ
and of his people, and did more than any one else to give
definite form to the general Christian hope which Christ’s
own resurrection had awakened. Nevertheless Paul’s doc-
trine of the resurrection was very unlike the Pharisaic
doctrine in which he had been reared. By Christ himself,
in the conversation with'the Sadducees just cited, resurrec-
tion is not distinguished in any way from continued exis-
tence. All that he there asserts is that such men as the
patriarchs, having been claimed by God as his own, still
live ; and this continued life he identifies with the resurrec-
tion, or raising-up of the dead. He also speaks, however,
according to John v. 28-29, of ^ resurrection of all who are
in the graves. By Paul the doctrine is unfolded into a


454 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


more definite doctrine of rising from death, — not a literal
or carnal rising, indeed, or a rising of the same matter that
was laid down in death, which Paul expressly denies, but
an entrance into an organism called a spiritual body, incor-
"ruptible and glorious (i Cor. xv. 3 S-S 4 )-

The resurrection that Paul spoke of in his great passage
on the subject (i Cor. xv.) is the resurrection of Christians.
To this his view was limited in that chapter, and of this
alone he spoke in his earlier passage, i Th. iv. i6. John
V. 28-29 and Acts xxiv. 15 are the chief passages that refer
to a resurrection of bad men as well as of good, and thus
represent resurrection as universal. But the resurrection
upon which thought in the New Testament dwells is that
of Christians acceptable to God. Resurrection of wicked
men, though mentioned, is nowhere made prominent or
dwelt upon. The “ sons of the resurrection ” of whom our
Lord spoke in Luke xx. 35-36, are those who are about
to enter the glorious kingdom of God ; and the apostolic
allusions to the subject follow the same line of hope.

This resurrection of Christians is associated very closely
in thought with that of Christ himself. The resurrection
of Christ is held forth as the pledge and promise of his
people’s resurrection, and as the sure foundation of their
hope (i Cor. xv. 12-19; 2 Cor. iv. 14); Rom. viii. ii. It
is not declared, however, that there would have been no
such thing as resurrection for men if Christ had not risen,
or that by rising he added a new element to human destiny.
Christians have sometimes represented that resurrection
itself was due to Jesus, but this is not the thought of the
Scriptures. The writers of the New Testament do strongly
feel, however, that the peculiar glory and blessedness of
the Christian resurrection is due to Christ. This experi-
ence, as well as others, he transfigures.

The resurrection that we hear of in the New Testament
implies the possession of a body, an organism for the use
of the spirit. It is opposite to disembodiment. But here
we need to note that there are two thoughts within the


THINGS TO COME


455


New Testament, both represented by the one word, resur-
rection, The resurrection that the Pharisees taught and
the Jews largely believed in was a resurrection of the
flesh, consisting in the return to life of the very body that
died. But though Paul was educated in this belief, his
Christian doctrine of resurrection was distinctly opposite
to it. With him, the restoration of the body that died has
no place whatever. For that body a “spiritual body”
will be the substitute. That there will be a resurrection of
flesh and blood, such as the Jews looked for, he strenuously
denies. By a spiritual body, Paul means a body in con-
trast to the flesh, which he considers to be inextricably
entangled with sin. It is a body that has no identity with
flesh, but is adapted to the free and uncarnal life of the
spirit, which through partaking in Christ’s resurrection has
been delivered from the flesh and has no further relations
with it. The difference between this body and the one that
the Pharisees expected to be brought forth from the grave
is immense, and equally great is the contrast between the
two conceptions of the resurrection as a whole that corre-
spond to it.

This body Paul expects to be like the body of Christ’s
glory (Phil. iii. 2i). In accordance with this hint, and in
view of the narratives that we have of Christ’s appearings
after his resurrection, Christians have often endeavored to
learn the nature of the future body from what we are told
about the body in which he rose from the dead. But this
avails little, and our knowledge still remains more vague than
clear, for we know too little of Christ’s bodily state and
characteristics after the resurrection to build up a definite
doctrine. The narratives seem to imply both that natural
bodily acts were possible to him, and that he was inde-
pendent of the need of them. In such a case a clear doc-
trine is impossible.

In the conversation with the Sadducees as it is reported
by Luke (xx. 35-36), Jesus spoke a suggestive word about
the life of “ the sons of the resurrection.” He says that
“ they neither many nor are given in marriage, for neither


can they die any more.” Where there is immortalit
there is no marriage, — the idea being, apparently, th:
birth and death are correlatives, and consequently whei
there is no death there is no birth, and no need of ma
riage, or of the physical element in sex. It does not follo\
however, that the differences between masculine and fern
nine spirits vanish, or that spiritual fellowships founde
upon them cease.

Concerning the relation of the future spiritual body t
the present physical organism speculation has always bee
busy, — often more busy than those who indulged it wei
aware, — and much that is really speculation has bee
taken for revelation. In spite of Paul’s explicit teaching t
the contrary, there has been an almost universal impre:
sion that the very bodies that have died will be restore
to life. Here Christendom has parted company wit
Paul, and gone with the Pharisees. That the deserte
body will be revivified, brought forth from the grave, an'
transformed into a spiritual body, has been the commo.
expectation. But wherever a good knowledge of physics
conditions has come in, this idea has retired as untenable
never to return. In place of it some have accepted th'
idea that from each body a germ will be preserved in th'
grave, or wherever the body may have gone to decay, t(
serve as the starting-point for the formation of the resur
rection-body. This fancy was admitted because then
appeared no other way of representing a connection be
tween the physical body and the spiritual body that woulc
arise ages after it had been returned to the fellowship o
matter, — it being assumed that such a connection mus
exist. This connection is supposed to be affirmed in Paul's
comparison of the seed and the harvest, in i Cor. xv
36-38; but that comparison was intended to illustrate the
unlikeness of the two bodies, rather than their connection
Some believe that the spiritual body is now forming itseli
within the physical body, being built up by moral action,
every deed of right or wrong contributing some beauty 01
deformity to its proportions and its features; and that this


THINGS TO COME


457


body, in which the mortal life has been unerringly regis-
tered as to its moral quality, will be set free by death, to
serve the spirit as its fitting organ in another life.

If the kingdom of Christ were an earthly kingdom like
the kingdom of David, as the Jews imagined, the revivifica-
tion of dead bodies would be essential to the entrance of
the dead upon its experiences. But since the kingdom of
Christ is a reign of the spirit, there is no such necessity.
The reasonable view of the matter is that the present body,
belonging wholly to the material order, has no further use
or destiny after death has detached the spirit from the
material order, and is abandoned, to be known no more;
and that whatever organism the spirit may need in the
other life will be provided there, without contribution from
this world. The personality will have such body as it may
require, but it will not be an outgrowth of the flesh. If it
has a real connection with the present life, it will be a con-
nection not with the body that now is, but with the life
that the spirit has lived here.

As to the time of the resurrection : It was the common
doctrine among the Jews who believed in resurrection that
it would occur at the establishment of the messianic king-
dom on the earth. Paul, in i Th. iv., associates the resur-
rection of the dead in Christ with the coming of Christ,
which he expected himself to witness. So, according to
I Cor. XV. 23, they that are Christ’s are to be made alive
“ at his coming.” In the great event for which the early
Christians were looking, the resurrection was to be included.
The same view has been held by the Church generally till
now, — that the dead will be raised when Christ comes
visibly in the clouds. The “ last day ” of John vi. 40, etc.,
at which Christ will “ raise up ” those who believe on him,
has been identified with this day of Christ’s appearing,
and a simultaneous resurrection at that time has been
expected. Postmillennialists have expected that after the
visible descent of Christ to the earth the dead will all be
raised, all humanity will be assembled, and a general judg-


4S8 A/iT outline of CHRISTIAN . 'NEOLOGY


ment will be held. Premillennialiets expect the resurrec-
tion to be divided. In connection with the descent of
Christ will occur the resurrection of Christians ; then will
follow the reign of Christ for a thousand years, and then
the resurrection and judgment of the rest of the dead.
This view rests solely upon Rev. xx. 4-6.

It is plain that one’s view of the resurrection must cor-
respond to the companion view of the second coming of
Christ. As the one is understood, so will the other be. If
the coming of Christ is conceived as spiritual, not visible,
and as a process, not an event, a change in one’s idea
of the resurrection will necessarily follow. If no visible
descent of Christ is looked for, no simultaneous resurrec-
tion of humanity on the earth will be expected. If we
accept the view of Christ’s coming that has been expressed
on previous pages, we shall naturally think that each human
being’s resurrection takes place at his death, and consists
in the rising of the man from death to life in another realm
of life. The spirit does not rise thither alone, but whatever
organism is needed for its uses in that other life the spirit
receives ; so that the man, complete in all that personality
requires, stands up alive beyond the great change that we
call death, having in the same hour died and risen again.
According to this view resurrection is not simultaneous for
all, but continuous, or successive ; and for no human being
is there any intervening period of disembodiment. This is
what we shall probably find to be the fact when we have
died, when first we shall really know what lies beyond.

The practical and moral value of the resurrection as an
element in belief is secured by any view that holds to the
presence in the other life of all that is essential to a human
being. The doctrine of the resurrection has rendered ser-
vice of great value in Christian thought, by adding definite-
ness and vigor to the hope of immortality. It is eaqr to
see how much the expectation of a body added to the
practi<^ strength of the hope of future life. The common
world is vastly indebted to the doctrine of resurrection, and


THINGS TO COME


459


even to that doctrine in its grosser and less spiritual forms,
for it has made immortality easier to believe in, by render-
ing the unseen world more homelike. Even in its lower
forms it is a great advance from the thought of a shadowy,
dim existence where no tangible realities appear; and in
its more spiritual forms it continues to add strength and
beauty to our conceptions of the unseen life. The grosser
forms, extending only to revival of the flesh, and later to
revival of the flesh with subsequent transformation, were
helpful while they were natural, but they are sure to be
outgrown, and the more spiritual forms of the expectation
should be eagerly welcomed. It may be added that a doc-
trine of the resurrection that dispenses with the interme-
diate period of disembodiment has exceptional advantage
in power to lift the gloom of death (2 Cor. v. 2-4).

3. Judgment. — Much of the language about judgment,
in the New Testament, refers to a process that goes on in
this world, as it must in any world, — the testing and
dividing of men according to their character and relation
to Christ, and the providential judgment between sin and
righteousness in the present affairs of mankind; but a
judgment to come is pointed out, relating to the destinies
that follow the present life.

This coming judgment is set forth in the Scriptures as a
judgment of God concerning the life that a man has lived,
regarded as indicating the state and destiny for which he
is prepared, and to which he must go. Such a judgment
the Scriptures bid us all expect; but we should have
reason to expect it if the Scriptures said nothing of it, for
it is a necessary element in human life, if only there is a
God over all, in whose hands men are. The theory is
very simple. We are not our own masters in going out of
this world ; we go we know not whither. Yet our going
is not without its just and holy method. Our place and
lot in the life that is beyond must be determined righteously,
in accordance with the life that we have lived thus far, that
the next stauge in our existence may be what it ought to be.


460 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


But God is the one Lord of all worlds, and the only one
who knows us well enough to judge where we must be
placed in the world to which we are going. We must
expect, therefore, to be estimated by his unerring judg-
ment, and to move on to a destiny that corresponds to his
just and faithful finding.

The only judgment that the Scriptures foretell is a judg-
ment according to works; and by a judgment according
to works is meant a decision founded upon an estimate of
character as illustrated and proved by conduct. Thus, in
2 Cor. V. 10, Paul foretells a manifesting of every one in
judgment, that each may receive thereafter according to
what he has done while living in the body, whether it be
good or bad. Paul is thinking here only of Christians ;
but what is true of them must be true in principle of all
men. In like manner Christ, in Matt xxv. 31-46, shows
destiny assigned according to the spirit of previous con-
duct So throughout the New Testament, — men are
judged, or estimated, according to what they have done,,
and go each to his own place under the direction of
God's true judgment To this judgment according to
works, or just summing-up of life, all men must be sub-
jected. It is sometimes believed that Christians will be
exempt from it; and in popular teaching it is often repre*
sen ted as desirable to make a friend of the Judge, as if he
could exempt whom he would from this final test of life.
But exemption is impossible. God's judgment is not an
arbitrary thing, or an act that is optional with the Judge.
When a life is ended God must estimate the man according
to it, and assign him his proper place in the life beyond ;
and this judgment is as inevitable in the case of a Christian
as in the case of another man. Only by abrogating his
own moral order could God dispense with it
The Judge of men is of course God, who alone has either
right or power over human destiny (Rom. xiv. 10-12).
But Christ is equally said to be the Judge (Matt, xxv, 32 ;
John V. 22, 27 \ 2 Cor, v. 10). God is said to judge men by
Christ, and in Christ (Rom. ii. 16; Acts xvii. 31),,


THINGS TO COME


461


two conceptions are united in the statement of the Fourth
Gospel, that the Father gave to the Son to execute judg-
ment ‘‘ because he is a son of man ” (John v. 27). Christ
is one of men, and at the same time is God manifest among
them; in him God's requirement upon men is brought
near and livingly illustrated; in him God's love to men is
shown; to him is committed the administration of the
kingdom of grace in this world ; he therefore is the proper
person to execute the divine judgment, whether in this
world or beyond it. When it is said that men are to be
judged by Christ, more is meant than that Christ will per-
sonally preside in judgment, and announce their destiny.
It is meant that Christ is the standard by comparison with
which character is to be estimated and destiny to proceed.
The judgment upon men is to consist in the application of
the principle and law of his kingdom as the test of their
conduct and their moral state. This is both right and
necessary ; for Christ, being ‘‘ a son of man," is the true
standard for human character and conduct, and the law of
his kingdom is the only rule according to which men can
possibly be approved or finally condemned by God.

The applying of the law of Christ as the test of judg-
ment is illustrated in the great parable of judgment, Matt.
XXV. 31-46. Here is set forth in most impressive pictorial
manner the judgment that Christ must execute, and from
which no man can escape. At the time of his speaking
there was nothing peculiar in the fact that he announced a
judgment. All his hearers expected that when the mes-
sianic kingdom was revealed in its glory a judgment would
occur, in order to the admission of the worthy and the
exclusion of the unworthy. What was peculiar in his
teaching was the test that he announced. He said that in
his judgment men would be judged by the law of love,
which is his own characteristic law. He says in this
passage that those who have done the works of love out of
a free and uncalculating heart will be accepted, and those
who have had no heart to perform such works will be re-
jected, — that is to say, Christ's own law, illustrated in his


462 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


life and death, and announced in his gospel, is the rule by
which men will be estimated in his judgment. To be
judged by Christ is to be judged by this principle. And
upon what other principle should the King who wore the
crown of thorns judge men? This great passage does not
refer exclusively to any single event, but sets forth the
principle on which Christ’s judgment must proceed,
whether to-day, or at the end of life, or on any day what-
soever, in any age or world. The test of judgment corre-
sponds to the nature of the kingdom, and the nature of the
kingdom corresponds to the character of the King. .

So the judgment at the end of life is an estimating of
men according to the life that they have lived, viewed in
the light of the standard of Christlike love. Those in
whom the right spirit has come to action will be approved
by God in that judgment, and those in whose conduct it
has been wanting will be disapproved. It should not be
forgotten that, while this judgment will be perfectly just,
— that is, in perfect accordance with truth and reality, —
this very statement implies that it will be made in the light
of all just and fair allowances, in that right spirit of kind-
ness which is always characteristic of God. It is a mistake
to suppose that for the purpose of judgment God will
assume some special sternness, or lay aside something of
his essential grace. God never changes. Men will be
judged by the same God who has created them, governed
them, and sought to save them ; for he is always the same,
and Christ is the true expression of his eternal character.
It is often represented that grace is now supreme, but
justice alone will be supreme in judgment; but in fact
men have as much to fear from God’s justice now as they
will have in the day of their judgment, and will find in
their judge that very grace in which they may trust to-day.
God’s judgment is an inexpressibly solemn reality, but not
because of any special qualities in God peculiar to that day.
It is the Father who will righteously place his children in
the other world. Judgment is solemn because life is seri*
ous and its moral issues are immeasurably important


THINGS TO COME


463


As to the time of the coming judgment: It is certain
that one judgment, as now defined, must occur for every
human being in the passage from this life to another. “ It
is appointed to men once to die, but after this, judgment ”
(Heb. ix, 27), and this is no arbitrary appointment. If
God assigns to a man his due position and portion in an-
other life, he must do it by such a judgment as has now
been described. The act may be public or private, vocal
or silent, explicit or implied, but judgment is passed and
executed in the very act of conveying a man to his proper
lot and place in another world. No one can question this
who believes in the continuous life of the human spirit.
No one can doubt that in this judgment at death the
immediate and principal end in view in judgment is
accomplished.

It is commonly held by Christians that another judg-
ment will occur at the end of the earthly career of the
human race ; that all who have ever lived will then be assem-
bled, that the entire life of each with all its secrets will be
made known to all, and that each will then receive the
final sentence, which the revelations of that day will justify
in the eyes of all as perfectly righteous. To all but the
latest generation this will of course be virtually a repetition
of the divine judgment by which destiny was assigned at
death ; but it will be followed by the completing of the
destiny of good or evil that was then entered upon. The
special end in view in this universal and simultaneous judg-
ment is held to be the exhibition of God’s righteousness,
and the vindication of his government as just God’s prov-
idential government has been mysterious to men, — visible
justice has not always been done, and the natural questions
of men have been left unanswered; but now at the end
God will assemble all his human creatures, and exhibit to
them the grounds of all his judgments, in order to vin-
dicate himself as the righteous Lord.

No Scripture is quoted in support of this view of the
purpose of final judgment. The coming judgment that is
known to Scripture is intended for the assignment of


464 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


destiny to men; there is no hint that it is intended for
vindication of God. It is true that Paul, in i Cor. iv. 3-5,
appeals to God’s judgment as the occasion at which the
rectitude of his motives will be made apparent; but Paul,
not God, is to be vindicated by the manifestation. It is
true that Paul, at Rom. ii. 5, mentions “ the day of reve-
lation of the righteous judgment of God;” but this
language is explained by the next words, “who will
render to every man according to his works,” — the right-
eous judgment is to be revealed in the result, each man
receiving his own. It is true that God’s judgments con-
cerning men are expected to show that he is righteous ;
but this they will do by what they are in themselves, with-
out the aid of explanations. God’s ordinary method is to
allow his action to vindicate its own rightness, and mean-
while to expect his creatures to trust him. This method
of faith is the spiritual method, and is morally superior to
the method of sight, or definite explanation. Universal
disclosure of all that has led to his action, even if it were
possible, would be a departure from the way that he has
established, and a descent to a lower method of seeking
human confidence. But we have no reason to suppose
that vindication of God by disclosure of his reasons to men
is possible. No man ever lived who could comprehend a
perfect vindication of God if it were offered. Life is too
vast and complicated for that. Even a single life is too
great. Nor is it any man’s concern to know all the details
of God’s justice in dealing with other men. No man
needs to know the secrets of his neighbor, and be able to
trace the justice of God through the mysteries of his
neighbor’s life, and no man who respects the sacredness
of individuality will desire it. Neither revelation of his
own secrets nor knowledge of another’s seems a good
thing to a self-respecting soul. Moreover, the ordinary
conception of the general judgment as a vindication of God
reverses the relations of the parties concerned. God is the
judge of men ; but this idea makes man the judge of God,
to whom God explains his course that man may approve


THINGS TO COME


465


his righteousness. Such an inversion of relations is not to
be expected. Men will meet God in judgment, but God
will be the judge.

All these reasons dissuade us from expecting that Gcd
will provide an occasion for the public vindication of his
righteousness. But it is easy to see how this idea of the
judgment arose. It was assumed that there was to be a
simultaneous judgment of the whole human race, in con-
nection with the visible coming of Christ and the simulta-
neous resurrection of the dead ; but the question what it
was intended to accomplish had then to be answered.
Certainly it could not be for genuine assignment of men's
destiny in the other world, for this had been done at each
man's death. It would plainly be needless to call men
back from destiny that they had entered ages ago in order
to adjudge them to it. There is nothing for a universal
assemblage and judgment to mean, unless it be an oppor-
tunity for God to manifest the righteousness of his acts and
his decisions.

If the coming of Christ is regarded as an invisible
spiritual process, instead of a visible event, and each man's
resurrection as his rising to life beyond the event of death,
we shall naturally regard the judgment that inevitably
occurs at death as the only judgment that is to be ex-
pected. It is difficult to see what more is needed, for this
judgment does justice to the life, and righteously opens
the next stage of existence. As to the vindication of God,
we may safely think of it as left to be made by the out-
come of his doings.

The value of the expectation of a coming judgment of
God upon our lives does not reside in any conception that
we may form of the time, the scene, or the manner of that
judgment. It resides in our sense of the certainty and
moral necessity of the coming judgment, and in the intelli-
gibleness of its significance. The view that is here pre-
sented makes judgment to be a righteous and solemn act
of God, shows it to be absolutely inevitable and certain,
gives it a moral significance that every soul can under


466 'A2V OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


Stand, and, instead of leaving it indeterminate and perhaps
distant in point of time, brings judgment as near as death,
and warns us that our life will be judged as soon as it is
finished. It makes less appeal to the imagination than the
doctrine of a simultaneous assembling and judgment of
mankind, but not less to the reason, the conscience, or the
heart.


4. The Life Beyond. — If it is true that resurrection
and judgment immediately follow death, there are no
questions about an intermediate state. In simple and
intelligible order, a man goes from his life here to his life
beyond, and enters at once upon its realities, not to be
called back after ages have passed to be assigned to the
destiny upon which he has already entered. The doctrine
of an intermediate state between death and resurrection
has occasioned many perplexities, and the doctrine of a
sleep of the soul during that period has been accepted by
many as a relief from them. But no such relief is needed,
and no such doctrine is possible, if we think of a man as
going at once to his judgment and his destiny. Of course
all perplexities about the intermediate state vanish if we
drop the idea of such a state.

When we come to speak of the life beyond death, the
general quality in that life that needs first to be emphasized
is this ; That life is a genuine life of the spirit, full of moral
activity and moral action. It is a life in which moral
action is as constant as it is now. There will still be char-
acter, volition, and responsibility, and life will possess full
moral significance. The action of that life will be as truly
personal, moral, and responsible as the action of this.

If we are asked how we know this, the answer is that
we know it from the nature of the case. If men are still
to be men, they must still be moral and responsible beings.
Anything less significant than this would not amount to
personal continuance.

A different view is often held, — that responsible action


THINGS TO COME


467


is limited to this life, and the life to come consists entirely
in retribution, or experience of the rewards and punish-
ments that follow the actions here performed. On the one
hand, the popular idea of heaven does not include the idea
of genuine moral activity, with perpetual motive, volition,
and responsibility ; there is no thought of moral effort, but
all is conceived as easy, sin being impossible, and virtue
almost automatic. Moral strain has been endured once for
all on earth ; and heaven is a state in which the reward of
successful endurance is enjoyed, in endless release from
pressure and responsibility. On the other hand, the
popular idea of hell equally excludes the idea of genuine
moral activity. In that state, all is conceived as retribution
for sin already committed; there is no new action for
which a man is responsible as he was in the earthly life, the
period of genuine moral action with full results having
ended, and given way to the period of retributive conse-
quences. Virtue is impossible, and evil necessary.

That retribution is a glorious and terrible reality, effec-
tive for reward and punishment in all worlds, is certain;
and that the results of judgment beyond death are retri-
butive is equally certain. But the experience of retribu-
tion does not deprive the life of spirits of its character as
moral and responsible life. It does not so alter the char-
acter of life in this world, where it begins, and cannot
so alter it hereafter. When we say that the life to come
is as truly moral and responsible as the present life we
are only unfolding the definition of immortality. If men
are still to be men, they must be real moral agents. Take
away motive, volition, and responsibility, and man sinks
to the grade of a thing. A life of mere retribution with-
out present responsibility would not be a human life ; a
deathless existence without responsible action would not
be an immortality of man. The future life must be as
real, active, intense, responsible, and full of solmnn
meaning as the present, or immortality will make man to
become less than man as he goes on. The popular con-
ception of the future life urgently needs improvement in


468 outline of Christian theology


this respect, for it is not a consistent and intelligent ide
of personal continuance.

Understanding that the life beyond is a moral an
responsible life, but remembering how narrow are th
limits of our knowledge, we may endeavor to follow i
thought the multitudes of human beings as they pas
through death, resurrection, and the just judgment c
God, and move on each to his own place in the othe
world. Some questions we cannot answer; but som
things are plain.

We are met at once by the fact that in this world ther
are many infantile and unresponsible lives, in whic]
opportunity for attaining to moral character does no
exist. Certainly one-third of all who are bom die with
out having lived long enough to become decidedly gooi
or evil. If we insist upon high definitions of good an<
evil, the proportion will be much larger. They are unde
veloped souls, without distinct moral life or record, who
if they continue to exist, must be placed in the othe
world as beginners, without developed personal character
Concerning these the Scriptures give us no definite teach
ing; but the spirit of the Christian faith leads us t<
believe that they are immortal, and that they enter thi
other world in the care of the heavenly Father, wh(
accepts them as beginners in life and watches over then
for good. The well -remembered words of Christ, “ Suffe,
the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not
for of such is the kingdom of heaven, ” do not affirm thi
salvation of infants ; but it is difficult to see how he couk
have uttered them if he had not regarded the little chil
dren as welcome to the divine heart when they leave thi;
world. By no means can we conceive it to be otherwise.

If those who die in infancy are immortal, it is plain tha
the undeveloped state in which they enter the other lifi
cannot be permanent. Infants must come to maturity
character must be attained, and life must have its mora


THINGS TO COME


469


significance; but all this must come to pass in the other
world. For infants, if they are immortal, the future life
is the only sphere of moral action, responsibility, and
spiritual growth. We thus meet the startling fact that
for at least one-third of mankind the entire life of con-
scious and developed personality is lived in the other
world, and that there alone is any conscious experience
of the grace of God possible to them. Conceivably such
human beings might sin and be ruined there; but though
we can prove nothing on the subject, the Christian heart
is immovable in its confidence that they are safer there
than here, and will be preserved from falling.

This significant fact concerning the vast multitude who
die in irresponsible age and without developed character
has never yet been admitted to the popular thought of the
future life, or exerted its due influence in theology. The
fact itself is perfectly unquestionable, however, to all who
believe in universal immortality, and so great a fact
ought not to be deprived of its influence in forming our
conceptions of the life beyond. It is a very influential
fact when properly considered, for it compels us to recog-
nize moral life and spiritual activity in the unseen world.
Infants cannot grow to maturity and attain to character
in any world without living a life of free and responsible
action. It is a vast enrichment of our ideas of that world
to think of innumerable youthful spirits as there open-
ing for the first time to the knowledge and love of the
heavenly Father and growing into his likeness. More-
over, if to so large a part of those who are with Christ
life is necessarily educational, opportunities of useful-
ness and help must open in inexhaustible abundance to
those who are farther advanced in holy experience, and the
heavenly life must be inteqsely active and interesting.

All who leave this world with life and character that
can be classed as good or evil are truly known and judged
by God, and go to the place — that is, the state — for
which they are fit. What is meant by place in the world


470 AN OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


of spirits we do not know ; and though perhaps we are
compelled to imagine localities more or less distinctly,
we do not know whither spirits go, or whether words of
locality are suitable in speaking of their destiny or not.
But we do know that God’s judgment assigns men to the
states in which they ought to be, and that state involves
place, so far as it may be necessary. The judgment of
God is discovered from the result, and a man entering that
world finds judgment executed by finding himself where
he is. This at least is true ; and how much more may be
true about the soul’s conscious meeting with God, the
Judge, we shall soon know, but cannot tell at present.
These results of judgment are retributive, — that is, a
man’s lot is the fruit of his living; he receives according
to what he has done, whether good or bad. His position
in that life is the righteous outcome and consequence of
his course of living in this.

Varieties in moral character and attainment in this life
are endless, and the corresponding states in the future
life must be more various than we can conceive ; yet there
are two broad results of life on earth, reaching out into
that which is beyond. A life that God approves as
rightly lived or rightly begun, acceptable to him in
Christ, goes on to its characteristic results in fellowship
with God, receiving the fulness of Christ’s salvation. A
life that God disapproves as the life of a sinful will and
a heart that is set upon evil goes on to its characteristic
results, receiving the development of the evil that it has
made its own. These two forward movements proceed as
results of judgment; good and bad life continue, each in
such state and environment as belong to it according to
the righteous paternal judgment of God.

These two forward movements of the soul beyond death
constitute a great separation. Judgment is always repre-
sented in the Scriptures as resulting in separation ; judg-
meiit distinguishes, and thus marks separation. It is so
in this world, as the Fourth Gospel abundantly and
powerfully illustrates, — men falling into classes morally


THINGS TO COME


471


separate even while they stand together in the presence
of Christ, who is the present as well as the future judge.
So it is also in the judgment at the end of life. In this
world, the moral separation does not involve local separa-
tion ; but though the judgment and the moral separation
are as real as they will be hereafter, the two classes
remain in each other’s presence and society. The great
distinction that is affirmed and manifested by the judg-
ment of God at the entrance of the other world is the
moral distinction, and any local separation that may be
made thereafter is but the result of that moral classifica-
tion. How the infinite variety of souls and characters
should justly be placed in groups or companies, God alone
knows, but he brings to pass whatever ought to be.
Every soul goes to its own fitting moral state and destiny.
The judgment of God at the point of transfer from world
to world makes no new facts in men, but only gives effect
in the newly entered realm to the realities that exist
already. Good characters and bad are wide apart; and
destinies, whatever be the place or scenes in which they
are met, are as wide apart as the characters to which they
correspond.

The nature of these two destinies respectively is plain
enough. One is true welfare and success in existence,
and the other is the opposite ; for one is the fruit of faith
and goodness, and the other of sin. One is the life of
reconciliation with God and moral fellowship with Christ;
the other is the life of alienation from God and unlike-
ness to the spirit of Christ.

There is a blessed state beyond this life, of which we
cannot speak minutely as if we had seen it, but of which
we can speak confidently because we know the principle
of it. The man who has entered it is present with God
and with Christ, in a clearer and truer consciousness of
the divine presence than was possible on the earth, and
enters upon the higher stages of that divine life which
has already been begun. He is living the life of progres-
sive holiness; he is like his Lord and Saviour, and is ever


AN OUTUNE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


growing more like him, advancing to perfection. He is
under the most holy and inspiring influences, where all
that is best in him is constantly helped to increase. All
characteristic activities of the Christ-like life are open to
him. The grade of being in which he finds himself is
higher than that which he has left, and fresh opportunities
of holy service and of holy growth and blessedness are
constantly set before him. He is in the life that he loves
and ought to love, and the course of free and Godlike
activity stretches on before him without end. This is
the life that is life indeed (i Tim. vi. 19), laid hold of on
earth, but experienced in its fulness only in the world
beyond.

With such general knowledge of that higher life with
God we must be content, for its details are hidden from
us; but we do not need them, for surely the great Chris-
tian word “ So shall we be ever with the Lord ’’ contains
enough. There is no better wisdom concerning that life
than this of Richard Baxter ; —

“ My knowledge of that life is small,

The eye of Jbith is dim ;

But ’t is enough that Christ knows all,

And 1 shall be with him.”

There is also an evil state for men beyond this life,
concerning which we are equally ignorant of details and
clear as to the principle. The man who has entered it is
morally separated from God, — not separated from God's
presence as if by local withdrawal from where he is, for
that is of course impossible; and not removed from God’s
notice and love, for that, though love be grieved and dis-
approving, is equally impossible ; but morally and spirit-
ually alienated from God, with God left out of the life
that he chooses. He is present with himself, and with
the sin that he has made his own. Fleshly sin is past,
but not sin of the spirit, — pride, wilfulness, and evil
choice. He moves on in the life of progressive sin, tend-
ing to grow more like to the moral evil that he has


THINGS TO COME


473


chosen. With preference for companionship of his own
kind, he finds help enough in living as he ought not.
He is in a life of action, where opportunities for wrong-
doing are not wanting, and unholy life opens before him,
with no end in sight. It is the life that he loves but
ought not to love, and in which he may find unworthy
delight but never true satisfaction. He may suffer un-
speakably, or he may take delight in evil, in which case^
he inherits the evil that is worse than pain. His course
contains in itself no efficient principle of reformation, but
naturally tends to go on downward. This is the life that
is death indeed, the fruit of persistent sin.

We should greatly misjudge if we thought of all men
as fitted for one or the other of these two states in its
extreme form. In addition to the many who die in
infancy, there is a multitude of souls who are far from
either extreme of this great contrast. Indeed, there are
few of whom the statements just made are true to the full
extent when they enter the other world. There cannot be
two states exactly alike for all individuals, for varieties of
character are endless, and must be attended by suitable
varieties in condition. How souls that differ so variously
in degree of good and evil are grouped with reference to
association among themselves we do not know ; but what-
ever may be the groupings and associations that the right-
eous judgment of God appoints, the great twofold division
of destiny according to character is certain.

With such an outlook for sinful and unrepentant men
it is not surprising that men ask whether the picture has
any features of relief. It seems strange that the moral
universe of the good God should be divided and a part of
it should be forever lost to him; and his own gospel
suggests that nothing else could be so good as that all
men should be brought to holiness, as God desires (i Tim.
ii. 3-4). Questions on the subject are irrepressible, and
we must not be surprised that our own time finds them
purrent among Christians.


474 OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


If we seek to know whether there is any hope of better
things for sinful men hereafter, we are met at the outset
by the question whether the moral separation that is
affirmed in judgment at death is necessarily final and
irrevocable. Upon this question it is affirmed, on the
one hand, that the Scriptures nowhere declare that the
death-line is the line of moral finality; that no plain
reason for such finality appears; that the great majority
of those who die have not reached a stage of character at
which moral change is impossible; that we can discern
nothing in the nature of death that would necessarily put
an end to the possibility of change ; that it would be very
strange if so solemn an experience as death wqre with-
drawn from among the experiences that might influence
the final decision of the soul ; that it is not like God to
fix a line beyond which he will not allow change, if
change is possible in the nature of the case; that judg-
ment upon the deeds done in the body, final so far as
this life is concerned, does not preclude judgments upon
future periods in their season ; that the hints of Scripture
in I Pet. iii. 18-20, iv. 6, denote in the apostolic mind
the thought that change is possible in the life beyond.
On the other hand, it is affirmed that the gospel is
addressed to men in this life, and they are exhorted to
lay hold of eternal life at once; that no promise or encour-
agement is given of opportimity to receive Christ in the
other life ; that the finality of death is taught by Christ
in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus (Luke xvi.
19-31); that the nature of the future life as retributive
is inconsistent with the idea of change; that character
tends to become fixed in good or evil, and in many cases
appears, so far as man can judge, to be unalterably fixed
for good or evil in the present life; that the great separa-
tion is announced in Scripture with an air of finality, from
which one would never naturally infer that it could be
altered. It should be added that many who regard the
judgment as an event to come at the end of the career of
jiumanity think that opportunity for moral change qqnt»


THINGS TO COME


475


tinues in the unseen world until the judgment, but no
longer. It should also be noted that the doctrine of the
irrevocableness of ruin when reached by fixity of character
is a different doctrine from that of the irrevocableness of
destiny from the moment of death. No one can doubt
that if character becomes unalterable, destiny becomes
unalterable with it, — unless annihilation should inter*
vene. But from this it would not follow that at death
unalterableness of character is reached.

Without discussing these reasons on the two sides, we
should notice that doubt of the irrevocability of destiny for
all men at death has become common in our time. This
doubt has sprung largely from such observation as our own
age is compelled to make upon the present life and its
character. The mutual acquaintance of men in the modern
world has thrown fresh light upon the incompleteness of
this life, and the undeveloped state in which the vast
majority of human beings leave it. Now first has the moral
unripeness of the world been taken note of in its bearing
upon destiny. Observation of life as it is has led to a wide-
spread conviction that such a life cannot for all men be
decisive of endless destiny; that though in many cases
character is finally decided here, in more, so far as man
can judge, it is not; that the most of all who are born do
not advance far enough in moral progress here to have
decided the great moral question for all coming duration,
and that God cannot regard or treat them as if they
had decided it. Conviction thus founded cannot well be
reasoned away; and those who come to entertain it are
certain to feel that Christ cannot have intended to con-
tradict it, since he is the truth and speaks according to
reality.

The present tendency of Christian thought is toward the
recognition of greater reality and freedom in the other life,
and thus toward the possibility of moral change. By very
many this tendency is regarded with dread, as likely to
render the present life less serious, and encourage inattention
to eternal realities. Any teaching that renders retribution


4/6 AJV OUTLINE OP CHRl^iidAN TNEOLOGV


unreal or uncertain in the minds of men is certainly dan-
gerous, as well as untrue ; and so, on the other hand, is any
teaching that presents retribution as arbitrary or morally
unintelligible, or as anything but the working-out of a
reasonable moral necessity. Only that retribution comes
which must come ; and all the retribution that must come
comes. The only doctrine of retribution that can per-
manently hold the conscience of mankind is doctrine that
represents retribution as natural, and therefore inevitable ;
as right, and therefore certain. Understatement and over-
statement alike weaken the doctrine and lead to moral
indifference. The doctrine of an inevitable, sufficient, and
absolutely righteous retribution upon all unforsaken sin has
all the moral power that any doctrine of retribution can
possess. In this world, and in all worlds, such retribution
is perfectly certain, as sure as the being of God. The ten-
dency to make this life less serious is to be counteracted,
not so much by insisting upon future unchangeableness, as
by proclaiming the serious and exacting nature of human
existence, the urgency of duty, the certainty of righteous
retribution, the holiness and love of God, and the spiritual
quality of salvation as consisting in becoming good like
him.

In this direction is a change that our time has witnessed
in the character of the doctrine of future punishment. Once
it was commonly held that endless punishment was simply
the just punishment of the sins of the present life. Of late
it has come to be more commonly held that the continued
punishment of the future is the necessary accompaniment
of the continued sin of the future; that punishment con-
tinues because sin continues, and must last while it lasts.
This change is for the better, because it grounds the future
retributions in a genuine moral necessity.

As to what will actually occur, it should be said that
nothing in the nature of sin offers any hope of its ending,
for sin naturally tends to endlessness. The Scriptures
afford us a look into the dark vista, where no end is in


THINGS TO COME


A77


sight. The word atonies, applied in Matt. xxv. 46, to the
life and the punishment that follow judgment, is a far-
reaching word, which probably does not mean absolutely
“ endless,” but does mean “ unmeasured,” or “ measured
only by ages,” stretching on with no end in sight. It does
not affirm or deny the existence of an end, but it sees no
end. In this respect it well suits the position of one who
stands at the entrance of the sad estate of sinful men here-
after, — no end is to be seen. On the other hand, there
are passages in the New Testament in which there seems
to be hope that God will yet gain the love and devotion of
all souls (John xii. 32; Rom. v. 12-21; Phil. ii. 9-1 1;
I Cor. XV. 28.) There arises also the question whether
God would not be just so far defeated if an endless dualism
were established in his universe by the endless sway of sin
over a part of his intelligent creatures. From such con-
siderations comes the hope of many that God will finally
bring all souls from sin to holiness. Doubtless this is the
best result, if God sees it possible. There is nothing in
sin or in man to accomplish it, and any such hope is
immoral that is not grounded solely in the spiritual great-
ness of God.

The possibility of such an expectation depends in part
upon what is true respecting the nature and aim of punish-
ment hereafter. Retribution is inevitable; but what is it?
It is the road over which unrepentant sinners must pass ;
but does it lead to anything beyond itself? Is it simply an
equivalent for sin, given to satisfy justice and stand as a
warning against evil, or is it further intended to promote
the purpose of mercy and lead the sinner to repentance?
If retribution is an agency of grace, making justice a means
for securing the ends of love, it is possible that hard experi-
ence may accomplish what milder agencies did not effect,
and lead the sinner to a better mind.

Christian thought in our time regards God as nearer and
more tender to his creation than he once appeared to be,
and looks more and more upon his administration of all life
as paternal in spirit and disciplinary in aim. It has learned


47 ^ OUTLINE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


from Christ that all things go on under the eye of the
Father. In this life Christian faith is constantly finding
the disciplinary purpose in events of every kind, and views
it with special delight and wonder when it appears in the
experiences of retribution. We discover that by the just
penalties of wrong-doing God evidently seeks to draw us
away from it. The way of the transgressor is hard because
it cannot be easy, but also in order that the transgressor
may weary of it and abandon it. It is commonly held that
in the other world this element disappears, and no benefit
to the sinner is intended in his punishment or can come
from it; punishment there has simply what value may
attach to what is just, and what worth it may possess as a
warning to the universe. But Christian thought is moving
in the direction of the belief that even there punishment
has in the mind of God a reformatory purpose. It is hard
to believe that God indefinitely perpetuates suffering that
is not useful, or that continuous punishment of one for the
benefit of others is arranged and executed by the eternal
justice. . The knowledge of God that has been gained by
Christian experience suggests the belief that his dealing
with all his creatures is disciplinary.

In fact, it may almost be said that all Christian thought
is tending, more or less clearly and consciously, toward en-
largement of hope for the spiritual welfare of humanity,
and that this tendency springs largely from the conception
of God to which the faith of the age has come. The
tendency is everywhere apparent, and little serious effort
is being made to check it. Of course the attendant danger
is the danger that the inevitable fact of retribution may for
many go out of sight Unspiritual men easily accept
unspiritual hopes, and ignore the terrible seriousness of
spiritual realities. The popular drift toward a shallow and
unspiritual belief in universal salvation is real and dan-
gerous ; yet it is not to be resisted by mere denial, or by
dogmatic assertion, or by driving back the conception of
God from the paternal and disciplinary to the regal and
judicial. The paternal conception of God has come into


THINGS TO COME


479


Christian thought to stay, and to be used or abused accord-
ing to the spirituality and wisdom of the Church. It is the
duty of Christian teachers to guard the current tendency
against its obvious dangers, by insisting upon the infallible
certainty of righteous retribution and the folly of continuing
in sin in blind and thoughtless hope. The true Christian
thought of God itself, when men have ceased to regard it
either with distrust or with soft delight, will cure the evils
of the time when it was but half apprehended, and will
serve for strengthening all goodness and warning against
all sin. Unspiritual hopes must be counteracted by the
bold use of the most spiritual truth that the Christian
revelation affords.

It is a popular but most erroneous idea that if only there
is possibility of moral change hereafter, a sinner need not
trouble himself to break off his sins at present. Even if
God’s punishments are disciplinary, and intended for the
sinner’s good, still the hope of release from the state to
which a sinful life brings him must be far remote. A hope
of final restoration opens no easy path. Nothing but just
such humble and holy return to God as Christ now demands
can ever, in any imaginable state or world, bring salvation.
This breaking-off of sins by righteousness, and of iniquities
by turning to the Lord, must naturally grow more difficult
the longer one goes on in evil. Sin must bring forth its
fruits in another world; naturally therefore long periods
may elapse before a change can come, if it is ever coming.
Only a dreary vista of sin and punishment, with no end in
sight, opens before one who moves on with his heart set
upon evil. Admit the possibility of returning to God here-
after, and even then the case is this : A man goes into the
other life loving and choosing evil, to live there in sin, and
take the consequences ; he thereby plans for nothing but to
go on losing, dwarfing himself, hungering, thirsting, chafing,
choosing to be as he is, and yet unsatisfied, loving his evil
and hating its fruit, growing away from the good or else
driven back to it through uttermost anguish of soul, — he
can expect nothing but this till such time as he is ready to


480 an- outline op CHRISTIAN THEOLOGT


take the step oi penitence, faith, and loyalty to God, to
which Christ is already calling him, and do, perhaps after
ages of bitter experience, what he ought to do to-day.
This is the brightest hope that any doctrine of future oppor-
tunity can hold out to a man who leaves this world reject-
ing grace in Christ and choosing a life of sin.

The most serious dangers in connection with thought
upon future destiny do not spring from belief in the large-
ness of the divine grace. They spring from the idea that
salvation is something else than transformation into the
likeness of the good God. Men think that to be saved is
to be snatched out of the suffering that is due to their
sins, and be brought to everlasting safety ; and in such a
thought there is deep moral danger. The lessons that need
to be enforced are such as these : That no man can possibly
have deliverance from punishment, or ought to think of it,
or would be blessed by it, while he is devoted to sin ; that to
be saved is to be transformed from sinfulness into the like-
ness of God in Christ; that this change is possible now,
and is urged by the love that endured the cross; that
delay must render this change more difficult ; that there-
fore it is folly to enter a new stage of existence expecting
to make it there instead of here, even if there it is possible ;
that duty knows no future ; that wisdom finds too much to
regret in what is past already, and knows no good day of
repentance but to-day ; that all the motives are thus present
now, and now is the day of salvation, too precious to be
spent in vain. It needs also to be urged upon the heart of
the Christian people that the way to turn men from sin to
righteousness is to bear them upon the heart as Christ did,
and as God does, by an intense, unconquerable, self-sacri-
ficing love ; and that the salvation of the world waits for a
redeeming Church, that lives not for its own comfort, or
even for its own salvation, but for the satisfying of the
heart of Christ.


“GOD GAVE UNTO US ETERNAL LIFE, AND THIS LIFE IS
T.V HIS SON.”


CONCLUSION


481


Of the many things that ought to be said about The-
ology but are not said in this book, some, I trust, may
be spoken in the discussions of our pleasant class-room
on the dear old hill. There, with our windows open to
the morning light, teacher and pupils all students to-
gether, we talk without reserve of all things in earth
and heaven that bear upon our high theme. It is al-
ways the light of the present day that shines in through
our windows ; past suns have set, and the suns of future
days have yet to rise. But all days are the Lord’s, and
we are as sure that God is with us in our work as that he
was with our fathers, or that he will enlighten those who
shall come after us. Indeed, his Spirit has often refreshed
our hearts there while we have talked together of him and
gazed upon his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, and our
quiet room has been to us the house of God. We do not
find all the questions that were present to our fathers
pressing upon us their children, nor do we feel ourselves re-
quired to settle all the questions that we see rising, to engage
the thoughts of future students. We are willing that our
successors should leave our*perplexities and our solutionsi
and answer their own questions in the clearer light of
coming time. Sufficient unto the day are its own magni-
tudes and mysteries. It may well suffice us if we can jus-
tify to mind and heart the vital faith, the ardent love, and
the sustaining hope that our own generation needs ; and
this, through the grace of him who is the same yesterday
and to-day and forever, we believe it is given us to do.
If all men knew the God whose light shines through our
windows, and knew him not only in study, but in life and
love, the murmurs of the world would surely sink to silence,
and the troubled heart of man find peace. To know


482 AN OUTITNE OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY


and love such a being as the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ is to find our questions answered and our
strength renewed. His eager and unsatisfied world needs
a thousand applications of the good tidings of him to its
manifold life and activity, and it needs a faith clear and
simple, — a faith that heals doubt, and wakens love, and
breathes wisdom, and imparts spiritual power. The work
of our class-room will have accomplished its purpose if
young men go out from it with the true secret of the Lord
in their hearts, with a faith that cannot be perplexed, a
love that burns in fellowship with him who gave himself
for men, and a hope unquenchable. This is much to ask
and seek ; but for what lower end than this has our Lord
given us our Seminary, our time, and our Bibles? May
he always be the teacher whose presence glorifies the
room!

“NOW UNTO HIM THAT IS ABLE TO DO EXCEEDING
ABUNDANTLY ABOVE ALL THAT WE ASK OR THINK,
ACCORDING TO THE POWER THAT WORKETH IN US,
UNTO HIM BE GLORY IN THE CHURCH BY CHRIST JESUS
THROUGHOUT ALL AGES. WORLD WITHOUT END. AMEW.”


INDEX


Annihilation, the doctrine of, 4505
the chief objection to it, 451,

Anthropology, and the origin of man,
222.

Ascension of Christ, 273, 363. .

Atonement, a favorite name for
Christ's work, 316; theories of,
3x8; eternal, 348.

Attributes of God, definition, 75;
how learned, 77 ; classification, 78.

Authority of the Scriptures, its na-
ture, 45*

Belief, different kinds of, 403.

Bible, the, purpose of, 21 ; origin of
the name, 22. See Sa^ipiures,

Birth of Jesus, 263.

Body, the human, 184; not essential
to personality, 187 j destiny of, 457.

Canon, formation of the, 23.

Cause, the idea of, an evidence of the
existence of God, 109,

Christ, his place in history, 260 ; the
recorded facts concerning him,
261 ; elements in his life, 263 ; his
miraculous birth, 263 ; his human
life, 264; his unique relation to
God, 265; his ministry of useful-
ness, 266 ; his teaching, 267 ; his
miracles, 269; rejected by Israel,
270; his death, 271; his resurrec-
tion, 272 ; his sinless life, 27 5 ; the
purpose of his mission, in the
Synoptics, 276 ; in the Fourth
Gospel, 278; result of his mis-
sion, 280; his person, 2S5; the
incarnation, 286 ; the possibility of
it, 290 ; the resulting person, 297 ;
a genuine person, 297 ; consti-
tuents of his personali^, 300 ; his


unity with God and man, 3055
vital unity with both, 305; revela-
tion of God in him, 308 ; revelation
of man in him, 308 ; his sympathy
with God, 310; his sympathy with
men, 312 ; his sense of the world's
sinfulness, 314; names for his
work, 316; theories of his work,
318; conditions of the reconcilia-
tion of God and men in him, 321 ;
his work in effecting reconciliation,
332 j his work a direct one, 332 ;
a work of free grace, 335 ; a work
of self-expression on the part of
God, 339; as hating sin, 340; as
Saviour, 340 ; as Sin-bearer, 341 ;
intended to win men, 347 ; to
satisfy God, 348; a work within
humanity, 349 ; the acceptable man,
350 ; his self-offering in union with
God, 350 ; the head of a new hu-
mam‘ty, 354 ; union with him, 356 ;
the outcome of his mission anc
work, 360 ; his mediatorship, 362 ;
his present activity, 362 j as king,
365; as priest, 366; the Holy
Spirit in relation to his work, 373 j
his second coming, 436; the judge,
460.

Christianity, definition, 5 ; not a book-
religion, 20.

Church, the, 381 ; the Holy Spirit's
work in, 381.

Conscience, definition, 199; source
of its importance, 200; its testi*
mony to general sinfulness, 228.

Conversion, 396.

Conviction, as wrought by the Holy
Spirit, 376.

Creationism, 216

Creatorship of God, 70 ^ti, 128


INDEX


484

Death, a witness to immortality,
194; of Jesus, 271; definition and
significance of, 449.

Deism, its relation to divine imman-
ence and transcendence, 130.

Depravity, definition, 243 ; (fistin-
guished from guilt, 244.

Determinism, 213.

Dichotomy, 183.

Dilemma, the great, God good or
bad, 120.

Divine Life in Man, the, sources of
information concerning, 386: the
nature of, 386 ; forms of holy love
in, 387 ; the freeness of, 389 ; the
beginning of, 395 ; the progress of,
409; helps to, 410; the perman-
ence of, 418.

Election, a fact in God’s dealing,
390 ; purpose and meaning of, 392.

Ends in the universe, an evidence of
the existence of God, 1 13.

Eschatology, 428.

Eternal Generation, 172.

Evidences of the Christian Revela-
tion, 9.

Evil, physical, 153; moral, 154; un-
avoidable in a free world, 156 ; its
relation to the purpose of God, 1 56.

Evolution, the method of God, 131 ;
its view of the origin of man, 224;
suggestion from, against universal
immortality, 452.

Existence of God, 102 ; evidence
from the intellectual starting-point,
105; from the religious starting-
point, 118; objections, 126.

Experience, Christian, its relation to
the Christian revelation, i''*; to
theology, 18 ; its testimony to the
existence of God, 123.

Faith, a proper means of confidence
in the realm of the spirit, 73 ; an
element in the beginning of the
divine life, 401 ; definition of, 403 ;
an act of moral unity with Christ,
404; correlative to grace, 404;
relation to knowledge, 405,

Fatalism, 212.


Fatherhood of God, 139, 267.

Forgiveness, its nature, 255; how
related to penalty, 257.

Freedom, a gift of God, 137; re-
sponsible to God’s moral govern-
ment, 140 ; relation to the doctrine
of predestination, 143; relation to
Providence, 150; of the will, de-
fined, 212 ; limitations upon, 213,

God, the theme of revelation, 9 ; the
Christian conception of, 63 j defini-
tion of, 64; his nature, 66; his
character, 68 ; his relation to other
existence, 70 ; his motive, 7 r ; his
attributes, 75; his omnipresence,
79 ; omniscience, 80 ; omnipotence,
85; unity, 88; immutability, 88;
holiness, 89 ; love, 94 ; wisdom,
loi ; his existence, 102 ; shown
from the intellectual side, 105 ;
from the religious side, nS; his
relation to the universe, 128; his
creatorship, 128 ; his freedom, 129 ;
his method, 130; his purpose, 134:
his right of control, 136; his sov-
ereignty, 137 j his attitude toward
the universe, 139; his moral gov-
ernment, 140 ; his relation to hu-
man freedom, 143 ; his providence,
147; his relation to evil, 153; his
threefold manifestation, 162; his
triune mode of existence, 165 ;
his relation to obligation, 203 ; the
relation of sin to him, 237 ; his
disapproval, 250 ; his attitude
toward sinful men, 25S; revealed
in Christ, 308; reconciliation be-
tween him and men, 315, 321 ; his
willingness to save, 323 ; his self-
expression in Christ, 339 ; as sin-
bearer, 341 ; his action intended to
win men, 347 ; to satisfy himself,
348 ; his choices among men, 391 ;
his work in regeneration, 397 ; in
justification, 406 ; in sanctification,
409; his promises and warnings,
4x8.

Good, meaning of the word as ajk
plied to God, 68.


INDEX


Gk)spels, cliaracterixation of, 262;
their testimony as to the purpose
of Christ’s mission, 276.

Grace, in God, definition of, 102;
relation to nature and law, 325;
satisfies law by saying sinners,
329; is the motive of God in
Christ, 335.

Guilt, cannot be inherited, 244 ; de-
finition, 246; an element in penalty,
250.

Heredity, perpetuating moral qual-
ities, 219.

History, Christianity founded in, 13 ;
contributes to theology, 49 j its
value in the study of theology, 59.

Holiness, definition, 89 ; its place in
the relation between God and his
creatures, 91 j how related to love,
98.

Holy Spirit, the, the last great mani-
festation of God, 164; the doctrine
of, not completed in the New
Testament, 168 ; ranks with the
Son in relation to the Godhead,
168 ; relation within the Godhead,
174J practical definition of, 369;
in relation to the work of Christ,
373; work of, before Christ, 375;
work of, in the world, 376 ; work
of, in the Church, 381 ; work of, in
individuals, 386; agency of, in
regeneration, 397; in sanctifica-
tion, 409; a group of the works
of, 424.

Humanity of Christ, 264, 300.

Human Race, the, relation of the
individual to, 215; influences the
individual through inheritance,
219; through relations, 220; ori-
gin of, 222 ; sin in relation to, 239 j
depravity in, 243.

Image of God in man, 191.

Immanence of God, 130*

Immortality, definition, 192 ; not de-
monstrable, 1931 the general belief
in, 193; various ai^uments for^
194*, the Christian Doctrine o£«


48s

^9^3 450; the doctrine of condi-
tional, 451.

Immutability of God, 88.

Incarnation, the, in the New Testa-
ment, 286; the possibility of, 290;
not a division of God, 294; how it
may be better understood, 295 ; the
person that resulted from, 297 ; its
place in the plan of God, 302 ; may
have occurred in other worlds, 304;
results of, in the work of Christ,

305-

" In Christ,” 357.

Inerrancy, 36.

Infants in the life beyond, 468.

Infinity of God, 73.

Inspiration, source of the word, 37 ;
Christianity historically independ-
ent of, 38; applies to men rather
than to writings, 40; definition,
41; a fruit of revelation in the
Church, 42; proved by the ex-
cellence of the Bible, 44; a work
of the Holy Spirit, 44, 425.

Intelligibleness of the Universe, an
evidence of the existence of God,
105.

Jerusalem, the destruction of, 442 ;
the new, 443.

Jesus. See Christ,

Judgment, hereafter, necessary, 459 j
according to works, 460; the test,
461; the time, 463; the purpose,
465.

Justice, of God, 92.

Justification, Paul’s use of the word,
406; a result, rather than a sepa-
rate gift, 407.

Kingdom of God, 276.

Law, not an obstacle to grace, 326;
one with nature and grace in aim,
328; different from grace in meth-
od, 336; salvation apart from it,
337 -

Life, in God, 76.

Life Beyond, the, 466; a moral lifC}
466; Infants in, 468 ; separation in.


INDEX


486

470; question of the possibility of
moral change in, 473.

Logos-doctrine, the, the Biblical
foundation of the doctrine of
Triunity, 166, 171; its place in
the doctrine of incarnation, 287,
293 -

Love, definition, 95; its relation to
approval, 97 ; how related to holi-
ness, 98 ; the vicarious impulse of,
353 > its place in the divine life in
man, 386.

Man, one of the sources of theology,
48; his constitution of body and
spirit, 182; how he differs from
lower animals, 188; wherein he
resembles God, 191; his immor-
tality, 192; a moral being, 198;
relation of the individual to the
race, 215; his origin, 222; his kin-
ship with God, making possible
the incarnation, 290.

Merit, not the rule with God, 337.

Messiah, 260.

Method of God in the universe, 130;
uniform, 130 j evolutionary, 131,

Method of study in Theology, 58.

Millennium, the, 433.

Ministry of Jesus, elements in, 266.

Miracles, definition, 133; of Jesus,
269; of the apostolic age, 424.

Mission of Christ, the purpose of, as
represented in the Gospels, 276;
statements of the Synoptics, 276 ;
statements of the Fourth Gospel,
278; summary, 279; the result of,
as represented in the later Scrip-
tures, 280.

Moral Government of God, defini-
tion, 140; principles of, 141.

Moral Inability, 214.

Motives, 211.

Natural Religion, not the way
to Christian faith, ii.

Nature, definition, 131.

Necessarianism, 213.

New humanity, the, established in
Christ, 354, 358; redemptive, 359.


Non-Christian religions, 3 ; their
theologies, 7; PauPs treatment
of, 9.

Obligation, the reality of, 200 ; the
ground of, 202 ; necessarily attends
personality, 202 ; rests on the per-
fectness of God, 203 ; theories d
the ground of, 205; the absolute
standard, 208 ; the working stand-
ard, 209.

Old Testament, its relation to the
New, 34; its permanent value, 34.

Omnipotence, 85 ; misconceptions
of, 86.

Omnipresence, 79.

Omniscience, 80 ; its relation to cer-
tainty, 84.

Order of topics in theology, 62.

Pantheism, its relation to divine im-
manence and transcendence, 130.

Paraclete, 373.

Penalty, the nature of, 248 ; elements
in, 250 ; relation of forgiveness to,
257 -

Person of Christ, the, 285.

Personal, definition of the word as
applied to God, 67, 170.

Personality, human, its elements,
187; undying, 192.

Philosophy, compared with science,
52 ; tributary to theology, 52.

Prayer, possibility of answer to,
134, 152; a help to the divine
life, 412.

Predestinarianism, 212.

Predestination, in relation to moral
government, 143? to human free-
dom, X45.

Pre-existence, theory of, 215.

Priesthood, 366.

Prophecy, its nature, 430.

Propitiation, definition, 348.

Providence, definition, 147 ; relation
to the order of nature, 148; to
human freedom, 150; to prayer,
152.

Psychology, tributary to theology, 48,
Punishment, untransferable^ 331 ; the


INDEX


487


question whether always discipli-
nary, 254, 477 j substitute for, 344.

Purpose of God in the Universe, 134.

Qualifications for the study of
theology, 53; intellectual, 53; in
spirit and temper, 54 ; by way of
knowledge, 56.

Race-Connection, nature of, 218;
relation to personal responsibility,
219; various results from, 220.

Reconciliation, the name chosen for
the work of Christ, 316; a per-
sonal matter, 322 ; God seeking it,
324 ; the work of Christ in effect-
ing it, 332; sought by Christ
directly, 338 ; effected in the new
humanity, 354 ; in Christ, 360.

Regeneration, the beginning of the
divine life, 396; definition, 396;
relation to God and to Christ, 397;
antecedents to, 398 ; whether man
is passive in, 400.

Religion, definition, i; how related
to theology, 4; the Christian, 5;
a valid and permanent element in
life, 119, 123; truths essential to,
161.

Religious nature of man, its testi-
mony to the existence of God, 118.

Remembrance wrought by the Holy
Spirit, 3S3.

Repentance, definition, 401 ; its place
in the Christian life, 402.

Resurrection, of Christ, 272; evi-
dence of it, 273; its evidential
value, 362 ; its place in the gospel,
363 : of men, 453 ; its nature, 454 ;
the time of, 457; the value of
belief in, 458.

Retribution, the principle 253,
470> 477.

Revelation, definition, 9; evidences
of, 9.

Revelation, the Christian, as a source
of theology, 12; definition, 12;
made in life, 13 : preserved in life,
16; preserved in the Scriptures,

22 .


Revivals of religion, 426.

Righteousness, in God, 93; of God,
expressed in Christ, 344.

Sacrifices, superseded, 354.

Sanctification, definition, 409 ; helps
in, 410; its nature as a process,
414; how soon to be completed^
415 ; misapprehensions of, 414, 416.

Science, definition, 51 ; tributary tc
theology, 53.

Scriptures, how related to revelation,
14 ; preservation of the Christian
revelation, 22 , the canon, 23 ; au-
thorship, 24; dates of composi-
tion, 25 ; their quality, 26 ; theme,
28; variety, 29; progressiveness,
31 ; freedom, 35 ; inspiration, 37 5
authority, 45 ; use in theology, 47.

Second coming of Christ, 436.

Self-existence of God, 74.

Self-expression of God in Christ, 339

Sin-bearing, of God, 341 5 of Christ,
345 } of the new humanity, 359.

Sinlessness of Jesus, 275,

Son of God, 172, 306 ; of Man, 306.

Soul, the scriptural usage of the word,
183.

Sovereignty of God, definition, 136;
exercise of, 140.

Spirit, definition, 66; the scriptural
usage of the word concerning man,
183 i relation to the body, 185;
likeness to God in, 191 ; continu-
ance of, after death, 449.

System, in theology, 60.

Teaching of Jesus, elements In,
267.

Teleology, 113.

Terminology, and order of treatment
52 -

Theology, preceded by religion, i ;
definition, 4; limitation of its field,

5 -

Theology, Christian, definition, 6;
sources of, 10; relation to Chris-
tian experience, 18; progressive,
20; ho;v it should use the Scrip-
tures, 47 ; relation to the various


488


INDEX


studies concerning man, 48; rela-
tion to science and philosophy,
52 j qualifications for studying, 53 ;
method of studying, 58*

Things to come, 428 ; in this world,
429 ; the conditions of study, 429 ;
the second coming of Christ, 436 ;
his predictions of it, 436; how
understood, 439; how fulfilled,
441; the scriptural view, 443;
questions left unanswered, 446;
beyond this world, 448 ; death and
the continuance of the spirit, 449 ;
resurrection, 453; time of, 457;
judgment, 459; time of, 463; the
life beyond, 466 ; a life of action,
466; infants in, 468; states in,
469 ; questions of finality at death,
474; 477; the aim, of

retribution, 477 ; the chief danger
in discussions of destiny, 480.
Traducianism, 217.

Transcendence, of God, 13a
Trichotomy, 183.

Trinity, the Divine, definition, 161 ;
relation to Triunity, 165 ; its place
> Christianity, 179.


Triunity, the Divine, definition, i6i ^
the ground of the Trinity, 162,
how far revealed in the Scriptures,
165; the biblical statements, 166;
how far explicable in thought, 171 ;
explained in the light of self-con-
sciousness, 172; relation to Chris-
tianity, 179.

Truth, love of, 55 ; Spirit of, 383 ,
definition, 383.

Union with Christ, 356 ; the bond
of the new humanity, 358.

Universe, the, a source for Christian
theology, 50 j its intelligibleness a
proof of the existence of God, 105 ;
causation in, 109; ends in, 113;
relation of God to, 128; God’s
attitude toward, 139; in relation
to God, 158.

Will, the, definition, 210 ; its office,
211 ; its relation to motives, 2ii j
its freedom, 212 ; limitations upon,
213.

Wisdom, of God, loi.

Word, the. See Logos^docirme^


book
was

presented
to

the people
of Kansas City
as a gift
from
