The Classical Poetry of the Japanese (Basil Hall Chamberlain, 1880)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1880 Trubner edition (https://archive.org/details/classicalpoetry00chamgoog). The pioneering English study of Japanese verse — Manyoshu and Kokinshu in translation.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


v:


,')i: •■•■-< xV;


TRiiBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.


Messrs. TRUBNER & CO. beg to call attention to their
ORIENTAL SEHIEJS, in which will be coUected, as far as
possible, all extant information and research upon the Histori/y
EdigionSy Languages^ Literature^ dx., of Ancient India, China, and
the East in general.

The Oriental Series will be on a comprehensive design, and
no labour or expense will be spared to render the undertaking
worthy of its subject. Messrs. Trubneb & Co. have already
secured the services of eminent Eastern students and writers ;
and while the labour proposed must necessarily prove vast, they
intend to accomplish it by working with many able hands over
the whole field, under careful and well-organised Editorship.


THE FOLLOWING WORKS ARE NOW READT:-^
Second Edition, post 8vo, cloth, pp. xvi — ^427, price 168.

ESSAYS ON THE SACKED LANGUAGE, ^.WRITINGS,
AND RELIGION OF THE PARSIS.

By martin HAUG, Ph.D.,

Late of the Uniyersities of Tubingen, Gottingen, and Bonn ; Superintendent
of Sanskrit Studies, and Professor of Sanskrit in the Poona College;
Honorary Member of the Bombay Branch Boyal Asiatic Society, &c.

Edited by Dr. E. W. WEST.

I. History of the Researches into the Sacred Writings and Religion of the '

Parsis, from the Earliest Times down to the Present,
n. Languages of the Parsi Scriptures.
IIL The Zend-Avesta, or the Scripture of the Parsis.
lY. The Zoroastrian Religion, as to its Origin and Development.

The Author of these Essays intended, after his return from India, to
expand them into a comprehensive work on the Zoroastrian religion; but
this design, postponed from time to time, was finally frustrated by his
untimely death. That he was not spared to publish all his varied Imow-
ledge on this subject must remain for ever a matter of regret to the student
of Iranian antiquities. In other hands, the changes that could be introduced
into this Second Edition were obviously limited to such additions and
alterations as the lapse of time and the progress of Zoroastrian studiei have
rendered necessary.


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.


In the Fint Esmy, the history of the European researches has been
extended to the present time ; but for the sake of brevity several writings
have been passed over unnoticed, among the more valuable of which thoee
of Professor Hiibschmann may be specially mentioned. Some account has
also been given of the progress of Zoroastrian studies among the Pteiia
themselves.

In the Second Essay, additional information has been given about the
Pahlavi language and literature ; but the technical portion of the Avesta
Grammar has been reserve for separate publication, being better adapted
for students than for the general reader.

Some additions have been made to the Third Essay, with the view of
bringing together, from other sources, all the author's translations from the
Avesta, except those portions of the G&thas which he did not include in the
First Edition, and which it would be hazardous for an Editor to revise.
Further details have also been given regarding the contents of the Nasks.

Several additional translations having been found among the author's
papers, too late for insertion in the Third Essay, have been added in an
Appendix, after careful revision, together with his notes descriptive of the
mode of performing a few of the Zoroastrian ceremonies.

The Author*8 principal object in publishing these Essays originally, was
to present in a readable form all the materials for judging impartially of the
scnptures and religion of the Parsis. The same object has been kept in
view while preparing this Second Edition, giving a large quantity of such
materials, collected from a variety of sources, which may now be left to th«
reader's impartial judgment.

The value of this Second Edition is greatly enhanced by the addition of
many posthumous papers, discovered by the Editor, Dr. E. West, at Munich.
They consist of further translations from the Zend and Pahlavi of the Zend-
Avesta, and idso of numerous detailed notes descriptive of some of the Parsi
ceremonies.


Post 8vo, cloth, pp. viiL— 176, price 7s. 6d.

TEXTS FROM THE BUDDHIST OANON

COMMONLY KNOWN AS ** DHAMMAPADA."

WUh Accompanying IfarroUivei.

Translated from the Chinese by S. BEAL, B.A., Professor of Chinese,

University College, London.

Among the great body of books comprising the Chinese Buddhist Canon,

Presented by the Japanese Government to the Library of the India Office,
[r. Beal discovered a work bearing the title of **Law Verses, or Scriptural
Texts,'* which on examination was seen to resemble the Pali version of
Dhammapada in manv particulars. It was further discovered that the
original recension of tnA Pali Text found its way into China in the Third
Century (A.D.), where the work of translation was finished, and afterwards
thirteen additional sections added. The Dhammapada, as hitherto known
by the Pali Text Edition, as edited by FausboU, by Max Muller's English,
and Albrecht Weber's German translations, consists only of twenty-six
chapters or sections, whilst the Chinese version, or rather recension, as now
transited by Mr. Beal, consists of thirty-nine sections. The students of
Pali who possess Fausboil's Text, or either of the above-named translations,
will therefore needs want Mr. Beal's English rendering of the Chinese
version ; the thirteen above-named additional sections not being accessible to
them in any other form ; for, even if they understand Chinese, the Chinese
original would be unobtainable by them.

** Mr. Beal, by making it accessible in an English dress, has added to the great
services he has already rendered to the comparative study of religious history."—
Acadimy.


TRUBNMR*S ORIENTAL SERIES,


" Valuable as exhibiting the doctrine of the Buddhists in its purest, least adol-
terated, form, it brings the modern reader face to face with that simple creed and rule
of conduct which won its wav over the minds of myriads, and which is now nominally
professed by 145 millions, who have overlaid its austere simplicity with innumerable
ceremonies, forgotten its maTlms, perverted its teaching, and so inverted its leading
principle that a religion whose founder denied a Qod, now worshixM that founder as
a god himself." — ScoUman.


Post 8vo, oloth, pp. xxiii — 360, jnrioe iSs.

THE HISTORY OF INDIAN LITERATUSR

By ALBRECHT WEBER.

Translated from the Second German Edition by John Mann, M.A., and
Th^odor Zachabiae, Ph.D., with the sanction of the Author.

Dr. BuHLER, Inspector of Schools in India, writes: — **I am extremely
glad to learn that you are about to publish an English translation of Pro-
fessor A. Weber's * History of Indian Literature.* When I was Professor of
Oriental Languages in Elphinstone College, I frequently felt the want of
such a work to which I could refer the students. I trust that the work
which you are now publishing will become a class-book in all the Indian
colleges, as it is the first and only scientific one which deals with the whole
field of Vedic, Sanskrit, and Prakrit literature."

Professor Co well, of Cambridge, writes : — **The English translation of
Professor A. Weber's * History of Indian Literature ' wiU be of the greatest
use to those who wish to take a comprehensive survey of all that the Hindoo
mind has achieved. It will be especially useful to the students in our
Indian colleges and universities. I used to long for such a book when I was
teaching in Calcutta. Hindu students are intensely interested in the history
of Sanskrit literature, and this volume will supply them with all they want
on the subject. I hope it will be made a text-book wherever Sanskrit and
English are taught."

Professor Whitney, Yale College, Newhaven, Conn., U.S.A., writes : —
** I am the more interested in your enterprise of the publication of Weber's
Sanskrit Literature in an English version, as I was one of the class to whom
the work was originally given in the form of academic lectures. At their
first appearance they were by far the most learned and able treatment of
their subject ; and with their recent additions they still maintain decidedly
the same rank. Wherever the language, and institutions, and history of
India are studied, they must be used and referred to as authority."


Post 8vo, cloth, pp. xii. —198, accompanied by Two Language

Maps, price 12s.

A SKETCH OF
THE MODERN LANGUAGES OF THE EAST INDIES.

By ROBERT N. CUST. .

The Author has attempted to fill up a vacuum, the inconvenience of
which pressed itself on his notice. Much had been written about the
languages of the East Indies, but the extent of our present knowledge had
not even been brought to a focus. Information on particular subjects was
only to be obtained or looked for by consulting a specialist, and then hunting
down the numbers of a serial or the chapters of a volume not always to be
found. It occurred to him that it might be of use to others to publish in an
arranged form the notes which he had collected for his own edification.
Thus the work has grown upon him.

" The book before us is then a valuable contribution to philological science. It
passes iiiider review a vast number of languages, and it gives, or professes to give, in
every case the siim and substance of the opinions and judgments of the best-imormed
writers." — Hatarday Review.


.^..^^.^ -.^ ^^-^^. -^.>.,, . . ^..n^


^a^^mH^mmm


«

TRUBNER*S ORIENT A jl^SERIES.

— nr — -■

Second Oorrected Edition, post Svo, pp. xii. — 116, cloth, price Ss.

THE BIETH OF THE WAB-GOD.

A Poem. Bt KALIDASA'.

Translated from the Sanskrit into English Terse by
Ralph T. H. Gbiffith, M.A.

" Mr. Griffith's very spirited rendering of the Kum&raiamhhava^ first published
twenty-six years ago, is wen known to most who are at all interested m Indian
literature, or enjoy tiie tenderness of feeling and rich creative imagination of its
author." — Indian Antiquary.

"We are very glad to welcome a second edition of Professor Griffith's admirable
translation of tibe well-known Sanskrit poem, the Kumdra^ainJbhava. Few transla-
tions deserve a second edition better." — Athenjoeum.


Post 8vo, cloth, pp. 432, price 168.

A OLASSIOAL DICTIONARY OF HINDU MYTHOLOGY
AND EELIGION, GEOGRAPHY, HISTORY, AND

LITERATURE.

By JOHN DOWSON, M.R.A.S.,
Late Professor of Hindustani, Staff College.

In this work an endeavour has been made to supply the long-felt want of
a Hindu Classical Dictionary. The late Professor Wilson projected such
a work, and forty years ago announced his intention of preparing it for the
Oriental Translation Fui^, but he never accomplished his design. Tiie main
portion of this work consists^ of mythology, but religion is bound up with
mythology, and in many points the two are quite inseparable. Of history,
in the true sense, Sanskrit possesses nothing, or next to nothing, but whjit
little has been discovered here finds its place. The chief geographical names
of the old writers also have received notice, and their localities and identi-
fications are described so far as present knowledge extends. Lastly, short
descriptions have been given of the most frequently mentioned Sanskrits
books, but only of such books as are likely to be foiud named in the works
of English writers.

This work will be a book of reference for all concerned in the government
of the Hindus, but it will be more especially useful to young Civil Servants
and to masters and students in the universities, colleges, and schools in India.

" It is no slight gain when such subjects are treated fairly and fully in a moderate
space ; and we need only add that the few wants which we may hope to see supplied
in new editions detract but little from the general excellence of Mr. Dowson's work."
— SaAurday Review,

Post 8vo, with View of Mecca, pp. cyii. — 172, cloth, price 9s.

SELECTIONS FROM THE KORAN.

By EDWARD WILLIAM LANE,

Hon. Doctor of Literature, Leyden ; Correspondent of the Institute of France ; Hon.
Member of the German Oriental Society, the Royal Asiatic Society, Ac. ;
Translator of '* The Thousand and One Nights ; " Author of an " Arabic-English
Lexicon/' &c.

A New Edition, Revised and Enlarged, with an Introduction by

Stanley Lane Poole.

Extract from Preface.

There has always been a wish to know something about the sacred book
of the Mohammadans, and it was with the design of satisfying this wish,
whilst avoiding the weariness and the disgust which a complete perusal of
the Koran must produce, that Mr. Lane arranged the "Selections" which


TRUBIfiR'S ORIENTAL SERIES.
^.^ ^


were publiihed in 1843. • • • It has proved of considenible servioe to students
of Arabic, who have found it the most accurate renderixiK in existence of a
large part of the Koran: and even native Muslims of India, ignorant of
Arabic, have used Lane's "Selections " as their Bible.

" Mr. Poole is both a generous and a learned biographer. . . . Mr. Poole tells iis
the facts ... so far as it is i>os8ible for industry and critiicism to ascertain them,
and for literary skill to present them in a condensed and.readable form." — EiigluK-
vfMn^ CcUaUta,


Post 8vo, pp. xliv. — 376, oloth, price 148.

METBIOAL TBANSLATIONS FBOM SANSKRIT

WAITERS.

With an Introduotion, many Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages froni-

Classical Authors.

By J. MUIR, C.LK, D.O.L., LL.D., Ph.D.

The present embraces the contents of the little work entitled "Religious
and Moral Sentiments, metrically rendered from Sanskrit Writers,'* &c.,
published by Messrs. Williams k Noroatb in 1875, together with Three
collections of Versified Translations subsequently printed, but not published,
and a reprint of the metrical pieces contained in Volumes II. and V. of the
author's ** Original Sanskrit Texts," &c.

.... "A volume which may be taken as a fair illtlBtration alike of the religious
and moral sentiments, and of the legendary lore of the best Sanskrit writers." —
Edinburgh Daily Eeview,


Post 8vo, pp. vi. — 368, cloth, price 14a.

MODERN INDIA AND THE INDIANS,

BEING A SERIES OF IMPRESSIONS, NOTES, AND ESSAYS.

By MONIER WILLIAMS, D.C.L.,

Hon. LL.D. of the University of Calcutta, Hon. Member of the Bombay Asiatic
Society, Boden Professor of Sans^t in the University of Oxford.

Third Edition, revised and augmented by considerable Additions,

with Illustrations and a Map.

This edition will be found a great improvement on those that preceded it.
The author has taken care to avail himself of all such criticisms on particu-
lar passages in the previous editions as appeared to him to be just, and he
has enlai^ed the work by more than a hundred pages of additional matter.
The chapter on the ** Villages and Rural Population of India," and several
other sections of the work, are quite new.

*' In this volume we have the thoughtful impressions of a thoughtful man on some
of the most important questions connected with our Indian Empire. ... An en-
lightened observant man, travelling among an enlightened observant people, Professor
Monier Williams has brought before the public in a pleasant form more of the manners
and customs of the Queen's Indian subjects than we ever remember to have seen in
any one work. He not only deserves the thanks of eveiy Englishman for this able
contribution to the study of Modem India— a subject with which we should be
specially familiar — but he deserves the thanks of eveiy Indian, Parsee or Hindu,
Biul(Uii8t and Moslem, for his clear exposition of their manners, their creeds, and
thdr necessities."— Tim^t.


TRUBNE^ ORIENTAL^RIES.


In Two Yolomes, post Svo, pp. viiL — 408 and viii-— 348, cloth, prtce 288.

inSOELLANEOUS ESSAYS BELATING TO •INDIAN

SUBJECTS. ^

By BRIAN HOUGHTON HODGSON, Esq.. F.R.S.,

Late of the Bengal Civil Service ; Corresponding Member of the Institute ; Chevalier
Of the Legion of Honour ; Honorary Memb^ of the German Oriental Society and
the Soci^t6 Asiatique ; Member of the Asiatic Societies of Calcutta and London ;
of the Ethnologiciu and Zoological Societiea of London ; and late British Minister
at the Court of Nepal.

CONTENTS OF VOL. I.

Section 1.— On the Eocch, B<Sd<S, and Dhlmil Tribes.— Fart L Vocabulary.—
Part IL Grammar. — Part III. Their Origin, Location, Numbers, 0reed, Customs,
Character, and Condition, with a General Descriptitm of the Climate they dwell in.
— Appendix.

Section II. — On Himalayan Ethnology. — I. Comxiarative Vocabulary of the Lan-
guages of the Broken Tribes of N€p^. — IL Vocabulary of the Dialects of the Elranti
IiHnguage. — ^IIL Grammatical Analyeds of the Vdyu Language. The VAyu Grammar.
— IV. Analysis of the BAhinff Dialect of the EirHUti T<anguage. The BiKhing Gram-
mar.— V. On the Vdyu or Hayu Tribe of the Central Himalaya. — VI. On tue Eiranti
Tribe of the Central Himahtya.

CONTENTS OF VOL. IL

Section III. — On the Aborigines of North-Eastem India. GomparatlTe Vocabulary
of the Tibetan, B6d6, and G4r6 Tongues.

Section IV. — Aborigines of the North-Eastem Frontier.

Section V, — Aborigines of the Eastern Frontier.

Section VI. — ^The Indo-Chinese Borderers, and their connection with the Hima-
layans and Tibetans. Comparative Vocabulary of Indo-Chinese Borderers hi Arakan.
Comparative Vocabulary of Indo-Chinese Borderers in Tenasserim.

SscrriON VII. — ^The Mongolian Affinities of the Caucaaiaus. — Comparison and Ana-
lysis of Caucasian and MouGrolian Words.

Section VIII.— Physical Type of Tibetans.

Section IX. — The Aborigines of Central India. — Comparative Vocabulary of the
Aborigrinal Languages of Central India. — Aborifdnes of the Eastern Ghats.— Vocabu-
lary of some of tlie Dialects of the Hill and Wandering Tribes in the Northern Sircars.
— Aborigines of the Nilgiris, with Remarks on their Affinities. — Supplement to the
Nilgirian Vocabularies.— The Aborigines of Southern India and Ceylon.

Section X. — Route of Nei>alese Mission to Pekin, with Remarks on the Water-
Shed and PlatCHU of Tibet.

Section XI.— Route from E&thmdndill, the Capital of Nep&l, to Darjeeling in
Sikim. — Memorandum relative to the Seven Cosis of Nepftl.

Section XII. — Some Accounts of the Systems of Law and Police as recognised in
the State of Nepftl.

Section XIII.— The Native Method of making the Paper denominated Hindustan,
N^p&lese.

Section XIV. — Pre-eminence of the Vernaculars ; or, the Anglidsts Answered :
Being Letters on the Education of the People of India.


Third Edition, Two Vols,, post 8vo, pp. viii. — 268 and viii. — 326, cloth,

price 21S.

THE LIFE OB LEGEND OF GAUDAMA,

THE BUDDHA OF THE BURMESE. With Annotations.

The ViTays to Neibban, and Notice on the Phongyies or Burmese Monks.

By the Right Rev. P. BIGANDET,

Bishop of Ramatha, Vicar Apostolic of Ava and Pegu.


Post 8vo, pp. xxiv. — ^420, cloth, price iSs.

CHINESE BUDDHISM.

A VOLUME OF SKETCHES, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL.

By J. EDKINS, D.D.,
Author of " China's Place in Philology," ** Religion in China," &o., &c.


TRUB17RR'S ORIENTAL SERIES.


Poit 8yo, pp. 496, cloth, price 181.

LINGUISTIO AND ORIENTAL ESSAYS.

Wbitt|:n from the Year 1846 to 1878.

By ROBERT NEEDHAM GUST,

Late Member of Her Majesty's Indian Civil Service ; Hon. Secretary to

the Royal Asiatic Society;
and Author of '* The Modem Languages of the East Indies.*'


Second Edition, post 8yo, pp. xxyL— 244, cloth, price los. 6d.

THE GULISTAN;

Or, rose GAIiDEN OF SHEKH MUSHLIU'D-DIN SADI OF SHIRAZ.

Translated for the First Time into Prose and Verse, with an Introductory
Preface, and a Life of the Author, from the Atish Kadah,

By EpWARD B. EASTWICK, C.B., M.A., F.R.S., M.R.A.S.,

Of Merton College, Oxford, &o.


Post 8vo, pp. civ. — 348, cloth, price i8s.

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES; or, JStaka Tales.

The Oldest Collection of Folk-lore Extant :

BEING THE JATAK ATTHAVANNANA,

For the first time Edited in the Original P&li.

By V. FAUSBOLL.

And Translated hy T. W. Rhys Davids.

Translation. Volume I.


Post 8vo, pp. xxviii — 362, cloth, price

A TALMUDIC MISCELLANY;

Or, a THOUSAND AND ONE EXTRACTS FROM THE TALMUD,
THE MIDRASHIM, AND THE KABBALAH.

Compiled and Translated by PAUL ISAAC HERSHON,
Author of " Genesis According to the Talmud," &c.

With Notes and Copious Indexes.


Post 8vo, cloth.

THE CLASSICAL POETRY OF THE JAPANESE.

By BASIL HALL CHAMBERLAIN,
Author of ** Yeigo Heiikaku Shirail."


NEARLY READY:—
Post Svo, cloth.

THE HISTORY OF ESARHADDON (Son of Sennacherib),

KING OF ASSYRIA, B.C. 681-668.

Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions upon Cylinders and Tablets in
the British Museum Collection ; together with a Grammatical Analysis
of each Word, Explanations of the Ideographs by Extracts from the
Bi-Lingual Syllabaries, and List of Eponyms, &c.

Br ERNEST A. BUDGE, M.R.A.S.
Assyrian Exhibitioner, Christ's College, Cambridge, Member of the

Society of Biblical Archaeology.


TRUBNE^I^ ORIENTAL SERIES.


THE FOLLOWING WORKS ARE IN PBEPARATION :—

Post 8vo.

THE SIX JEWELS OF niz LATV!

With Pali Texts and Englbh Translation.
By R. morris, LL.D.


In Two Volumes, post 8vo, cloth.

BUDDHIST RECORDS OF THE WESTERN %ORLD,

BEING THE SI-YU-KI BY HYEN THSANG.
Translated from the Original Chinese, with Introduction, Index, &c.

By SAMUEL BEAL,

Trinity College, Cambridge ; Professor of Chinese, University

College, London.


Post 8yo, cloth.

THE POEMS OF HAFIZ OF SHIRAZ.

Translated from the Persian into English Verse

By E. H. PALMER, M.A.,

Professor of Arabic in the University of Cambridge.


In Two Volumes, post 8vo, cloth.

ORIENTAL RELIGIONS IN THEIR RELATIQN
TO UNIVERSAL RELIGION.

By SAMUEL JOHNSON.
Second Section — China.


Post 8vo, cloth.

INDIAN TALES FROM TIBETAN SOURCES.

Translated from the Tibetan into Gorman, with Introductions, by Anton
SCHIEFNER, of the Imperial Academy of St. Petersburg.

Rendered into English, with Notes, by W. R. S. Balstok.


Post 8vo, cloth.

THE RELIGIONS OF INDIA.

By a. BARTH.
Translated from the French with the authority and assistance of the Author.


LONDON : TRUBNER & CO., 57 and 59 LUDGATE HILL.

250— i/i 1/80


TRUBNER'S "

ORIENTAL SERIES.


BALLANTYNB, HANSON AND CO.
fiUINBUKGH ANd LONDON


I-


THE CLASSICAL POETRY


OT


J


THE JAPANESE


.r


■J

BY


BASIL HALlLcHAMBEELAIN,

▲UTHOB OF

" TEiaO BENKAKU lOBIRAN."


"^.. ) ;


LONDON:
TR^BNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL.

1880.

[AU right* reterved.'\


a '^/


. . > .J ■■


'*.—''


PREFACE.


In bringing before the public a subject which, if
remote, has at least the merit of novelty, it is the
translator's pleasant duty to acknowledge the assist-
ance which has done much to smooth for him the
difl&culties of an almost untrodden path. From
European sources, indeed, little or no help has been
derived. But to a native man of letters, Suzuki Tsune-
masa, thanks are due for continued aid and counsel
during the preparation of the present versions, whUe.
the necessary preliminary studies would never have
been successfully carried through but for the kind
encouragement of the aged poetess Tachibana-no-
Toseko. Writing at a distance from England, and
unable personally to supervise the correction of the
proofs, the translator must beg the indulgence of
Orientalists if any errors should have crept into the
spelling of Japanese words.- A few of the "Short
Odes" and three or four of the longer pieces have
already appeared in the pages either of the " Comhill
Magazine '* or of the ." Transactions of the Asiatic
Society of Japan," and to the President and Council
of this Society and to the Editor of that Magazine


A,


vi PREFACE.

thanks are due for permission to republisL The chief
native works that have been consulted are : —
Siyakur-NifL Itsv^Shiu Hito-To Gatari ("Nightly Con-
versations on the Hundred Odes by a Hundred

Poets "), by Wozaki Motoyoshi
Ise MonO'Gatari Ko-I (" The Old Signification of the

Tale of Ise "), by Kamo-no-Mabuchi
Kagura Iri-Aya (" The Damask of the Sacred Songs

Penetrated "), by Tachibana-no-Moribe.
Kita Riu Teukiyoiku Bofl ("Book of Lyric Dramas

According to the Kita Style ").
KohifL Wa-Ka Shifu UchirGiki ("Memoranda Con-
cerning the Collection of Japanese Odes Ancient

and Modem "), by Kamo-no-Mabuchi.
Kozhihh Deft (" Traditional Commentary on the Eecords

of Antiquity *'), by Motowori Norinaga.
Kuwafize Riu Tmhiyohi Bofl (" Book of Lyric Dramas

According to the Kuwanze Style ").
Kuwaffzhi Kau ("Considerations on the Pillow-Words"),

by Kamo-no-Mabuchi
Mafiyefv, Kau (" Considerations on the Myriad Leaves"),

by Kamo-no-Mabuchi
Mafiyefu Kau Betsuhi ("Addenda to the Considerations

on the Myriad Leaves "), by Kamo-no-Mabuchi.
Mafiyefu Shifu-Eb Seu (" Gleanings from the Myriad

Leaves, — a Commentary "), by Kitamura Kigifi.
Maflyefushifu, Riydkuge ("Abbreviated Conmientary

on the Collection of a Myriad Leaves'*), by

Tachibana-no Chikage.
Miyako Meishiyo Dzuwe ("Illustrations of the Sights

of the Capital"), by Magakizhima Akisato.


PREFACE. vii

Mo-Shio Gusa (" Seaweed "), by Souseki.

Nihofl Shiyohi ("Notices of Japan"), by Prince TonerL

Nou Kiyau-Gdi ("Comic Interludes of the Lyric

Dramas "), M.S.
Setsutm Meishiyo JDzwwe ("Illustrations of the Sights

of Setsutsu "), by Magakizhima Akisato.
Shimotmhe Koku-Shi ("Archives of the Province of

Shimotsuke "), by Kahano Morihiro.
Shifi-Sefi SeirShi Rohi ("Newly Selected Index of

Family Names "), by Prince Mata.
Utahi Sahmhiya Nou Butai Ton Kaki-Tsuke (" Memo-
randa Concerning Dramatic Authors, the Lyric

Stage, &c."), by the Heads of the Nou Families,

M.S.
Wa-Miyau Ruwi-Zhiu Seu (" Japanese Words Collected

in Categories with Commentary"), by Mina-

moto-no Shitagafu.
Tamato Meishiyo JDzwwe (" Illustrations of the Sights

of Tamato "), by Hairafi.
Tamato Mono-GataH Seu (" Commentary on the Tales

of Japan "), by Kitamura Kigifi,
Ymhiyoku Shifu-Tefu Seu ("Gleanings from the

Lyric Dramas, — a Commentary "), by Zhifikou.


Impbeial Naval College, Yedo,
September 1880.


CONTENTS.


-#-


PAOU

Intboduction I


BALLADS.

The Fisher Boy Urashima 33

Ballad Composed on seeing a Dead Body by the Roadside 37

The Maiden of Un£hi 38

The Grave of the Maiden of Un^ 41

The Maiden of Ratsnshika 45

The Beggar's Complaint . . . . . . .46

A Frontier Soldier's Regrets on Leaving Home ... 48

LOVE SONOa

Song Composed by the Commander-in-Chief on Beholding

the Mountains 53

Lines sent to his Mistress when the Poet was Leaving the

Province of Ihami . . 54

Love is Pain 55

No Tidings 55

Love is All 56

Homeward 57

The Maiden and her Dog 57

Secret Love 57


X CONTENTS,

He comes not . • 58

The Omen 58

Bain and Snow . .59

Farted by the Stream 60

He and She 60

Husband and Wife 61

The Pearls . . , 61

Lines on Beholding an Unaccompanied Damsel . . 62

Evening . . , . 63

A Maiden's Lament r ^3

Song Composed on Ascending Mount Mikasa . . .64
Asking for Pearls to send Home to Nara . . . .65
The Flowers of my Garden 66


ELEGIES.

On the Death of the Mikado Tenji 71

On the Death of Prmce Hinami 71

On the Death oi the Poet's Mistress '74

lines Supposed to have been Written on the Death of the

Prince of Mino . . . 75

On the Poet's Young Son, Furubi 76

Stanza on the Same 78

On the Poet's Wife . . . . . ... .78

On Yuki-no-Murazhi Ihemaro . . . . . .79

On the Death of the Corean Nun Biguwan . . ,80


MISCELLANEOUS POEMS.

Lines Composed by the Emperor SQiiyomei ... .85

The Mikado's Bow .86

Spring and Autumn . . S6

Spring. .87

The Brook of Hatsuse . gj


CONTENTS. xi

PAOS

lines to a Friend 88

The Bridge to Heaven S9

A Very Ancient Ode 89

The Seventh Night of the Seventh Moon .... 90

Becollections of my Children 93

Stanza on the Same 92

Lines on the Occasion of Lord Ohotomo making the

Ascent of Moimt Tsnkuba 93

Couplet 94

Ode to the Cuckoo 94

Ode on Ascending Mount Tsukuba 95

Ode Presented to Prince Tachibana-no-Hironari • • 96

Another Ode on the Same • • 98

Lines on Prince Wosa's Hunting Party .... 99

Ode to Fusiyama 100

Verses on an Imperial FtQgress to the Summer Palace of

Y6shino lox

Spring his Gentle Beams is Flinging 102

Ode at a Parting Feast 104

Lament on Nara, the Deserted Capital .... 104

A Stag's Lament 106

Lines on Beholding a Favourite Hawk .... 108

From eVry Quarter of the Vast Domains 1 1 1

Lament on the Mutability* of all Earthly Things . .112

The Cuckoo. 113

Lines from a Mother to her Daughter . . . -113

BHOKT STANZAS.

Spring . . . 117

Summer 119

Autumn 120

Winter * .... 122

Congratulations 123

Parting 124


xii CONTENTS.

* PAOB

Travelling 124

Acrostics 126

Love 126

Elegies. . . . : 129

Miscellaneous . . ^ 130

Conceits .132


SELECTIONS.

The Robe of Feathers 137

The Death-Stone 147

Life is a Dream ! ... 157

Nakamitsu 169


APPENDICES.

Appendix I. 189

Appendix IT. 213

Appendix IIL 216

Appendix IV. 225


Ik «


\\ :-


THE CLASSICAL POEJRY

OF

THE JAPANESE.


-♦♦■


INTRODUCTION.
I.

The current impression that the Japanese are a nation
of imitators is in the main correct. As they copy us
to-day, so did they copy the Chinese and Coreans a
millennium and a half ago. Eeligion, philosophy,
laws, administration, written characters, all arts but
the very simplest, all science, or at least what then
went by that name, — everything was imported from
the neighbouring continent; so much so, that of all
that we are accustomed to term " Old Japan " scarce
one trait in a hundred is really and properly Japanese.
Not only are their silk and lacquer not theirs by right
of invention, nor their painting (albeit so often praised
by European critics for its originality), nor their porce-
lain, nor their music, but even the larger part of their
language consists of mispronounced Chinese ; and from
the Chinese they have drawn new names for already
existing places, and new titles for their ancient gods.
That their literature should be, for the most part,

A


2 INTRODUCTION.

fashioned on the Chinese model and express Chinese
ideas is, therefore, but what was ^ 'priori to be expected.
What was not to be looked for, was, that one whole
branch of that literature should, weathering the storm
that shook its infancy, have preserved down to our
own times the unaltered form and the almost unaltered
substance of the earliest manifestation of Japanese
thought. This one original product of the Japanese
mind is the native poetry.

So remarkable a fact should, of itself, suffice to gain
for the poetry of this people the first place in the
attention of those who make Japan and Japanese the
special object of their investigations. It should even
attract the passing notice of the more general reader,
who, in the present day, has to peruse quite a library
of books treating of Japan, — and this, altogether apart
from any intrinsic merit which that poetry may or
may not possess. Hitherto, like the rest of the litera-
ture of the far East, it has been more often judged than
studied. The following pages are an attempt to make
the study more general, by placing it within the reach
of those who, while sharing in the interest for Japan
now universally felt, are yet not prepared to face the
difficulties which must ever continue to hedge in the
Oriental orijj^inals.

In order to appreciate the assertion made as to the
peculiar and non-Chinese character of the form of
Japanese poetry, — in other words, of its prosody, — it
is, of course, necessary to possess some knowledge of
the distinguishing features of Chinese versification, a
subject which it does not fall within the scope of this
work, as a popular one, to treat in any detaiL Suffice


INTRODUCTION. 3.

it to say that, as in Frencli verse, so in Chinese, rhyme
is considered essential, but that the syllables of which
each line is composed, instead of being, as in French,
merely counted, must follow each other according to
rule in various tones, just as the cadence of an English
verse is determined not merely by the rhyme, and by
the enumeration of the syllables composing each line,
but also by the relative position of the accented
syllables and those on which no stress is laid. The
third chief characteristic of Chinese versification is
what has been termed " parallelism," that is, the exact
correspondence between every word in two successive
lines or clauses, noun for noun, verb for verb, particle
for particle, thus —

We-would'heep the-Spring, hut-the-Spring
will-not stay : the-Sjpring goeth, and-men
are-forlorn and-lonely,
We-would-avert the- Windy tut-the-Wind
will-not be-at-peace: the- Wind riseth,
and-tfie-blossoms are-stricken and-desolated*

Owing to the unrivalled conciseness of the Chinese
literary style, all the words bracketed together in the
above, form but one character, that is, one syllable,
and the correspondence is, therefore, as exact in sound
as it is in sense.

* The structure of a great portion of Hebrew poetry
rests on a somewhat looser kind of parallelism. Take,
for instance. Psalm cxiv. —


* Verses by Peh Ku- Yih, a famous poet of the T*ang dynasty, who
died A.D. 846.


4 INTRODUCTION.

When Israel came out of Egypt : and the house
of Jacob from among the strange people,
Jvdah was his sancttiary : and Israel his
dominion.

The sea saw that and fled : Jordan was
driven lack.

The rrunintains skipped like rams : and the
little hills like young sheep.

&c. &c.

Of all such complications Japanese prosody knows
nothing. It regards neither rhyme, tone, accent,
quantity, nor alliteration, nor does its rather frequent
parallelism follow any regular method. Its only
essential rule is that every poem must consist of
alternate lines of five aud seven syllables, with, gene-
rally, an extra line of seven syllables to mark the
close. It is, indeed, prosody reduced to its simplest
expression.''^ Yet so little artifice is needed to raise

* Here U an example. It is the original of the elegy on p. 71, begin-
ning '* Alas ! poor mortal maid "—

5. UtsutemUhi 5. Tama naraha,

7. Kami ni taheneba, 7. Te ni maki-mochite ;

.5. Hana^'C-wite, 5. Kinu naraba,

7. Asa nageku kimi ; 7. Nugu toki mo naku,

5. Sakari-wite, 5. Wa^fa kohimu

7. Waga kofuru kimi 7. Kimi zo kizo no yo

7. Ime ni miyetsuru.

The fondness of the Japanese for brevity has led them to >vrite an

immense amount of poetry in a rery short stanza of thirty-one syllables,

thus —

5. Momiji-ha too

7. Kaze ni makatete

5. Miru yori mo^

7. Hakanaki mono Jut

7. Inochi nari keri.

Some European writers have falsely supposed that the flights of the
Japanese Muse were always bound down within these lilliputian limits.
For a translation of the above stanza see p. 129 (No. 38).


INTRODUCTION. 5

prose to verse in this most musical of tongues, that
such a primitive metre still satisfies the native ear
to-day in every street-ballad, as it already did in the
seventh century at the Mikado's court ; and no serious
attempt has ever been made to alter it in the slightest
degree, even during the period of the greatest intel-
lectual ascendancy of China.

Though not essential, there are, however, some
usual additions to the means at the Japanese versifier's
command. They are three in number, and altogether
original, viz., what are styled " Pillow- words," " Pre-
faces," and « Pivots."

The " Pniow- words " are meaningless expressions
which are prefixed to other words merely for the sake
of euphony. Almost every word of note has some
" Pillow- word " on which it may, so to speak, rest
its head ; and dictionaries of them are often resorted
to by the unready Japanese versifier, just as rhyming
dictionaries come to the aid of the poetasters of
modern Europe.

A " Preface " is but a " Pillow- word " on a more
extensive scale, consisting, as it does, of a whole
sentence prefixed to a poem, not on account of any
connection with the sense of what follows, but merely
as an introduction pleasing to the ear. This ornament
is chiefly confined to the very early poetry, whereas
the " Pillow-words " have flourished equally in every
age.

The " Pivot " is a more complicated device, and one
which, in any European language, would be not only
insupportable, but impossible, resting, as it does,, on a
most peculiar kind of jeu de mots. A word having


/


6 INTRODUCTION.

two significations serves as a species of hinge on which
two doors turn, so that while the first part of the
poetical phrase has no logical end, the latter part has
no logical beginning. They run into each other, and
the sentence could not possibly be construed. To the
English reader such a punning invention will doubtless
seem the height of misapplied ingenuity, calculated
to reduce poetry to the level of the acrostic and the
louts rimis. But, as a matter of fact, the impression
produced by these linked verses is delightful in the
extreme, passing, as they do, before the reader, like a
series of dissolving views, vague, graceful, and sugges-
tive. The Japanese, too, have their acrostics, and also
their common pirns, with the same stigma of vulgarity
as is attached by ourselves to such lower sallies of wit ;
but the line between them and the poetical artifice
just described, though difl&cult to define, is very sharply
drawn. It rests, probably, chiefly on the fact that
newness is an essential constituent of the ludicrous
sensation excited by the jeu de mots properly so called,
which newness forms no part of the " Pivot," it being,
as a rule, in all poems the same half-dozen words that
serve as the points of transition from clause to clause.
This ornament especially characterises the old poetical
dramas, and renders them a peculiarly arduous study
to such as do not thoroughly appreciate its nature.*

So much for the independent character of the form
of Japanese poetry. To prove conclusively that its

* Those who may feel curious for more details on the subject of
Japanese prosodj should consult Aston's ''Grammar of the Japanese
Written Language.** For a special essay on the "Pillow-words," &c.,
the present writer may be allowed to refer to a paper printed in the fifth
volume of the *' Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan."


INTRODUCTION. 7

substance is equally autochthonotis would be a harder
task, though few, probably, of those competent to form
an opinion on the point would deny that such is the
case. Three facts may, however, be signalised as tend-
ing to show that such likenesses as do exist, — for
instance, the absence of impersonation, and the very
secondary place taken by the religious element, —
should be attributed rather to a fundamental resem-
blance between the Chinese and the Altaic minds than
to any direct influence of the former upon the latter.

In the first place, it seems scarcely doubtful that
the earliest Japanese poetical compositions that have
come down to us date from an age preceding the intro-
duction of the art of writing, or at least its general
diffusion, and when, consequently, the study of Chinese
literary models was, if not impossible, unlikely in the
extreme.* Moreover, the earliest general teachers of
Chinese learning were the Buddhist missionaries, who,
we may presume, esteemed true doctrine much more
highly than they did lelles lettres, while the stray
merchants, adventurers, and outlaws who preceded
them, are still less likely to have thought of meddling
with, or to have been able to inspire, the songs of
either court or people. Yet in all essential respects
the earliest poems resemble those produced by the
bards of succeeding ages, when Chinese influence un-
doubtedly deeply swayed the national mind. Were
this fact altogether indisputable, no further argument


* Tradition places the arrival in Japan of the first Corean teacher in
A.D. 284 ; but there is no reliable evidence to show that the Japanese
studied with any profit tiU the time of the preaching of Buddhism in the
sixth eenturj.


S INTRODUCTION.

would be required. But absolute proof of any assertion
regarding so dim a past as that in which began the
intercourse between China and Japan being unobtain-
able, no element of the discussion should be omitted.

Secondly, therefore, it may be stated that such dif-
ferences of style and spirit as can be traced, clearly
show us the more ancient poems as being also the
simpler, the more natural, and intrinsically the better,
which could scarcely have been the case had their
inspiration been derived from abroad ; for every copy
is a parody, and the most salient peculiarities of the
Chinese style would have been the first to be seized
on. Then, little by little, the national mind would
have shaken itself free from the foreign leading-stringSL
which had guided its first faint efforts, as did, in fact,
partially occur in the case of history, philosophy, and
essay-writing; and the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth centuries would have been the zenith of
Japanese poetry, as they were of Japanese literature in
all its other branches. As a matter of fact, however,
the sources of true lyric poetry suddenly dried up at
the commencement of that epoch. Thenceforward,
instead of the heart-outpourings of the older poets, we
find nothing but empty prettinesses and conceits, con-
fined within the narrowest limits. The lyric drama,
it is true,- arose and flourished during the Middle Ages ;
but, though deeply tinged with Buddhist ideas, and
though frequently quoting the Chinese poets, it is still,
both in form, treatment, and choice of subjects, dis-
tinctly national and indigenous.

Lastly, the originality of the Japanese system of
versification, which has been independently established,


INTRODUCTION. 9

is in itself a weighty argument in favour of the equal
originality of the thoughts which that versification is
the means of expressing. In all the instances known
to us of a people borrowing its inspiration from
abroad, the foreign poetical form has been the first
thing to* be adopted. The Latins submitted without
a groan to the heavy yoke of Greek prosody; the
semi-barbarians of Northern Europe adopted the
rhymes, as they did the religion, of their Southern
neighbours ; while in our own days, in like manner,
EngHsh stanzaic arrangement and EngHsh prosodial
conventions are following the missionaries into the
homes of the numerous uncultured tribes to whom they
.bring an extraneous civilisation. To this rule Japan
shows us a complete contrast, by far the simplest
explanation of which is, that her poetry is, in every
respect, a plant of native growth. That its substance
is very peciiliar is by no means what is meant to be
asserted. On the contrary, the reader can hardly fail
to be struck with its generality and want of local
colouring. When, therefore, originality is claimed for
this product of Japanese thought, it is merely origin-
ality in the sense of spontaneous invention, not origin-
ality in the sense of uniqueness.


II.

The classical poetry of the Japanese is contained in
the " Mafiyefushiful' or "Collection of a Myriad Leaves,"
and in a large number of collections made by imperial
order duriag the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth.


lo INTRODUCTION.

fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries, and commonly
known as the "Collections of the One-and-Twenty
Eeigns." To these may be added, as quasi-classical,
the lyric dramas known by the name of " Ulahi*'

The " Myriad Leaves," a selection from which forms
the chiqf portion of the following work, are not, indeed,
the very oldest lyric compositions of the Japanese ; or,
to speak more correctly, they were not brought together
at quite so early a period as that belonging to the
historical books called " KbzhiJci" or " Notices of
Antiquity," dating from the year 7 1 2 of our era, and
" Nihcyflgi,'* or "Eecords of Japan," dating from 720,
both containing a considerable number of poems
attributed to divine and other legendary personages.
These are nol, however, commonly included by the
Japanese themselves in the cycle of their classical
poetry ; and, moreover, a complete and literal version
of the books in question is so earnestly to be looked
for in the interests of Japanese archaeology, that it has
been thought best not here to trench on ground which
would have to be gone over again in a more critical
spirit.

The exact date of the bringing together in the
twenty volumes ^ of the " Myriad Leaves " of the pro-
ductions of the most esteemed poets that had ap-
peared up to that time, though not known with
certainty, is referred by the best native critics to the
reign of the Mikado Shiyaumu (died A.D. 756). The
compiler was a favourite of that monarch. Prince


* Originally twenty small scrolls of a size convenient for rolling and
nnroUing. As now published, however, with superincumbent masses of
eommentary, the volumes are tomes indeed.


INTRODUCTION. ii

Moroye (died a.d. 757), to whom some would add as
coadjutor the court noble Yakamochi (died A.D. 785),
a number of whose poems are contained in the latter
volumes of the collection. It has, however, been sug-
gested that only the volumes now bearing the numbers
I., II., XL, XII., XIII., and XIV. should be regarded as
forming the original compilation, the remaining fourteen
having been added a few years later from various
private sources. Those to whom Japanese is familiar,
will find the whole matter treated in extenso, in
Mabuchi's edition of the " Myriad Leaves ; " but to the
general reader, and, indeed, to the main question of
authenticity and antiquity, it matters little what
decision be arrived at on this and other minor points.
There are no grounds for placing the composition of any
of the poems later than a.d. 760, while from the
beginning of the tenth century onwards, that is, from
less than a hundred and fifty years after that date, we
have constant and unimpeachable reference to the
collection as a body, and to its appearance during the
period when Nara was the capital of the country, viz.
(including temporary migrations of the court to other
towns in the neighbourhood), from a.d. 710 to 784.
Knowing, moreover, as we do, the language of the
tenth century, the linguistic test alone would sufiBce to
throw back a century or two the composition of the
most modem of the '' Mafiyefiishifu" odes, while for by
far the greater number a much higher antiquity may,
on the same grounds, be claimed.

The " KohiHshifu'' or " Collection of Odes Ancient
and Modern," the first of the " Collections of the One-
and-Twenty Eeigns," was compiled in the year 905


12 . INTRODUCTION.

by the high-bom poet Tsurayuki and three coadjutors.
It consists almost entirely of the shoit thirty-one-
syllable stanzas, of which a specimen was given in the
footnote to page 4. This stanza, after having, during the
ages that witnessed the production of the poems con-
tained in the old histories and in the " Myriad Leaves,"
struggled against the longer form which was then also
in common use, drove the latter out of the field, and
has ever since remained the favourite metre of a
people, who, in every species of composition, consider
brevity to be the soul of wit. The many thousands of
stanzas forming this collection, are arranged, according
to their subjects, under the headings of Spring, Summer,
Autumn, Winter, Congratulations, Parting, Travelling,
Acrostics, Love, Elegies, Various, Conceits, and one or
two minor ones, several of these headings being them-
selves subdivided for the sake of convenience of refer-
ence. Thus, Love is broken up into five parts, com-
mencing with Love Unconfessed, and ending with Love
Unrequited and Forgotten. Such a conceit is highly
characteristic of the downward tendency of the
Japanese mind since the simpler and healthier early ,
days, and of the substitution of hair-splitting puerilities
for the true spirit of poetry. So far as they go, how-
ever, the " Odes Ancient and Modem " are not without
manifold charms, and are decidedly superior to the
twenty imperial collections that succeeded them, for
which reason a small selection of representative short
stanzas has been made from them alone.

Though fading, the poetical spirit of the country
did not, however, yet wither completely away. Indeed,
some may think that, like the forests of the land that


INTRODUCTION. 13

gave it birth, it was fairer in its autumn tints than in
its summer or in its spring. Towards the end of the
fourteenth century, in the hands of the Buddhist
priesthood, who during that troublous epoch had
become almost the sole repositaries of taste and learn-
ing, arose the lyric drama, at first but an adaptation
of the old religious dances, the choric songs accom-
panying which were expanded and improved. The
next step was the introduction of individual personages,
which led to the adoption of a dramatic unity in the
plot, though the supreme importance still assigned to
the chorus, left to the performance its mainly lyric
character, till, at a somewhat later period, the theatrical
tendency became supreme, and the romantic melodrama
of the modem Japanese stage was evolved. The last
of the four plays translated in this work is a specimen
of Japanese classical poetry just before this final step
was taken, when the new spirit was already struggling
within the old forms. The analogy of the course of
development here sketched out with that of the Greek
drama is too obvious to need any remark. Great doubt
hangs over the precise date and authorship of most of
the dramatic pieces, on account of the Japanese custom
of attributing to the head of the house of lyric actors
at any given time, all the plays brought out under his
auspices. But before the end of the sixteenth century
their production had ceased, and with them the torch
of Japanese inspiration finally became extinct.

Then during the long peace of more than two cen-
turies that preceded the arrival of the American men-
of-war in Uraga Bay arose the critical and antiqua-
rian school. Every monastery, every noble's mansion,


14 INTRODUCTION.

was ransacked for the written relics that had survived
the chances of so many ages of feudal warfare. The
pioneers * of this Japanese renaissance inoculated the
educated classes with that passion for the literary and
religious features of antiquity, which, afterwards ex-
tending into the political domain, so greatly contri-
buted to the overthrow of the usurped authority of
the Shogunate, and to the re-establishment of the old
imperial regime. The ancient language was elucidated,
the ancient poets commented on, the ancient style
imitated, by men to whom Old Japan was all in aH
What might have been the final result had the native
mind been left to itself, it is hard to conjecture.
Would this small far - Eastern renaissance, after
expending its first natural antiquarian energy, have
resulted in any new flowering forth of the national
genius, or had every possible vein been exhausted, and
would the intellect of the country, artificially walled
in from the fresh air of the world at large, have
revolved for ever in the circle of an arid scholasticism ?
History, as we know, took an altogether unexpected
turn. The sudden influx of Western ideas, checked the
natural course of events by introducing a potent novel
factor; and the Japanese, at no time given to idealism,
have, during the last few years, attached themselves to
the pursuit of the advantages of the material side of
European civilisation, with an eagerness amounting
to disdain for everything poetical, or even literary, in
any branch. Some stray volumes of poetry may.


« The names of Mabuchi, Motowori, and others of lesser note, wiU occur
o every student of Japanese literature who is at the same time a lover
of parity of style.


INTRODUCTION. 15

indeed, occasionally issue from the press. But they
are mostly copies of copies, — imitations either of the
mediaeval courtly versifiers, who themselves looked to
. the " Odes Ancient and Modern " for their models, or
of the richauffd productions of the last-century revival
school. Ancient Japanese verses are now written just
as our schoolboys write Latin verses ; even the popular
songs for the singing and dancing girls being composed
in what is, in reaUty, a dead language mechanicaUy
reproduced. Of course this cannot go on for ever.
Poetry and helles lettres must either perish utterly, or
they must adapt themselves to the changed circum-
stances of the times. But ^ these thin^^s are ever
harder to alter than are political systems and ways of
life, and as yet there is not the slightest indication of
what the Japanese poetry of the future will be like ;
the only thing that may be predicted of it with toler-
able certainty is, that its outward form will probably
receive less modification than its inward essence.


III.

It is with the past, however, and not with the
future, that we are concerned. What were the char-
acteristics, and what is the value of the old standard
poetry of Japan ?

The answers to these questions may best be found
by those who, without any foregone conclusions or
special personal interest, wiU be at the trouble of
perusing a sufficient number of representative speci-
mens of the productions of the Japanese Muse, The


x6 INTRODUCTION.

object here proposed is to render this for the first
time possible for English readers, the translations
being purposely left to speak, as much as possible,
for themselves, unencumbered by any mysterious array
of unknown characters, and unaided by any notes but
such as are indispensable to full comprehension.*
From certain points of view, doubtless, the student
who has devoted years of loving toil to the task of
saturating himself with the letter and spirit of the
originals should be likewise best able to appreciate
them. But appreciation and partiality are akin, and all
general judgments passed by specialists on the object
of their investigations must be open to suspicion. If,
therefore, a few such generalities are here made room
for, it is not as information that they must be regarded,
but simply as suggestions, which it is for the less
biassed reader to accept or to disagree with, as his
truer judgment may dictate.

It would seem, then, that simplicity, love of pre*
cedent, and a certain courtly polish, are the most
characteristic features of the poetry of the Japanese,
— characteristics which, as the familiar instance of
French literature may show us, have a natural afi&nity
for each other, though each one of them may, in the
case before us, be easily traced back to its own proper
actuating cause.


♦ The only English work on the subject is Mr. Dickins's " Hyak Niw
It'thiUf** translations of a favourite mediaeval collection of thirty-one-
syllable stanzas. There is in French a valuable work by the well-known
Japanologue, Mons. L6on de Rosny, published under the title of " Antho-
logie Japonaise," and containing prose versions of a few of the *' Manye'
fuahifu " poems, with critical notes for the benefit of the student of the
language.


INTRODUCTION. t;

To take the courtliness first. Its reason lies on
the surface. It was in a court that the poetry of
Japan sprang up and flourished. Indeed the whole
literature may be said to have been written by, and
for, a small circle of lords and ladies, princes and
princesses, who, when not helping to swell the
Mikado's train at Kara, the capital, or at the summer
palace of Yoshino, were the bearers of imperial missives
to the neighbouring continental monarchs, or the con-
sorts or mothers of viceroys of recently conquered
provinces. To this very day a different cast of features
distinguishes the high-born Japanese from the common
folk, whose " pudding-faces " announce their intellectual
inferiority, and who, at that early period, when but
little mixture of blood could as yet have taken place,
doubtless retained in a still more marked degree the
impress of their Aino descent. All talent was, there-
fore, as naturally aristocratic as was all education,—
so much so, that we find in the " Mafiyefvshifu " what
reads like a note of surprise at the possibility of poetic
genius manifesting itself in any man of plebeian origin.*
Thus did it come about that Japanese poetry, though
often immoral, was from the very beginning polished
and refined. Nowhere do we come across a low word
or a vxdgar thought. Even the mention of low and
vulgar people seems well-nigh prohibited. It is always
upward, never downward, that the poet looks, so that
if, for instance,, a drought is the subject of his verse,
he makes lamentation, not for the sufferings of the
peasantry, but for the loss to the imperial exchequer ! -(•


♦ Seep. 63. t Seep. in.

B


IS INTRODUCTIONy

ThuSj too, we may account for the general avoidance
of shocking and over- vivid themes, including the theme
of war; for though the Japanese have ever been a
military people, and were, indeed, during the earUer
classic times, still busily engaged in subduing the
remoter portions of their empire, yet murder and
bloodshed were not deemed fit subjects to occupy a
courtly pen, or to be sung before so refined and sensi-
tive an audience.

It may be, perhaps, in part, to this same aristocratic
origin of the poetry, that should be ascribed the love
of precedent which distinguishes it. More probably,
however, we have here an example of the influence,
not of circumstances, but of race. The Japanese
lyrists belonged to a court, but that court was an
Altaic, a Tartar one. Its members came of a family of
nations to whom the spark of genius has been denied,
and who must hold fast to the few ideas inherited
from their ancestors, if they would not, like the steppes
from whence they issued, become altogether barren.

The simplicity which has been noted as the third
characteristic (and it is, perhaps, the most marked of
the three) is doubtless owing to the same poverty of
the intellectual constitution. Acting together with
the love of precedent, it confined the vehicle of
expression within the limits of one unchanging metre,
and it likewise, for nearly a thousand years, forbade
all poetical attempts beyond the strictly lyrical
domain. Epic, didactic, and satirical poetry are here
quite imknown, and the drama was of late growth.
Of all such productions as narratives or discussions
in a versified form there is likewise no trace, neither


INTRODUCTION. 19

do we, as in China, find mnch taste for poetically
cadenced prose. Indeed^ the Japanese theory and
practice recognise none of those fine distinctions
between poetry, and verse, that are often drawn in
countries farther to the West. According to their
view, all poetry must be in verse, and all verse must
be poetical; and their definition of the word "poetical "
omits much that is elsewhere considered, not indeed
essential, but welcome as an addition. There are no
soundings of the depths of the human heart: that
would be philosophy, and not poetry ; and for philo-
sophy there was no need in the land of the gods,
where all men were naturally perfect.* There are no
invectives against rulers or aspirations after liberty : f
that would be, not poetry, but politics, or rather
treason against the heaven-born Mikado, the descen-
dant of the sun. There are, for similar reasons, but
few prayers to the upper powers ; neither are there,
in a coimtry possessing, indeed, a mythology, but no
religion properly so called, any yearnings after a
possible life beyond the grave. What we find is the
expression, in natural language, of the simple feelings
common to all mankind, — ^love, regret, loyalty, attach-
ment to old traditions, and, in the place of religion
and of moralising, nothing but that hopeless sense of
the transitoriness of life, which precedes, as it survives,
all culture and all philosophy. It is only the later
dramas that have any ethical tendency, and the change
is owing to Confucian and to Buddhist influence.
The value of such a literature will be very differently

♦ See p. 88.

t For the sole partial exception to tlua atatement, aee p. 46.


ao INTRODUCTION.

estimated according as the critic takes or does not take
utilitarian views of the subject. If he incline to such
•views, then certainly the Japanese Muse can say little
in her own defence, for she teaches us little or nothing
that will either increase our science, or tend to improve
our actions. In fact, as already said, she does not
consider it her mission to teach at all. It is, then, merely
as works of art that her productions must be judged ;
and, for our own part, if we had to express in one word
the impression left on our mind by an attentive con-
sideration of them, that one word would be prettiness.
As in Japanese scenery we miss the awe-inspiring
grandeur of the Alps and the vast magnificence of the
wide-watered plains of the American continent, but are
charmed at each turn by the merry plashing of a
mountain torrent, the quaintly painted eaves of some
little temple picturesquely perched on a hill-side amid
plantations of pines and cryptomerias, or by the view
of fantastic islets covered with bamboos and azaleas as
we thread our way through the mazes of the inland
sea, so do we seem, on turning over the pages of the
Japanese poets, to be, as it were, transported to some
less substantial world, where the deeper and wider
aspects of things are forgotten, and where prettiness
and a sort of tender grace are allowed to reign supreme.
The Japanese themselves would doubtless dispute this
judgment, as containing all too faint praise. But when
they tell us ^ of their verses " making heaven and


* Preface to the "Odea Ancient and Modern.*' Equally exaggerated
praise is to be met with in many other places. It is in the same cele-
brated preface that occurs the absurd attempt to deck out the simple
songs of Japan with the Chinese titles of " metaphorical,*' " allusive," &c


INTRODUCTION. It

earth to tremble, and bringing tears to the eyes of the
very demons," we ask, but ask in vain, to be shown
any masterpieces that might warrant statements even
far less enthusiastic.

It was on a national mind producing a poetry of
this complexion that the influence of China was brought
to bear. The Japanese were at once led intellectually
captive by their more highly gifted neighbours, and
even in the poetical domain they first of all endeavoured
to make out that their compositions might be distri-'
buted into certain Chinese categories, and then, finding
this difficult, turned to the composition of actual Chinese
verse, an accomplishment which has been cultivated
down to the present day with the indifferent success
that might have been expected. But to change the
native poetry was beyond their power. Its very sim-
plicity saved it. It was open to attack on too few
points, and the language and literature which attacked
it were, however intrinsically superior, too uncouth,
or at least too dissimilar in form, to be capable of
even slow assimilation. There are not in the poetical
vocabulary of Japan a dozen Chinese words, although
the language of business and of common life swarms
with them in the degree to which all practical matters
have been affected by Chinese influence ; neither, until
a very late period, can we trace any Chinese or other
foreign philosophical ideas in the productions of the
Japanese poetical writers.

Thus did the native poetry continue to exist. But
its existence gradually became an artificial one. Never
wide in scope, and cut off from the living interests
which were all bound up with the Chinese civilisation


32 INTRODUCTION.

that had found in Japan a new horne^ there at last
remained nothing for the bard to say, except indeed
to intone an endless round of frivolous repetitions, and
to torture verse into acrostics for the amusement of a
degenerate court.

•

IV.

A few words on what may be termed the externals
of the subject under consideration may not come amiss.
The Japanese name for " poem " is allied to the word
" to sing," and it is the opinion of the native literati
that in olden days all poems were sung. This, how-
ever, is a matter of conjecture. In the texts themselves
there is a remarkable absence of reference to the art of
music, and certainly none of the ancient secular tunes
have been handed down. All that we know is that
the various odes were composed from time to time as
occasion might suggest, and then written down and
preserved as family relics, for which reason the term
" Family collection " is still in use to designate a poet's
productions. It was from manuscript family collec-
tions of this kind that the " Maflyefushifu " and other
imperial collections were compiled ; for although print-
ing was known in China as early as the time of Alfred
the Great, it was scarcely used in Japan before the
beginning of the seventeenth century. The poetical
tournaments mentioned by European writers for the
composition of short odes, on subjects drawn by lot,
were not in vogue until the Middle Ages, when real
poetry was abeady defunct, poetastering having taken
its place. They therefore call for no mention here.


INTRODUCTION. 23

The manner of representing the lyrio dramas is
peculiar. The stage, which has remained unaltered iDL
every respect since the beginning of the fifteenth century,
when the early dramatists Seami and Otoami acted
at Kiyauto before the then Shlyaugufl,* Yoshimasa, is
a square wooden room open on aU sides but one, and
supported on pillars, the side of the square being about
eighteen English feet It is surmounted by a quaint
roof somewhat resembling those to be seen on the
Japanese Buddhist temples, and is connected with the
green-room by a gallery some nine feet wide. Upoii
this gallery part of the action occasionally takes place.
Added on to the back of the square stage is a narrow
space where sits the orchestra, consisting of one flute-
player, two performers on instruments which, in the
absence of a more fitting name, may perhaps be called
tambourines, and one beater of the drum, while the
chorus, whose number is not fixed, squat on the ground
to the right of the spectator. In a line with the chorus,
between it and the audience, sits the less important
of the two actors t during the greater portion of the
piece. The back of the stage, the only side not open
to the air, is painted with a pine-tree in accordance
with ancient usage, while, equally in conformity to
established rules, three small pine-trees are planted


* More oommonly caUed by Europeans the Shognn or Tycoon. At
first nothing but military commanders, the Shiyauguil soon absorbed aU
real political power, and were practicaUy kings of the country until the
revolution of 1868.

f Two was the number of the actors during the golden days of the
art. ** Nakamitsu," which is a late piece, written when the poetical
drama of the Middle Ages was already passing over into the prose play
of modem times, oostains several characters. It is the Abbot who would
sit in the place indicated in the text.


24 INTRODUCTION.

in the court which divides the gallery from the space
occupied by the less distinguished portion of the
audience. The covered place for the audience, who
all sit on the mats according to the immemorial custom
of their countrymen, runs round three sides of the stage,
the most honourable seats being those which directly
face it. Masks are worn by such of the actors as
take the parts of females or of supernatural beings,
and the dresses are gorgeous in the extreme. Scenery,
however, is allowed no place on the lyric stage, though
carried to such perfection at the theatres where are
acted the more modern plays. A true sense of the
fitness of things seems, on this point, to have kept the
actors faithful to the old traditions of their art. For
on the few occasions, occurring mostly in the later
pieces, where this rule is broken through, and an
attempt made at scenic effect, the spectator cannot
help feeling that the speU is in a manner broken, so
completely ideal a performance being only marred by
the adoption of any of the adventitious aids of the
melodramatic stage.* The same remark applies to the
statuesque immobility of the actors, and to the peculiar
intonation of the recitative. When once the ear has
become used to its loudness, it is by no means unpleas-
ing, while the measured cadences of the chorus are
from the very first both soothing and impressive. The
music, unfortunately, cannot claim like praise, and the
dancing executed by the chief character towards the


♦ For a different view of this absence of scenery, see Mitford's " Tales
of Old Japan,*' yoL i. p. 164, where an interesting analysis is given of a
set of lyric pieces acted before H.B.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, includ-
ing the *' Bobe of Feathers," translated below.


INTRODUCTION. 25

close of each piece is tedious and meaningless to
the European spectator. The perfonnance occupies a
whole day. For although each piece takes, on an
average, but one hour to represent, five or six are
given in succession, and the intervals between them
filled up by the acting of comic scenes.

Down to the time of the late revolution, much
ceremony and punctilious etiquette hedged in on every
side those who were admitted to the honour of viewing
these dramatic performances at the Shiyaugufi's court.
Now the doors are open to all alike, but it is stUl
chiefly the old aristocracy who make up the audience ;
and even they, highly trained as they are in the ancient
literature, usually bring with them a book of the play,
to enable them to follow with the eye the diflBicult
text, which is rendered still harder of comprehension
by the varying tones of the choric chant.


V.

Shall translations from foreign poetry be made in
prose or in verse ? or, to change the form of the question,
shall we reproduce the actual words of the original, or
make ourselves the interpreters of its intention ? Shall
we sacrifice the spirit to the letter, or the letter to the
spirit ?

This question, this perplexity, is as old as the art
of translation, and, by its very nature, admits of no
authoritative and satisfactory solution; for different
minds wiU inevitably approach it mth contrary pre-
possessions, so that the debate between the literalists


26 INTRODUCTION.

and iheir adversaries must ever remain an open
one. This advantage, at least, is the translator's,
to whichever choice his own opinion may incline
him, that even if he be thought to err, he must be
admitted to have erred in good company, — ^here, in the
field of Oriental translation, more especially. While
Sir John Davis contends for the vehicle of verse, Mons.
De Eosny prefers prose, and Dr. Legge's practice has
varied in his two versions of the same book.* Other
names (though of less authority) may be adduced on
both sides of the question.

The ideal, presumably, of all translators of poetry
would be a version in which the general spirit and the
ipsissima verba of the original should both be equally
preserved. Unfortunately this ideal is scarcely attain-
able in practice, save in the case of such cognate dialects
as English and German or Italian and Spanish. Even
when we come to render English verse into French,
the difficulty makes itself pressingly felt. How much
more so when the two idioms are divided from one
another by an interval of a thousand years and by the
breadth of the whole globe, as is the case with modern
English and classical Japanese !

It would seem to be an illusive idea that any trans-
lation from the poetry of an utterly unrelated people
can be literal (in any fair sense of the word " literal "),
however inelegant, however queer-sounding, and how-
ever prosaic it may become in the attempt. In the
case of the Japanese lyric dramas, a more special


* The *' She Kin;," a ooUection of the most ancient classical poems of
China.


INTRODUCTION. 27

reason for a free versified rendering is to be found in
the peculiar soldering (so to speak) of the style, which
has been already touched on, and which makes a
literal version not so much difficult as impossible, for
the simple reason that there is no logical sense or
sentence to be translated, for all that there is to the
ear the sweetest poetical sense and music in these
vague, unfettered periods, in these

** Notes with many a winding bout
Of linkM sweetness long drawn out
With wanton heed and giddy cunning."

If such compositions are to be reproduced at all in a
European dress, none, probably, would deny that, as
the original cannot, by its very nature, be literally
transferred to any other tongue, at least the aim should
be to do justice, not only to the general sense, but
also to the delightful rhythmic melody. The attempt
may, indeed, be condemned as rash, howsoever it be
made. From another point of view, however, it would
be unjustifiable to pass over altogether a branch of
Japanese poetry which is worthy of much more atten-
tion than it has hitherto received from European
scholars ; and for this reason there is here given of
four of these pieces what, after all possible care has
been taken to ensure such accuracy as is alone com-
patible with the nature of the originals, must still be
deemed a paraphrase. With regard to all the other
poems composing this volume, a much greater degree
of fidelity to the Japanese text has been aimed at, and,
it is hoped, attained. The versions claim to be, not
paraphrases, but as fairly faithful translations as the


28 INTRODUCTION.

widely divergent genius of the English and Japanese
tongues and methods of thought will permit, only such
originals as proved themselves sufficiently pliable hav-
ing been allowed to pass muster.

The choice of the poetical form, however, for his
versions, by no means terminates the translator's pre-
liminary embarrassments. English, unfortunately —
or we should rather say fortunately — differs from
Japanese in possessing a whole array of various metres.
But to none of these, as has been already seen, does
the form of versification adopted by the poets of
Japan bear the faintest resemblance. The question
is, which English metre will most fitly set forth the
spirit of the Oriental originals ? — a question more
easily asked than answered. The " parallelism " already
referred to as an occasional ornament of Japanese
poetry, suggests the use of the unrhymed trochaic
measure of " Hiawatha," which seems specially calcu-
lated to give such parallel verses their due effect ; and
it has accordingly been adopted in the version of such
of the odes as are most strongly marked by this
characteristic. The trochaic metre, however, though
comparatively easy to write, is beyond all comparison
tedious to read, except when wielded by a master-
hand ; nor would it properly reproduce the more
delicate and varied rhythm of most Japanese classical
productions, especially of the ballads and love-songs.
It has, therefore, been attempted, by a separate consi-
deration of each individual piece, to determine which
form of verse will most aptly render, in each special
instance, the spirit and movement of the original, and
in many cases a selection has been made from among


INTRODUCTION. 29

various translations. On the other hand, the rhythm
of the short verse of thirty-one syllables is so pecu-
liar, and so constant, by whatever author it may be
handled, that it has been judged best to reproduce it
in every instance in the same English form, viz., a
four-lined stanza, slight differences of melody being
represented by an occasional change in the position
of the rhymes.

The whole question, of course, is one of ear, and it
must be left to more competent scholars to decide
whether the translator's ear has guided him as correctly
as the circumstances of the case will allow. To such
as would argue, from the absence of rhyme in Japanese
poetry, to the necessity of excluding rhyme from an
English translation, it may suflBice to point out, that
English blank verse is, in reality, as different from the
Japanese metre as is English rhymed verse, reposing,
as it does, on completely different principles ; and also
that many of the best translators of Western classical
poetry, from Dryden downwards, have not hesitated
to adopt rhyme, and even to break up the continuous
flow of Greek and Latin hexameters, to fit them into
the straiter limits of the modern stanza.


NOTE ON THE SPELLING OF JAPANESE PROPER

NAMES.

No general agreement as to the best method of translitering Japanese
having as yet been arrived at by European students of the language,
great confusion still prevails in the Roman spelling of native names
of persons and places. Most writers seem to have taken as their
standard the modem pronunciation of the portion of the country with
which they happened themselves to be most familiar, {and to have


30 INTRODUCTION.

written down the words, more or less approximately, by ear. Sach a
plan, which is not without its drawbacks, even in the case of a q)oken
dialect, is singularly inai^licable to a dead language such as ancient
Japanese, which differs as much from the speech of the present day as
Latin does from Italian, and whose true pronunciation is not to be
ascertained with any certainty. It has, therefore, been thought advis*
able in the present work to follow a more regular sjrstem, suggested by
Mr. Satow in vol. yii part iii. of the ''Transactions of the Asiatic
Society of Japan," and which consists in simply reproducing in Roman
letters each syllable of the original precisely as it is written. It seems
almost certain that in ancient times each letter was sounded, though
that is no longer the case ; thus, Maiiyeftuhiffu is now pronounced in
three syllables, Manydshyu. As a rough general rule, it will be best
to give to the consonants their English, and to the rowels their Italian,
value. Japanese has, like French, little or no tonic accent ; and such
native names as are introduced into the translations have, therefore,
been accentuated on whatever syllable best suits the metre.


FROM THE

"MA5IYEFUSHIFU;"

OK,

" COLLECTION OF A MYRIAD LEA VES."


BALLADS.


'Tis springy and the mists come stealing

O'er Suminoye's shore,
And I stand by the seaside musing

On the days that are no more.

I muse on the old-world story,

As the boats glide to and fro,
Of the fisher-boy Urashima,

Who a-fishing lov'd to go ;

How he came not back to the village
Though sev'n suns had risen and set,

But row'd on past the bounds of ocean.
And the sea-god's daughter met ;

How they pledged their faith to each other.
And came to the Evergreen Land,

And enter'd the sea-god's palace
So lovingly hand in hand,


* For a literal prose version of this baUad see the second Appendix to
Aston's *' Grammar of the Japanese Written Language/'

C


34 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

To dwell for aye in that country,
The ocean-maiden and he, —

The country where youth and beauty
Abide eternally.


But the' foolish boy said, "To-morrow
I'll come back with thee to dwell;

But I have a word to my father,
A word to my mother to telL"

The maiden answered, ^ A casket

I give into thine hand;
And if that thou bopest truly

To come b^k to the Evergreen Land,

" Then open it not, I charge thee I

Open it not, I beseech I"
So the boy row'd home o'er the billows

To Suminoye's beach.

But where is his native hamlet ?

Strange hamlets line the strand.
Where is his mother's cottage ?

Strange cots rise on either hand.

" What, in three short years since I left it,"

He cries in his wonder sore,
" Has the home of my childhood vanished ?

Is the bamboo fence no more ?


; BALLADS. : J5

^ Perchance if I open the casket

Which the maiden gave to me,
My home and the dear old village

Will come back as they used to be,"


And he lifts the lid, and there rises

A fleecy, silvery cloud,
That floats off to the Evergreen Country : -^

And the fisher-boy cries aloud ;

He waves the sleeve of his tunic,

He rolls over on the ground.
He dances with fury and horror,

Kunning wildly round and round,*

But a sudden chill comes o'er him

That bleaches his raven hair.
And furrows with hoaiy wrinkles

The form erst so young and fair.

His breath grows fainter and fainter,
Till at last he sinks dead on the shore ;

And I gaze on the spot where his cottage
Once stood, but now stands no more.

(Anon.)


* Such frantic demonstrations of grief are very frequently mentioned
in the early poetry, and sound strangely in the ears of those who ai-e
accustomed to the more than English reserve of the modem Japanese.
Possibly, as in Europe, ro in Japan, there may have been a real change
of character in this respect.


'3S JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

The legend of Urashima is one of the oldest in the language,
and traces of it may even be found in the official annals, where it
is stated that "'in the twenty-first year of the Mikado lyuuriyakn,
the boy Urashima of Midzunoye, in the district of Yosa, in the
province of Tafigo, a descendant of the divinity Shimanemi, went
to Elysium in a fishing-boat." And again, that ''in the second
year of Te&chiyau, under the Mikado Go-Zhiyu&wa . • . the boy
Urashima returned, and then disappeared, none knew whither."
The dates mentioned correspond to A.D. 477 and 825. Urashima's
tomb, together with his fishing-line, the casket given him by the
maiden, and two stones said to be precious, are still shown at one
of the temples in Eanagaha near Yokohama ; and by most of even
the educated Japanese, the story, thus historically and topographi-
cally certified, is accepted as literally true. | In the popular version,
the '* Evergreen Land/' visited by Urashima is changed into the
Dragon Palace, to which later Japanese myth, coloured by Chinese
tradition, has assigned the residence of the sea-god. The word
Dragon Palace is in Japanese ringu, or, more properly, rinkiu,
which is likewise the Japanese pronunciation of the name of the
islands we call Loochoo, and the Chinese Liu-kiu ; and it has been
suggested by some, that the Dragon Palace may be but a fanciful
name given by some shipwrecked voyager to those sunny southern
isles, whose inhabitants stUl distinguish themselves, even above
their Chinese and Japanese neighbours, by their fondness for the
dragon as an artistic and architectural adornment. There is one
ode in the " Maflyefushifu " which would favour this idea, speak*
ing, as it does, of the orange having been first brought to Japan
from the ** Evergreen Land " lying to the south, .


BALLADS, , 37:

COMPOSED ON SEEING A DEAD BODY BY THE BOADSIDE WHEN

CEOSSINQ THE ASHIGARA PASS.*

Metliinks from the hedge round the garden
His bride the fair hemp had ta'en,

And woven the fleecy raiment
That ne'er he threw ofif him again.

For toilsome the journey he journeyed

To serve his liege and his lord,t
Till the single belt that encircled him

Was changed to a thrice-wound cord ;

And now, methinks, he was faring

Back home to the country-side.
With thoughts all full of his father,

Of his mother, and of his bride.

But here 'mid the eastern moimtains.

Where the awful pass climbs their brow.

He halts in his onward journey
And bmlds him a dwelling low ;

And here he lies stark in his garments,

Dishevelled his raven hair.
And ne'er can he tell me his birthplace.

Nor the name that he erst did bear.

(Sakimaro.)

* One of the passes by which the traveUer from Kiyauto may cross
the Hakone range to reach the plain of Yedo.

t {.6., the Mikado. The feudal system did not grow up tiU many
centuries later.


38 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


E&e JEaftrm of ®n6fii.*

In Ashin6ya village dwelt

The Maiden of Unahi,
On whose beauty the next-door neighbours e*en

Might cast no wondering eye ;

For they locked her up as a child of eight,
When her hair hung loosely still ;

And now her tresses were gathered up,
To float no more at will.f

And the men all yeam'd that her sweet face

Might once more stand reveal'd.
Who was hid from gaze, as in silken maze

The chrysalis lies concealed.

And they formed a hedge around the house,
And, " I'll wed her ! " they all did cry ;

And the Champion of Chinu he was there,
And the Champion of Unahi.

With jealous love these champions twain
The beauteous girl did woo ;


* The letters nahi are sounded like our English word nigh^ and there-
fore form but one syllable to the ear.

t Anciently (and this custom is stiU followed in some parts of Japan)
the hair of female children was cut short at the neck and allowed to hang
down loosely till the age of eight. At twelve or thirteen the hair was
generally bound up, though this ceremony was also frequently postponed
until marriage. At the present day, the methods of doing the hair of
female children, of grown-up girls, and of married women vary con-
siderably.


BALLADS. 39

Eacli had liis hand on the hilt of his sword,
And a fuU-chaiged quiver, too.

Was slung o'er the back of each champion fierce,

And a bow of snow-white wood
Did rest in the sinewy hand of each ;

And the twain defiant stood.

Crying, '* An 'twere for her dear sake.

Nor fire nor flood I'd fear ! "
The maiden heard each daring word.

But spake in her mother's ear :

" Alas ! that I, poor country girl,

Should cause this jealous strife !
An I may not wed the man I love *

What profits me my life ?

" In Hades' realm 1 1 will await

The issue of the fray."
These secret thoughts, with many a sigh.

She whisper'd, and passed away.

To the champion of Chinu in a dream

Her face that night was shown ;
So he followed the maid to Hades' shade,

And his rival was left alone ;


* Viz., as we gather from another poem hy the same author, the Cham-
pion of Chinu.

t The Japanese name for Hades is Fomt, allied to the word yorUy
'* night," Few particulars are to be gleaned from the old books. Moto-
wori, the great modem apostle of Shiiitau, writes of it as follows: —
** Hadei is a land beneath the earthy whitheTf when they die, go all men,
mean and TioUe, virtuous and wicked, without distinction.*


*$


40 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Left alone, — too late ! too late I

He gapes at the vacant air,
He shouts, and he yells, and gnashes his teeth,

And dances in wild despair.

" But no ! Ill not yield ! " he fiercely cries,

" I'm as good a man as he I "
And, girding his poniard, he foUows after,

To search out his enemy.

The kinsmen then, on either side,

In solemn conclave met.
As a token for ever and evermore

Some monument for to set,

That the story might pass from mouth to mouth
While heaven and earth shall stand :

So they laid the maiden in the midst.
And the champions on either hand.

And I, when I hear the mournful tale,

I melt into bitter tears,
As though these lovers I never saw

Had been mine own compeers.

(MUSHIMAKO.)


BALLADS. 41

W^z ©rabe of t^e iHailim of ®na]^{.

I stand by the grave where they buried

The Maiden of Un&hi,
Whom of old the rival champions

Did woo so jealously.

The grave should hand down through the ages

Her story for evermore,
That men yet unborn might love her,

And think on the days of yore*

And so beside the causeway

They piled up the boulders high ;
Nor e'er, till the clouds that o'ershadow us

Shall vanish from the sky,

May the pilgrim along the causeway

Forget to turn aside,
And mourn o'er the grave of the Maiden ;

And the village folk, beside,

Ne'er cease from their bitter weieping,

But cluster around her tomb ;
And the ages repeat her story.

And bewail the Maiden's doom.

Till at last e'en I stand gazing

On the grave where she now lies low.

And muse with unspeakable sadness
On the old days long ago,

(Sakimaro.)


42 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

The existence of the Maiden of Undhi is not doubted by any of
the native authorities, and, as usual, the tomb is there (or said to
be there, for the present writer's search after it on the occasion of
a somewhat hurried visit to that part of the country was vain) to
attest the truth of the tradition. Ashinoya is the name of the
village, and Undhi of the district. The locality is in the province
of Setsutsu, between the present treaty-ports of Kaube and
' Ohosaka. During the Middle Ages the stoiy went on growing,
and it may perhaps not be without interest to see the shape it
had assumed by the tenth century. A* classical story-book dating
from which time, and entitled ** Yamato Mmto-gatari,*^ or "Tales
of Japan," tells the tale as follows : —

In days of old there d/wdt a maiden in the land qfSetmtsu^ whose
ha/nd was sought in ma/rriage by two lovers. One, Muba/ra by namey
was a native of the same country-side j the other, called Chdnu, vxis
a native of the Umd of Idav/nvL The two were alike m yea/rs, alike
in face, i/a figwre and in stalwrej and whereas the maiden thought
to accept the wooing of him that should the more dearly love her,
lo 1 it fdl out that they both loved her with the same love. No
sooner faded the light of day, than both cams to do their cov/rting,
a/nd when they sent her gifts, the gifts were quite alike. Of neither
could it be said that he excelled the other, and the girl meanwhile felt
sick at heart. Had they been men of lukewarm devotion, neither
would ever ha/oe obtained the mmden^s hand; but it was because both
of them, day after day and month after month, stood before the cot-
tage-gate and made eviderU their affection in ten thousartd differerd
ways, that the maiden pined with a divided love. Neither loven^s
gifts were a>ccepted, and yet both would come and stand, bearing in
their hands gifts. The mmden had a father and a mother, arvd they
aid to her, '' Sad is it for tm to have to bear the burden of thine
unseemly conduct, in thus carelessly from month to month, a/nd from
year to year, causing others to sorrow. If thou unit accept the one,
after a little time the other's love wUl cease,^^ The maiden made
answer, " That likewise was my thought. But the sameness of the
love of both has made me altogether sick at heart, Alas 1 what shall
IdoV

Now in olden days the people dwelt in houses raised on platforms
huUt out into the river Ikuta, So the girVs father and mother,
summoning to their presentee the two lovers, spake thus: " Owr chUd


Ballads. 43

If pining vnth a hyve divided by the equal ard&wir of yov/r itmeM^e,
But to-day we intend, by whatever meems^-tofia her choice. One of
yoik ihoweth hie devotion by coming hither frtm, a distant home; (he
other i$ ofw neighlxmr, but his love is boundless. This one and thai
are alike worthy of owr pitying regard,'* Both the lovers heard these
words with respectful joy; and the father and mother continued :
** What we have further in our minds to say is this : floating on our
river is a water-bird, Dra/w your bows at itj and to him that shall
strike it, vnll we have the honour to present our daughter,^ '* Well
thought I" replied the lovers twain j and drawing their bows at the
ecms instant, one struck the bird in the head and the other in the
tail, so that neither could daim to be the better ma/rksm/m. Sick
with love, the maiden cried out^^

** Enough, enough/ yon svHftly flowing wave
Shall free my soul from her long anxious strife :
Men call fair Settsv!s stream the stream of life.
But in that stream shall be the maiden*s grave/** *

andy with these words, let herself fall down into the river from the
platform that overlooked it.

While the father and mother, frantic with grief, were ramng and
shouting, the two lovers plunged together into the stream. One ca/ught
hold of the maiden^ s foot and the other of her hand, and the three sank
together and perished in the flood. Terrible vhis the grief of the girVs
father and mother, a>s, amid tears and lamentations, they lifted her
body out cf the water and prepared to give it burial. The parents
of the two lovers likeunse came to the spot, and dug for their sons,
grams beside the grave cf the maiden. But the father and mother of
him that dwelt in the same country-side raised an outcry, saying,
*^ That he who belongs to the same land should be buried in the same
place is jtut. But how shall it be lawful for an alien to desecrate
owr soU ? " So the parents of him that dwelt in Idzumi laded a junk
with Idzumi earth, in which, having brought it to the spot, they laid
their son: and to this day the maiden^ grave stands there in the
middle, and the graves of her lovers on either side. Paintings, too,
of all these scenes of bygone days have been presented to the former
Empress,'^ and, moved by the pictures, many persons have composed

* In this stanza the phonetio spelling Settsu has been adopted for the
sake of the metre,
t Probably the consort of the Mikado Uda, who died A.D. 931.


44 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETR V.

stanms of poetry, putting themselves in the place of one or other of th^
three persons of the story, • • • {Here follow a number of thirty-one-
syllable stanzas that are not worth the trovhle of translating j and the
tale then proceeds thus :) Ceremonial garmerds, trousers, a hat, and
a sash were placed in a large hollow hamhoo-cane, and bv/ried with
the one {i.e,, the native of Undhi), together with a bow, a quiver and
a long sword. But tlte father and mother of the other must luive
been silly folks, for they prepared nothing in like manner. The
" MaiderCs Grave " is the n/ime by which the grave is called.

A certain wayfarer, who once passed the night in the neighbourhood
of the grave, startled by the sound of fighting, sent his retainers to
inquire into the cause thereof They returned saying that they could
hear nothing. But the wayfarer kept pondering on the strange story ^
and at last fell asleep. Then there rose up before him a blood-stained
man, who, kneeling at his side, spaJce thus : ^^ I a/m sorely harassed
by the persecutions of an enemy, and erUreat thee to condescend to lend
me thy sword that I may be revenged on my tormenlor.^ The request
filed the wayfa/rer with alarm; nevertheless, he lent his sword, and^
shortly awaking, imagined it to have been but a dream/ yet in very truth
the sword was missing; and, as he listened attentively, his ear caught
the same terrific sound of fighting that had struck it at first. Bui a
brief time elapsed before the spectre reappeared, and exclaimed exult--
ingly : ^^By thine honourable assistance have I slain the foe that had
oppressed me during these many years. From henceforward I will
for ever watch over thy safetyj^ He then told the tale from the.
beginning to the wayfarer, who, notwithstanding that the whole matter
seemed to him to have [an ugly look, would have inquired rrvore par^
ticularly into the rights of so strange a story* Bui at that mxmierU
day began to dawn, and hefownd hi/mself alone. The next momingy
from the foot of the grave a stream of blood was seen to flow; and the
sword also was blood-stained. The tale seems a most uncomfortal)le
one; but I tell it as it was told to me.


BALLADS. 45

Wit iEaitrnt of ilatsusfitfta.

Where in the far-off eastern land

The cock first crows at dawn,
The people still hand down a tale

Of days long dead and gone.

They tell of Katsushika's maid,

Whose sash of country blue
lipund but a frock of home-spun hemp,

And kirtle coarse to view ;

Whose feet no shoe had e'er confined,
Nor comb passed through her hair ;

Yet all the queens in damask robes
Might nevermore compare

With this dear child, who smiling stood,

A flow'ret of the spring, —
In beauty perfect and complete,

Like to the full moon's ring.

And, as the summer moths that fly

Towards the flame so bright.
Or as the boats that seek the port

When fall the shades of night,

So came the suitors ; but she said :
" Why take me for your wife ?

Full well I know my humble lot,
I know how short my life." *

* The original of this stanza is ohscure, and the native commentators
have no sati»factory interpretation to offer.


46 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

So where the dashing billows beat

On the loud-sounding shore,
Hath Eatsushlka's tender maid

Her home for evermore.

Yes 1 'tis a tale of days long past ;

Butj list'ning to the lay,
It seems as I had gazed upon

Her face but yesterday.

(Anon.)

To the slight, hut nndouhtedly very ancient, tradition preserved
in the foregoing hallad, there is nothing to add from any authentic
source. Popular fancy, however, has heen husy lil^ng up the
gaps, and introduces a cruel stepmother, who, untouched hy the
piety of the maiden in drawing water for her every day from the
only well whose water she cares to drink, is so angry with her for,
by her radiant beauty, attracting suitors to the house, that the
poor girl ends by drowning herself, upon which the neighbours
declare her to be a goddess, and erect a temple in her honour.
Both the temple and the well are still among the show-places in
the environs of Yedo.


STfje 33eflflar*s Complaint*

The heaven and earth they call so great,

For me are mickle small ;
The sun and moon they call so bright,

For me ne'er shine at all.


* In the original the title is " The Beggar's Dialogue," there being two
poems, of which that here translated is the second. The first one, which
is put into the mouth of an unmarried beggar, who takes a cheerier view
of poverty, is not so well fitted for translation into English.-


BALLADS. 47

Are. all inen sad, or only I ?

And what have I obtained,—
What good the gift of mortal life,

That priae ao rarely gained,* .

If naught my ehilly-baek-protects

But one thin grass-cloth coat.
In tatters hanging like the weeds

That on the billows float, —

If here in. smoke-stained, darksome hut.

Upon the bare cold ground,
I make my wretched bed of straw.

And hear the mournful sound, —

Hear how mine aged parents groan^ "

And wife and children cry,
Father and mother, children, wife,

Huddling in misery, —

If in the rice-pan, nigh fprgot.

The spider hangs its nest,t
And from the hearth no smoke goes up

•Where all is so unblest ?

And now, to make our wail more deep,

That saying is proved true
Of " snipping what was short before : " —

Here comes to claim his due


* Became, according to the Buddhist doctrine of perpetually recurring
births, it is at any given time more probable that the individual wiU
«ome into the world in the shape of one of the lower animalBt

t A literal translation of the Japanese idiom.


48 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

The village provost, stick in hand.
He's shouting at the door; —

And can such pain and grief be all
Existence has in store ?


Shame and despair are mine from day to day ;

But, being no bird, I cannot fly away.

(Anon.)


a jFrontier Sollrier'iS Heflrets on iLeabfnfl f&ome^^

When I left to keep guard on the frontier
(For such was the monarch's decree),

My mother, with skirt uplifted,t
Drew near and fondled me ;

And my father, the hot tears streaming
His snow-white beard adown.


* The '* Frontiers** in the early part of the eighth century of oar era
were, north, at a line drawn roughly across the main island of Japan at
latitude 38°, and separating the Japanese proper from the aboriginal
Ainos, and, south, the island of Kinshiu. Neither Yezo nor Loochoo had
as yet been added to the empire. Troops sent to the Corea (see p. 79)
were likewise said to be doing *' frontier service.** The mention of em-
barking at Naniha (near the site of the modem treaty-port of Ohosaka)
shows that it v^as on duty in the south or west that the author of this
piece was sent.

t The Japanese commentators do not help us much towards a comprd-
hension of this curious passage (lit. took up in her fingers the lower part
of her skirt, and stroked "). One of them supposes that she lifted up
her skirt in. order to be better able to walk towards her son and caress
him.


BALLADS. 49

Besought me to tarry, crying :
*' Alas I when thou art gone,

" When thou leav'st our gate in the morning,

No other sons have I,
And mine eyes will long to behold thee

As the weary years roll by;

" So tarry but one day longer.

And let me find some relief
In speaking and hearing thee speak to me ! ''

So wail'd the old man in his griel

And on either side came pressing

My wife and my children dear,
Elutt'ring like birds, and with garments

Besprinkled with many a tear ;

And dasp'd my hands, and would stay me.

For 'twas so hard to part ;
But Tiaine awe of the sovereign edict

Constrained my loving heart

I went ; yet each time the pathway

O'er a pass through the mountains did wind,

rd turn me round — ah ! so lovingly !—
And ten thousand times gaze behind.

But farther still, and still farther.

Past many a land I did roam.
And my thoughts were all thoughts of sadness.

All loving, sad thoughts of home ; — •


59 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

■

Till I came to the shores of Sumi,
Where the sovereign gods * I prayed,

With ofifrings so humbly offered, —
And this the prayer that I made : —

" Being mortal, I know not how many
The days of my life may be ;

And now the perilous pathway

That leads o'er the plain of the sea,

*<Past unknown islands will bear me:
But grant that while I am gone

No hurt may touch father or mother,
Or the wife now left all alone ! "

Yes, such was my prayer to the sea-gods;

And now the imnumber'd oars,t
And the ship and the seamen to bear me

From breezy Nanlha's shores

• Are there at the mouth of the riyer : —
Oh ! tell the dear ones at home,
That I'm off as the day is breaking
To row o'er the ocean foam.}


(Anon.)


* Their names are Sokodzutsuwo, NakadzutsnwO) and Uhadzutsnwo,
and together they rule the sea. To them is often associated the semi-
fabulous Empress Zhifigou, who is said to have conquered the Corea in
the third century of our era.

f In the earliest Japanese literature there is but little mention made
of sailing, and even so late as the tenth century the oar would seem to
have remained the chief means of propulsion at sea.

X To whom this request is made does not appear.


lotie ^ongier


FROM THE


"MANYEFUSHIFU;"

OR,

« COLLECTION OF A MYRIAD LEA VES."


LOVE SONGS.


Sons

COMPOSED BY THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF ON BEHOLDING THE
MOUNTAINS, WHEN THE MIKADO MADE A PROGRESS TO THE
DISTRICT OF AYA IN THE PROVINCE OF SANUKI.*

The long spring day is o'er, and dark despond
My heart invades, and lets the tears flow down,

As all alone I stand, when from beyond

The mount our heav'n-sent monarch's throne doth
crown

There breathiss the twilight wind and turns my sleeve.

Ah, gentle breeze I to turn, home to return,
Is aU my prayer ; I cannot cease to grieve

On this long toilsome road ; I bum, I bum !


* This commander-in-cliief' 8 name is not to be ascertained. The
Mikado mentioned would seem to be Zhiyomei, who, according to the
history, made a progress to the hot baths of Aya in the winter of ▲.D.
639-64a Sanuki is one of the four provinces forming the island of
Shikoku, which lies between the Inland Sea and the Pacific Ocean.
Tsunu is a TiUage on the eoast. Salt-burning, as it is caUed, is still a
considerable industry in the maritime districts of Japan,


54 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Yes ! the poor heart I used to think so brave
Is all afire, though pone the flame may see.

Like to the salt-kilns there by Tsunu's wave.
Where toil the fisher-maidens wearUy.

(Anon.)


£ines

SENT TO HIS MISTRESS WHEN THE POET WAS LEAVING THE
PROVINCE OF IHAMI* TO GO UPON IMPERIAL SERVICE TO
THE CAPITAL.

Tsunu's shore, Ihami's brine.
To all other eyes but mine
Seem, perchance, a lifeless mere*,
And sands that ne'er the sailor cheer.
Ah, well-a-day ! no ports we boast.
And dead the sea that bathes our coast ;
But yet I trow the wingid breeze
Sweeping at mom across our seas.
And the waves at eventide
From the depths of ocean wide.
Onward to Watadzu bear
The deep-green seaweed, rich and fair ;
And like that seaweed, gently swaying,
WingM breeze and waves obeying,
So thy heart hath swayed and bent
And crowned my love with thy consent.


* On the north-west coast of the main island of Japan. There is no
rise and fall of the tide in this portion of the Japan Sea, — a fact aU the
more remarkable, as the tides are particularly strong on the opposite
shores of the Gorea. Tsunu and Watadzu are the names of villages, the
former not to be confounded with Tsunu in Sanuki. It was at Tsunu
that the poet's mistress dwelt.


LOVE SONGS. 55

But, dear heart ! I must away,
As fades the dew when shines the day ;
Nor aught my backward looks avail,
Myriad times cast down the vale
From each turn the winding road
Takes upward ; for thy dear abode
Farther still and farther lies.
And hills on hills between us rise.
Ah ! bend ye down, ye cruel peaks.
That the gate my fancy seeks.
Where sits my pensive love alone,
To mine eyes again be shown !

(HiTOMARO.)


ILobe is Pain*

'Twas said of old, and still the ages say,
" The lover's path is full of doubt and woe."
Of me they spake : I know not, nor can know,

If she I sigh for will my love repay.

My head sinks on my breast ; with bitter strife
My heart is torn, and grief she cannot see.
All unavailing is this agony

To help the love that has become my life.

(Anon.)

00 killings*

The year has come, the year has gone again.
And still no tidings of mine absent love :
Through the long days of spring all heaven above

And earth beneath re-echo with my pain.


56 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

In dark cocoon my mother's silkworms dwell ;

like them, a captive, through the livelong day

Alone I sit and sigh my soul away.
For ne'er to any I my love may telL

Like to the ^iTW-trees I must stand and pine*
While downward slanting fall the shades of night.
Till my long sleeve of purest snowy white

With showers of tears is steeped in bitter brine.

(Anon.)


3£obe is SllU

Where in spring the sweetest flowers
Fill Mount Kaminabi's bowers,
Where in autumn, dyed with red.
Each ancient maple rears its head.
And Aska's f flood, with sedges lin'd.
As a belt the mound doth bind : —
There see my heart, — a reed that sways.
Nor aught but love's swift stream obeys.
And now, if, like the dew, dear maid,
life must fade, then let it fade :
My secret love is not in vain.
For thou lov'st me back again.J

(Anon.)

* The play in the original is on the word matsu, which has the double
signification of ** a pine-tree " and ** to wait."

t Thns pronounced, b^t properly written Asuka.

X Though no formal comparison is expressed, the allusions to the
blossoms, to the ruddy tint, and to the girdle, are meant to apply to the
poet's mistress as weU as to the scenery of Elamin&bi. These Sugges-
tions, as it were from without, are much sought after by the poets of
Japan,


LOVE SONGS. 57

From Kamindbi's crest
The clouds descending pour in sheeted rain, •
And, 'midst the gloom, the wind sighs o'er the
plain : —
Oh ! he that sadly press'd,
Leaving my loving side, alone to roam
Magami's deslate moor, has he reach'd home ?

(Anon.)


As the bold huntsman. on some mountain path
Waits for the stag he hopes may pass that way,
So wait I for my love both night and day :

Then bark not at him, as thou fear'st my wrath !

(Anon.)


Secret Kobe*


If as my spirit yearns for thine

Thine yearns for me, why thus delay ?
And yet, what answer might be mine
If, pausing on her way,
Some gossip bade me tell
Whence the deep sighs that from my bosom
swell?

And thy dear name my lips should pass,
My blushes would our loves declare ;


S8 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

No, no ! I'll say my longing was

To see the moon appear

O'er yonder darkling hill ;
Yet 'tis on thee mine eyes would gaze their

fill!

(Anon.)


?&e comes not^**^

He comes not ! 'tis in vain I wait ;

The crane's wild cry strikes on mine ear,
The tempest howls, the hour is late,
. Dark is the raven night and drear :

And, as I thus stand sighing,

The snowflakes round me flying
Light on my sleeve, and freeze it crisp and clear.

Sure 'tis too late ! he cannot come ;

Yet trust I still that we may meet,
As sailors gaily rowing home

Trust in their ship so safe and fleet
Though waking hours conceal him.
Oh ! may my dreams reveal him,
Filling the long, long night with converse sweet !

(Anon.)

[The reference in this song is to an old superstition. It used to
be supposed that the chance words caught from the mouths of
passers-by, would solve any doubt or question to which it might

'* The translation is here made, not from the standard text, bat from
a slightly varying one quoted in the *' Biydkuge " commentary.


LOVE SONGS. 59

otherwise^ be impossible to obtain an answer. This was called
the yufu^ra^ or "evening divination/' on account of its being
practised in the evening. It has been found impossible in this
instance to follow the original very closely.]

Yes ! 'twas the hour when all my hopes

Seemed idle as the dews that shake
And tremble in their lotus-cups

By deep Tsunigi's lake, —

'Twas then the omen said:
" Fear not ! he'll come his own dear love to wed."

What though my mother bids me flee

Thy fond embrace ? No heed I take ;
As pure, as deep my love for thee
As Kiyosiimi's lake.
One thought fills all my heart :
When wilt thou come no more again to part ?

(Anon.)


Itatn anti Snotn.

For ever on Mikane's crest,

That soars so far away.
The rain it rains in ceaseless sheets,

The snow it snows all day.

And ceaseless as the rain and snow

That fall from heaven above.

So ceaselessly, since first we met,

I love my darling love.

(Anon.)


6o JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY,

^artelr l&s 1&^ Stream.

Here on one side of the stream I standi
And gaze on my love on the other strand.

Oh I not to be with her, what sadness !

Oh ! not to be with her, what madness I

If but a red-lacquered skiff were mine,

With paddles strewn over with pearls so fine.

Then would I pass the river.

And dwell with my love for ever !

(Anon.)

?&e anil Slje*

He. To Hatsiise's vale I'm come,
To woo thee, darling, in thy home
But the rain rains down apace.
And the snow veils ev'ry place.
And now the pheasant 'gins to cry,
And the cock crows to the sky :
Now flees the night, the night hath fled,
Let me in to share thy bed I

She. To Hatsiise's vale thou'rt come,

To woo me, darling, in my home :

But my mother sleeps hard by.

And my father near doth lie ;

Should I but rise, TU wake her ear;

Should I go out, then he will hear :

The night hath fled 1 it may not be,

For our love's a mystery !

(Anon.)


LOVE SONGS. 6x


Wife, While other women's husbands ride

Along the road in proud array,
M7 husband up the rough hillside

On foot must wend his weary way.

The grievous sight with bitter pain
3iy bosom fills, and many a tear

Steals down my cheek, and I would fain
Do ought to help my husband dear.

Come ! take the mirror and the veil,
My mother's parting gifts to me ;

In barter they must sure avail
To buy an horse to carry thee t

Husband. An I should purchase me an horse,
: Must not my wife still sadly walk ?
No, no ! though stony is our course,
We'll trudge along and sweetly talk.

(Anon.)


W^z pearls/


Oh ! he my prince, that left my side
O'er the twain Lover Hills •(• to roam.


* For the reference in this song to the " evening horoscope," see p. 59.

t Mount Lover and Mount Lady-love (Se-yama and Imo-yama), in the
province of Yamato. Between them ran the rapid Yosliino-gaha, which
has ended by sweeping away the Lover's Mount, — at least so the trans-
lator was told by the ferryman at the river in. the summer of 1876; and


62 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Saying that in far Kfshiu's tide
He'd hunt for pearls to bring them home.

When will he come ? With trembling hope

1 hie me to the busy street
To ask the evening horoscope,

That straightway thus gives answer meet —

" The lover dear, my pretty girl,
For whom thou waitest, comes not yet,

Because he's seeking ev'ry pearl
Where out at sea the billows fret.

" He comes not yet, my pretty girl !

Because among the riplets clear
He's seeking, findmg ev'ry pearl;

'Tis that delays thy lover dear*

. " Two days at least must come and go,
Sev'ji days at most will bring him back ;
'Twas he himself that told me so :
Then cease fair maid, to ciy Alack ! " .

(Anon.)


COMPOSED ON BEHOLDING AN UNACCOMPANIED DAMSEL CROSS*
INQ THE GREAT BRIDGE OF KAHAUCHI.

Across the bridge, with scarlet lacquer glowing,
That o'er the Katashiha's stream is laid,

certainly from the boat there was but one mountain to be seen in the
direction indicated. Perhaps there was never more than one, save in
thd brains of tiie Japanese poets, who are very fond of playing with
these romantic names.


LOVE SONGS. 6^

All trippingly a tender girl is going,

In bodice blue and crimson skirt arrayed.

None to escort her : would that I were knowing
Whether alone she sleeps on virgin bed,

Or if some spouse has won her by his wooing : —
Tell me her house ! Til ask the pretty maid !

(Anon.)


From the loud wave-wash'd shore

Wend I my way,
Hastening o'er many a flow'r,

At close of day, —
On past Kusaka's crest,

Onward to thee,
Sweet as the loveliest
Flower of the lea !

(Anon.)

A note to the origin^ says : " The name of the composer of the
above song is not given because he was of obscure rank," a reason
-which will sound strange to European ears. See, however, the
Introduction, p. 17.]


Full oft he sware, with accents true and tender,
" Though years roll by, my love shall ne'er wax
old ! "

And so to him my heart I did surrender.
Clear as a mirror of pure bumish'd gold ;


$4 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

And from that day, unlike the seaweed bending
To ey*37 wave raiaed by the autunm gust^

Firm stood my heart, cm him alone depending,
As the bold seaman in his ship doth trust

•

Is it some cruel god that hath bereft me ?

Or hath some mortal stol'n away his heart ?
No word, no letter since the day he left me.

Nor more he cometh, ne'er again to part !

In vain I weep, in helpless, hopeless sorrow,
From earliest mom until the close of day ;

In vain, till radiant dawn brings back the morrow,
I sigh the weary, weary nights away.

No need to tell hpw young I am and slender, —
A little maid that in thy palm could lie :

Still for some message comforting and tender
I pace the room in sad expectancy.

(The Lady Sakanouhe.)


Sons

COMPOSED ON ASCENDING MOUNT MIKASA.*

Oft in tlie misty spring
The vapours roll o'er Mount Mikasa's crest,

While, pausing not to rest^
The birds each morn with plaintive note da sing."

* In tlie prorixicfi of Tamato, close to Nara, the ancient eaj^taL


k


LOVE SONGS. 6$

like to the mists of spring
My heart is rent ; for, like the song of birds,

Still all unanswered ring
The tender accents of my passionate words,

I call her ev'ry day

Till daylight fades away ;

I call her ev'ry night

Till dawn restores the light; —
But my fond pra/rs are all too weak to bring

My darling back to sight.

(Akahito.)


Sons

ASKING FOB FEABLS TO SEND HOME TO NABA.

They 'tell me that the fisher-girls
Who steer their course o'er Susu's*^ brine,
Dive 'neath the waves and bring up pearls :-
Oh ! that five hundred pearls were mine !

Forlopi upon our marriage-bed,
My wife, my darling sweet and true,
Must lay her solitary head
Since the sad hour I bade adieu.

No more, methinks, when shines the dawn,
She combs her dark dishevelled hair :


* A place in the province of Noto, the little peninsnla that jata out
into the Japan Sea on the north-west coast.

E


66 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

She counts the months since I am gone.
She coimts the days with many a tear.

If but a string of pearls were mine,
I'd please her with them, and I'd say,
" With flags and orange-blossoms * twine
Them in a wreath on summer's day/*

(YAKAMOCm.)


Wfi jFIotoers of mg ®ar5em

Sent by the sov reign lord to sway
The farthest lands that own his might,
To Koshi's t wilds I came away,
Where stretch the snows all wintry white.

And now five years are past and gone,
And still I sleep on widowed bed.
Nor loose my belt, nor, being thus lone,
May pillow on thine arm my head.

But as a solace for my heart.
Before my dwelling, pinks I sow.
And lilies small, with gard'ner's art
Ta'en from the summer moor below ;


* literaUy, the tachibana {dtnis mandarintu), one of the orange tribe,
t The most northern province of the empire, on the Aino border.


N LOVE SONGS. 67

And never can I leave the house
And see them flow'ring, but I think
On when 111 see my lily spouse^
My spouse as fair as any pink.

Sweet dreams of love ! ah I came ye not
The anguish of mine heart to stay^
In this remote and savage spot
I could not live one single day.

(Yakamochi.)


FROM THE

"MANYEFUSHIFU;"

OK,

" COLLECTION OF A MYRIAD LEA FES."


ELEGIES.


(B^iSi on ^t I3eat!) of t^t jEiluibo Cef^u^

BT ONE OF HIS LADIES.

Alas I poor mortal maid ! unfit to hold
High converse with the glorious gods above^t
Each mom that breaks still finds me unconsoled,
Each hour stiU. hears me sighing for my love.

Wert thou a precious stone, I'd clasp thee tight
Around mine arm ; wert thou a silken dress,
I'd ne'er discard thee either day or night : —
Last night, sweet love I I dreamt I saw thy face.

(Anon.)


(Sites, ovi tfie IBtuHif of prince fginamU

[This prince died A.D. 689 in the twenty-second year of his age.
His father, Tetimu, who had died three years previously, had been
temporarily succeeded during the statutory years of mourning and


* Died A.Dti 67Z. This piece hM been translated by Mons. L6on de
Bosny in his " Anthologie Japonaise.**
t Viz., with the departed and deified Mikado.


72 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

the tronUons times that ensued by his consort, the Empresfs JitoOi
from whom the throne was to have passed to Prince Hinami
as soon as circumstances would permit of the ceremony of his
accession.

The first strophe of the elegy deals with the fabulous early
history, relating the appointment by a divine councQ of Ninigi-
no-Mikoto as first emperor of the dynasty of the gods in Japan*
From him Prince Hinami was descended, and his death is, there-
fore, in the second strophe, figured as a flight back to heaven, his
ancestral home, motived by the inutility of his presence in a world
where his mother reigned supreme. The third strophe expresses
the grief of the nation, and paints the loneliness of the tomb at
Mayumi, which is represented by the poet as a palace where the
Prince dwells in solitude and silence. The closing lines refer to
the watchers by the tomb, who are removed after a certain time.]


When began the earth and heaven,
By the banks of heaven's river *
All the mighty gods assembled,
All the mighty gods held council,
Thousand myriads held high council;
And (fQr that her sovereign grandeur
The great goddess of the day-star
Eul'd th' ethereal realms of heaven)
Downward through the many-piled
Welkin did they waft her grandson,
Bidding him, till earth and heaven.
Waxing old, should fall together.
O'er the middle land of Eeed-plains,
O'er the land of waving Eice-fields,t
Spread abroad his power imperial


• The Milky Way.
t Old poetical names for Japan*


ELEGIES. 73


IL


But not liis Kiy6mi's palace !

'Tis his sovereign's, her's the empire ;

And the sun's divine descendant^

Ever soaring, passeth upward

Through the heav'n's high rocky portals.

III.

Why, dear prince, oh ! why desert us ?

Did not all beneath the heaven,

All that dwell in earth's four quarters.

Pant, with eye and heart uplifted.

As for heaVn-sent rain in slmek

For thy rule of flow'ry fragrance.

For thy plenilune of empire ?

Now on lone Mayumi's hillock.

Firm on everlasting columns,

Pilest thou a lofty palace.

Whence no more, when day is breaking,

Sound thine edicts awe-compelling.

Day to day is swiftly gathered.

Moon to moon, till e'en thy faithful

Servants from thy palace vanish.

(HiTOMABO.)


/^


74 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


®n tf^e I3eat]^ o! tfje Poet's JHistregg.

How fondly did I yearn to gaze
(For was not there the dear abode
Of her whose love lit up my days ?)
On Karats often-trodden road.*


But should I wander in and out
Morning and evening ceaselessly.
Our loves were quickly noised about,
For eyes enough were there to see.

So trusting that, as tendrils part
To meet again, so we might meet.
As in deep rocky gorge my heart.
Unseen, unknown, in secret beat.

But like the sun at close of day.
And as behind a cloud the moon,
So passed my gentle love away,
An autumn leaf ta'en aU too soon.

When came the fatal messenger,
I knew not what to say or do : —
But who might sit and simply hear ?
Eather, methought, of all my woe.


* Kara'fl Boad Beems to have been tlie name of the YiUage. It was in
the proTinoe of Yamato, not far from the capitaL


ELEGIES. 75

Haply one thousandth part might find
Belief if my due feet once more,
Where she so often trod^ should wind
Through Karu's streets, and past her door.

But mute that voice, nor all the crowd
Could show her like or soothe my care ;
So, calling her dear name aloud,
I waved my sleeve in blank despair.

(HiTOMABO.)


iLineg

SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN WRITTEN ON THE OCCASION OF THE
DEATH OF THE PRINCE OF MINO (DIED A.D. 708), FATHER
OF PRINCE TACHIBANA-NO-MOROYE, COMPILER OF THE
•* MAfryEFUSmFU."

O ye steeds the Prince of Mine
Stabled in his western stables !
O ye steeds the Prince of Mino
Stabled in his eastern stables !
Is it for your food ye whinny ?
Then the fodder I will bring you.
Is it for your drink ye whinny ?
Then the water I will bring you*
Wherefore neigh the milk-white chargers ?

Ah ! methinks these steeds have bosoms.
For their voice is chang'd and sadden'd.

(Anon.)


76 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


(Cleflg on tfie Port's gouns Son JFuruSU

Sev*ii * are the treasures mortals most do prize,

But I regard them not :
One- only jewel could delight mine eyes, —

The child that I begot.

My darling boy, who with the morning sun

Began his joyous day ;
Nor ever left me, but with childlike fun

Would make me help him play ;

Who'd take my hand when eve its shadows spread,

Saying, " I'm sleepy grown ;
'Twixt thee and mother I would lay my head :

Oh 1 leave me not alone ! "

Then, with his pretty prattle in mine ears,

I'd lie awake and scan
The good and 3vil of the coming years,

And see the child a man.

And, as the seaman trusts his bark, Fd trust
That nought could harm the boy :

Alas I I wist not that the whirling gust
Would shipwreck all my joy !


* Vis., gold, nlver, emeralcli, crystali, rabies, amber (or coral or the
diamond), and agate.


ELEGIES. 77

Then with despairing, helpless hands I grasp'd

The sacred mirror's sphere ; *
And round my shoulder I my garments clasp'd.
And pray'd with many a tear :

"'Tis yours, great gods, that dwell in heav'n on high,
Great gods of earth ! 'tis yours

To heed or heed not, a poor father's cry,
Who worships and implores ! **

Alas I vain pray'rs, that more no more avail !

He languished day by day,
Till e'en his infant speech began to fail.

And life soon ebVd away,

Stagg'ring with grief I strike my sobbing breast,

And wildly dance and groan :
Ah ! such is life ! the child that I caress'd

Far from mine arms hath flown !


* The part played by the mirror in the devotions of the Japanese is
carried back by them to a tale in their mythology which relates the dis-
appearance into a cavern of the Sun-goddess Amaterasu, and the manner
in which she was enticed forth by being led to believe that her reflection
in a miiTor that was shown to her was another deity more lovely than
herself. The tying up of the wide sleeve (originally by some creeping
plant, and later by a riband), which is still commonly practised by the
lower classes when engaged in any manual labour, was also naturally
adopted by the priests when making their offerings of fruits, &c., and
thus passed into a sign of devotion. In this place may also be mentioned
the nusa^ — offerings of hemp, a plant always looked upon as one of the
most precious of the productions of the soil, and presented to the gods
as such, or used in the ceremony of purification (see p. 103). In modem
times, worthless paper has been substituted for the precious hemp, and
the meaning of the ceremony entirely lost sight of, sone of the common
people even supposed that the gods come down and take up their
residence in tho strips of paper.


78 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Sfjort Stanja on tfje Same ©ccaston*

So young, so young ! he cannot know the way :
On Hades' porter * Til a bribe bestow,
That on his shoulders the dear infant may
Be safely carried to the realms below.

{Attributed to Okura.)


(Keflg on tlje ^oet'g MHz.

The gulls that twitter on the rush-grown shore

When fall the shades of night,
That o'er the waves in loving pairs do soar

When shines the morning light, —

'Tis said e'en these poor birds delight
To nestle each beneath his darling's wing

That, gently fluttering,
Through the dark hours wards off the hoar-frost's might.

Like to the stream that finds
The downward path it never may retrace,

like to the shapeless winds.
Poor mortals pass away without a trace :

So she I love has left her place,
And, in a comer of my widowed couch,
Wrapp'd in the robe she wove me, I must crouch

Far from her fond embrace.

(Nibl)


* The reference is a Buddhist one. In a Sutra entitled ^^Zhifuvtau
kij/au " details are giTen of sereral infernal attendants.


ELEGIES. 79


(Clefls on guftitsno^JHttrajfji I^nitaro,

WHO DIED AT THE ISLAND OF lEI ON HIS WAT TO THE COREA.

[Of this personage nothing farther is known. The word Kara
in the poem signifies the Corea, although in modem Japanese it
is exclosiyely used to designate China. From the most ancient
times down to the year 1876, when the pretension was formally
renounced, the Mikados laid claim to the possession of the Corea,
— a claim which was substantiated by two conquests, one by the
Empress^hiligou in the beginning of the third century of our era,
the other by the armies of Hideyoshi, the Napoleon of Japan, who
practically ruled the country during the latter part of the sixteenth
century. It must, however, be admitted that the warrior-empress
is At most but a semi-historical character, and that, whatever may
be the truth as to the alleged early conquest of the Corea by the
Japanese, the latter were undoubtedly led captive by the arts and
letters of their more cultivated neighbours.]

Sent by the sovereign monarch to hold sway
O'er Kara's land, he left his native soil;
. But ye, his kinsmen, ne^er the gods did pray, '
Or else, perchance, the mats ye did defile.*

" In autumn," spake he, " I will come again,
"Dear mother I " But that autumn is forgot;
And days roll by, and moons do wax and wane,
And still they watch, and still he cometh not.


* Beferenoe is here made to the custom, not yet extinct, of leaving
untouched during a certain time the apartment recently occupied by one
who has started on a journey. The idea is that to sweep the mats at once
would be, as it were, to wipe him out of remembrance. On the second
day, at earliest, the room is cleaned, and food for the absent one brought
in at the accustomed houis.


8o JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

For he ne'er lighted on that distant shore,
Though far he sailed from fair Yamdto's * lea ;
But on this cragged rock for evermore
He dwells among the islands of the sea.

(Anon.)


f&\t^ on tf^e Beatf) o! tfie Corean j^un

[A note appended to the original poem tells us that Bignwafi,
desirous of placing herself under the beneficent sway of %the
Japanese Emperor, crossed over in the year 714, and for the space
of one-and-twenty years sojourned in the house of the Prime
Minister Ohotomo. She died in 735 while the Minister and his
wife were away at the mineral baths of Anma, a mountain retreat
not far from the present por£ of Kaube. The daughter of the
house, Sakanouhe, was alone present at her death and interment,
and afterwards sent the following elegy to her mother at Arima.
During the sixth, seventh, and eighth centuries there was a very
considerable immigration from the Corea into Japan. Artisans and
teachers of every description, and even monks and nuns, flocked
to what was then a new country.]

Oftimes in far Corea didst thou hear
Of our Cipango as a goodly land ;
And so, to parents and to brethren dear
Bidding adieu, thou sailed'st to the strand


* Yamato, though properly the partionlar designation of one of the
eentral provinces, is often used as a name for the whole of Japan. Nara,
the ancient capital, is situated in Yamato, and most of the older tempo-
rary capitals were within its limits.


ELEGIES. 8x

Of these domains that own th' imperial poVr,
Where glitt'ring palaces unnumber'd rise ;
Yet such might please thee not, nor many a bow'r
Where village homesteads greet the pilgrim's eyes :

But in this spot, at Sahoyama's * base,
Some secret influence bade thee find thy rest,—
Bade seek us out with loving eagerness.
As seeks the weeping infant for the breast.

And here with aliens thou didst choose to dwell,
Tear in, year out, in deepest sympathy ;
And here thou builtest thee an holy cell ;
And so the peaceful years went gliding by.

But ah ! what living thing mote yet avoid
Death's dreary[summons ? — ^And thine hour did sound
When all the friends on whom thine heart relied
Slept on strange piUows on the mossy ground.t

So, while the morn lit up Kasuga's crest,
O'er Sahogaha's flood thy corse they bore.
To fill a tomb upon yon mountain's breast.
And dwell in darkness drear for evermore.

No words, alas ! nor efforts can avail :
Nought can I do, poor solitary child !


* A mountain in the province of Yamato. The riyer Sahog&ha, men-
tioned a little farther on, runs past its base.

\ This line is an adaptation of the Japanese term Kusa-makurc^
litendly "a pillow of herbs," itself the " piUow-word *' for the word
Journey.


ai JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Kouglit can I do but make my bitter wail.
And pace the room with cries and gestures wild,

Ceaselessly weeping, till my snowy sleeve
Is wet with tears. Who knows ? Perchance again
Wafted they're borne upon the sighs I heave
On 'Arima's far distant heights to rain.

(Sakwouhe.)


^ijoicenaneouiar Wotmg


FROM THB


"MANYEFUSHIFU;"

OH,

%

"COLLECTION OF A MYRIAD LEAVES,"


rv


MISCELLANEOUS POEMS,


%ints

COMPOSED BY THE EMPEROR ZHIYOMEI ON THE OCCASION OP
HIS ASCENDING MOUNT KAGU,* AND CONTEMPLATING THE
SURROUNDING COUNTRY.

Countless are the mountain-chains
Tow'ring o'er Cipango's plains ;
But fairest is Mount Kagu's peak,
Whose heavenward soaring heights I seek
And gaze on all my realms beneath, —
Gaze on the land where vapours wreathe
O'er many a cot ; gaze on the sea.
Where cry the seagulls merrily.
Yes ! 'tis a very pleasant land,
Fill'd with joys on either hand.
Sweeter than aught beneath the sky,
Dear islands of the dragon-fly ! t


* Near Nara.

t One of the ancient names of Japan, given to the country on account
of a supposed resemblance in shape to that insect. The dragon-flies of
Japan are various and very beautiful.


86 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


When the dawn is shining,
He takes it up and fondles it with pride ;

When the day's declining;
He lays it by his pillow's side.

Hark to the twanging of the string !

This is the bow of our Great Lord and King !
Now to the morning chase they ride,
Now to th0 chase again at eventide :

Hark to the twanging of the string !

This is the bow of our Great Lord and King !

(fiASHIBITO.)


5|)frin0 arUi Autumn.

(AN ODE COMPOSED IK OBEDIENCE TO THE COMMANDS OF THE

MIKADO TENJI.)

When winter turns to spring,
Birds that were songless make their songs resound,
Flow*r3 that were flow*rless cover all the ground ;

Yet 'tis no perfect thing : —
I cannot walk, so tangled is each hill ;
So thick the herbs, I cannot pluck my fill.

But in the autumn-tide
I cull the scarlet leaves and love them dear,
And let the green leaves stay, with many a tear.

All on the fair hiU-side : —

* The Mikado referred to is Zhiyomei, who died in A.D. 641,


MISCELLANEOUS. 87

No time so sweet as that. Away ! away !
Autumn's the time I fain would keep alway.

(Ohogimi.)


Spring*

When winter turns to spring,
The dews of morn in pearly radiance lie,
The mists of eve rise circling to the sky.

And Kajninabi's thickets ring
With the sweet notes the nightingale doth sing.

(Anon.)


^fje Brooft of f^atsttse.

Pure is Hatsiise's mountain-brook, —
So pure it mirrors all the clouds of heaven ;
Yet here no fishermen for shelter look

When sailing home at even :

'Tis that there are no sandy reaches.
Nor shelving beaches.
Where the frail craft might find some sheltering

nook.

Ah, well-a-day ! we have no sandy reaches :
But heed that not ;
Nor shelving beaches :
But heed that not !


88 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Come a jostling and a hustling
O'er our billows gaily bustling :
Come, all ye boats, and anchor in this spot !

(Anon.)


iLineis to a jFrienU.

Japan is not a land where men need pray,

For 'tis itself divine : —
Yet do I lift my voice in prayer and say :

" May ev'ry joy be thine !

And may I too, if thou those joys attain.

Live on to see thee blest ! "
Such the fond prayer, that, like the restless main.

Will rise within my breast.

(HrroMARO.)

[Japan is the dwelling-place of the gods, and the whole nation
claims divine ancestry. Thus prayer, with them, were doubly
useless. The gods are abeady on earth, therefore no petitions
need be lifted up to heaven. Also the heart of man, — at least of
Japanese man, — ^is naturally perfect : therefore he has only to
follow the dictates of his heart, and he will do right. These are
the tenets of Sintooism,* claimed by the Japanese as their ab-
original religion, but in which any person conversant with the
writings of the Chinese sages will not fail to detect the influence
of their ways of thought. The believers in Sintooism, moreover,
are by no means consistent; for, while deprecating the use of
prayer, they have numerous and lengthy liturgies. A translation
of some of these liturgies and an account of the modem attempt

* Properly Shin-tau (" the Way of the Gods ").


MISCELLANEOUS. 89

to infuse such new vitality into Sintooism as might enable it to
cope with the more potent influence of the Buddhist religion, will
be found in some learned essays by Mr. Ernest Satow, printed in
the '' Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan. "]


^!je Brilrge to l^eabm.*

Oh ! that that ancient bridge
Hanging 'twixt heaven and earth were longer still !

Oh ! that yon mountain-ridge
So boldly tow'ring tow'red more boldly still !

Then from the moon on high
I'd fetch some drops of the life-giving stream,t —

A gift that might beseem

Our Lord the King, to make him live for aye !

(Anon.)


a Uerg ^Indent ©Ire^

Mountains and ocean-waves

Around me lie ;
For ever the mountain-chains

Tower to the sky ;


* The poet alludes to the so-called ama no ukihashif or ' ' floating bridge
of heaven," — the bridge by which, according to the Japanese mythology,
the gods passed up and down in the days of old. The idea of such bridges
seems to have been common in early times in Japan, for there are several
traditions concerning them in various widely-separated provinces.

t The translator can discover no reference elsewhere to this lunar
river or spring. The commentator Mabuchi says : ** The poet uses this
expression on account of the watery nature of the moon."


90 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Fixed is the ocean

Immutably : —
Man is a thing of nought^

Bom but to die !

(Anon.)


V^z Sebentfj 0ifif|t of tfie Sebentfj JEoon.

[The following poem requires some elucidation. The ** Heavenly
Kiver" is the Milky Way. The Herdboy is a star in Aquila, and
the Weaver is the star Vega. The fable of their being spouses or
lovers who may never meet but on the seventh night of the seventh
moon is extremely ancient^ apparently owing its origin to some
allusions to the movements of the two stars in question in the
•* 5Ae King" or ** Book of Ancient Chinese Poetry," edited by Con-
fucius. As might be expected, the legend has taken several forms.
According to one version, the Weaver was a maiden who dwelt on
the left bank of the River of Heaven, and was so constantly
employed in making garments for the offspring of the Emperor of
Heaven (Gk>d), that she had no leisure to attend to the adorning of
her person. At last, however, God, taking compassion on her
loneliness, gave her in marriage to a Herdsman who dwelt upon
the opposite bank of the stream. Hereupon the Weaver began to
grow slack in her work ; and God in his anger made her recross
the river, at the same time forbidding her husband to visit her
more than once every year. Another story represents the pair as
having been mortals who were married at the ages of fifteen and
twelve, and who died at the ages of a hundred and three and
ninety-nine respectively. After death, their spirits flew up to the
sky, in the river watering which, the supreme divinity was un-
fortunately in the habit of performing his ablutions daily. No
mortals, therefore, might pollute it by their touch, excepting on
the seventh day of the seventh moon, when the deity, instead of
bathing, went to listen to the reading of the Buddhist scriptures.
Japanese literature, like that of China, teems with allusions to


MISCELLANEOUS. 91

the loves of the Herdboy and the Weaver ; and till within the last
three or four years, the seventh day of the seventh moon was one
of the most popular festivals in town and country. Traces of it,
as of almost everything else that was picturesque and quaint, must
now be sought for in the remoter provincial districts.]

Since the hour when first begun
Heaven and earth their course to run,
Parted by the Heav'nly Eiver
Stand the Herdboy and the Weaver :
For in each year these lovers may
Meet but for one single day.
To and fro the constant swaiu
Wanders in the heavenly plain,
Till sounds the hour when fore and aft
He's free to deck his tiny craft
In gallant trim, and ship the oar
To bear him to the opposing shore.

Now the autumn season leads,
When through the swaying, sighing reeds
Eustles the chill breath of even.
And o'er the foaming str.eam of heaven,
Heedless of the silv'ry spray.
He'll row exulting on his way.
And, with his arms in hers entwiu'd.
Tell all the loving tale he pin'd
To tell her through the livelong year.

Yes ! the seventh moon is here ;
And I, though mortal, hail the night
That brings heav'n's lovers such delight.

(Anon.)


92 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


l^ecollectionjS of JSg Cfjillrren^

[To the verses are, in the original, prefixed the following lines
of prose : —

" The holy Shiyaka Mnni, letting drop verities from his golden
mouth, says, * I love mankind as I love Ragora.' * And again
he preaches, *No love exceedeth a parent's love.* Thus even so
great a saint retained his love for his child. How much more,
then, shall not the common run of men love their children ? "]

Ne'er a melon can I eat,

But calls to mind my children dear ;

Ne'er a chestnut crisp and sweet,

But makes the lov'd ones seem more near.

Whence did they come my life to cheer ?

Before mine eyes they seem to sweep,

So that I may not even sleep.


Sfjort Stanja on tfje same occasion*

What use to me the gold and silver hoard ?
What use to me the gems most rich and rare ?
Brighter by far, — ay ! bright beyond compare, —
The joys my children to my heart afford !

(Yamagami-no-Okura.)


* Properiy Bahula, Buddha's only son. Shiyaka, a corruption of
Sakya, is the name commonly employed in Japan to designate the
Indian prince Gautama, the founder of Buddhism, whom Europeans
usuaUy caU Buddha.


MISCELLANEOUS. 93


COMPOSED ON THE OCCASION OF MY LORD OHOTOMO, THE IN-
SPECTOR OP TRIBUTE, MAKING THE ASCENT OF MOUNT
TSUKUBA.

[Who this Lord Ohotomo was is not certain, there being no
sufficient grounds for supposing, with the commentator Keichiyuu,
that he was the same as the Prime Minister Ohotomo mentioned
on page 105 as father of the poetess Sakanouhe. Mount Tsukuba,
in the province of Hitachi, is well seen from Yedo, rising with its
two peaks of almost exactly equal height, at a distance of some
sixty miles to the north of the city, and gaining from the flatness
of the country, between its base and the coast, an appearance of
dignity to which its actual elevation of only three thousand feet
would scarcely entitle it. The translator, on making the ascent,
found a small shrine on either peak, one dedicated to the god,
and the other to the goddess, of the locality.]

When my lord, who fain would look on

Great Tsukiiba, double-crested,

To the highlands of Hitachi

Bent his steps, then I, his servant,

Panting with the heats of summer,

Down my brow the sweat-drops dripping.

Breathlessly toil'd onward, upward.

Tangled roots of timber clutching.

" There, my lord ! behold the prospect ! "

Cried I when we scal'd the summit.

And the gracious goddess gave us

Smiling welcome, while her consort

Condescended to admit us

Into these his sacred precincts.

O'er Tsukuba double-crested,

Where the clouds do have their dwelling


94 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

And the rain for ever raineth,
Shedding his divine refulgence,
And revealing to our vision
Ev'ry landmark that in darkness
And in shapeless gloom was shrouded ;-
Till for joy our belts we loosen'd,
Casting off constraint, and sporting
As at home we oft had sported.
Danker now than in the dulcet
Spring-time grew the summer grasses ;
Yet to-day our bliss was boundless.


Couplets

When the great men of old pass'd by this way,
Could e'en tiieir pleasures vie with ours to-day ?

(Anon.)


©Ire to t!je Cucftoo*

Nightingales built the nest
Where, as a lonely guest,
First thy young head did rest,

Cuckoo so dear !
Strange to the father bird,
gtrange to the mother bird
Sounded the note they heard,

Tender and clear.


MISCELLANEOUS. 95

rieeing thy natal bow'rs
Bright with the sflv'ry flow'rs,*
Oft in the summer hours
Hither thou fliest ;
Light'st on some orange f tall.
Scattering the blossoms all«
And, while around they fall,
Ceaselessly criest

Though through the livelong day
Soundeth thy roundelay,
Never its accents may

Fall on mine ear :
Come, take a bribe of me I
Ne'er to far regions flee ;
Dwell on mine orange-tree,

Cuckoo so dear 1

(Anon.)


COMPOSED ON THE OCCASION OF ASCENDINa MOUNT T&UKUBA,
AND JOINING IN THE CHORIO DANCE.

Where many an eagle builds her nest
On Tsukuba's mountain-crest,
There the men and maids foregather,
And this the song they sing together :


* literally "the blossomB of the « slirab (denJtsiak t^^bMianaS^^ which
are white.
t Literally, the iaMtMna (c{fo'u«mani^ar»nt»), one of the oraoge tribe.


96 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

" I your mistress mean to woo !
You may take and love mine too !
For the gods that here do throne
Ne'er this ancient use disown :
So shut your eyes but for to-day,
And find no fault howe'er we play !

(MUSHIMAEO.)


BESPECTFULLY PRESENTED TO PRINCE TACHIBANA-NO-HIRONARI
ON THE OCCASION OF HIS DEPARTURE AS AMBASSADOR TO
THE COURT OF CHINA, WISHING HIM A PROSPEROUS YOTAGB
AND A HAPPY RETURN. (A.D. 733.)

In the great days of old,
When o'er the land the gods held sovereign sway.

Our fathers lov'd to say
That the bright gods with tender care enfold

The fortunes of Japan,
Blessing the land with many an holy spell :

And what they lov'd to teU
We of this later age ourselves do prove ;

For every living man
May feast his eyes on tokens of their love.

Countless are the hosts attendant
On the heaVn-establish'd throne

Of the Mikado, bright descendant
Of the goddess of the Sun :

But on thee his special grace

Lights to-day, for thou canst trace


MISCELLANEOUS. 97

From king to king thy noble birth

To the lords of all the earth ;
And to thee the word is given

Sacred missives to convey
From the resplendent Son of Heaven

To the far distant limits of Cathay.

May the great immortals dwelling

On the isles that line thy road.
And the gods who in the swelling

Billows make their dread abode.
Gather round and safely guide thee,

While, that nought but good betide thee,
That Great Spirit ^ in whose hand

Lie the fortunes of our land.
And all the gods of heaven and earth,

Fluttering down on airy' pinions,
From the country of thy birth
Waft thee to Cathay's unknown dominions !

And when, thine embassage concluded.
Hither again thou think'st to come,

May the same great gods that brooded
0*er thy going, bring thee home ;


* What divinity should he understood hy this term is a matter of
dehate among the native commentators. Prohahly it refers to Ohoana-
muchi, the ahoriginal monarch of the province of Idzumo, who, according
to the national traditions, peacefully relinquished the sovereignty of the
country to the Mikado's ancestors, the heaven-descended gods, on the
condition of receiving from them divine honours. One of the most
interesting questions connected with the semi-fabulous early Japanese
history is that, as to whether this tradition may be interpreted so
as to warrant the belief of the existence in Japan of a pre-Japanese
civilisation.

G


98 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Maj their fingers help thy vessel

Surely with the waves to wrestle,
As if across the azure line

Thy path were ruled with ink and line, —
That, round bold Chika's headland * turning,

Soon thou land on Mitsu's shore.
Oh ! tarry not ! for thee we're yearning ;
On thee may Heav'n its richest blessings pour !

(Yamagami-no Okuka.)


^noti)er &^t

PRESENTED TO THE PBIKCE OK THE SAME OCCASION.

Till the thread of life is broken
Shall thine image fill my heart ;

But the sov'reign lord^ has spoken,
And, poor mortals, we must part !

Where the crane, with accents wailing,
On Naniha's billowy strand

Calls his mate when day is failing.
There thou leav'st thy native land.

With the foam-capped waves to wrestle.
In his place each oarsman sits ;


* A cfvpe in the province of Hizefi, not far from the site of the modem
town of KagAsaki. This is a long way from Mitsu-no-Hama, near Nara,
the vessers final destination ; but the worst portion of the journey from
China would be overpast, as the rest of the way lies through the Inland
Sea.

t Not God or fate, but the Mikado.


MISCELLANEOUS. 99

Eounding Mitsu's cape, thy vessel
On past countless islands flits.

While, the sacred emblems taking ^
' To implore the heaVnly train,
I await thee : heed mine aching
Heart, and soon come home again !

(Kasa-no-Kanamura Asoif.)


iLines

COMPOSED ON THE OCCASION OF PBINCE WOSA'S HUNTINQ
PARTY ON THE MOOB OF KARIJLf

[Prince Wosa was son of the Emperor Telimu, and died A.D.
715.]

When our prince, the mighty monarch.
When our prince, of high-set splendour.
To the hunt, with many a horseman,
Marches o'er Kariji's moorland.
Kneeling low, the deer adore him,
Kiieeling low, the quails surround him.
We, too, kneel like deer before him,
We, too, kneel like quails around him.
Giving true and trembling service ;


* See the note to p. 77,

t Kariji is by some taken as a common noun in the sense of ** hunting
field ; " but it is better to regard it as the name of a place, probably
situated in the neighbourhood of the modem village of Shishiji in the
province of Tamato.


loo JAPANESE^ CLASSICAL POETRY.

And our eyes and hearts, uplifted,
Seem to rest on heav'n's own radiance,
Ever piercing new perfections
In our prince, the mighty monarch !

(HiTOMARO.)


©5e to iFusisama/

There on the border, where the land of Kahi t
Doth touch the frontier of Suruga's land,
A beauteous province stretch'd on either hand,'
See Fusiyama rear his head on high !

The clouds of heav'n in rev rent wonder pause,
Nor may the birds those giddy heights assay.
Where melt thy snows amid thy fires away,
Or thy fierce fires lie quench'd beneath thy snows.

What name might fitly tell, what accents sing,
Thine awful, godlike grandeur ? 'Tis thy breast
That holdeth Narusaha's flood at rest,
Thy side whence Fuzhikaha's waters spring.

* Fusiyama has been considered as a naturalised English word, like
Vienna, Brussels, &c., and the native spelling of Fuzhiyama (more
correctly Fuzhinone or Fuzhisan) has therefore not been adopted in the
text. Fuzhikaha is the name of a river, and Narusaha that of a lake
now dried up. The lovely waterfalls of Shiraito-no-Taki, which form by
far the most charming feature of the landscape surrounding the great
volcano (not yet extinct in the poet's time), have been strangely passed
over in silence by hira as by the other poets his contemporaries. It is a
common Japanese saying that no good verses have been written on
Fusiyama.

t Pronounced as one syllable, as if written Kye, Kahi and Suruga are
the names of provinces.


k


MISCELLANEOUS. loi

Great Fusiyama, tow'ring to the sky !
A treasure art thou giVn to mortal man,
A god-protector watching o'er Japan : —
On thee for ever let me feast mine eye !

(Anon.)


Ferses

COMPOSED ON THE OCCASION OF AN IMPERIAL PROGRESS TO
THE SUMMER PALACE OF YOSHINO IN A.D. 725.

[Y6shino is justly famous for its beauty, — a beauty so marvel-
lous when, in the spring-time, every mountain and every valley
is ablaze with flowering trees, that, borrowing the proverb relating
to Naples, it might well be said, "See Y6shino and die I" It is
situated in the province of Yamato, and has witnessed some of the
most stirring events of Japanese history. During the fourteenth
century, when what the author of ** The Mikado's Empire " has
aptly termed the " Wars of the Chrysanthemums" * split up the
court and country into two hostile camps, Y6shino was the
residence of the southern or legitimate sovereigns, and the lovely
country surrounding it was the scene of perpetual bloody combats
and hairbreadth escapes. Not far from Y6shino lie the maple-
trees of Tatsuta, the heights of Mount Kagu, Nara the ancient
capital, all celebrated in Japanese song and story, while the
palaces of Kiyauto and the blue waters of the lute-shaped lake of
Afumi are not far to seek.]

Beauteous is the woody mountain

Of imperial Yoshino ;
Fair and limpid is the fountain

Dashing to the vale below ;

* The chrysanthemum flower is the Mikado's crest*


102 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

High beside whose upper reaches

Warbles many a tiny bird,
While upon its lower beaches

Frogs' loud am'rous notes are heard.*

Far and near, in stately leisure.
Pass the courtiers o'er the lea ;

Ev'ry glance shows some new pleasure.
And I pray thus tremblingly :

" Glorious deities that for ever

O'er the heaVn and earth do reign !

Grant that these our joys may never
From fair Yoshino be ta'en ! "

(Kasa-no-Kanamuka Asok.)


[In the first moon of the fourth year of the period Zhiliki (A.D.
727), the nobles and courtiers had assembled in the fields of
Kasuga^t and were diverting themselves with a game of polo,
when the sky was suddenly overcast, and the rain poured down
amid thunder and lightning, while the palace was left without
guards or attendants. Thereupon the Mikado issued an edict
confining the offenders to the guard-house, imder strict prohibition
of leaving its gates. The following ode was composed under the
feeling of disappointment and vexation thus engendered.]

Spring his gentle beams is flinging
O'er Kasiiga's ivy-tangled lea ;


* The musical (?) voice of the frog Ib much admired by the Japanese,
and is frequently alluded to in their poetry. They also, like the ancient
Greeks, liave a partiality for the cry of certain species of cicadce.

t Close to Nara.


MISCELLANEOUS. 103

To the hills the mists are clinging,
Takamdto's heights are ringing
With the nightingale's first melody.


All the court * for this entrancing
Hour had yeam'd — oh ! might it never end ! —

Then upon our chargers prancing,

GaUy side by side advancing,
Through the fields our course we long'd to bend.


Ah ! could we have been foreknowing
This accurs'd, unutterable thing,
Then by Saho's waters flowing,
Where the ferns and rushes growing
Line the strand 'mid birds' sweet carolling.


O'er our heads their branches twining,
In the stream we might have lav'd us free : f
Now the monarch's law, confining,
Bids us mourn away the shining
Hours of spring in dark captivity.

(Anon.)


* The lines in the original answering to the commencement of this
stanza are so oorrupt as to be well-nigh unintelligible. Motowori's
interpretation has been followed in the translation.

t One of the ceremonies of purification consisted in waving ferns and
rushes over the person and then flinging them into the water. At a
later period, for these plants were substituted the so-called wiua or gohei^
strips of linen, and afterwards of paper. Beligious ablutions are con-
stantly referred to in the earliest poetry and history of the Japanese.


io4 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


WHICH, AT A PARTING FEAST, THE EMPEROE SHIYAUMU * CON-
DESCENDED TO COMPOSE FOR THREE NOBLES ABOUT TO
START ON THEIR SEVERAL CIRCUITS THROUGH THE PRO-
VINCES. (A.D. 732.)

If, like loyal men, ye up and carry

To far realms your sov'reign lord's behest,

I within these halls of bliss may tarry,
I my hands may fold upon my breast.

O'er your heads my sacred hands, extended,
Shall caress, shall bless each faithful soul :

When ye come again, your labours- ended,
I, the king, will fiU again .this bowL


iLammt on i^ara, tfie ©eserteti CapitaLt

Yamato's land, that still with pow'r imperial
Our monarchs rule in undivided sway,

* Beigned A.D. 724-756. As stated in the Introduction, it is to the
reign of this prince that the *'CoUection of Ten Thousand Leaves'*
should almost certainly be referred. A note appended to the ode in the
original mentions that, according to some authorities, it was composed,
not by Shiyaumu himself, but by his mother, the Empress Dowager
Geflshiyau, who had governed from 715 to 723, and then abdicated in
favour of her son. In this case, the word '*king" in the translation
would have to be altered to ** queen." The Japanese language, which
ignores our distinction of genders, cannot here lend to criticism the
assistance of grammar.

t The seat of government was definitively moved from Nara in A.D.
784, and continued to be at Kiyauto from that time until i868«


MISCELLANEOUS, log

Since first the gods came down from realms ethereal*
Hath never ceas'd those monarchs to obey*

Wherefore methought that while, in grand succes-
sion,

Prince after prince should rule earth's wide domain.
Throughout the myriad ages' long procession

From Nara's palace would they choose to reign.t

Sweet Kara ! still in Mount Mikasa's bowers.
When circling mists proclaimed the pow'r of spring,

Darkening the forest bloomed the cherry-flowers.
Nor ever ceas'd the birds their carolling.

Still, when mid-autumn's frost-touch'd dews were
falling.

High on Ikoma's | often-burning crest
The lusty stag, for his dear consort calling,

O'er trampled lespedeza thickets press'd.§ '

Never thy hills might tire my gaze, and never
Far from thy dwellings might I wish to roam ;


* The first sovereign of the dynasty of the gods on earth, according to
the Japanese mythology, was His Grandeur Minigi, to whom the more
ancient aboriginal ruler Ohoanamuchi resigned his throne and domain
(see note to p. 97).

t Nara being in the province of Yamato.

% A mountain in the province of Kahachi, on whose summit, in ancient
times, signal fires used to be lighted. Though discontinued nearly a
century before the probable date of this poem, the ancient custom had
bequeathed its name to one of the peaks, which was called Tobu-hi-ga-
Woka, or the "Eminence of the Flying Fires."

§ In the later poetry the lespedeza flower is itself perpetually termed
the stag's mate, doubtless on account of its blossoming at the time of
year when these animals pair off.


io6 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY,

Thy streets, stretcli'd out across the plain for ever,
Each house some loyal and sturdy warrior's home.


And so I trusted that, till old and hoaryj

The heav'ns and earth should on each other fall,
Nara might sparkle with perennial glory,
And Nara's palace hold the Lord of alL

But Nara, too, must yield, as yield all mortals^
To the great King's inscrutable commands :

Her beauty fades ; the court deserts her portals,
like birds of passage seeking other lands.

Here in these streets, where high-bom throngs ad-
vancing,
And neighing steeds erst made the heavens re-
sound,
No step is heard, no chargers more are prancing,
And desolation covers all the ground.

(Sakimaeo.)


a Stafl^s ILammt

[The foUowing lines, and otliers which set forth in a similar
strain the '* Lamentations of a Crab/' appear to have been com-
posed with the intention of enforcing the Buddhist doctrine of
the sinfuhiess of slaying any living creature. The first ten lines
in the original offer a good example of the poetical ornament
described in the Introduction under the name of a "preface,"
forming, as they do, a mere preparation for the * * piUow-word "
which ushers in the name of Mount ^eguri.]


^


MISCELLANEOUS. 107

Oft in June, or earlier May-tide,
On Heguri's heights foregather
From afar the med'cine hunters,*
Where, amidst the mountain gorges,
By twin-soaring yew-trees sheltered,
As with many a stalwart comrade,
Arm'd with bows and arm'd with arrows,
Tor the passing deer I waited,
Came a stag, and stood before me,
'And thus 'gan his lamentation : —

" Sudden death is now my sentence ;
I must serve the mighty monarch.
And mine horns shall grace his sunshade.
And mine ears shall be his inkhorn.
And mine eyes shall be his mirror.
And mine hoofs shall be his bow-notch,
And mine hairs shall grace his pencil.
And mine hide shall line his casket.
And my flesh shall be his mincemeat.
And my liver, too, his mincemeat,
And my cud shall be his seas'ning.
Men shall praise me, men shall praise me,
Saying, * Lo ! on one poor agSd
Stag these sev'nfold blossoms flower.
Eightfold blossoms flower sweetly ! ' " f

(Anon.)


* The flesh of the stag was supposed to possess medicinal properties.

t What in English are called ''double-flowers" are termed by the
Japanese "eightfold flowers." The *' sevenfold " is in the original put
merely to fiU up the verse, and has no special meaning.


lo8 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


COMPOSED WHEN THE POET COULD NOT CONTAIN HIMSELF FOR
JOY AT HAVING BEHELD IN A DREAM A FAVOURITE HAWK
THAT HE HAD LOST.*

Farthest of all the lands that own
The sovereign monarch's might,

There lies a province wild and lone,
" Koshi the Snowy *' hight.

So barren are its moors, that nought

But tangled grasses grow ;
So high its hills, that like mere rills

The distant rivers show.

There, when on panting summer night

The grayling dart around.
With cormorants and lanterns bright

Into their wherries bound

The fishermen, a merry crowd,

From off the shingly beach.
And row against the dashing flood

Though ev'ry crystal reach.

And when the hoar-frost 'gins to fall,

And Koshi's autumn moors
Are full of birds, my hawkers all

Assemble out of doors.


* The poet, at the time of composing this piece, was governor of the
province of Koshi in the north-west of the empire.


MISCELLANEOUS. 109

But none of their so vaunted stock
With " Blackie " mote compare : —

" Big Blackie " was a roof- tailed hawk,
And a silver bell she bare»

At mom five hundred birds we'd start,

And more at fall of day :
Swift in her flight, swift to alight,

She never miss'd her prey.

But while I gaz'd with smiling pride

Upon my " Blackie " dear,
Sure that in all the world beside

Ne'er would arise her peer.

That ugly, vile, and craz'd old man,*

All on a rainy day,
Without a word, takes the dear bird

Out hunting far away ;

And, coming back, and coughing low.

Tells me the bitter tale.
How, soaring from the moor below,

Heavenward the hawk did sail.

On past Mishima's grassy plain

And Futagami's height.
Till, lost amid the clouds and rain,

She vanished from the sight.


* My lord's Iiawker,


iio JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

To tempt her home was past my pow'r :
Helpless and dumb I stood,

While flames my bosom did devour,
And sadly I. did brood.

And yet, if haply some fond spell
Might lure her back to me,

Watchers I set, and many a net
All over hill and lea ;

And with the holy symbols white.
And gUtt'ring mirror's sphere *

Call'd on the gods of awful might
My sad complaint to hear.

So, as I waited at the shrine,
And sleep stole o'er mine eyes,

A fairy maid stood forth and said : —
" The hawk thy soul doth prize,

" Thy glorious * Blackie,' is not lost ;

But o'er Matsuda's beach,
And where the fisher-boats are toss'd

On Himi'B breezy reach.

" O'er Furu's strand and Tako's isle,
Where myriad seagulls play,

She's been a hunting all the while :
I saw her yesterday.


* For the use of the mirror and of linen or paper symbols in making
supplication to the gods see the notes to pp. 77 and 103.


MISCELLANEOUS. ;xii

" Two days at least must come and go

Before she homeward flies ;
Sev'n days at most, — ^it must be so, —

Will show her to thine eyes.

" So let thy tears no longer stream,

No more for ' Blackie ' sigh 1 "
So spake the maiden in my dream,

Then vanish'd to the sky.

(Yakamochi.)


[In the year 749 there had been no rain since the sixth day of
the intercalary fifth moon,* and the peasants* fields and gardens
seemed on the point of drying up. On the first day of the sixth
moon there suddenly appeared a rain-doud, which gave occasion
to the following verses.]

From eVry quarter of the vast domains, —
Earth's whole expanse, — o'er which the sov'reign

reigns,
Far as the clank of horses' hoofs resounds,
Tar as the junks seek ocean's utmost bounds,
Ten thousand ofiPrings, as in days of yore,
Still to this day their varied treasures pour
Into th' imperial coffers : — but of all
The bearded rice is chief and principal.
But now, alas ! the fields are till'd in vain ;


* According to the old Japanese calendar, which was modelled on that
of China, an intercalary month ha^ to be inserted three times in every
eight years to make up for the reckoning of the year as containing only
360 days.


Iia JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Day follows day, and still no show'r of rain ;
Mom after mom each thirsty blade droops down,
And eVry garden tint is chang'd to brown ;
While I, heart-stricken, on the prospect gaze,
And, as the infant that his hands doth raise
To clutch his mother's breast, so to the heav'n
I lift mine eyes to pray that rain be giv'n.

Oh ! may the cloud whose fleecy form is seen
To rest yon distant mountain-peaks between,
Wafted across to where the ocean-god
Makes in the foaming waves his dread abode.
Meet with the yapours of the wat'ry plain.
Then here retuming, faU as grateful rain !

(Yakamochi.)


lEament on tfje JHutafiilits of aU ^artfjlg EfiinsiS.

Since the far natal hour of earth and heaven,

Men never cease to cry
That ne'er to aught in this our world 'twas given

To last eternally.

If upward gazing on the moon of light

That hangs in heav'n's high plain,

I see her wax, 'twill not be many a night
Before that moon shall wane.

And if in spring each twig puts forth his flow'r

On all the hills around,
Dew-chill'd and storm- swept in dull autumn's hour

The leaves fall to the ground,


MISCELLANEOUS. It3

Such, too, is man : soon pales the ruddy cheek,

The raven locks soon fade ;
And the fresh smile of morn 'twere vain to seek

Amid the evening shade.

And I that gaze upon the mortal scene.
My tears flow down for ever.

Where all is viewless as the wind unseen,
And fleeting as the river.

(Takamochi.)


(MAY, A.D. 750.)

Near to the valley stands my humble cot,
The village nestles 'neath the cooling shade
Of lofty timber; but the silent glade

Not yet re-echoes with the cuckoo's note.

The morning hour e'er finds me, sweetest bird !
Before my gate ; and, when the day doth pale,
I cast a wistful glance adown the vale ; —

But e'en one note, alas ! not yet is heard.

(HiEONAHA.)


3Lines

SENT BY A MOTHER TO HER DAUGHTER. (JULY, A.D. 750.)

[The mother was Sakanouhe, and lived at the court of Nara.
Her daughter, who was married to the poet Yakamochi, had


H4: JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

accompanied her husband to his governorship of the distant pro-
vince of Koshi*]

ff

Thou wast my child, and to my heart more dear
Than to the sov'reign monarch of the deep
All the rich jewels that in casket rare
Beneath the billows he is said to keep.
But it was just that thy bold spouse should bear
Thee' in his train t'ward Koshi's deserts wild.
Thou bad'st adieu; and since that hour, sweet child.
In ceaseless visions of remembrance clear
There seems to float the face for which I yearn,
The brows oblique as ocean's crested wave.
But I am old, and scarce love's pow'r to save
May stretch my 'life to welcome thy return.

(Sakanouhe.)


* The native commentators do not notice the discrepancy between the
statement of this poem that Yakamochi had taken his wife with him to
his far northern governorship, and those of his own verses written from
the north to the wife whom he had left ai Nara, and lamenting his solitary
state (see the songs on pp. 64 and 66, besides many others in the ^^Manye-
fuikifu *'). The simplest explanation probably is that the poet had two
wives (though Sakanouhe's daughter was doubtless the legitiinate one), and
that, in writing of his solitariness to his Nara wife, he made use of a
poetical license as common among the ancient Japanese as the relations
between the s^zes were loose.


@)!)ort @)tan|aief


FROM THE


"KOKINSHIFU;"


OR,


" COLLECTION OF ODES, ANCIENT AND

MODERN"


« I

1


SHORT STANZAS.


I.

(Spring, i 4.*)

Spring, spring, haa come, while yet the landscape bears
Its fleecy burden of unmelted snow !
Now may the zephyr gently 'gin to blow,
To melt the nightingale's sweet frozen tears.

(Anon.)


(Spring, i. 6.)

Amid the brancties of the silv'ry bowers
The nightingale doth sing : perchance he knows
That spring hath come, and takes the later snows
Tor the white petals of the plum's sweet flowers.t

(SOSEI.)


* As noted in the Introduction, the *' KokiHthifu " stanzas are, in the
original, arranged in several categories, — Spring, Summer, Love, &c.,
many of which are themselves subdivided. Thus Spring, i. 4, signifies
the fourth ode in the first subdivision of Spring, and so on of the rest.

t The plum-tree, cherry-tree, &c., are in Japan cultivated not for
their f nlit, but for their blossoms. Together with the wisteria, the lotus,
the iris, the lespedeza, and a few others, these take the place which is
occupied in the West by the rose, the lily, the violet, &c« Though
flowers are perpetually referred to and immensely admired, there has
never been any symbolism connected with them.


n8 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

3.
(Spring, I 23.)

Too lightly woven must the garments be, —
Garments of mist, — that clothe the coming spring :
In wilcl'disorder see them fluttering
Soon as the zephyr breathes adown the lea.

(YUKIHIEA.)

(Spring, I SI.)

Heedless that now the mists of spring do rise,
Why fly the wild geese northward ? — Can it be
Their native Jiome is fairer to their eyes.
Though no sweet flowers blossom on its lea ?

(ISE.)

(Spring,!. 5 J.)

If earth but ceas'd to offer to my sight
The beauteous cherry-trees when blossoming.
Ah ! ,then indeed, with peaceful, pure delight.
My heart might revel in the joys of spring ! ^

(Narihira.)

6.

(Spring, ii. 8.)

Tell me, doth any know the dark recess

Where dwell the winds that scatter the spring flow'rs?


* i.e., ''The cherry-blossoms are ineffably lovely ; but my joy in gazing
at them is marred by the knowledge that they must so soon pass away.


>»


SHORT STANZAS. -l li^

Hide it not from me ! By the heav'nly pow'rs,
I'll search them out to upbraid their wickedness !

(Sosel)

... . 7-

{Spring, ii 20.)

No man so callous but he heaves a sigh
When o'er his head the wither'd cherry-flowers
Come flutt'ring down. — ^Who knows ? the spring's soft

show'rs
May be but tears shed by the sorrowing sky.

(KUBONUSHI.)

8.
(Spring, ii. 41.)

Whom would your cries, with artful calumny,
Accuse of scatt'ring the pale cherry-flow'rs ?
'Tis your own pinions flitting through these bow'rs
That raise the gust which makes them fall and die !

(SOSEI.)

9-

{SumTner, i.)

In blossoms the wisteria-tree to-day
Breaks forth, that sweep the wavelets of my lake :
When will the mountain-cuckoo come and make
The garden vocal with his first sweet lay ? *

{Attributed to HiTOMARO.)

* The wisteria among flowera, and among birds the cnckoo, are the
poetical representatives of early summer, as are the plum-blossom and
the nightingale of early spring.


I20 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

10.

{Summer^ 31.)

Oh, lotos-leaf! I dreamt that the wide earth

Held nought more pure than thee, — ^held nought more

true:
Why, then, when on thee rolls a drop of dew,
Pretend that 'tis a gem of priceless worth ? *

(Henzeu.)

II.

{Autumn, i 4.)

Can I be dreaming ? 'Twas but yesterday
We planted out each tender shoot again ; f
And now the autumn breeze sighs o*er the pl^in,
Where fields of yellow rice confess its sway.

{Av/m!)

12.

{Autumn, i. 25.)

A thousand thoughts of tender vague regret

Crowd on my soul, what time I stand and gaze

On the soft-shining autumn moon ; — and yet

Not to me only speaks her silv'ry haze.

(Chisato.)


* The lotus is the Buddhist emblem of purity, and the lotus growing
out of the mud is a frequent metaphor for the heart that remains unsullied
by contact with the world.

f The transplanting of the rice occupies the whole rural population
during the month of June, when men and women may all be seen
working in the fields knee-deep in water. The crops are gathered in
October.


SIfORT STANZAS. • Ml

(AiUumn, i. 44.)

What bark impelled by autumn's freshening gale
Comes speedmg tVard me ?— 'Tis the wild geese driven
Across the fathomless expanse of Heav'n,
And lifting up their voices for a sail !

(Anon,)

14.
(Autumn, i. 58.)

The silv'ry dewdrops that in autumn light
Upon the moors must surely jewels be ;
For there they hang all over hill and lea,
Strung oA the threads the spiders weave so tight.

(ASAYASU.)

IS.
(Autumn, ii 2.)

The trees and herbage, as the year doth wane,
For gold and russet leave their foirmer hue, —
All but the wave-toss'd flow'rets of the main,
That never yet chill autumn's empire knew.

(Yasuhide.)

16.

(AtUumn, ii. 9.)

The dews are all of one pale silv'ry white :
Then tell me, if thou canst, oh ! tell me why


Ui JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

These silv'ry dews so marvellously dye
The autumn leaves a myriad colours bright ?

■ (TOSHIYUKI.)

17-

{Autumn, it 44.)

The warp is hoar-frost and the woof is dew,-^
Too frail, alas ! the warp and woof to be :
For scarce the woods their damask robes endue,
When, torn and soil'd, they flutter o'er the lea.

(Sekiwo.)

18.
{Autumn, ii. 47.)

E*en when on earth the thund'ring gods held^sway
Was such a sight beheld ? — Calm Tatsta's * flood,
Stain'd, as by Chinese art, with hues of blood,
Eolls o'er Yamato's peaceful fields away.

(NTarihira.)

r •

I . t

19.
{Winter, 10.)

When falls the snow, lo ! eVry herb and tree.
That in seclusion through the wintry hours
Long time had been held fast, breaks forth in flow'rs
That ne'er in spring were known upon the lea.

(TSURAYUKI.)

* Properly written Tatstita. The allusion liere is to the crimson and
scarlet of the autumn maple-trees, which may well form a constantly
recurring themid for the raptures of the Japanese poets, who in the fall
of every year see around them a halo of glory subh as our duU European
forests do not even distantly approacK


SHORT STANZAS. 123

r «. , - •

20.

{Wirtier, 17.)

When from the skies, that wintry gloom enshrouds,
The blossoms fall and flutter round my head,
Methinks the spring e'en now his light must shed
O'er heavenly lands that lie beyond the clouds.

(FUKAYABU.)

*^ {Congratulations^ i.)

A thousand years of happy life be thine !
Live on, my lord, till what are pebbles now.
By age united, to great rocks shall grow,
Whose venerable sides the moss doth line !

(Anon!)

22.

{Congraiulations^ 9.)

[Ode composed on beholding a screen presented to the Empress
by Prince Sadayasu * at the festival held in honour of her fiftieth
birthday, whereon was painted a man seated beneath the falling
cherry-blossoms and watching them flutter down.]

/

k .

Of all the days and months that hurry by
Nor leave a trace, how long the weary tale !


* The Empress intended is the one famous in Japanese literature
under the designation of Nideu-no-Kisaki, consort of the Mikado Seiwa
and mother of Prince Sadayasu. It was in A.D. 891 that the festival
was held»


124 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

And yet how few the springs whei^ in the vale
On the dear flowerets I may feast mine eye ! *

(Okikaze.)

23.
{Congratulations^ 11.)

If ever mortal in the days of yore

By Heav'n a thousand years of life was lent,

I wot not ; but if never seen before,

Be thou the man to make the precedent ! t

(SOSEI.)

24.
{Parting, 39.)

Mine oft-reiterated pray'rs in vain
The parting guest would stay : Oh, cherry-flow'rs !
Pour down your petals, that from out these bow'rs
He ne'er may find the homeward path again !

{Anon,)

25.

{Travelling, 4.)

With roseate hues that pierce th' autumnal haze
The spreading dawn lights up Akashi's shore ;


* In rendering this stanza the translator has foUowed, not the original
** Kokinshifu " text, but the better known reading of the ** Bauyeishifu**
(*'CoUection of Bright Songs*'), a compilation made early in the eleventh
century as a wedding-present for his son-in-law Michinori (afterwards
regent of the empire) by the Minister KiHtau.

t For this very prosaic expression the Japanese original is resppnaible.


SHORT STANZAS. I2S'

But the fair ship, alas ! is seen no more : —
An island veils it from my loving gaze.

(AttrHnUed to Hitomabo,)

But more probaUy by 9ome court lady who thus expresses her
grief at.thefiight of the departure of the vessel hearing her love
from her side. Akashi is a lovely spot on the shores of the Inland
Sea.

■

26.
(Travelling, 6.)

[The high-born poet Nfirihira, who had been banished from the
court on account of an intrigue with the Empress, was either
compelled, or himself chose,— we know not which, — ^to hide kis
disgrace in a temporary absence from the capital, and made to
what were then the wild and almost undiscovered districts of
Eastern Japan, a journey whose every step has been rendered
classic in the national literature through the pages of the **Ise
Mono-gcUari/* an historical romance which details in the most
perfect literary style Narihira's amorous and other adventures,
and strings together on a thread, of narrative the various odes that
he composed.* ** He had now," says the original, ** reached the
banks of the river Sumida, which floweth between the lands of
Musashi and Shimofusa,t and had dismounted and sat him doWu
awhile with his heart full of loving remembrances of Miyako,
gazing steadfastly before him, and thinking of the immeasurable
distance that he had travelled. Nor was there any in the whole
company whose thoughts went not back to Miyako, as the ferry-
man Wde them hasten on board for that the daylight had waned ;
and so they stepped into the boat And as thus they grieved, they
saw a white fowl sporting on the bank of the river, — ^white, witli


* This is not the place to discuss, but the translator may state that he-
totally rejects the theory of one eminent native critic, who holds that
the Naiibira of literature vtind the Narihira of history are not the same
individual. There is no warrant for such an opinion.

f On the spot where, seven and a half centuries later, rose the great
city of Yedo.


126, JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

red legs and a red bill ; and it was a fowl never beheld in IiGyako^
so none of all the company did know it. So when they inquired
of the ferryman its name, and Narihira heard him make answer,
* This is the Miyako-bird/ he composed this verse :]

Miyako-bird ! if not in vain men give

Thy pleasing name, my question deign to hear : —

And has she passed away, my darling dear,

Or doth she stOl for Karihira live ?

• (Narihika

27.
{Acrostics, 8.*)

Since that I talk'd with thee, my brooding heart
' Is sadder far than when I was less blest : —
The prescient thought will never let me rest
Of the swift-coming hour when we must part,

(FUKAYABU.)
28.

{Love, i. 44.)

The barest ledge of rock, if but a seed
Alight upon it, lets the pine-tree grow : —
If, then, thy love for me be love indeed.
We'll come together, dear ; it must be so !

{Anon)

* In the English version of this stanza the general sense alone has
been preserved. The phiy in the original is on Kara'momo-nO'hxinay the
name of a flower, "which is embedded in the text after the fashion of the
popular game of ** Buried Cities," thns : —

Afu KARA MO

Mono ha naho Icoso
KanathiJcere,

WakareH koto v>o

Kanete omoheba.


SHORT STANZAS. 127.

29.
{Love, i. 54.)

There is on earth a thing more bootless still
Than to write figures on a running stream :
And that thing is (believe me if you will)
To dream of one who ne'er of you doth dream.

(Anon.)

30.
{Love, L 66.*) .

Now hid from sight are great Mount Fusi's fires.
Mount Fusi, said I ? — 'Tis myself I mean ;
For the word Ftcsi signifies, I ween,

Few see the constant flame of my desires.

(Anon.)

31.
(Love, ii 2.)

Since that first night when, bath'd in hopeless tears,

I sank asleep, and he I love did seem

To visit me, I welcome ev'ry dream.

Sure that they come as heav'n-sent messengers.

(KOMACHI.)

32.
(Love, ii 9.)

Methinks my tenderness the grass must be.
Clothing some mountain desolate and lone ;

* This stanza is, by the necessity of the case, a mere free imitation of
the panning origivial.


i.2» JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

For though it daily grows luxuriantly,
To eViy mortal eye 'tis ^tiU unknown.

(YosHna)

33.

{Love, iL 23.)

Upon the causeway through the land of dreams
Surely the dews must plentifully light ;
For when I've wander'd up and down all night.
My sleeve's so wet that nought will dry its streams.

(TSURAYUKI.)

34-
{Love, ii. 43.)

Fast fall the sUv'ry dews, albeit not yet
'Tis autumn weather ; for each drop's a tear,
Shed till the pillow of my hand is wet,
As I wake from dreaming of my dear.

{Anon)

35.
{Love, V. 56.)

I ask*d my soul where springs th' ill-omened seed
That bears the herb of dull forgetfulness ; ^
And answer straigKtway came: Th' accursed weed
Grows in that heart which knows no tenderness.

(SOSEI.)


* The " Herb ol Forgetfulness " {wasure-giiaa) answers in the poetical
diction of the Japanese to the classical waters of Lethe. . .


SHORT STANZAS. 129

36.
{Elegies, 10.*)

So frail our life, perchance to-morrow's sun
May never rise for me. Ah 1 well-a-day !
Till comes the twilight of the sad to-day,
I'll mourn for thee, thou belovM one !

(TSURAYUKI.)

37.
{Elegies, 23.)

The perfume is the same, the same the hue
As that which erst my senses did delight :
But he who planted the fair avenue
Is here no more, alas ! to please my sight !

(TSURAYUKI.)

38.


{Elegies, 31.)

One thing, alas ! more fleeting have I seen
Than wither'd leaves driVn by the autumn gust :
Yea, evanescent as the whirling dust
Is man's brief passage o'er this mortal scene !

(Chisato.)


* It is the yonng poet Ki-no-Tomonori who is mourned in this stanza.
He was nephew to Tsurayuki, and, after holding several high posts at
court, had been appointed to assist his uncle in the compilation of the
** Odes Ancient and Modem." He died in A.D. 905, a few months before
the completion of the work.

I


I30 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY,

39.
(Miscellaneoics, i. i.)

Softly the dews upon my forehead light :
From off the oars, perchance, as feather'd spray,
They drop, while some fair skiff bends on her way
Across the Heav'nly Stream * on starlit night.

(Anon.)

40.
(Miscellaneous, i 24.)

What though the waters of that antique rill
That flows along the heath no more are cold ;
Those who remember what it was of old
Go forth to draw them in their buckets still.

(A71071.)

41.

(Miscellaneous, i. iS-f)

Old Age is not a friend I wish to meet ;
And if some day to see me he should come,
Td lock the door as he walk*d up the street,
And cry, " Most honoured sir ! I*m not at home ! "

(Anon.)


• The Milky Way.

t This stanza is remarkable for being (so far as the present writer is
aware) the only instance in Japanese literature of that direct impersona-
tion of an abstract idea which is so very strongly marked a characteristic
of Western thoughts and modes of expression.


SHORT STANZAS. 131

42.
{Miscellaneous, i. 41.*)

Yes, I am old ; but yet with doleful stour
I will not choose to rail 'gainst Fate's decree.
An' I had not grown old, then ne'er for me *
Had dawn'd the day that brings this golden hour.

(TOSHIYUKI.)

43.
{Miscellaneous, i 6i.-f)

The roaring torrent scatters far and near
Its silv'ry drops : — Oh ! let me pick them up !
For when of grief I di*ain some day the cup.
Each will do service as a bitter tear.

(YUKIHIRA.)

44.
{Miscellaneous, i. 64.)
[Composed on beholding the cascade of Otoha on lEtount Hiye.]

Long years, methiuks, of sorrow and of care
Must have pass'd over the old fountain-head
Of the cascade ; for like a silv'ry thread
It rolls adown, nor shows one jet black hair.

(TADA]^^NE.)

45.
{Miscellaneous, ii 24.)

If e'en that grot where thou didst seek release
From worldly strife in lonesome mountain glen


* Composed on the occasion of a feast at the palace.

t One of a number of stanzas composed by a party of courtiers who
visited the cascade of Nunobiki, near the site of the modem treaty-port
of Kiiube.


132 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Should find thee sometimes sorrowful, ah ! then
Where mayst thou farther flee to search for peace ?

(MiTSUNE.)

46.
{Conceits, 11.)

[Stanza composed and sent to the owner of the neighbouring
house on the last day of winter, when the wind had blown some
snow across from it into the poet's dwelling.]


So close thy friendly roof, so near the spring,
That though not yet dull winter hath gone hence.
The wind that bloweth o'er our parting fence
From thee to me the first gay flow rs doth bring.

(FUKAYABU.)

47.
{Conceits, 21.)

If to this frame of mine in spring's first hour.
When o'er the moor the lightsome mists do curl.
Might but be lent the shape of some fair flower.
Haply thou'dst deign to pluck me, cruel girl !

(Okikaze.)

48.
{Conceits, 29.)

" Love me, sweet girl ! thy love is all I ask ! "
" Love thee ? " she laughing cries ; " I love thee not ! "
" Why, then I'll cease to love thee on the spot.
Since loving thee is such a thankless task ! "

{Anon)


SHORT STANZAS. 133

49.
{Conceits, 31.)

A youth once lov'd me, and his love I spum'd.
But see the vengeance of the powers above
On cold indifif 'rence : now 'tis I that love,
And my fond love, alas ! is not returned.

{Anon)

SO.
{Conceits, 48.)

Beneath love's heavy weight my falt'ring soul
Plods, like the packman, o'er life's dusty road.
Oh ! that some friendly hand would find a pole
To ease my shoulders of their grievous load !

{Anon.)


@)election0


FROM THE


NOU-NO-UTAH I;"


OK,


''LYRIC dramas:'


1. THE ROBE OF FEATHERS.

2. THE DEATH STONE.

3. LIFE IS A DREAM.

4. NAKAMITSU.


W]!t Bofie of JFeatljerg*


DRAMATIS PERSON jE,

A Fairy. A Fisherman. The Chorus,

Scene. — The shore of Miho,* in the province of Suruga, near the

base of Fus^yama.

[The piece opens with a long recitative in which the Fisherman
and the Chorus describe the beauties of Miho's pine-clad shxyre at
dawn in spring. The passage is a beautiful one ; but, after several
efforts at reproducing it in an English form, the translator has had
to abandon the task as impossible. At the conclusion of this
recitative the Fisherman steps on shore, and the action of the piece
then commences as follows : t — ]

Fisherman. As I land on Miho's pine-clad shore
and gaze around me, flowers come fluttering down


* Pronounced like the Italian word nUo,

t The end of the poetical opening of the piece is perhaps fairly
rendered by the following lines v—

But hark ! methoaght I saw the storm-clouds flying

And heard the tempest rave :
Oome, fishermen I come homeward plying I —

But no ! no tempest frets the wave :
'Tis spring ! 'tis spring ! 'twas but the morning breeze,

That Tocal grew th* eternal pines among ;
No murmur rises from th' unruffled seas,

No storm disturbs the thronging boatmen's song t


138 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

from the ethereal space, strains of music are re-echo-
ing, and a more than earthly fragrance fills the air.
Surely there is something strange in this. Yes ! from
one of the branches of yonder pine-tree hangs a
beauteous robe, which, when I draw nigh and closely
scan it, reveals itself more fair and fragrant than any
common mortal garb. Let me take it back to show
to the old folks in the village, that it may be handed
down in our house as an heirloom for all generations.

Fairy, Ah ! mine is that apparel ! Wherefore
wouldst thou carry it away ?

Fisherman. *Twas found by me, forsooth, and I
shall take it home with me.

Fairy, But 'tis a fairy's robe of feathers, a thing
that may not lightly be bestowed on any mortal being.
Prithee leave it on the branch from which it hung.

Fisherman, What, then, art thou thyseK a fairy, that
thou claimest possession of this feathery raiment ?
As a marvel for all ages will I keep it, and gamer it
up among the treasures of Japan. No, no ! I cannot
think of restoring it to thee.

Fairy, Alas! without my robe of feathers never
more can I go soaring through the realms of air, never
more can I return to my celestial home. I beg thee,
/ beseech thee, therefore, to give it back to me.

Fisherman. Nay, fairy, nay, the more I hear thee plead
The more my soul determines on the deed ;
My cruel breast but grows more heartless yet ;
Thou mayst not have thy feathers : 'tis too late.

Fairy, Speak not, dear fisherman! speak not that word!
Ah ! know'st thou not that, like the hapless bird


THE ROBE OF FEATHERS. 139

Whose wings are broke, I seek, but seek in

vain,
Eeft of my wings, to soar to heav'n's blue

plain?

Fisherman. Chain'd to dull earth a fairy well may
pine.

Fairy. Whichever way I turn, despair is mine :

Fisherman. For ne'er the fisher will her wings
restore.

Fairy. And the frail fay sinks helpless evermore.

Chorus. Alas 1 poor maiden, in thy quiv'ring eyne
Cluster the dews ; the flow'rets thou didst twine
Amidst thy tresses languish and decay,
And the five woes * declare thy fatal day !

Fairy. Vainly my glance doth seek the heav'nly
plain,
Where rising vapours all the air enshroud.
And veil the well-known paths from cloud to
cloud.

Chorus. Clouds ! wand'ring clouds ! she yearns, and
yearns in vain.
Soaring like you, to tread the heav'ns again;


* Viz., the withering of the orown of flowers, the poUution by dust of
the heavenly raiment, a deadly sweat, a feeling of dizzy blindness, and
the lost of all joy*


J40 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Vainly she sighs to bear, as erst she beard,
The melting strains of Paradise* sweet bird : *
Tbat blessed voice grows faint. Tbe beav'n in

vain
Eings witb tbe song of tbe returning crane ;
In vain sbe lists, wbere ocean softly laves,
To tbe free seagull twitt'ring o*er tbe waves ;
Vainly sbe barks wbere zepbyr sweeps tbe plain:
These all may fly, but she'll ne'er fly again !

Fisherman. I would fain speak a word unto thee.
Too strong is tbe pity tbat overcomes me as I gaze upon
thy face. I will restore to thee thy robe of feathers.

Fairy, Ob, joy I oh, joy ! Give it back to me !

Fisherman. One moment ! I restore it to thee on
condition tbat thou first dance to me now, at this very
hour, and in this very spot, one of those feiry dances
whose fame has reached mine ears.

Fairy, Oh, joy untold I It is, then, granted to me
once more to return to heaven ! And if this happiness
be true, I will leave a dance behind me as a memorial
to mortal men. I wiU dance it here, tbat dance tbat
makes the Palace of tbe Moon turn round, so tbat
even poor transitory man may learn its mysteries.
But I cannot dance without my feathers. Give them
back to me, then, I pray thee.

Fisherman. No, no ! If I restore to thee thy feathers,
thou mayest fly home to heaven without dancing to
me at all.


* LiteraUy, the Kariyoubifiga, a corruption of the Indian word KcUa-
vifigka. The Japanese commentator erroneously considers Kariyou and
Bifiga as two separate names.


THE ROBE OF FEATHERS. 141

Fairy. Fie on thee ! The pledge of mortals may be
doubted, but in heavenly beings there is no falsehood.

Fisherma/n, Fairy maid ! thou shamest me :
Take thy feathers and be free !

Favry, Now the dancing maiden sings,
Eob'd in clouds and fleecy wings.

Fisherman. Wings that flutter in the wind I

Fairy. Eobes like flow'rs with raindrops lin'd !

[The Fairy's dance commences.

Chorus, See the fairy's heav'nly power I
This the dance and this the hour
To which our Eastern ^ dancers trace
AU their frolic art and grace.


Chorus, Now list, ye mortals ! while our songs declare
The cause that gave to the blue realms of air
The name of fibmament. All things below
From that great god and that great goddess

flow,
Who first descending to this nether earth,
Ordain'd each part and gave each creature birth.


• * Tlie word " Eastern " does not refer to the position of Japan in Asia,
hut to that of the province of Suruga as compared to the then capital,
Kiyauto.


142 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

But older still, nor sway'd by their decree,

And FIRM as adamant eternally,

Stand the wide heav'ns, that nought may change

or shake.
And hence the name of firmament did take.*

Fairy, And in this firmament a palace stands
Yclept the Moon, built up by magic hands ;

Chorus. And o'er this palace thirty monarchs rule,
Of whom fifteen, until the moon be full.
Nightly do enter, clad in robes of white ;
But who again, from the full sixteenth night.
One ev'ry night must vanish into space,
And fifteen black-rob'd monarchs take their place.
While, ever circling round each happy king.
Attendant fays celestial music sing.

Fairy. And one of these am I.

Chorus. From those bright spheres.

Lent for a moment, this sweet maid appears :
Here in Japan she lights (heav'n left behind)
To teach the art of danciQg to mankind.


.* The original Japanese word, whose derivation the Chorus thus
quaintly commences bj explaining, is not the firmament itself, but
hisakata, the ** Pillow- word " for the firmament, which lends itself to a
similar rough-and-ready etymology. This passage has had to be para-
phrased and somewhat amplified by help of the commentary in order to
render it intelligible to English readers, — a remark which likewise applies
to the description immediately below of the internal economy of the lunar
government. The idea of the latter is taken from Buddhist sources;
The great god and goddess here mentioned are the national deities
Izanagi and Izanami, the creators of Japan and progenitors qf gods and
men.


THE ROBE OF FEA THERS. 143


II.


Chorus, Where'er we gaze, the circling mists are
twining:
Perchance e'en now the moon her tendrils fair *
Celestial blossoms bear.

Those flow'rets tell ns that the spring is shining,
Those fresh-blown flow'rets in the maiden's hair.

Fairy, Blest hour beyond compare !

Chorus.^ Heaven hath its joys, but there is beauty
here.
Blow, blow, ye winds ! that the white cloud-belts

driv'n
Around my path may bar my homeward way:
Not yet would I return to heav'n.
But here on Miho's pine-clad shore I'd stray.
Or where the moon in bright unclouded glory
Shines on Kiyomi's lea,
And where on Fusiyama's summit hoary
The snows look on the sea.


* The inhabitants of the far East see a cinnamon-tree in the moon
instead of our traditional **man." A Japanese poetess has prettily
suggested that the particular brilliancy of the autumn moon may come
from the dying tints of its foliage.

t As in the following song, the Chorus frequently acts as the mouth-
piece of the chief personage present on the scene. It should likewise be
noted that the lyric passages contain a very great number of aUusions to,
and more or less exact quotations from, the earlier poetry. It has not
been thought necessary to embarrass the English reader with perpetual
explanatory references. By an educated Japanese none would be
required.


144 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY,

While breats the morning merrily !

But of these three, beyond compare

The wave- washed shore of Miho is most fair

When through the pines the breath of spring is

playing.—
What barrier rises 'twixt the heav'n and earth ?
Here, too, on earth th' immortal gods came

straying,
And gave our monarchs birth.

Fairy, Who in this empire of the rising sun.
While myriad ages run.
Shall ever rule their bright dominions,

Chorus, E'en when the feath'ry shock
Of fairies flitting past with silv*ry pinions
Shall wear away the granite rock !


III.


Chorus, Oh, magic strains that fill our ravish'd

ears!
The fairy sings, and from the cloudy spheres,
Chiming in unison, the angels' lutes,
Tabrets and cymbals and sweet silv*ry flutes,
Eing through the heav'n that glows with purple

hues.
As when Som6iro's ^ western slope endues

* The Sanscrit Sumdru, an immense mountain formed of gold, silver,
and precious stones, which, according to the Buddhist cosmogony, is the
axis of every universe, and supports the various tiers of heaven.


THE ROBE OF FEATHERS. 145

1

The tints of sunset, while the azure wave
From isle to isle the pine-clad shores doth lave.
IVom Ukishima's* slope, — a beauteous storm, — '
Whirl down the flow'rs: and still that magic

form.
Those snowy pinions, fluttering in the light,
Eavish our souls with wonder and delight.

[The Fairy pauses in the dance to sing the next
couplet, and then continues dancing till
the end of the piece.

Fairy, Hail to the kings that o'er the moon hold
sway!
Heav'n is their home, and Buddhas, too, are
• . they.t

Chorus. The fairy robes the maiden's limbs endue

Fairy, Are, like the very heav'ns, of tend 'rest blue ;

Chorus, Or, like the mists of spring, all silv'ry white.

Fairy, Fragrant and fair, — too fair for mortal sight !


* An alternative name for part of the shore of Siiho. Mount Ashidaka,
mentioned a little further on, is the eminence rising on one sloi>e of
Fusiyama, and slightly spoiling from some points of view its symmetry
of form.

t Or rather .B6dhisattvas. To be a Buddha is to have attained to the
highest degree of saintship, " having thrown off the bondage of sense,
perception, and self, knowing the utter unreality of all phenomena, and
being ready to enter into Nirv&ua." A BOdhisattva, on the other hand,
has still to pass once more through human existence before it attains to
Buddhaship. Headers will scarcely need to be told that " Buddha " was
never the name of any one man. It is simply a common noun meaning
'* awake," ** enlightened," whence its application to beings lit with the
fuU beams of spiritual perfection.

K


146 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Chorus, Dance on, sweet maiden, through the happy
hours!
Dance on, sweet maiden, while the magic flow'rs
Crowning thy tresses flutter in the wind
Eais'd by thy waving pinions intertwin'd !
Dance on ! for ne'er to mortal dance 'tis giv'n
To vie with that sweet dance thou bring'st from

heaVn :
And when, cloud-soaring, thou shalt all too soon
Homeward return to the full-shining moon.
Then hear our pray'rs, and from thy bounteous

' hand
Pour sevenfold treasures on our happy land ;
Eless ev'ry coast, refresh each panting field.
That earth may still her proper increase yield !

But ah ! the hour, the hour of parting rings !
Caught by the breeze, the fairy's magic wings
Heav'nward do bear her from the pine-clad shore.
Past XJkishima's widely-stretching moor.
Past Ashidaka's heights, and where are spread
Th' eternal snows on Fusiyama's head, —
Higher and higher to the azure skies.
Till wand'ring vapours hide her from our eyes I


( 147 )


Wiit Beatfi^Stone^


DRAMATIS PEBSOITjE.

The Spirit of the "Flawless Jewel Maiden.**
The Buddhist Priest GEfJwou.
The Chorus.

Scene. — The moor of Nasu, in the province of Shimotsuke, som

ninety miles to the north of Yedo.

Priest. What though the vapours of the fleeting scene
Obscure the view of pilgrims here below ?
With heart intent on heav'nly things unseen,
I take my journey through this world of woe.*

I am a priest, and Geflwou is my name. Ever fixed
in the seat of contemplation, I had long groaned over
my imperfection in that which of all things is the
most essentiaLt But now I see clear, and, waving in
my hand the sacerdotal besom, go forth to gaze upon
the world. After sojourning in the province of Michi-
noku, I would now fain go up to the capital, and there
pass the winter season of meditation. I have crossed
the river Shirakaha, and have arrived at the moor of
Nasu in the province of Shimotsuke.


* The original of this stanza and of the next is extremely obscure, and
the English trnDslation is therefore merely tentative,
t Viz., spiritual insight.


148 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Alas ! the vapours of the fleeting scene
Obscure the view of pilgrims here below ;
Strike out the hope in heav nly things unseen,
What guide'were left us through this world of
woe ?

Spirit. Ah! restnotunder the shadow of that stone!

Priest. What then ? Is there any reason for not
resting under the shadow of this stone ?

Spirit. Yes ; this is the Death-Stone of the moor
of Nasu ; and not men only, but birds even and beasts
perish if they but touch it.

Seek not to die ! What ! hast thou not heard tell
■ Of Nasu's Death-Stone and its fatal spell ?

I entreat thee draw not nigh unto it !
Priest What is it, then, that maketh this stone so
murderous ?

Spirit. 'Tis that into it, in the olden time, entered .
• the spirit of her who was called the " Flawless Jewel
Maiden,** concubine to the Emperor Toba.

Priest. Into this stone ? on this far-distant road ?
Methought the palace was the girl's abode.

Spirit. Verily it cannot be without reason that the
story hath been handed down from the olden time.

Priest. Thine appearance and thy language seem to
assure me that the tale is not unknown to thee.

Spirit. No ! no ! I know it but in outline. Fleeting
as the dew is the memory of the maiden's fate.


THE DEATH'STONE. 149

/Jpin^. Erst through the king's abode

Priest. Proudly the maiden strode,

Spirit. Now on this des'late road
Priest. Her ghost doth dwell,

Spirit. Broods o'er the fated land,

Priest. And ev'ry pilgrim band

Spirit. Falls 'neath her murd'rous hand,
Priest. Wielding the spell !


I.

Chorus. The Death-Stone stands on Nasu's moor
Through winter snows and summer heat ;
The moss grows grey upon its sides,
But the foul demon haunts it yet.

Chill blows the blast : the owl's sad choir

Hoots hoarsely through the moaning pines ;

Among the low chrysanthemums

The skulking fox, the jackal whines.

As o'er the moor the autumn light declines.*


IL

Chorus. Fair was the girl, — ^beyond expression fair ;
But what her country, who her parents were,
None knew. And yet, as in her native place,
She proudly dwelt above the Cloudy Space,t

* This stanza is an adaptation of part of an ode by the Chinese poet
Peh Kti-yih.

t t.e., in the Mikado's palace. The courtiers are called '*the people
above the clouds.*'


ISO yAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

So sweetly deck'd by nature and by art,

The monarch's self soon clasp'd her to his heart.

Spirit. One day th' Imperial Majesty saw fit
To put to proof the Jewel Maiden's wit.

Chorus, Nor did she fail in ought : grave Buddhist lore,
Confucian classics of the days of yore,
Cipango's bards, the poets of Cathay,
And all the science the two realms display, —
She knew them all, nor did her answers fail
To tell of music all the wondrous tale.

Spirit, A mind so flawless in a form so fair
Deserv'd the name her lord then gave to her.

Chorus, Once the Mikado made a splendid feast
At the cool Summer Palace : ev'ry guest
That of accomplishments or wit could boast
Was bidden there, — a gay and brilliant host,
like to the clouds, from out whose fleecy sphere
Th' imperial kindred, like the moon, shone clear.
But hark ! what rumour mingles with the strains
Of liveliest music ? See I the heav'nly plains
Are wrapp'd in clouds and darkness \ Not a

star, —
The moon not risen yet : but from afar,
Heralded by the rustling of the show'r.
The wind comes howling through the festive

bow'r;
The lanterns are blown out : "Alight ! a light!"
Cry all the courtiers in tumultuous fright.


THE DEA TH-STONE. 1 5 1

And lo I from out the Jewel Maiden's frame
There's seen to dart a weirdly lustrous flame 1
It grows, it spreads, it fills th' imperial halls ;
The painted screens, the costly pannell'd wsdls,
' Erst the pale viewless damask of the night,
Sparkling stand forth as in the moon's full light.

Spirit From that same hour the sov'reign monarch
pin'd.

Chorus. From that same hour the sovereign monarch

pin'd
In dire disease, whose hidden cause to find
The court magician cast his curious spell,
And thus the fortune of the lots did tell :
" 'Tis none but she, great Emp'ror ! without dodU
That harlot is the culprit : cast her out !
Expel the fiend, who, with insidious art,
The state to ravage, captivates thy heart I "
Thus spak^ the seer, and in an instant tum'd
The monarch's love to hate. The

spum'd,
Eesumes her proper shape, and speeds awaj
To Nasu's moor, there dwelling to this day-


Priest. Thou that hast deigned to tell
history, who may'st thou be ?

Spirit, Wherefore any longer conceal it ?
that of old dwelt in the breast of the '
Maiden," and that now inhabits the DaA&SKif 'iiA
moor of Kasu iaj^B^Qier than mneSL


152 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Priest Ah,well-arday 1 Strange is it, but true, that the
soul sunk lowest in the depths of wickedness will rise
highest on the pinnacle of virtue. I will bestow on
thee the priestly robe and begging-bowl * But, prithee,
reveal thyself to mine eyes in thy proper shape.

Spirit. Alas 1 what shame is now my portion I

In the garish light of day

I hide myself away, '

Like pale Asama*s t fires :
With the night I'll come again,
Confess my guilt with pain
And new-born pure desires.

Chorus. Dark will be the night ;
But her red lustrous light
Ne'er needs the moon.
" Wait ! fear not ! " she cries.
And from the hermit's eyes.
Fades 'neath the stone.

[The Spirit vanishes.

Priest. 'Tis said of stocks and stones they have no
soul. Yet what signifieth the text : " Herbs and trees,
stones and rocks, shall aU enter into NirvS,na,"J save
that from the beginning a divine essence dwells within
them ? How much more, then, if I bestow on this un-


* For a priest to hestow his own robe on a favourite disciple is a
praetioe of which the founder of Buddhism himself is said to have set
the example.

t An active volcano situated in the province of Shinano.

X A quotation from the " Sokekiyau," or "Lotus of the Law."


THE DEATH-STONE; 153

happy creature the priestly robe and begging-bowl,
must not her attainment of Nirv&na be placed beyond
a doubt ? Wherefore, with oflferings of flowers and of
burning incense, I recite the scriptures with my face
turned toward the stone, crying :

Spirit of the Death-Stone, I conjure thee ! what was
it in a former world that did cause thee to assume in
this so foul a shape ? *

Tarry not ! away ! away !

From this very hour shalt thou through mine inter-
cessions obtain Nirv&na,

From this very hour shall they gain for thee the vir-
tues of a saint.

Hear me 1 hear me !

[The stone is rent asunder and the Demon issues from it

Spirit. In stones there are spirits,

In the waters is a voice heard :

The winds sweep across the firmament 1

Chorus, Oh, horror ! horror I

The Death-Stone's rent in twain.
And lo ! the demon stands reveal'd 1

Priest Strange I passing strange 1

The Death-Stone's rent in twain :
O'er moor and field
A lurid glare

* See infra text and footnote p. 175*


154 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Bums fierce. There stands reveal'd
A fox, — and yet again
The phantom seems to wear
The aspect of a maiden fair ! * •

Spirit No more the mystery can be conceal'd.

I am she who first, in Ind, was the demon to whom
Prince Hanzoku paid homage at the murderous mound.t
In Great Cathay I took the form of Hauzhi, consort of
the Emperor luwao; and at the court of the Kising
Sun I became the " Flawless Jewel Maiden," concubine
to the Emperor Toba.

Intent on the destruction of the imperial line, I
assumed the shape of a fair maiden, whose presence
caused the Jewel-body J to languish in disease. Already
was I gloating over the thought of the monarch's death,
when the court magician, Abe-no-Yasunari, directed
against me his powers of exorcism; he set up the
many-coloured symbols § of the gods upon the altar,
and gave them also into my hands :

[Here the Spirit commences a dance, which lasts tiU the end
of the play.


* It is to he understood that the "Jewel Maiden " had originally heen
a fox, and that the moor of Nasu was her native place. Innnmerable are
the stories of foxes and oats assuming human shape in order to carry out
their diabolical designs, and to this day the belief in the reality of such
occurrences has firm hold on the minds of the less educated classes of the
community.

t The translator has not been able to ascertain the details of the story
to which reference is here made. The proper Chinese names of the
Emperor and his consort mentioned in the next sentence are Yeo Wang
and Fao Sze, who lived in the eighth century B.O. Pao Sze ruined her
imperial master by her criminal luxury and folly.

X A phrase signifying the person of the Mikado.

§ See the note to p. 77,


THE DEATH-STONE. 155

Spirit. With fervent zeal the great magician prays :

Chorus. With fervent zeal the great magician prays,
And ev'ry tone with anguish and amaze
0*erpow'rs the witch, who with convulsive grasp
The holy symbols of the gods doth clasp,
And, heav'nward-soaring, flies o'er land and sea
To seek the shelter of this distant lea.

Spirit Thereat the monarch issued his commands :

Chorus, Therreat the monarch issued his commands
To the two satraps of the neighboring lands : *
"Drive out," spake he, "the fiend of Nasus

moor ! "
And each true liege, to make his aim more sure,
For fivescore days on dogs his arrows tried.
For to the fox the dog is near allied : f ,
May we not thus tirace back to that command
The custom of dog-shooting in our land ? J

Then the two satraps, arm'd with bow and
spear.
And myriad horsemen brought from far and near,


* Viz., of the department of Miura and of the province of Kadznsa.

t In outward shape, not on account of the latter's possessing any of the
supernatural power ascribed to the former.

X The sport of practising archery on dogs survived to the time of the
revolution of 1868, and exhibitions of it (though rare) have been given
since then, as on the occasion of the visit to Yedo of ex-President Grant
in 1879. It is not cruel, at least in its modern form, as the arrows are
blunted. The dogs are brought into a closed arena, and the marksmen
are mounted, the horses enjoying the excitement as much as their riders.
The members of the princely house of Satsuma have always been specially
noted for their skill in dog-shooting.


156 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Beat all tfa^ moor, 8urt*ound its ev'ry part.
Whose rage to 'scape avails no magic art ;
Swift fly the dogs, and swift the arrows fly
And, panting, stricken, I sink down and die..
But yet my ghost (though, like the morning dew
*Twas wrapt away from grosser human view)
Ceas'd not to haunt this distant deslate moor,
And from the Death- Stone wield its murd'rous

pow'r, —
Till thou, great Buddha! send'st thy priest this

way
To bid reUgion reassert her sway.
" I swear, 0,man of God ! I swear," she cries,
" To thee whose blessing wafts me to the skies,
I swear a solemn oath, that shall endure
Firm as the Death-Stone standing on the moor.
That from this hour I'm virtue's child alone ! "
Thus spake the ghoul, and vanished 'neath the

stone.*


* The good priest's blessing does not seem, however, to have been
effectual; for a poisonous stream stiU issues from the Death-Stone
thrice every day.


( 157 )


%itt Ui a Bream.


DHAMATIS PEBSONjE.


The Pilgrim Rosei.
An Envoy.


A Minister.
The Chorus.


Scene. — Inn at the village of Kafktamu in China.
Time. — Early in the eighth century.

• Rosei, Lost in this pathless world of woe,
Where nothing is, but only seems,
How may the weary pilgrim know
His waking moments from his dreams ?

My name is Eosei, and I dwell in the land of
Shiyoku.* Though bom to mortal estate,-f- I have
hitherto idled my life away without so much as seek-
ing to tread the Buddhist path. But they tell me that
on Mount Yauhi in the land of Ibara there dwells a
learned and venerable priest ; and to Mount Yauhi do


* Shiyoku and Ibara are the Japanese names of two feudal states in
ancient China, whose proper Chinese appellations are respectiyely Shuh
and Ch'u. Kafitamu, in like manner, should be Han-tan. This latter
place, in the Japanese original, gives its name to the piece. But the
expression ''the pillow of Kaiiiamu" haying become proverbial in the
sense rendered by Calderon's famous title, the latter has been borrowed
as both more euphonious and more expressive.

t A rare boon ; for, according to Buddhist views, there are many more
chances in favour of one s being bom as a lower animaL He who obtains
this inestiuiable privilege should show himself worthy of it by ardently
following in the footsteps of the great reformer Shiyaka Muni.


158 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

I now turn my steps to search after the one great
thing needful.

Behind the clouds, in distance veil'd,
The well-known landscape fades from sight,
While endless peaks my feet have scal'd
This many a weary day and night.

Chorus, On hill and moor the setting sun
PuU oft has left him desolate ;
But half his course at length is run
What time he sees Kantamu's gate.

[He arrives at the village of Eafitamiu

Bosei, What then ? and is this the celebrated pillow
of which I have so often heard tell? Heaven must
surely have placed it in my way-to bestow on me in a
dream a taste of that world whose portals I am about
to close for ever behind me.*

Chorus. 'Tis but a wayside inn to spend the hour
Of burning noon or wait the passing show'r ;
But he would fain through some strange dream be

led.
And on the magic pillow lays his head.


Envoy. How shall I venture to address thee ? I have
a message for thee, Eosei


* Not by death, but by the renunciation of all earthly vamties, which
cannot but follow on my hearing the exposition of the law by the hermit
of Mount Yauhi.


LIFE IS A DREAM. 159

-Bosei Who, then, art thou ?

Envoy. An ambassador sent by the Emperor of the
land of Ibara to tell thee that 'tis his imperial desire
to relinquish the throne in thy favour.

Bosei, Incredible ! and for what cause should I be
thus raised to the supreme dignity ?

Envoy. Far be it from me to scan the reasons. It
must doubtless be because thou possessest the capacity
worthily to rule the world. But tarry not, tarry not !
Deign to enter the palanquin sent to bear thee to the
capital.

Bosei. What may this strange message mean ?
Sure th* imperial palanquin,
Strewn with gems of radiant hue
Sparkling like the evening dew.
For my limbs was ne'er designed.


Chorus. Strange to leave the world behind !


Rosd. But perchance of highest heaVn

To scale the heights to me is giv'n.

Chorus, Onward the palanquin they bear
In jeweird flow'ry radiance fair ;
And he (unwittiDg that his pow'r
Forms but the dream of one short hour)
Outsoars the clouds * to find a throne
'Mid scenes of beauty past comparison

* See note to the ** Death-Stone," p. 149.


i6o 1 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


I.

Chorus, For ne'er in those old vasty halls imperial,*
Bath'd in the moonbeams bright,
Or where the dragon soars on clouds ethereal,
Was ought like this to entrance the sight :
With golden sand and silvern pebbles white
Was strewn the floor ;
And at the comers four.
Through gates inlaid
With diamonds and jade,
Pass'd throngs whose vestments were of r$idiant

light,-
So fair a scene.
That mortal eye might ween
It scanned the very heav'ns* unknown delight.-f-
Here countless gifts the folk came bearing,
Precious as myriad coins of finest gold ;
And there, the lesser with the greater sharing,
Advanced the vassals bold,
Their banners to display
That paint the sky with colours gay,
While rings the air as had the thunder roU'd.

Bosd. And in the east (to please the ^monarch's will).
Full thirty fathoms high.


* The references in this line and in the next line but one are to two
famous ancient Chinese palaces.

t The particular heaven mentioned in the Japanese text is that
entitled KikeflzkiyaUf or *'the castle joyful to behold,'' the capital where
Indra sits enthroned.


UFE IS A DREAM. i6i

Chorus. There rose a silvern hill,
O'er which a golden sun hung in the sky.

Itosei. And on the western side,

O'er a gold mountain thirty fathom high,

Chxyrus. A silver moon did ride; —
So mote it seem as had the builder striven
To prove the poet's rhyme,*
Who sings that in th' abiding heaven
No spring and autumn mark the time,
And o'er that deathless gate
The sun and moon their wonted speed forget.

Minister, How shall I venture to address your
Majesty ?

'Tis already fifty years since your Majesty deigned
to ascend the throne; but if you will be pleased to
partake of this elixir, your imperial life may be pro-
longed to a millennium. Therefore have I brought
hither the nectar and the patera.

Rosei, What, then, may nectar be ?

Minister. 'Tis the drink of the immortals.

Eosei, And the patera ?

Minister. That likewise is their wine-cup.

[After the ensuing dialogue commences the dance, ^ hich
lasts until Bosei wakes from his dream.

Rosei, A thousand years this potion gives.


* The already often-qnoted Chinese poet Peh Ku-yih.

L


|62 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Minister. Ten thousand springs my lord outlives.

Bosei. I the glorious sceptre swaying,

Minister. Happy multitudes obeying,

Chorus. Ev'ry town and ev'ry cot
Blest for ever in its lot.


LIFE IS A DREAM. 163


11.


Chorus. Oh, lot immortal ! rapture flow'ry fair !
Thou bear'st new blossoms still :
Each laughing guest of nectar quaffs his fill,
And bids the others share.

Bosei, Go circling round for e'er,

Chorus, Sweet cup, and on the stream securely ride I
But all too swiftly ebbs the flow'ry tide.
To stay whose burden yet the dancer yearning, —
His violet sleeve upturning, —
Waves to and fro like trembling beams of light.
While shines for e'er heav'n's silvern goblet
bright *


* The original of these verses is an extreme instance of the obscurity^
logical incoherence, and many-sided application which have been noticed
in the Introduction as characteristic of the style of the Japanese lyric
dramas. The passage is intended to convey two distinct pictures to the
mind : primarily, that of the wine-cup, whose nectar each guest would
keep for himself, and regrets to see passing round and away from him.
The stream of nectar, though in reality inside the cup, is thought of by
the poet as outside of it, and therefore likened to a river, from a connec-
tion of ideas which leads him to allude to a festival held in the spring
when goblets of wine are floated down streams on leaves and made the
subject of verses. Secondarily, there is a reference to the taming round


«54 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

JRosei. Haply the dews, an' they should light for ever,

Chorus. Filling the wine-cups of the flow'rs.
Might grow to be a mighty river :
But ah ! what joys more fix*d are ours !
Our nectar is a living spring
Whose flow'ry waters never shall run dry,
What though we quaff for aye
Their heav'nly dews, and dance and sing
All through the day and night,
Not parting day from night,
'Mid dazzling pomp and joys more ravishing
Than e'er before were shower'd on mortal sight.

Rosei, Oh, radiant spring-time of delight,

• Chorus. That never more shall end !

'Tis from the moon that fairies erst did send
This dance ; * and therefore, rob'd in garments

white.
As borrow'd from a fleecy cloud,
He dances and he sings aloud, —
He sings all night for joy,

From night till morn do songs his voice employ: —
And now again 'tis surely even :

Bosei. No ; midday's shining here !


t.e., the dancing ; and the sleeve which is upturned to enable Rosei to
stretch out his hand to stay the goblet, is also the sleeve which he waves
in the dance. The goblet in the sky is the moon.
♦ See the " llobe of Feathers."


LIFE IS A DREAM. 165

Chorus, 'Tis midday lighting up the heaven :

Bosd, Ko ; 'tis the moonbeams sparkling clear I

Chorus, Scarce hath the spring-tide brought the
flowers,

Rosei. When scarlet leaves fall through the bowers ;

Chorus. And summer hardly 'gins to reign,

Rosei. Ere snow lines all the plain.

Chorus, Spring, summer, autumn, winter, all turn
round ;
No herbs so rare but strew the ground ;
In one short day no flow'r but charms his sense,
And all is sweet magnificence.


I66 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.


III.


Chorus. So speed the hours, and now the time is o'er ;
His fifty years of splendour are no more : *
*Twas all a dream, whose ev'ry shadowy grace
Must in a moment vanish into space,
Nought, as he wakes, bequeathing in their stead
Save the fam'd pillow where he laid his head.

Eosei. Mine eyelids ope and the fair vision fades :

Chorus. His eyelids ope, and all the grandeur fades : —
Astonied he sits up.

Bosei. But those sweet maids.

Chorus. In queenly garb, singing soft melodies ?

Rosei. 'Twas but the zephyr rustling through the trees.

Chorus. And those vast halls of royal wealth and
pride ?


* This does not fit in with what was said on p. i6i as to Rosei's life
being prolonged to a miUennium ; but in a dream consistency can scarcely
be expected.


LIFE IS A DREAM. 167

Bosei. Nought but this inn where I did turn aside.

Chorus. Thy reign of fifty years ?

Rosei. One hour of dreams

While in the pot a mess of millet steams.*

Chorus. Strange ! passing strange !

Bosei. But he that ponders well

Chorus. Will find all life the self -same story tell, —
That, when death comes, a century of bliss
Fades like a dream ; that 'tis in nought but this
Must end the monarch's fifty years of state,
Age long drawn out, th' ambition to be great.
And all that brilliant, all that joyful seems.
For there is nought on earth but fading dreams.

Rosei, Save Precious Triad 1 f save a suppliant soul !

Chorus, Kantamu's pillow leads him to the goal,
Through insight to renounce all earthly things.
Thrice-bless'd the dream which such salvation

brings !
Life is a dream is what the pilgrim learns.
Nor asks for more, but straightway home retums.J


* This phrase has become proverbial.

t The Sanskrit Trvratna, It consists of the Founder of Buddhism, the
Law, and the Priesthood.

X He had penetrated straight to the core of Buddhist doctrine, and the
lessons of the holy man of Mount Yauhi would be superfluous.


,^wi^''*Jlimr,J-^' yg?


NAKAMITSU.


j^aftamitsu.


DRAMATIS PEBSONjE,

MiTSUNAKA,* Lord of the Horse to the Emperor Murakami.

BiJiYAU, son of Mitsunaka, and still a hoy.

Nakamitsu, retainer of Mitsunaka.

Kauzhiyu, son of Nakamitsn, and foster-hrother of Bijiyau.

Weshin, Ahhot of the great monastery on Mount Hiyei, near

Kiyauto (Miaco).
The Chorus.

Scene. — ^The Temple of Chiynuzafizhi, and my Lord Mitsunaka's

palace in Kiyauto.

Time. — ^Early in the tenth century.


* More often, following the Chinese pronunciation of the characters
composing the word, called MafLjiynn. The play in the original is thus
entitled, hut the translator has preferred to rename it after the real hero
of the piece. Mitsunaka was great-grandson of the Emperor Seiwa (died
A.D. 880), and ancestor of the celehrated Minamoto family, and therehy
of Toritomo, the founder of the Shogunate. He is mentioned in the
Japanese military annals as the queller of various rehellions, and may be
considered as one of the warriors who were most influential in founding
the mediadval feudal system.


NAKAMITSir. 171


PAET I.

Nakamitsv, I am Nakamitsu, a man of the Fujihara
clan, and retainer of Mitsunaka, Lord of Tada in the
land of Setsushiu. Now you must know that my lord
hath an only son, and him hath he sent to a certain
monastery amid the mountains named Chiynuzanzhi,
while I, too, have a son called Kauzhiyu, who is gone
as page to young my lord. But young my lord doth
not condescend to apply his mind unto study, loving
rather nothing so well as to spend from morn to night
in ^quarrelling and disturbance. Wherefore, thinking
doubtless to disinherit young my lord, my lord already
this many a time, hath sent his messengers to the
temple with summons to return home to Kiyauto.
Nevertheless as he cometh not, me hath he now sent
on the same errand.

[The above words are supposed to be spoken during the
journey, and Nakamitsu now arrives at the monastery.*

Prithee ! is any within ?
Kauzhiyu. Who is it that deigneth to ask admittance ?

* The reader wiU call to mmd what was said in the Introduction on
the subject of the extreme simplicity which distinguishes the method
of representing the Japanese lyric dramas. In accordance with this
siptiplicity, all the changes of place mentioned in the text are indicated
merely by a slight movement to and fro of the actors upon the stage.


172 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Nakamitm, What! is that Kauzhiyu? Tell young
xuy lord that I have come to fetch him home.
Kauzhiyu. Your commands shall be obeyed.

[He goes to his youthful master's apartment.

How shall I dare to address my lord ? Nakamitsu is
come to fetch my lord.
Bijiyau. Call him hither.
Kauzhiyu. Your commands shall be obeyed.

[He returns to the outer hall and addresses his father.

Condescend to come this way.

[They go to Bijiysu's apartment.

Nakamitm. It is long since I was last here.

JBiJiyau. And what is it that hath now brought thee ?

Nakamitm. Tis that my lord your father hath sent
me to bid your lordship follow me home without delay,

Bijiyau. Shall I, then, go without saying anything to
the priests my preceptors ?

Nakamitm. Yes ; if the priests be told, they will
surely wish to see your lordship on the way, whereas
my lord your father's commands were, that I alone was
to escort you.

Bijiyau. Then we will away.

Nakamitm. Kauzhiyu! thou, too, shalt accompany
thy master.

Kauzhiyu. Your conmiands shall be obeyed.

[They depart from the temple, and arrive at Mitsimaka's
palace.

NaJcamitsu. How shall I dare to address my lord ? I
have brought hither his lordship Bijiyau.

Mitsunaka, Well, Bijiyau ! my only reason for send-


NAKAMITSU. 173

ing thee up to the monastery Tiras to help thy learning ;
and I would fain begin, by hearing thee read aloud
from the Scriptures .♦

MUsuTtaha, And with these words, and bidding him
read on,
He lays on ebon desk before his son
The sacred text in golden letters writ.

Bijiyau, But how may he who never bent his wit
To make the pencil trace Asaka's line -f*
Spell out one letter of the book divine ?
In vain, in vain his sire's behest he hears :
Nought may he do but choke with idle tears.

Mitsunaha. Ah '! surely 'tis that, being my child, he
respecteth the Scriptures too deeply, and choosethnot to
read them except for purposes of devotion. What of
verse-making, then ?

Bijiyau, I cannot make any.

MitsunaJca, And music ?

[Bijiyau makes no answer.

Mitswaaha, What ! no reply ? Hast lost thy tongue,
young fool?

* ie., the Buddhist Scriptures. The particular book inteuded is the
*^ Hoke-kiyau^^* OT ** Lotus of the Law," the standard doctrinal work of
most of the Buddhists of Japan. The reader of anj modem descriptions
of Japan need scarcely be told that it was only during the dark and
Middle Ages that Japanese education followed this religious direction.
For the last two or three hundred years the secular classics of Chini
have had the entire forming of the national mind.

i' It is said that in antiquity an ode commencing with the name of
Mount Asaka was the first copybook put into the hands of children.
The term is therefore now used as the '* Pillow-word" for learning to
write.


174 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Chorus. Whom, then, to profit wentest thou to school ?
And can it be that e'en a father's word.
Like snow that falling melts, is scarcely heard.
But 'tis unheeded ? Ah ! 'twill drive me wild
To point thee out to strangers as my child !
No sooner said, than out the scabbard flies
His trusty sword, and with fierce flashing eyes
Forward he darts ; but, rushing in between,
Good Nakamitsu checks the bloody scene, —
Firm though respectful, stays his master's arm.
And saves the lad from perilous alarm.

Nahamitm. Good my lord, deign to be merciful this
once!

MitsunaJca. Why stayedst thou my hand? Haste
thou now and slay Bijiyau with this my sword.

Nakamitsu. Tour commands shall be obeyed.

[He retires into another apartment.

What is this horror unutterable? 'Tis no mere
passing fit of anger. What shall I do ? — Ah ! I have
it ! I have it ! I will take upon myself to contrive
some plan for his escape. Kauzhiyu, Kauzhiyu, art
thou there ?

Kauzhiyu. Behold me at thy service.

Nakamitsu. Where is my lord Bijiyau ?

Kauzhiyu. All my prayers have been unavailing to
make him leave this spot.

Nakamitsu. But why will he not seek refuge some-
where ? Here am I come from my lord his father as a
messenger of death I

[Bijiyau shows himself.


NAKAMITSU. 17S

Bijiyau. That I am alive here at this moment is thy
doing. But through the lattice I heard my father's
words to thee just now.

Bijiyau. Little imports it an' I die or live,
But 'tis for thee I cannot choose but grieve
If thou do vex thy lord : to avert his ire
Strike off my head, and show it to my sire !

Ndkamitsu, My lord, deign to be calm ! I will take
upon myself to contrive some plan for your escape. —
What ! say you a messenger hath come ? My heart
sinks within me. — What ! another messenger ?

[These are messengers from Mitsunaka to ask whether his
orders be not yet carried into execution.

Ndkamitm, Alas ! each joy, each grief we see unfurl'd

Eewards some action in a former world.
Kauzhiyu. In ages past thou sinnedst ;
, Bijiyau, And to-day

Chorus. Comes retribution : think not then to say
•Tis others' fault, nor foolishly upbraid
The lot thyself for thine own self hast made.
Say not the world's askew ! with idle prate
Of never-ending grief the hour grows late.
Strike off my head ! with many a tear he cries,
And might, in sooth, draw tears from any eyes.*


* The dootrine of retribution set forth in the above lines is a cardinal
point of the Buddhist teaching; and, as the afiSdcted Christian seeks sup-
port in the expectation of future rewards for goodness, so will the pious
Buddhist find motives for resignation in the consideration of his present
sufferings as the consequence of sins committed in past stages of exis«


176 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

NakamUsu. Ah ! young my lord, were I but of like
age with thee, how readily would I not redeem thy life
at the cost of mine own ! Alas ! that so easy a sacrifice
should not be possible !

Kauzhiyu. Father, I would make bold to speak a
word unto thee.

NakamUsu. What may it be ?

KavaMyu, 'Tis, father, that the words thou hast just
spoken have found a lodgement in mine ears. Thy
charge, truly, is Mitsunaka; but Mitsunaka's son is
mine. This, if any, is a great occasion, and my years
point to me as of right the chief actor in it. Be quick !
be quick ! strike off my head, and show it to Mitsunaka
as the head of my lord Bijiyau ! *

Nakamitsu. Thou'st spoken truly, Nakamitsu cries.
And the long sword from out his scabbard flies.
What time he strides behind his boy.

Bijiyau. But no !

The youthful lord on such stupendous woe

tence. One of their Soriptures says : *' If thou wonldst know the eanses
in the past life, look at the effects in the present : if thou wouldst know
the effects in the future life, look at the causes in the present." In such
words we seem to see foreshadowed some of the most modem of philo-
sophical doctrines.

* A little further on, Kauzhiyu says it is a ''rule'* that o. retainer
must lay down his life for his lord. Though it would he difficult to find
either in the Buddhist or in the Confucian teaching any explicit state-
ment of such a duty, it is nevertheless true that the almost frantic
loyalty of the mediseval and modern Japanese was hut the natural
result of such teaching domiciled amid a feudal society. We may see in
this drama the whole distance that had heen traversed by the Japanese
mind since the time of the ** Maflyefushifu** poets, whose views of life
and duty were so much nearer to those of the simply joyous and unmorctlf
though not immoral, chUdren of nature.


NAKAMITSU. 177

May never gaze unmov'd ; with bitter wail
The father's sleeve he clasps. Nought may't avail,
He weeping cries, e'en should the deed be done,
For I wiU slay myself if falls thy son.

Kauzhiyu. But 'tis the rule, — a rule of good renown, —
That for his lord a warrior must lay down
His lesser life.

Bijiyau, But e'en if lesser, yet

He, too, is human ; neither shouldst forget
What shame will e'er be mine if I survive.

Nakamitm. Alas! alas! and 'tis for death they
strive !

Kauzhiyu, Me deign to hear.

Bijiyau, No ! mine the truer word !

Nakamitm. Ah ! this my child !

Kauzhiyu. . And there behold thy lord I

Ifakamitsu. Betwixt the two see Nakamitsu stand :

Clwrus. His own brave life, an' 'twere his lord's
command,
Were freely giVn ; but now, in sore dismay,
E'en his fierce courage fades and droops away.

Bijiyau. Why heed a life my sire himself holds cheap ?

M


178 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Nought may thy pity do but sink more deep
My soul in wretchedness.

Kauzhiyu. Mistake me not !

Think not 'tis pity moves me ; but a blot
The martial honour of our house will stain,
If, when I might have bled, my lord be slain.

Cliorus, On either side 'tis infancy that pleads.

Nakamitm. And yet how well they've learnt where
duty leads !

Chorus. Dear is thy lord !

Nakamitsu. And mine own child how dear !

Chorus. But Nakamitsu knows full well that ne'er.
To save the child his craven heart ador'd.
Warrior yet dar'd lay hands upon his lord.
He to the left, the trembling father cries,
Was sure my boy, nor lifts his tear-stain'd eyes :
A flash, a moment, the fell sabre gleams,
And sends his infant to tlie land of dreams.*

Nahamitsu. Oh, horror unutterable ! to think that I
should have slain mine own innocent child ! But I
must go and inform my lord.

[He goes to INIitsunaka's apartment.
* Lit. " turns his child into a dream."


NAKAMITSU. 179

How shall I dare to address my lord ? I have slain
my lord Bijiyau according to your commands.

Mitsunaka. So thou hast killed the fellow ? I trow
his last moments were those of a coward. Is it not
true?

Nakamitsu, Not so, my lord. As I stood there
aghast, holding in my hand the sword -your lordship
gave me, your son called out, " Why doth Naka-
mitsu thus delay ? " and those were the last words
he was pleased to utter.

Mitsunaka, As thou well knowest, Bijiyau was mine
only child. Go and call thy son Kauzhiyu, and I will
adopt him as mine heir..

Nakamitsu, Kauzhiyu, my lord, in despair at being
separated from young my lord, hath cut off his locks,*
and vanished none knows whither.

Nakamitsu. I, too, thy gracious license would obtain
Hence to depart, and in some holy fane
To join the priesthood.f

Mitsunaka, Harsh was my decree ,

Yet can I think what thy heart's grief must be
That as its own my recreant child received,
And now of both its children is bereav'd.
But 'tis a rule of universal sway
That a retainer ever must obey.


* During the Middle Ages it was very usual for afflicted persons to
renounce lecular life, the Buddhist tonsure being the outward sign of the
step thus taken.

i* The dramatist omits to tell us that, as we gather from the sequel,
this request was not granted.


l8o JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Chorus. Thus would his lord, with many a suasion fond.
Have rais'd poor Nakamitsu from despond.
Nor eke himself, with heart all stony hard,
Mote, as a father, ev'ry pang discard :
Behold him now, oh ! lamentable sight !
O'er his own son perform the fun'ral rite.


NAKAAflTSU. i8i


PAET II.

[Some time is supposed to have elapsed, and Weshifi, abbot of
the monastery on Mount Hiyei, comes down from that retreat to
Mitsimaka's palace in the capital, bringing with him Bijiyau,
who had been persuaded by Nakamitsu to take refuge with the
holy man.]

WeshiTi. I am the priest Weshin, and am hastening
on my way to my lord Mitsunaka's palace, whither
certain motives guide me.

[They arrive at the gate, and he cries out :

I would fain crave admittance.

Nakamitsu. Who is it that asks to be admitted?
Ah ! 'tis his reverence Weshin.

WesM'fl, Alas for poor Kauzhiyu !

Nahamitm. Yes ; but prithee speak not of this be-
fore his lordship.

Weshifi. I understand. Pray tell my lord that I am
come.

Nakamitsu, Wait here, I pray thee, while I go and

inform his lordship.

[He goes to Mitsunaka's apartment

How shall I venture to address my lord ? His reve-
rence Weshin hath arrived from Moimt Hiyei
Mitsunaka, Call him hither.


l83 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Nakamitsu. Your commands shall be obeyed.

[He goes to the room where WeshiH is waiting, and says :

Be pleased to pass this way.

[They enter Mitsunaka's apartment.

MitsunaJca. What may it be that has brought your
reverence here to-day ?

Weshifl. 'Tis this, and this only, I come desiring to
speak to your lordship anent my lord Bijiyau.

MitsunaJca. Eespecting him I gave orders to Naka-
mitsu, which orders have been carried out.

Weshifl. Ah ! my lord, 'tis that, 'tis that I would
discourse of. Be not agitated, but graciously deign to
give me thine attention while I speak. Thou didst
indeed command that my lord Bijiyau's head should
be struck off. But never might Nakamitsu prevail
upon himself to lay hands on one to whom, as his lord,
he knew himself bound in reverence through all the
changing scenes of the Three Worlds.* Wherefore he
slew his own son, Kauzhiyu, to save my lord Bijiyau's
life. And now here I come bringing Bijiyau with me,
and would humbly supplicate thee to forgive one who
was so loved that a man hath given his own son in
exchange for him.-f*

MitsunaJca. Then he was a coward, as I thought!

* i.e., the Past World, the Present World, and the World to Come.
According to the Buddhist teaching, the relations subsisting between
parents and children are for one life only; those between husband and
wife are for two lives ; while those uniting a servant to his lord or a dis-
ciple to his master endure for the space of three consecutive Uves.

t This sentence, which so strangely reminds one of John iii z6, is, like
aU the prose passages of these dramas, a literal rendering of the Japanese
originaL


NAKAMITSU. 183

Wherefore, if Kauzhiyu was sacrificed, did he, too, not
slay himself ?

Weshifi. My lord, put all other thoughts aside, and,
if it be only as an act of piety towards Kauzhiyu's soul, —
Curse not thy son I

Chorus. As thus the good man speaks,

Tears of entreaty pour adown his cheeks.
The father hears, and e'en his ruthless breast,
Soft'ning at last, admits the fond request,
While Nakamitsu, crowning their delight.
The flow'ry wine* brings forth, and cups that

might
Have served the fays : but who would choose to set
Their fav'rite's bliss that, home returning, met
His grandsons' grandsons' still remoter line.
Beside the joy that doth itself entwine
Eound the fond hearts of father and of son,
Parted and now in the same life made one ?

Weshi'fh, Prithee, Nakamitsu, wilt thou not dance
and sing to us a while in honour of this halcyon hour ?

[During the foUowing song Nakamitsu dances.

* LiteraUy, "the chrysanthemum mne.'* There is an old Chinese
story of a peasant who, following up the banks of a stream bordered with
flowering chrysanthemums, arrived at the mountain home of the elves
and fairies. 'After spending a few hours feasting with them and watch-
ing them pl{Ly at checkers, he set out on his homeward route, but found,
to his amazement, on reaching the spot whence he had set out, that more
than seven hundred years had elapsed, and that the village was now peopled
by his own remote posterity. The baUad of " Urashima " at the beginning
of this volume may be referred to as another way in which the Far Eastern
mind has worked out the apparently world-wide tradition familiar to
Europeans under the forms of Bip van Wii^de and the Seven Sleepers of
EphesuiB.


i84 JAPANESE CLASSICAL POETRY.

Nakamitsu. Water-bird, left all alone

Now thy little mate hath flown,
On the billows to and fro
Flutter, flutter, full of woe !

Chorus, Full of woe, so full of woe,
Flutter, flutter, full of woe !

Nakamitsu. Ah ! if my darling were but here to-day
I'd make the two together dance and play
While I beat time, and, gazing on my boy,
Instead of tears of grief, shed tears of joy !

Chorus. Behold him weep !

Nakamitsu. But the gay throng perceive

Nought but the rhythmic waving of my sleeve.

Chorus. Hither and thither .flutt'ring in the wind,

Nakamitsu. Above, beneath, with many a dewdrop
lin'dl.

Chorus. Ah, dewy tears ! in this our world of woe
If any stay, the friends he loves must go :
Thus 'tis ordain'd, and he that smiles to-day
To-morrow owns blank desolation's sway.

But now 'tis* time to part, the good priest cries.
Him his disciple follows, and they rise ;
WhUe Nakamitsu, walking in their train,
The palanquin escorts ; for he would fain
Last counsel give : " Beware, young lord, beware !


NAKAMITSU. xSj

" Nor cease from toilsome study; for if e'er
Thy sire again be anger'd, aU is lost !"
Then takes his leave, low bending to the dust.
Forward they're borne ; but Nakamitsu stays,
Watching and watching with heart-broken gaze,
And, mutely weeping, thinks how ne'er again
He'll see his child borne homeward o'er the plain.


APPENDICES.


APPENDICES.


APPENDIX I.

As the severely classical character of the Japanese poetical
dramas is in practice relieved by the performance between
every other metrical piece of a prose comedietta, it may not
be out of place to give the English reader some idea of what
the latter are like. The following specimens are two taken
at random from among those which the translator has him-
self seen acted in Yedo. The technical name of these little
plays is Nou KiyaurGefi, which might be almost literally
rendered as ^^ Folies Dramatique^^ They possess in the
original a philological interest out of all proportion to the
lightness of their construction, as they are almost the only
source of our knowledge of the s^Tcen Japanese of the
Middle Ages ; the written and spoken languages of Japan, as
of several other Eastern countries, having all within histori-
cal times differed very considerably from each other both in
grammar and in vocabulary. Their date is the same as
that of the Dramatic Poems. They are, of course, acted on
the same platform, and derive as little adventitious aid from
scenery and stage effect.


I90 APPENDIX I.


(HONE KAHA.)


DRAMATIS PERSONS.

The Rector of a Buddhist Temple. His Curate.

Three of the Parishioners.

Scene.— The Temple.

Hector. — I am rector of this temple. I have to call my
curate, to make a communication to him. Curate -! are you
there ? are you there ? halloo !

Curate, — Here am I ! What is your reason for being
pleased to call me ?

Rector. — My reason for calling you is just simply this : I,
unworthy priest, am already stricken in years, and the duties
of the temple service weigh heavily upon me. So, do you
please to understand that, from to-day, I resign this benefice
in your favour.

Curate. — ^I feel deeply indebted [to your reverence]. But,
as I am still deficient in learning, and as, moreover, no time,
however late, would seem too late to me, I beg of you to be
so kind as to delay this change.

Rector, — Nothing could please me more than your most
charming answer. But [you must know that], though
retiring from the rectorship, I do not intend to leave the
temple. I shall simply take up my abode in the back apart-
ment ; so, if there should be any business of any kind, please
to let me know.

Curate. — Well, if it must be so, I will act in accordance
with your august desire.

Rector. — ^And mind (though it will carcely be necessary


APPENDIX L 19^1

for me to say so) that you do everything in snch a manner
as to please the parishioners, and make the temple pros-
perous.

Curate, — ^Pray feel no uneasiness [on that head] ! I will
do things in such a way as to please the parishioners right
well.

Bedor, — ^Well, then, I retire without further delay. So,
if there should bo aaiything you want to ask, come and
call me.

Curate, — ^Your commands are laid to heart.

Rector, — ^And if any parishioner should call, please to let
me know.

Curate, — Your injunctions shall be kept in mind. — Ha !
ha ! this is delightful ! To think of the joy of his ceding
the benefice to me to-day, just as I was saying to myself,
" Wlieii will the rector resign in my favour ? when will he
resign in my favour ? " The parishioners, when they hear of
it, are sure to be charmed ; so I mean to manage in such a
way as to give them all satisfaction.

First ParisJiioner. — I am a resident in this neighbour-
hood. I am on my way to a certain place on business ; but,
as it has suddenly begun to threaten rain, I think I will look
in at the parish-temple, and borrow an umbrella. Ah ! here
it is 1 Hoy ! admittance !

Curate, — Oh ! there is some one hallooing at the gate !
Who is that asking for admittance ? Who is that hallooing %

First Par. — It is L

Curate, — Oh ! you are indeed welcome I
' First Par, — It is long since I last had the honour of com-
ing to inquire after you ; but I trust that the worthy rector
and yourself are still in the enjoyment of good health.

Curate, — Oh. yes ! we both continue welL But I must
tell you that, moved by some impulse or other, my master
has deigned to resign the benefice in my favour. So I pray
that you will continue as heretofore to honour our temple
with your visits.


192 APPENDIX L

First Par. — ^That is an auspicious event ; and if I have
not been [before] to offer my congratulations, it is because I
was not apprised of it. Well ! my present reason for calling
is just simply this : I am off to-day to a certain place ; but
as it has suddenly begun to threaten rain, I should feel much,
obliged if you would kindly condescend to lend me an
imibrella.

Curate, — Certainly 4 Nothing easier! I will have the
honour to lend it to you. Please wait here an instant

First Par, — Oh ! very many thanks.

Curate. — Here, then I I will have the honour to lend you
this one.

First Par. — Oh ! I owe you very many thanks.

Curate. — Please always tell me if there is anything of any
kind that I can do for you.

First Par, — Certainly ! I will call in your assistance.
[But] now I will be off

Curate. — ^Are you going ?

First Par. — Yes. Good-bye !

Curate. — Good-bye !

First Par. — I am much indebted to you.

Curate. — Thanks for your visit.

First Par. — ^Ah ! well ! that is all right ! I will hasten on.

Curate. — As he said I was to let him know if any of the
parishioners came, I will go and tell him what has passed.
Pray ! are you in ?

Bedor. — Oh ! that is you !

Curate. — How dull your reverence must be feeling !

Bedor. — No, I am not dulL

Curate. — Somebody has just been here.

Bector. — ^Did he come to worship, or was it that he had
business with us ?

Curate. — He came to borrow an umbrella ; so I lent hinx
one.

Bedor. — Quite right of you to ^lend it. But tell mo,
which umbrella did you lend ?


APPENDIX I. 293

Cwrate, — I lent the one that came home new the other
day.

Bedor. — What a thoughtless fellow you are ! Would
anybody ever dream of lending an umbrella like that one,
that had not even been once used yet t The case will pre-
sent itself again. When you do not want to lend it, you
can make an excus&

Curate, — How would you say ?

Rector, — You should say : " The request with which you
honour me is a slight one. But a day or two ago my master
went out with it, and meeting with a gust of wind at a place
where four roads met, the ribs flew off on one side, and the
skin on another. So we have tied both skin and ribs by the
middle, and hung them up to the ceiling. This being so it
would hardly be able to answer your purpose." Something
like that, something with an air of truth about it, is what
you should say.

Curate. — Your injunctions shall be kept in mind, an(^I
will make that answer another time. — ^Now I will be going.

Rector, — Are you off?

Curate. — Yes.

^^^^' \ Good-bye ! good-bye !
Curate, )

Curate, — ^What can this mean ? Let my master say what
he likes, it does seem strauge to refuse to lend a thing when
you have it by you.

Second FarisJiioner. — I am a resident in this neighbour-
hood. As I am going on a long journey to-day, I mean to
go to the parish-temple and borrow a horse, — ^I will go
quickly. Ah ! here it is ! Hoy ! admittance !

Curate. — There is some one hallooing at tlie gate again !
Who is that asking for admittance ? Who is that hallooing ?

Second Par, — It is I.

Curate. — Oh ! you are indeed most welcome !

Second Par, — My present reason for calling is just simply
tliis : I am off to-day on a long journey, and (though it is a

N


194 APPENDIX I.

bold request to make) I should feel much obliged if you
would condescend to lend me a horse.

Curate^ — Nothing could be slighter than the request with
which you honour me. But a day or two ago my master
went out with it, and meeting with a gust of wind at a place
where four roads met, the ribs flew off on one side, and the
skin on another. So we have tied both skin and ribs by the
middle, and hung them up to the ceiling. This being so
it "Would hardly be able to answer your purpose.

Second Par, — Why ! it is a horse that I am asking for !

Curate. — ^Yes, certainly ! a horse.

Second Par, — Oh well ! then there is no help for it I
will be offl

Curate. — Are you going?

Second Par, — Yes. Good-bye !

Curate. — Good-bye ! Thanks for your visit.

Second Par. — Well ! I never ! He says things that I
cannot in the least make out.

Curate. — I spoke as my master had instructed me; so
doubtless he will be pleased. Pray ! Are you in ?

Rector. — Oh ! that is you ! Is it on business that you
come]

Curate. — Somebody has just been here to borrow our
horse.

Rector. — ^And you lent him, as he fortunately happened
to be disengaged ?

Curate. — Oh no ! I did not lend it, but replied in the

■

manner you had taught me.

Rector. — What ! I do not remember saying anything about
the horse I What was it you answered ?

Curate. — I said that you had been out with it a day or
two ago, and that, meeting with a gust of wind at a place
where four roads met, the ribs had flown off on one side, and
the skin on the other, which being the case, it would hardly
be able to answer his purpose.

Rector, — What do you mean ? It was if they came to ask


\


APPENDIX I. 195

for an umbrella that I told you to reply like that ! [But]
would anybody ever dream of saying such a thing to a person
who should come to borrow a horse % Another time, when
you do not want to lend it, you can make a [fitting] excuse.

Curate, — How would you say %

Redor. — ^You should say : " We lately turned him out to
grass ; and, becoming frolicsome, he dislocated his thigh, and
is lying down covered with straw in a comer of the stable.
This being so, he will hardly be able to answer your pur-
pose" Something like that, something with an air of truth
about it, is what you should say.

Curate, — Your, injunctions shall be kept in mind, and I
will make use of them next time.

Hector, — Be sure you do not say something stupid !

Curate, — ^What can this mean? To say a thing because
he tells me to say it, and then, forsooth, to get a scolding for
it ! For all I am now my own master, I see no way out of
these perplexities.

Third Parishioner. — I am a resident in this neighbour-
hood, and Um on my way to the parish-temple, where I have
some business. Well, I will make haste. Ahl here I
am ! Hoy ! admittance !

Curate, — ^There is some one hallooing at the gate again !
Who is that asking for admittance ? Who is that hallooing ?

Third Par.— It is I.

Curate, — Oh ! a hearty welcome to you !

Third Par, — It is long since I last had the honour of
coming to inquire after you; but I trust that the worthy
rector and yourself are still in the enjoyment of good health.

Curate, — Oh yes ! we both continue welL Btlt by the
way, my master, moved by some impulse or other, has
deigned to resign the benefice in my favour. So I pray that
you will continue to honour our temple with your visits.

Third Par, — That is an auspicious event ; and if I have
not been already to offer my congratulations, it is because I
was not apprised of it To-morrow being a religious anniver-


196 APPENDIX I.

saiy [in my family], I shonld feel greatly obliged if onr
worthy rector aad yourself would condescend to oome [to
my house].

Curaie. — ^For myself I will come, but my master will
scarcely be able to do so.

Third Par, — ^What ! has he any other business on hand %

Curate, — ITo, he has no particular business on hand ; but
we lately turned him out to grass, and, becoming frolicsome,
he dislocated his thigh, and is lying down covered with straw
in a comer of the stable. This being so, he will scarcely be
able to come.

Third Par. — ^Why! it is the rector that I am talking
about I

Curate, — ^Yes, certainly ! the rector.

Third Par, — ^Well 1 I am very sorry such a thing should
have occurred. At any rate, do you, please, be so kind as
to come.

Curate, — Most certainly, I will come.

Third Par, — Now I will be oi£

Curate, — ^Are you going ?

Third Par, — Yes. Good-bye I

Curate, — Good-bye ! Thanks for your visit.

Third Par, — Well, I never ! He says things that I can-
not in the least make out.

Curate, — This time, at all events, he will be pleased.
Pray ! are you in ?

Rector, — Oh ! that is you ! Is it on business that you
come]

Curate, — Somebody has just been here to ask both your
reverence and myself to go to him to-morrow, when there is
a religious anniversary [in his family]. So I said that I
would go, but that you would scarcely be able to do sa

Rector, — ^What a pity ! I should have liked to have gone,
as I just happen to be at leisure to-morrow.

Curate^ — Oh ! but I said what you had instructed me
to say.


APPENDIX L I97

Bedor, — ^I do not remember. What was it, then, that
you answered ?

Curate. — I said that we had lately turned you out to
grass, and that, becoming frolicsome, you had dislocated your
thigh, and were lying down covered with straw in a comer
of the stable, so that you would scarcely be able to go.

Hector. — You reaUy and truly went and said that ?

Curate, — Yes ! really and truly.

Hector, — ^Well, I never ! You are an idiot ! Speak as I
may, over and over again, nothing seems to be able to make
you understand. It was if they came to borrow a horse, that
I told you to make that answer ! The end of all this is, that
it will never do for you to become rector. Get along with you !

Curate, — Oh !

Rector, — Won't you get along? Won't you get along?
Won't you get along ?

Curate, — Oh dear ! oh dear 1 oh dear ! oh dear ! oh dear !
But, reverend sir, for all you are my master, it is an unheard-of
shame for you to beat me thus. And for all you are the man
you are, you cannot be said to have been without your frolics,
either, — that you cannot.

Rector, — ^When was I ever, frolicsome ? If I ever was,
out with it quick ! out with it quick !

Curate, — If I were to tell it, you would be put to shame.

Rector. -r-^ am conscious of nothing that could put me to
shame. If anything there be, out with it quick ! out with it
quick !

Curate,— y^QW then. Til tell it, I wiU.

Rector, — Out with it quick !

Curate. — ^Well, then ! the other day, Ichi, who lives out-
side the temple-gate, was here.

Rector. — And what about Ichi, pray ?

Curate. — Just listen, please ! Don't you call it a frolic to
have beckoned to her, and then to have taken her into the
bedroom ?

Rector. — Insolent rascal, inventing things that I never


198 APPENDIX L

did, and bringing shame on your superior ! After this, by
the God of War with his Bow and Arrows, I shall not let
you escape me !

Curate, — For all you are my master, I do not intend to let
myself get the worst of it

BotJu — ^Ah ! ah ! ah ! {fighting.)

Curate, — Has the old fool learnt a lesson ? Oh ! oh ! I
am glad 1 I am glad ! I've beat! IVe beat !

Bedor. — ^Deary, deary me ! where is he off to after having
put his master in such a plight ? Is there nobody there 1
Catch him ! I won't let him escape ! I won't let him
escape !


( 199 )


(ZA-ZESf.)


DRAMATIS PERSONjE,

A Husband. His Wife. Their Servant Taraukuwazhiya.*
Scene. — A room in a private house in Kiyauto.

Hushand, — I am a resident in the suburbs of the metro-
polis. On the occasion of a recent journey downt East, I
was served [at a tea-house] in the post-town of Nogami, in
the province of Mino, by a girl called Hana, who, having
since then heard of my return to the capital, has followed
me up here, and settled down at Kita-Shirakaha, where she
expects me this evening according to a promise made by
letter. But my vixen of a wife % has got scent of the affair,
and thus made it difficult for me to go. So what I mean to
do is to call her, and tell her some pretty fable that may set
me free. Halloo ! halloo ! are you there, pray ? are you
there]

Wife. — So it seems you are pleased to call me. What
may it be that makes you thus call me ?

Hushand, — Well, please to come in.

Wife, — Your commands are obeyed.

Hushand, — My reason for calling you is just simply this :

»

* Pron. Tar6kaja.

t In Japan, as in England, it is usual to talk of going up to the Capital
and d<ywn to the country.

X By some such equivalent must be rendered the Japanese term yanm
no kami, lit. '* mountain spirit/' which was used secondarily as the
name of the wolf, and lastly transferred to the signification of *' ill-
tempered, overbearing wife."


200 APPENDIX I.

I want to tell you how mncli my spirits have been affected
lately by continual dreams that I have had. That is why I
have called you.

Wife, — You are talking rubbish. Dreams proceed from
organic disturbance, and do not come true ; so pray don't
trouble your head about them.

Husband, — ^What you say is quite correct. Dreams, pro-
ceeding as they do from organic disturbance, do not come
true nine times out of ten. Still, mine have affected my
spirits to such an extent, that I think pf making some
pilgrimage or other to offer up prayers both on your behalf
and on my own.

Wife, — ^Then where shall you go ?

Husband, — I mean (to say nothing of those in the metro-
polis and in the suburbs) to worship at every Shintau shrine
and every Buddhist temple [throughout the land].

Wife, — No, no ! I won't allow you to go out of the house
for a single hour. If you are so completely bent upon it,
choose some devotion that can be performed at home.

Husband, — Some devotion to be performed at hornet
What devotion could it be ?

Wife, — Burning incense on your arm or on your head.*

Husband, — How thoughtlessly you do talk ! What I is a
devotion like that to suit ine^ — a layman if ever there was
one?

Wife, — I won't tolerate any devotion that cannot be per-
formed at home.

Husband, — ^Well, I never ! You are one for talking at
random. Hang it ! what devotion shall it be % \Ee rtfiects a
few moments.] Ah ! I have it ! I will perform the devotion of
abstraction.

Wife, — Abstraction ? What is that ?

Husband, — Your want of familiarity [with the term] is
but natural. It is a devotion that was practised in days of

* A form of mortification current in the Shifigofi sect of Buddhists.


APPENDIX L 20I

old by Saint Daruma : * (blessings on him !) yon pnt your
head nnder what is called the "abstraction blanket," and
obtain salvation by forgetting all things past and to come — a
most difficult form of devotion.

. TFV/e.— About how long does it take % . .

Husband, — ^Well, I should say about a week or two. \

Wife, — ^That won't do either, if it is to last so many days.

Husband, — Then for how long would my own darling con-
sent to it without complaining %

Wife, — ^About one hour is what I should suggest; but,
however, if you can do it in a day, you are welcome to try.

Husband, — Never, never ! This important devotion is not
a thing to be so easily performed within the limits of a single
day. Please, won't you grant me leave for at least a day
and a night ?

Wife. — ^A day and a night %

Husband,— Yq^

Wife, — I don't much relish the idea ; but if you are so
completely bent upon it, take a day and a night for your
devotion.

Husband, — Keally and truly?

Wife, — Yes, really and truly.

Husband, — Oh ! that is indeed too delightful ! But I
have something to tell you : know then that if a woman so
much as peep through a chink, to say nothing of her coming
into the actual room where the devotee is sitting, the spell
of the devotion is instantly broken. So be sure not to come
to where I am.


* BCdhidhamia, the first Buddhist Patriarch of China, whither he
came from India in a.d. 520. He is said to have remained seated in
abstraction gazing at a wall for nine years, till his legs rotted off, and
(according to an apocryphal Japanese account) to have re-appeared in
Japan a hundred years after his death, being buried, on the occasion of
his second decease, at a place called Eatawoka in Yamato. His name is,
in Japan, generally associated with the ludicrous. Thus certain legless
and shapeless dolls are called after him, and snow-figures are denominated
yuki'daruma (snow-Darumas).


202 APPENDIX I.

Wife, — ^All right I will not come to yoiu So perfomi
away.

Husband, — ^Well, then, we will meet again after it shall
have been happily accomplished.

Wife, — ^I shall have the pleasure of seeing you when it is
over.

' > Good-bye! good-bye! [ShtfMM» away,

wVije, )

Husband. — I say !

Wife.—WhsX is it ?

Husband, — ^As I mentioned before, mind you don't come
to me. We have the Buddhist's warning words : " When
there is a row in the kitchen, to be rapt in abstraction is an
impossibility." * So, whatever you do, do not come to me.

Wife, — Please feel no uneasiness, I shall not think of
intruding.

Husband. — ^Well, then, we shall meet again when the
devotion is over.

Wife, — ^When it is done, I shall have the pleasure of see-
ing you.

Husband, \ ri :i\. % j v i
V Good-bye ! good-bye !

WW tje, )


Husband {laughing). What fools women are, to be sure !
To think of the delight of her taking it all for truth, when I
teU her that I am going to perform the religious devotion of
abstraction for one whole day and night 1 Taraukuwazhiya,
are you there ? halloo ?


Servant, — ^Yes, sir !
Husband, — ^Are you there ?
Servant, — At your service.


* Needless to say that uo such text exists.


APPENDIX L 203

Husband, — Oh ! you have been quick in coming.

Servant — ^You seem, master, to be in good spirits,

Hmhand.—FoT my good spirits there is a good reason. I
had made, as you know, an engagement to go and visit Hana
this evening. But as my old woman has got scent of the
affair, thus making it difficult for me to go, I have told her
that I mean to perform the religious devotion of abstraction
for a whole day and night — a good device, is it not? for
carrying out my plan of going to see Hana 1

Servant, — ^A very good device indeed, sir.

Hiushand, — But in connection with it, I want to ask you
to do me a good turn. Will you ?

Servant, — Pray, what may it be ?

Husband, — ^Why, just simply this : it is that I have told
my old woman not to intrude on my devotions ; but, being
the vixen that she is, who knows but what she may not peep
and look in ? in which case she would make a fine noise if
there were no semblance [of a religious practice to be seen] ;
and so, though it is giving you a great deal of trouble, I
wish you would oblige me by taking my place until my
return.

Servant, — Oh! it would be no trouble; but I shall get
such a scolding if found out, that I would rather ask you to
excuse me.

Husband. — ^What nonsense you talk ! Do oblige me by
taking my place ; for I will not allow her to scold you.

Servant, — Oh, sir 1 that is all very well ; but pray excuse
me for this time.

Husband. — No, no ! you must please do this for me ; for
I will not so much as let her point a finger at you.

Servant, — Please, please let me off !

Husband, — Gracious goodness ! The fellow heeds what
my wife says, and i?\ron't heed what I say myself ! Do you
mean that you have made up your mind to brave me ?

[Threatening to heat him»
Servant, — Oh ! I will obey.


204 APPENDIX I.

Hushand, — No, no ! you mean to brave me !

Servant. — Oh no, sir ! surely I have no help but to obey.

Husband, — ^Really and truly ?

Servant — ^Yes, really and truly,

HtishoTid. — [My anger] was only a feint. Well, then,
take my place, please.

Servant. — ^Yes, to be sure; if it is your desire, I will
do so.

Hushand, — That is really too delightful. Just stop quiet
while I set things to rights for you to sit in abstraction.

Servant, — Your commands are laid to heart

Husband. — Sit down here.

Servant, — Oh I what an unexpected [honour] !

Husband, — Now, then ; I fear it will be uncomfortable,
but oblige me by putting your head under this " abstraction
blanket."

Servant, — ^Your commands are laid to heart.

Husband, — Well, it is scarcely necessary to say so ; but
even if my old woman should tell you to take off the
" abstraction blanket," be sure not to do so until my return.

Servant, — Of course not. I should not think of taking it
off. Pray don't be alarmed.

Husband, — I will be back soon.

Servant, — Please be good enough to return quickly.


Husband, — ^Ah ! that is well over ! No doubt Hana is
waiting impatiently for me. I will make haste and go.


Wife. — I am mistress of this house. I perfectly under-
stood my partner the first time he asked me not to come to
him on account of the religious devotion which he was going
to perform. But there is something suspicious in his insist-
ing on it a second time with a " Don't come to look at me !
don't come to look at me ! " So I will just peep through
some hidden comer, and see what the thing looks like.


APPENDIX I. 205

{Peeping.) What's this? Why, it seems mnch more uncom-
fortable than I had supposed 1 {Coming in and d/ramng near.)
Please, please ; you told me not to come to you, and there-
fore I had intended not to do so ; but I felt anxious, and
so I have coma Won't you lift off that "abstraction
blanket," and take something, if only a cup of tea, to
unbend your mind a little ? {The figure under the blanket thahes
its head.) You are quite right. The thought of my being so
disobedient and coming to you after the care you took to
tell me not to intrude may justly rouse your anger ; but
please forgive my rudeness, and do please take that blanket
off and repose yourself, do ! {The figure iluxJcee its head again.)
You may say no again and again, but I will have it off.
You must take it off Do you hear ? {She pulU U off, and
Tarauhuwazhiya standi exposed.) What ! you, you rascal ?
Where has my old man gone ? Won't you speak ? won't you
speak ?

Servant — Oh ! I know nothing.

Wife. — Oh ! how furious I am ! Oh ! how furious I am I
Of course he must have gone to that woman's house. Won't
you speak ? won't you speak ? I shall tear you in pieces ?

Servant — In that case, how can I keep anything from
you ? Master has walked out to see Miss Hana.

Wife. — What ! Miss Hana, do you say ? Say Minx, say
Minoc Gracious me, what a rage I am in 1 Then he reaUy
has gone to Hana's house, has he ?

Servant. — Yes, he really has gone there.

Wife. — Oh 1 when I hear he has gone to Hana's house, I
feel all ablaze, and oh ! in such a passion ! oh ! in such a
passion ! [She burets out crying

Servant — [Your tears] are but natural

Wife. — ^Ah ! I had meant not to let you go unhurt if you
had kept it from me. But as you have told the truth, I
forgive you. So get up.

Servant — I am extremely grateful for your kindness.

Wife. — Now tell me, how came you to be sitting there }


2o6 APPENDIX I.

Servant. — It was master's order that I should take his
place ; and so, although it was most repugnant to me, there
was no alternative but for me to sit down, and I did so.

Wife, — ^Naturally. Now I want to ask you to do me a
good turn. WiU you 1

Servant — Pray, what may it be ?

Wife, — Why, just simply this : you will arrange the
blanket on the top of me just as it was arranged on the top
of you ; won't you ?

Servant — Oh 1 your commands ought of course to be laid
to heart ; but I shall get such a scolding if the thing becomes *
known, that I would rather ask you to excuse me.

Wife, — No, no ! I will not allow him to scold you ; so you
must really please arrange me.

Servant, — Please, please, let me off this time.

Wife, — No, no ! you must arrange me, as I will not so
much as let him point a finger at you.

Servant, — Well, then, if it comes to my getting a scolding,
I count on you, ma'am, as an intercessor.

Wife, — Of course. I will intercede for you; so do you
please arrange ma

Servant, — In that case, be so good as to sit down here.

Wife,— AW right.

Servant, — I fear it will be uncomfortable, but I must ask
you to put your head under this.

Wife^ — Please arrange me so that he cannot possibly know
the difference [between us.]

Servant, — He will never know. It will do very nicely
like this.

Wife,—^^^ it ?

Servant, — Yes.

Wife, — ^Well then ! do you go and rest.

Servant — Your commands are laid to heart.

[He moves away.

Wife. — Wait a moment, Taraukuwazhiya !

Servant, — Yes, ma'am.


APPENDIX L 207

Wife, — It is scarcely necessary to say so, but be sure not
to tell him that it is I.

Servant — Of course not. I should not think of' telling
him.

Wife, — It has come to my ears that you have been secretly
wishing for a purse and a silk wrapper.* I will give you
one of each which I have worked mysel'l

Servant, — I am extremely grateful for your kindness.

Wife, — Now be off and rest.

Servant, — Yes, ma'am.


(Enter husband singing as he walks along the road.)

Why should the lonely sleeper heed
The midnight bell,t the bird of dawn ?

But ah ! they're sorrowful indeed
When loosen'd was the damask zone.

Her image still, with locks that sleep
Had tangled, haunts me, and for aye ;

Like wHlow-sprays where winds do sweep,
All tangled, too, my feelings lie.

As the world goes, it rarely happens even with the most
ardent secret love ; but in my case I never see her but what
I care for her more and more :

Twas in the spring-tide that we first did meet,
Nor e'en can I forget my flow'ret sweet. J

Ah well ! ah well ! I keep talking like one in a dream,

* Used for carrying parcels, and for presenting anything to, and
receiving anything from, a superior. The touch of the inferior's hand
would be considered rude.

t Lit. ** the beU late in the night,*' i.e,, the bell which was rung at the
beginning of the eighth hour according to the Japanese method of reckon-
ing time {circa 2 A.M.).

t There is a play here in the ori^al on the name Hana, whose real
signification is ** flower."


2o8 APPENDIX I.

and meantime Taraukuwazhiya is sure to be impatiently
awaiting me. I must get home. How will he have been
keeping my place for me f I feel a bit uneasy.

[ZTe arrives at his honse.

Halloo ! halloo ! Taraukuwazhiya ! I'm back ! I'm back !
(He enters the room.) I'm just back. Poor fellow ! the time
must have seemed long to you. There now ! {Seating himsdf.)
Well, I should like to tell you to take off the " abstraction
blanket;" but you would probably feel ashamed at being
exposed.* Anyhow, I will relate to you what Hana said
last night, if you care to listen. Do you ? (The figure nods
acquiescence,) So you would like to 1 Well, then, I'll tell you
all about it :

I made all the haste I could, but yet it was nearly dark
before I arrived ; and I was just going to ask admittance,
my thoughts full of how anxiously Hana must be waiting for
me in her loneliness, saying, perhaps, with the Chinese poet : t

" He promised, but he comes not, and I lie on my pillow in

the fifth watch of the night :
The wind shakes the pine-trees and the bamboos ; can it be

my beloved ? "

when there comes borne to me the sound of her voice, hum-
ming as she sat alone :

" The breezes through the pine-trees moan,
The dying torch bums low ;
Ah me ! 'tis eerie all alone !
Say, will he come or no 1 "

So I gave a gentle rap on the back-door, on hearing which

* The meaning is that as one of the two must be under the blanket
in readiness for a possible visit from the wife, the servant would doubtless
feel it to be contrary to their respective positions for him to take his ease
outside while his master is sitting cramped up inside, — a peculiarly
uncomfortable position, moreover, for the teller of a long story.

t The lines are in reality a bad Japanese imitation of some in a poem
by Li ShaDg-Yin (died a.d. 858).


APPENDIX I. 209

she cried out: "Who's there?, who's there?" Well, a
shower was falling at the tima So I answered by singing :

" Who comes to see you, Hana dear,
Eegardless of the soaking rain %
And do your words, * Who's there, who's there % '
Mean that you wait for lovers twain % "

to which Hana replied :

" What a fine joke ! well, who can tell ?
On such a dark and rainy night
Who ventures out must love me well,
And I, of course, must be polite,

and say : Pray, sir, pass this way ! " and, with these words,
she loosened the ring and staple with a cling-a-ring, and
pushed open the door with a crick-a-tick ; and, while the
breeze from the bamboo-blind poured towards mo laden with
the scent of flowers, out she comes to me, and, "At your
service, sir," says she, "though I am but a poor country
maid." So in we went hand in hand to the parlour. But
yet her first question, " Who's there % " had left me so doubt-
ful as tb whether she might not be playing a double game,
that I turned my back on her, and said crossly that I sup-
posed she had been expecting a number of lovers, and that
the thought quite spoilt my pleasure. But oh ! what a
darling Hana is ! Coming to my side and clasping tight my
hand, she whispered, saying :

" If I do please you not, then from the first
Better have said that I do please you not ;
But wherefore pledge your troth, and after turn
Against me % alas ! alas !

Why be so angry ? I am playing no double game." Then
she asked why I had not brought you, Taraukuwazhiya, with
me ; and on my telling her the reason why you had remained
at home, " Poor fellow ! " said she, " how lonely he must be

o


2IO APPENDIX I.

all by himself ! Never was there a handier lad at everything
than he, though doubtless it is a case of the mugworfc
planted among the hemp, which grows straight without need
of twisting, and of the sand mixed with the mud, which gets
black without need of dyeing,* and it is his having been
bound to you from a boy that has made him so genteel and
so clever. Please always be a kind master to him." Yes,
those are the things you have said of you when Hana is the
speaker. As for my old vixen, she wouldn't let as much,
fall from her mug in the course of a century, I'll warrant !
{Vident shaJcing under the hUnhet.) Then she asked me to pass
into the inner room to rest awhile. So in we went to the
inner room, hand in hand. And then she brought out wine
and food, and pressed me to drink, so that what with drink-
ing oneself, and passing the cup to her, and pressing each
other to drink, we kept feasting until quite far into the night,
when at her suggestion another room was sought, and a little
repose taken. But soon day began to break, and I said I
would go homa Then Haua exclaimed :

• " Methought that when I met thee, dearest heart I
I'd tell thee all that swells within my breast k
But now already 'tis the hour to part.

And oh ! how much still lingers unexpress'd !

Please stay and rest a little longer ! " " But no ! " said I,
" I must get home. All the temple-bells are a-ringing."
" And heartless priests they are," cried she, " that ring them !
Horrid wretches to begin their ding-dong, ding-dong, ding-
dong, when it is stiU the middle of the night ! " But for all
her entreaties, and for all my own regrets, I remembered
that " meeting is but parting," and.

Tearing me loose, I made to go 3 farewell I
Farewell a thousand times, like ocean sands

* Proverbial expressions.


APPENDIX!. 211

Untold ! and followed by her distant gaze
I went ; but as I tum'd ine round, the moon,
A slender rim, sparkling remained behind,
And oh ! what pain it was to me to part !

[Ut sheds tears,) And SO I came home. Oh ! isn't it a pity ?
{WeepiTig again.) Ah well ! out of my heart's joy has flowed
all this long history, and meanwhile you must be very
uncomfortable. Take off that " abstraction blanket." Take
it offj for I have nothing more to tell you. Gracious good-
ness ! what a stickler you are ! Well then ! I must pull it
off myself. I mill have it off, man ! do you hear me ?
(He puUa off the blanket, and up jumps his wife,)

Wife, — Oh ! how furious I am ! Oh ! how furious I am !
To hoax me and go off to Hana in that manner !

Husband, — Oh ! not at all, not at all ! I never went to
liana. I have been performing my devotions, indeed I have.

Wife, — What ! so he means to come and tell me that he
has been performing his devotions ? and then into the bargain
to talk about " things the old vixen would never have let
drop ! " Oh ! I'm all ablaze with rage ! Hoaxing me and
going off, — where ? going off where ?

[Pursuing Iter husband round the stooge.

Husband, — Not at all, not at all ! I never said anything
of the kind. Do, do forgive me ! do forgive me !

Wife, — Oh ! how furious I am ! Oh ! how furious I am !
'WTiere have you been, sir ? where have you been %

Husband, — Well then ! why should I conceal it from you ?
I have been to pray both for your weKare and for my own
at the Temple of the Five Hundred Disciples * in Tsukushi.

Wife, — Oh ! how furious I am ! Oh ! how furious I am !
as if you could have got as far as the Five Hundred
Disciples !

* Properly, the Five Hundred "Arh&n, " or personal disciples of
S&kya. The island of Tsukushi forms the south-western extremity of
Japan.


212 APPENDIX I.

Husband, — Do, do forgive me ! Do forgive me !

Wife. — Oh ! how furious I am ! Oh ! how furious I am !

\Tlu Aus6atu2 mm away*

Where's the unprincipled wretch off to ? Is there nobody
there ? Please catch him ! I won't let him escape ! I
won't let him escape !


( 213 )


APPENDIX 11.

(Seepage yy.)

Few subjects are so difficult to obtain precise information
on as this of the steps of development of the religious
dances entitled Kagura and Saru-gaku. Their origin is evi-
dently as old as that of the Japanese nation, for they are
mentioned (though not by their later technical names) in the
most ancient monuments of the literature, and explained by
reference to the important legend of the retreat into a cave
of the Sun-Goddess Amaterasu. We hear of them again in
the seventh century, when a man of the name of Hada-no
Kahakatsu composed several dances at the order of the
Prince Kegent, son of the Empress Suwiko. The name of
the composer points to Corean descent, and may be thought
to cast, after all, some doubt on the reality of the native
origin of these entertainments. Be this as it may, they are
again mentioned in the annals of the tenth and eleven cen-
turies as being performed at the court of the Mikados, and
the still existing families of actors trace their pedigree to
dancers who lived at that time ; but until the sudden leap
taken in the fourteenth century, no advance would seem to
have been made on the strings of ** short odes " by which
the dancers were accompanied.

The passage in the " Kozhiki" or " Records of Antiquity,"
which describes the origin and execution of the first dance
in heaven may be worth quoting almost in full : *

As the Great and Grand Goddess Amaterasu sat in Iter


♦ »«


Kokufi Kozhikij" pp. 23-26.


214 APPENDIX IL

sacred loorh-romn, seeing to the weaving of the Grand Garments
of the Gods, [her brotlier Haya-Susanowo] made a hole in the
roof and dropped down through it a Heavenly Piebald Horse
which he had flayed backwards, at lohose aspect the maidens
tceaving the Heavenly Garments were so much alarmed that
they died, , , , At this sight was the Great and Grand
Goddess Amaterasu so much terrified that, closing behind her
the door of the Rocky Abode of Heaven, she made it fast and
disappeared. Then was the whole High Plain of Heaven
darkened, and darkened was the Middle Land of Reed-Plains
[i.e., Japan], in such wise thai perpetual night prevailed.
And the clamour of the myriad evil spirits was like unto the
buzzing of flies in the flfth moon, and all manner of calamities
did everywhere arise. Therefore did the eight myriad Gods
assemble in a Divine Assembly on the banks of the Hver
Amenoyasu, and hid the God Omohikane.. . . . devise apian.
[After relating how various divinities were then entrusted
with the making of a mirror, j;he collecting of offerings, and
the searching of an omen from the shoulder-blade of a stag,
the text thus continues :] And Her Grandeur Ame-no-Uzume,
binding tip her sleeve tvith the Heavenly Moss from Mount
Ame-no-Kagu, and braiding the Heavenly Masaki * in Iter
hair, and bearing in her hands the leaves of the bamboo-grass
from Mount Ame-no-Kagu, did set a platform before the door
of the Heavenly Abode, and stamp on it till it resounded, andt
becoming divinely possessed , open her breasts to view, pushing
the girdle of her dress down, . . . Then did the High Plain
of Heaven tremble, and the eight myriad Gods did laugh in
chorus. TJien the Great and Grand Goddess Amaterasu was
filled with amazement, and, setting ajar the door of the Rocky
Abode of Heaven, spake thus from the inside : " Methought
thai my retirement would darken the Plain of Heaven, and
that darkened wotdd be the whole Middle Land of Reed-
Plains. How, then, cometh it to pass that Ame-no-Uzume


* Evonymus Japonicus.


•APPENDIX IL 215

tliua frolics^ and that all the eight myriad Gods do laugh V^
To which Ame-nO'Uzuine replied : ^^ If we laugh and rejoice,
His because there is here a Goddess more illustrious than thou,"
And, as she spake, Their Grandeurs Ame-no-Koyane and
Futotama brought out the mirror, and respectfully shmced the
same to the Great and Grand Goddess Amaterasu, who, ever
more and more amazed, gradually came forth from the door
to gaze upon it, whereupon the God Am&-no-Tajikarawo, who
had been lying in ambush, took her by the hand and drew her
out, ^ . , And so, whe)t the Gfreat and Grand Goddess
Amaierasu had come forth, light was restored both to the
High Plain of Heaven and to the Middle Land of Reed-
Plains.


( 2i6 )


APPENDIX III.

1

Shoet Notices of the Japanese Poets and Poetesses
Specimens of whose works are given in the
Text.

[Hfot a little confusion is caused in Japanese^ as in Chinese,
literature hy the variety of designations %ised to denote one and
the same person. In the text each author has been mentioned hy
the individual narrie corresponding to our " Christian nam^ " hy
which the majority of them are best known. ThefulVnames and
titles are hei^e given, the individual name being in large capitals,
the surname or clan name in small capitals, and the rank or title
in italics,"]

AKAHITO (Yamanobe no * Suhine AKAHITO). Of this
contemporary and sole admitted rival of Hitomaro (see p. 217),
nothing is known but his compositions as they have come down
to us in the " Collection of a Myriad Leaves." The latest bears
date A.D. 736.

ASAYASU (BuSfYA no ASAYASU) was son of the better
known Bunya no Yasuhide (see p. 224).

CHISATO {Zhifu-Go Wi no Zhiyau Ohoye no Asoh
CHISATO) was son of a councillor, and flourished at the end


* The word no, which so perpetually recurs in Japanese names, means
'*of." Sukune, like Ason and Murazhi, is something between a clan
name and an hereditary title of nobility.


APPENDIX III. 217

of the ninth century. He held the posts of Vice-Governor
of the province of lyo and Assistant Vice-Minister of Kites
and Ceremonies, besides an office in the Department of War,
and was granted a patent of nobility. He was a very fertile
poet.

FUKAYABU) Kiyohara no FUKAYABU). Of this poet
no particulars have been handed down.

HASHIBITO (HASHIBITO Kuwaugm, t.«., the Empress
Consort Hashibito) was daughter of the Mikado Zhiyomei
(died A.D. 641), and wife of the Mikado Kautoku (died 654).

HEl^ZEU (Souzhiyau HENZEU, i.e., the Buddhist Bishop
Henzeu; his original name as a layman was Yoshimine no
Munesada), one of the foremost men of his time, was great-
grandson of the Mikado Kuwanmu (died a.d. 806), and
favourite of the Mikado Ninmiyau (died a.d. 850), to whom
he seems to have been in reality tenderly attached. On the
deat}i of his patron he entered into religion, was made a bishop
about A.D. 886, and died shortly afterwards. He was founder
of the celebrated monastery of Kuwazanzhi, the retreat, in
after years, of the melancholy Emperor Morosada. The poet
Tsurayuki, who, in his celebrated preface to the "Odes Ancient
and Modem," passes judgment on all the chief writers his pre-
decessors, says of Henzeu : " The bishop was a skilful versifier,
hut in real feeling he was lacking : I might liken him to one that
should conceive an artificial passion for the mere painted sem-
blance of a maiden.''

HIRONAHA (KuME no Ason HIRONAHA) was an official
employed in the administration of tbe province of Koshi during
the governorship of the noble poet Yakamochi (see p. 223).

HITOMAEO (Kakinomoto Asoh HITOMARO). Of this,
the most celebrated of the poets of Japan, we know nothing
more than can be gleaned from the notes to his poems contained


2 1 8 APPENDIX III.

in the "Collection of a Myriad Leaves," excepting the bare
statement in the official annals that he died in the province of
Ihami on the eighteenth day of the third moon of the year
737.* He would appear to have been a confidential retainer of
Prince Hinami and afterwards of Prince Takaichi, and to have
finally obtained an office in the province of Ihami, where he
ended his days. Though apparently of noble origin (the
^^ Shiyauzhirohi^ an ancient work on pedigrees, traces his
descent to the Mikado Bidatsu, who died a.d. 585), he was of
low rank, a fact which is sufficiently established by the various
mentions of him in the notes to the poems, and by the non-
honorific Chinese character employed for the word "died " in
the official notice of his decease. Legend, however, has not
been content to leave so favourite a bard in obscurity, and has
drawn materials from his very name where otherwise there was
nothing to build on. Kakinomoto signifies literally "the fort
of the persimmon-tree," t and it is fabled that a warrior called
Ayabe, on going one day into his garden, found standing at the
foot of his persimmon-tree a child of more than mortal splen-
dour. On being asked its name, the little creature replied, "I
have neither father nor mother ; but the moon and the winds
obey me, and poetry is my delight." The warrior thereupon
called his wife, who was as greatly charmed with the boy as
her husband had been. So they took and adopted him, and
named him after the tree beneath whose shade he had first
been shown to them. The native author from whom this story
is taken remarks : " The tale is scarcely worthy of credence ;
yet it is curious that the surname of Ayabe should have been
handed down to this very day in the country-side where the
event is said to have taken place." It is also alleged that in
the vicinity of the poet*s grave there grows a persimmon-tree.


* By other authorities, however, his death is placed thirteen years
earlier.

t Most Japanese surnames are taken from natural objects, thus :
Wisteria-Moor, Large-Estuary, Slope-of-the-Mountain. There is, there-
fore, nothing peculiar in Kakiuomoto.


APPENDIX III. 219

possessing, among other remarkable qualities, that of bearing
fruit which are pointed and black at the end, resembling a pen
in shape and colour. Akahito is the only admitted rival of
Hitomaro.

ISE (ISE no MiyasundoJcoro, i.e., Ise the imperial mistress ;
or ISE no Go, i.e., the Lady Ise), so called after the province
of Ise, of which her father had been governor, flourished in
the latter part of the ninth and the early part of the tenth
centuries. Originally maid of honour to the consort of the
Mikado Uda, she was loved by the monarch himself, and gave
birth to the accomplished Prince Katsura. Equally celebrated
for her talents and for the gentleness of her disposition, she
followed the Mikado's example in retiring from the court and
the world, and, after his death, appears to have fallen into
poverty, though still consulted as an authority on literary
matters.

KANAMUEA (Kasa no KANAMURA'^iso^). No details
of his life have been handed down. He flourished in the early
part of the eighth century.

KOMACHI (WoNO no KOMACHI). Less is known, though
more is told, of this celebrated contemporary of the Henzeus
and the Yasuhides than of any other of the poetesses of Japan.
Thus much only appears certain : that she flourished during the
reigns of the Mikados Ninmiyau, Montoku, and Seiwa (a.d.
834 to 880), and created an immense sensation by her beauty,
her talents, and the miserable old age to which her pride con-
ducted her. In point of diction, Mabuchi, the greatest scholar
of modem Japan, places her above all other female writers
of verse. Tsurayuki's judgment was:. ^^KomacMs style is
plaintive and delicate^ like to a lovely woman wasted vntk
disease*^'

KURONUSHI (Ohotomo no KLTIONUSHI). Of this poet
not much is known, save that he was of imperial descent, and


220 APPENDIX III.

flourished during the latter part of the ninth century. Tsnra-
yuki, who did not appreciate his somewhat archaic manner, says
of him, "Kuronushi is clevevy hiU his style is low, I woidd liken
him to a woodman laden vnih faggots, and halting to rest under
the shadow of the hlossoms^^ — a dictum in which later critics are
by no means disposed to acquiesce. Tradition represents him
as envious and deceitful, and tells how he endeavoured to injure
the reputation of the poetess Komachi by declaring that an ode
which she claimed to have composed, was in reality, stolen from
the " Collection of a Myriad Leaves." In order to make good
this calumny, he purloined the imperial scroU of the " Myriad
Leaves," and copied into it the disputed oda But Heaven
came to Eomachi's rescue ; for when, after adjurations to the
gods in the presence of the Mikado and his court, she took
water and washed the scroll, the falsely inserted verses alone
were rubbed out, while the ink in which all the others were
written stood firm. This tale forms the subject of one of the
lyric dramas, under the title of " The Washing of the Manu-
script."

MITSUNE (Ohoshikafuchi* no MITSUNE) was not of
noble birth. His chief distinction is that of having been one
of the committee for the compilation of the " Odes Ancient and
Modem."

MUSHIMARO (Takahashi no Murazhi MUSHIMARO).
Of this poet nothing is known. The denomination of Murazhi^
however, shows him to have been of noble family.

NARIHIRA (Aeihara no NARIHIRA Ason\ the. most
prominent figure in the courtly annals of his age, was son of
Prince Aho and of Princess Idzu, and grandson on both sides of
a Mikado. He was born in a.d. 825 and died in 880, after a
career in which love played the chief part. The history of
some of his amours and of his exile (on account of an in-


* Commonly, but incorrectly, called Ohochikapcohi.


APPENDIX III. 221

trigue with the Empress) to the then uncultured regions of
Eastern Japan is given in the "ise MonogaJtari^^ the most
elegant of the prose classics of the country. Narihira is noted
for his conciseness and frequent obscurity. Tsurayuki says
of him, " Narihirds stanzas are so pregnant with meaning that
the words suffice not to express it. He is like a closed Jlower that
hath lost its colour, lut whose fragrance yet remainethJ^

NiBi Taifu (individual name not known). No particulars
of this poet have been handed down.

OHOGIMI (NuKADA no OHOGIMI) was sister-in-law to
the Prime Minister Prince Kamatari, and mistress successively
of the Mikados Tenji and Tenmu. She flourished in the
seventh century.

OKIKAZE (FuJiHABA no OKIKAZE) held subordinate
posts in the government of the provinces of Shimofusa and
Sagami. We find mention of him as late as a.d. 914.

•

OKURA (Yamagami no OKURA) was an officer in the
revenue department, and afterwards Governor of the province
of Chikuzen. He flourished during the first half of the eighth
century.

SAKANOUHE (Ohotomo SAKANOUHE no Iratmrne*)
was daughter of the Prime Minister and Commander-in-Chief
Saho Dainagon Ohotomo no Yasumaro. She married the
Viceroy of the island of Tsukushi,t and was both aunt and
mother-in-law of the celebrated poet Yakamochi. Her own
compositions are much esteemed by the native critics. She
flourished during the first half of the eighth century.

SAKIMAKO (Tanabe no SAKIMARO) was an officer in


* Jratsume was the honorific appellation for ladies of high rank,
f Called in modern times Shikoku.


223 APPENDIX III.

the Mikado's Wine Borean, as we learn by a reference to him
in the eighteenth volume of the ^^ Collection of a Myriad
Leaves/' where he is mentioned as having been sent on business
to Yakamochi, Governor of the province of Eoshi, in the year
748.

SEKIWO (FujiHABA no SEKIWO) seems to have held the
posts of President of the Board of Rites, Chief Lay Official of
the Shintau temples at Ise, and Governor of the province
of Shimotsuke during the reign of the Mikado Buiitoku (a.d.
851-858).

SHIYAUMU* (Shiyaumtj Tenwau, AME-SHIRUSHI-
KUNI-OSHI-HIRAKI-TOYO-SAKUEA-HIKO no Mikoto)
was the forty-sixth Mikado, and reigned from a.d. 724 to 756.
As stated in the Introduction, ijb is to the reign of this prince
that the " Collection of Ten Thousand Leaves " must almost
certainly be referred.

SOSEI (SOSEI Hofushi, le., the Buddhist priest Sosei ;
his original name as a layman was Yoshimine no Hironobu)
flourished in the latter part of the ninth century, and is. said
to have been the son of the more illustrious poet, the Buddhist
Bishop Henzeu, who had been married prior to his entry into
religion. Sosei himself was abbot of the monastery of Eiyau-
iiiwin at Isonokami, a famous religious centre in the province
of Yamato.

TADAMINE (NiBut no TAD AMINE). Nothing certain

* Mikados are always known, not by their personal, but by their pos-
thumous names, for which reason, an 4 on account of the unmanageable
length of the personal name, the posthumous name has been adopted in
the text, and is here, for the sake of clearness, printed in small capitals.
Teriwau is the designation of the imperial dignity, meaning, as it does
literally, "Emperor of Heaven." Mikoto is equivalent to our title of
Highness or Majesty, and is also applied to the gods.

f Commonly, but incorrectly, called MiBU.


APPENDIX III. 223

is known of Tadamine but the fact of his having been one of
Tsurayuki's three coadjutors in the work of editing the ^' Odes
Ancient and Modem." He is said to have died in 965 at the
age of ninety-nine.

TOSHIYUKI (FuJiHAJiA no TOSHIYUKI Awn), during
his short life of seven-and-twenty years held successive im-
portant posts in the Imperial Guard, and died in or about
A.D. 907. To his other talents he joined the, in Japan, highly
prized one, of caligraphy.

TSUKAYUKI (Ki no TSURAYUKI). The noble house of
Ki claimed descent from the Mikado Kaugen through Takeu-
suchi Sukune, the Methusaleh of Japan. Tsurayuki's own
history is but a catalogue of the important official posts to
which he was raised, and of brilliant literary achievements.
He was successively bead of the Official Department of Litera-
ture, Private Secretary in Chief to the Mikado, Governor of
the province of Tosa, Minister for Foreign AflFairs, and Super-
visor of the Imperial Constructions. He died in a.d. 946 at
the age of sixty-two. Though much admired as a poet,* his
chief glory is that of having been the first prosaist in his
native tongue, all prose compositions up to that time, except-
ing a few liturgies and edicts, having been made in Chinese,
or what passed for such. The prose works by which he is best
known are, the " Tosa Nild^^ a charmingly simple and lifelike
account of his voyage home by junk from Tosa to the capital,
and the extremely elegant Preface to the ** Collection of Odes
Ancient and Modem," the gathering together and editing of
which was intmsted to him and to three other literary men of
the period, by the Mikado Daigo.

YAKAMOCHI {ChiyuuTuigofi Ohotomo no Suhme YAKA-
MOCHI), the most favourite of the ancient poets with the

* The present writer coDsiders him to be, in point of versification, the
sweetest of all the poets of Japan.


224 APPENDIX III.

modem Japanese, was son of the Prime Minister Tabiudo and
grandson of the Prime Minister Yasomaro. He was succes-
sively Governor of the province of Koshi, and Viceroy and
Commander-in-Chief of the then unsettled country in the east
and north of the Empire. He died in a.d. 785.

YASUHIDE (BuihrA no YASUHIDE) was vice-director
of the Imperial Bureau of Fabrics, and likewise occupied a
post in the administration of the province of SagamL He
flourished during the latter part of the ninth century.

YOSHIKI OVoNO no YOSHIKI) is said to have been an
excellent Chinese scholar, and to have died in a.d. 902.

YUKIHIRA {Chiyuunagofi Arthara no YUKIHIRA Ason)
was half-brother to the more celebrated Narihira, whom he sur-
passed in practical ability. He died in a.d. 893 at the age of
seventy-five, after having occupied distinguished posts under
six successive Mikados.

Zhiyomei * (ZniYOMEi Tehwau, TAMUKA or OKI-NAGA-
TARASHI-HI-HIRO-NUKA no Ma-oto) was the thirty-fifth
Mikado, and reigned from a.d. 629 to 641.


* See note to SuiYAUMU.


( 225 )


APPENDIX IV.

Index of First Lines to Facilitate Reference to
THE Japanese Originals in the "Collection
OF a Myriad Leaves."

[The pages referred to are those of the " Riyakuge "' edition.]

PAOB

Across the bridge with scarlet lacquer glowing . voL ix. 23
Alas ! poor mortal maid, unfit to hold . . . ii 30

As the bold huntsman on some mountain path xiii. (ist pt.) 33
Beauteous is the woody mountain . . . . vi. 9
Countless are the mountain-chains . . . . i. 6
Farthest of all the lands that 9wn . . xviL (2nd pt.) 25
For ever on Mik^ne's crest .... xiii (2nd pt.) 2
From eVry quarter of the vast domains . . xviiL 41

From Kamindbi's crest xiii (ist pt.) 27

From the loud wave-wash'd shore .... viii 8
Full oft he aware with accents true and tender iv. (ist pt.) 42
He comes not ; 'tis in vain I wait . . xiii (ist pt.) 34
Here on one side of the stream I stand . xiii (2nd pt.) 5

How fondly did I yearn to gaze ii 62

If, as my spirit yearns for thine . . . xiii. (ist pt) 32
If, like loyal men, ye up and carry . . . . vi 28

In Ashinoya village dwelt ix. 50

In the great days of old v. 49

I stand by the grave where they buried . . . ix. 46
Japan is not a land where men need pray . xiii (ist pt.) 5

P


226


APPENDIX IV.


PAGE

Methinks from the hedge round the garden . • vol. ix. 45
Mountains and ocean waves around me lie . xiii (2nd pt.) 26
Near to the valley stands my humble cot . ziz. (ist pt.) 30
Ne'er a melon can I eat V. 10


Nightingales built the nest .

Oft in June or earlier May-tide .

Oft in the misty spring . . .

Ofttimes in far Corea didst thou hear

Oh ! he, my prince, that left my side

Oh ! that that ancient bridge

O ye steeds the Prince of Mino .

Pure is Hatsuse's mountain brook

Sent by the sovereign lord to sway

Sent by the sovereign monarch to hold sway

Sev*n are the treasures mortals most do prize

Since the far natal hour of earth and heaven

Since the hour when first begun .

So young, so young ! he cannot know the way

Spring his gentle beams is flinging .

The gulls that twitter on the rush-grown shore

The heav*n and earth they call so great

The long spring day is o'er, and dark despond

There on the border, where the land of Kahi

The year has come, the year has gone again

They tell me that the fisher-girls .

Thou wast my child, and to my heart more dear

Till the thread of life is broken .

'Tis spring, and the mists come stealing

To Hatsuse's vale I'm come .

Tsunu's shore, Ihami's brine .

'Twas said of old, and still the ages say

What use to me the gold and silver hoard

When began the earth and heaven

When I left to keep guard on the frontier

When my lord, who fain would look on

When our prince, the mighty monarch


. IX. 29
. xvL 46
iii. (2nd pt.) 10
iiL (2nd pt.) 42
xiii. (2nd pt.) 15
xiiL (istpt.) 17
xiii (2nd pt.) 22
xiii (ist pt.) 4
xviii. 36
. XV. 31
. V. 59
xix. (ist pt.) 1 1
X. (ist pt ) 54
V. 61
vL 19
. XV. 14

• ▼. 45
i< 8

. iii. (ist pt.) 33

xiiL (ist pt.) 23

xviii. 28

xix (2nd pt.) 4

viii 14

. ix. 19

xiii. (2ndpt.) 12

ii. 20

xiii, (ist pt.) 2 1

V. II

. ii. 39

XX. (ist pt.) 47

ix. 27

iii. (ist pt.) 3


APPENDIX IV.


227


When the dawn is shining .
When winter turns to spring (p. 86)
When winter turns to spring (p. 87)
Where in spring the sweetest flowers
Where in the far-off Eastern land .
Where many an eagle builds her nest
While other women's husbands ride
Yam^to's land, that still with pow'r imperial
Yes ! 'twas the hour when all my hopes


PAOS

voL L 7

i 17

xiii. (ist pt.) 2

. iz. 48
xiii. (ist pt.) 26

. ix. 30
xiii. (2ndpt.) 13

. vi. 51
xiii (2nd pt.) I


N.B. — The references to the originals of the " Odes Ancient
and Modem " are given in the text. The Japanese names of
the four lyric dramas there translated are ^^ na-goromo^
" Setsu-shiyau-sehi^ ^^Kantamu^^ and Manjiyuu" by which
they will easily be found in any complete edition. The
names of the writers of these plays are not to be ascertained,
owing to a peculiar Japanese custom of attributing to the head
of the clan of lyric actors at any given time, the authorship of
all such pieces as came out under his auspices.


THE END.


PRINTED BY BALLANTYNB, HANSON AND CO.
LONDON AND EDINBURGH


7

j


!

I'

:1"
I •

■i
'I

f !

i'

'i ■

t

#. »

■


t


I-


TRUBNER'S


^ O-A-TA-LOO-TJE


OP


BOOKS, PERIODICALS, AND SERIALS,


ON THE


^imtv^ languages, iaeltg:ion0, antiqiuities, Itteta^
turc, anu ©eograpftp of tfje (Bm,


AND KINDRED SUBJECTS,


PUBLISHED BY


TI^tJBIsrs:E^ <Sc CO.


LONDOIT:

TRUBNER & CO., 57 and 69, LUDGATE HILL.

1880.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Triibner's Oriental Series • • • ••• ••• 3

Serials and Periodicals •• ••• ••• 6

History, Geography, Travels, Ethnography, Archaeology, Law, Namismatics... 16

The Religions of the East • •• •<

Comparative Philology (Polyglots) •••

Grammars, Dictionaries, Texts, and Translations : —


'24
29


PAGE


82

33
34
34
36
36
38


38

38

39


39


Accad — V, Assyrian

African Languages

American Languages

Anglo-Saxon

Araoic .( ,«• .,. ,«, •••

xLssamcse ■•• «•• ,»« ••■

Assyrian .«• .•. «,« ,«« •••

Australian Languages

Aztek— v. American Lang. ...

Babylonian — v, Assyrian ...

Dcugaii ... ... ... ... ...

JJranoe ••■ ... ..• ... .*.

Braj Bh^k& — v. Hindi

Durmese ... ... ... ... ...

Celtic — V. Keltic

Chaldaic — v. Assyrian

Chinese (for books on and in
Pidgin- English see under
this heading)

Choctaw — V. American Lang.

Coptic — V. Egyptian

V/OlCclIl ««« ««• ••• t*« •••

Cornish — V.Keltic

Cree ) — v. American Lan-

Creole ( guages

Cuneiform— V. Assyrian

Dutch (Pennsylvania) ... .«.

J2«gVL)LlclU ••• ••« ••• ••■ •••

English — Early and Modern 45

English and Dialects

r nsian •• ... .•• *•• ...

Gaelic — v. Keltic

German (Old)

vvipsy ... ... ... ••• ...

Greek (Modem and Classic) ..
viujarati ... ... ■•• ••■ ...

Gurmukhi ;.

•ULaWelliclXl « .. « ••• ••• ••• •••

Xl.cDrc*T ••• ••• ••• ••• ••«

. Bidatsa — v. American Lang,
.tiincti ... ..•. .•■ ft* ..•


43


65
43


55

55
55
56
56
56
56
57


Hindustani ...

AceianQic ... ... ... ... ... ,«•

Japanese ... ... ... ... ... «.,

Irish — V. Keltic

Kamilaroi — see Austra an Lang. .. .
Keltic(Cornish,Gaelic, Welsh, Irish)

Mahratta (Marathi)

JVlalagasy ... ... ... ,,. ... »,•

ivi oitty ... ... ... ... ... •••

Malayalim

'"wvri ... ... ... ... ... ...

Oriya — V. Uriya

Pflli

^ nil ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

X azanu ... .. ... ... ... ,..

A ci^uuu ... ... ... ... ... ...

Pehlvi

Pennsylvania Dutch

' CrBiaU ... ... ... ... ... .••

Pidgin- English

1 raKilv •«• ••• ••• •«■ ••• •••

Pukshto (Pakkhto, Pashto)

Punjabi — v. Gurmukhi

Quichua — v, American Languages

^VUoSlctlX ... ... ... ... ... ...

oamaritan ... ... ... ••• •••

oamoan ... ••• ... ... ... •.•

oansKrib ... ... ... ... *•« ...

Shan — V. Burmese...

Sindhi

Sinhalese

oyriac .«• ••• ...

Tamil

Telugu

Tibetan ... ••• ...
1 urKi ... ... ••*

Turkish

Umbrian ...

Urdu — V. Hindustani
u riya ... ... ...

"Welsh — V, Keltic ...


PAGE
. 58

, 69
. 60


...

• a.


i7


...
•••
•••

...


60
61
61
61
62
62

62
63
64
64
65
65
66
66
66


67
67
67
67

77
77
78
78
78
78
79
79
79

79


TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.


Messrs. TRUBKER & CO. beg to call attention to tbeir ORIENTAL
SERIES, in which will be coHsected, as far aEs possible, all extant information and
research upon the History, BeligionB, Langaages, Literature,- etc., of Ancient
India, China, and the East in general.

The Oriental Series will be on a comprehensive design, and no labour or
expense will be spared to render the undertaking worthy of its subject. Messrs.
Trubner & Co. have already secured the services of eminent Eastern students and
writers ; and while the labour proposed must necessarily prove vast, they intend to
accomplish it by working with many able hands- over the whole field, under careful
and well-organized Editorship.


THE FOLLOWING WOBKS ABE NOW BEADY ^

EssArs ON THE Sacred Language, Writings, and- Eeligion of

THE Parsis. By Martin^ HAro, Ph.D.. late Professor of Sanskrit and Com-
parative Philology at the University of Murnich. Edited by Dr. E. W. West.
Second Edition. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 428. 1878. 169.

Texts from tJbee Buddhist Cai^on, commonly known as Dhamma-
pada. With accompanying Narratives. Translated from the Chinese by S.
Beal, B.A., Professor of Chinese, University College, London. Post 8vo. cloth,
pp. viii. and 176. 1878. 79, 6d,

The History of Indian Literature. By Albrecht Weber.

Translated from the German by John Mann, M.A., and Theodor Zachariae,
Ph.D., with the sanction of the Author. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. ixziii. and 860.

1878. 18*.

A Sketch of The Modern Languages of the East Indies. By
. Robert Cust. Accompanied by Two Language Maps. Post 8vo. cloth, pp.
zii. and 198. 1878. 12«.

The Birth of the "War God. A Poem by KIlidIsa. Translated
from the Sanskrit into English Yerse. By Ralph T. H. Griffith, M.A.,
Principal of Benares College. Second Edition. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xii.-116.

1879. 58.

A Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology and History,
Geography and Literature. By John Dowson, M.R.A.S., late Professor
in the Staff College. Post 8vo. cloth» pp. zix. and 412. 1879. 16«.

Selections from ^:he Ku-ran. With a Commentary. Translated by

the late Edward William Lane, Author of an ** Arabic- English Lexicon/' etc.
A New Edition, Revised, with an Introduction on the History and Develop*
ment of Islam, especially with reference to India. By Stanley Lane Poole.
Post 8vo. cloth I pp. cxii. and 176. 9«.


4 Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co.,

Metktcal Translations feom Sanskeutt Weiters. With, an Intro-
duction, Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages from Classical Authors. By J.
MuiB, C.I.E., D.C.L., LL.D., Ph.D. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xliv. and 376.
1879. 14*.

Modern India and the Indians. Being a Series of Impressions, K'otes,
and Essays. By Monieb Williams, D.C.L., Hon. LL.D. of the UniTersity
of Calcutta, Hon. Member of the Bombay Asiatic Society, Boden Professor of
Sanskrit in the University of Oxford. Third Edition. Revised and augmented
by considerable additions. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. 366. With map. 1879. I4«.

MlSCELLANEOTIS EsSAYS RELATING TO InDIAN SUBJECTS. By BbTAK
HouoHTON Hodgson, Esq., F.R.S., late of the Bengal Civil Service, etc., etc.
2 vols. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 408, and viil and 348. 1880. 28«.

The Life or Legend of Gattdama, the Buddha of the Burmese. 'With
Annotations, The Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the Phongyies or Burmese
Monks. By the Eight Reverend P. Bioandet, Bishop of Ramatha, Vicar
Apostolic of Ava and Pegu. Third Edition 2 vols. 8vo. cloth, pp. zx. and
268, and vUi. and 326. 1880. 2U.


THE FOLLOWING WORKS ABE IN PBEPABATION :—

Oriental Religions in their Belation to ITniversal Religion. By
Samuel Johnbon. Second Section — China. In Two Volumes, post 8vo. cloth.

The Gulistan; or, Rose Garden of Shekh Mushliu'd-din Sadi of
Shiraz. Translated for the first time into Prose and Verse, with an Intro-
ductory Preface, and a Life of the Author, from the Atish Kadah, by Edward
B. Eastwick, F.R.S., M.R.A.S., etc. Second Edition, post 8vo. cloth.

The Jataka Stories. With the Commentary and CoUection of
Buddhist Fairy Tales, Fables, and Folk Lore. Translated from the original
Pali by T. W. Rhys Davids. (The first part of the Commentary contains the
most complete account we yet have of the Life of Buddha.) Vol. I., post 8vo.
cloth.

Chinese Buddhism. A Volume of Sketches, Historical and Critical.
By J. Edkins, D.D , Author of *• China's Place in Philology,'* •* Religion in
China,** etc., etc. Post 8vo. cloth.

Buddhist Records of the Western "World. Being the Si-tu-ki by
Hyen Thsano. Translated from the original Chinese, with Introduction,
Index, etc. By Samuel Beal, Trinity College, Cambridge; Professor of
Chinese, University College, London. In Two Vols., post 8vo. cloth.

The Poems of Hafiz of Shiraz. Translated from the Persian into
English Verse by E. H. Palmer, M.A., Professor of Arabic in the University
of Cambridge. Post 8vo. cloth.

Indian Tales from Thibetan Sources. Translated from the Thihetan

into German by Anton Schiefner. Bendered into English, with Notes, by
W. R. S. RAL8T0N. In One Volume, post 8vo.

The Religions of India. By A. Barth. Translated ftom the
French, with the Author's sanction and help. Post 8vo.

The History of Esarhaddon (Son of Sennacherib) King of As-
syria, B.C. 681-668. Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions upon
Cylinders and Tablets in the British Museum Collection. Together with a
Grammatical Analysis of each Word, Explanations of the Ideographs hy
Extracts from the Bi-Lingual Syllabaries, and list of Eponyms, etc. By Ebnsst
A. Budge, M.R.A.S., etc.

Linguistic and Oriental Essays. By Robert Needham Oust.

Selections from the Talmud and the Mldrash. With an Intro-
duction to the Talmud. By P. J. Hershon.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hilly London^ KC.


SERIALS AND PERIODICALS.

Asiatic Society of Oreat Britain and Ireland. — JoimNAL of the

BoYAL Asiatic Society op Great Britain and Ireland, from the Com-
mencement to 1863. First Series, complete in 20 Vols. Svo., with many Plates.
Price £10; or, in Single Numbers, as follows: — Nos. 1 to 14, 6s. each; No. 16,
2 Parts, 4«. each; No. 16, 2 Parts, 4*. each; No. 17, 2 Parts, 4«. each; No.
18, 6«. These 18 Numbers form Vols. I. to IX.— Vol. X., Part 1, o.p. ;
Part 2, 68. ; Part 3, 6*.— Vol. XI., Part 1, 6«.; Part 2 not published.— Vol.
XII., 2 Parts, 6«. each— Vol. XIII., 2 Parts, 6*. each.— Vol. XIV., Part 1,
68. ; Part 2 not published.— Vol. XV., Part 1, 6*. ; Part 2, with 3 Maps, £2 2«.
—Vol. XVI., 2 Parts, 6*. each.— VoL XVII., 2 Parts, 6t. each.— Vol. XVIIL,
2 Parts, 6*. each.— Vol. XIX., Parts 1 to 4, 16t.— Vol. XX., Parts 1 and 2, 4«.
each. Part 3, 7«. 6^^.

Asiatic Society. — Jotjknal op the Royal Asiatic Society of Great
Britain and Ireland. Jfew Series, Vol. I. In Two Parts, pp. iv. and
490, sewed. 1861-5. 16«.

Contents.— I. yfdra-chhedik&, tbe ** Kin Kong King," or Diamond Sdtra. Translated from
the Chinese by the Key. 8. Beal, Chaplain, R.N. — II. The PAramit&-hridaya Sfitra, or, in Chinese,
** Mo ho-pd-ye-po-lo-mih-to-sin-king," i.e. "The Great P&ramit& Heart Sdtra." Translated
from the Chinese by the Rev. 8. Beal, Chaplain, R.N.— III. On the Preservation of National
Literature in the East. By Colonel F. J. Goldsmid.— IV. On the Agricultural, Commercial,
Financial, and Military Statistics of Ceylon. By £. R. Power, Esq.— Y. Contributions to a
Knowledge of the Vedic Theogony and Mythology. By J. Muir, D.C.L., LL.D.— VI. A Tabular
List of Original Works and Translations, published by the late Dutch Government of Ceylon at
their Printing Press at Colombo. Compiled by Mr. Mat. P. J. Ondaatje, of Colombo.— VII
Assyrian and Hebrew Chronology compared, with a view of showing the extent to which the
Hebrew Chronology of Ussher must be modified, in conformity with the Assyrian Canon. By
J. W. Bosanquet, Esq.— VIII. On the existing Dictionaries of the Malav Language. By Dr.
H. N. van der Tnuk. — IX. Bilingual Readings : Cuneiform and Phoemcian. Notes on some
Tablets in the British Museum, containing Bilingual Legends (Assyrian and Phoenician). By
Major-Oeneral Sir H. Rawlinson, K.C.B., Director R. A.B.— X. Translations of Three Copper-plate
Inscriptions of the Fourth Century a.d., and Notices of the Ch&lukya and Gurjjara Dynasties
B^Professor J. Dowson, Staff College, Sandhurst.— XI. Tama and the Doctrine of a Future
Life, according to the Rig-Tajur-, and Atharva-Vedas. By J. Muir, Esq., D.C.L., LL.D.-«XII.
On the Jyotisha Observation of the Place of the Colures, and the Date derivable ftrom it. By
William D. Whitney, Esq., Professor of Sanskrit in Tale College, New Haven, U.S.— Note on
the preceding Article. By Sir Edward Colebrooke, Bart., M.P., President R.A.S.— XIII. Pro-
gress of the Vedic Religion towards Abstract exceptions of the Deity. By J. Muir, Esq.,
D.C.L., LL.D.— XIV. Brief Notes on the Age and Authenticity of the Work of Arvabhata,
Var&hamihira, Brahmagupta, Bhattotpala, and Bh&skar&ch&rya. By Dr. Bh&u Dftjl, Hono-
rary Member R.A.S.— XV. Outlines of a Grammar of the Malagasy LtEinguage. By H. N. Van
der Tuuk. — XVI. On the Identity of Xandrames and Krananda. By Edward Thomas, Esq.

Vol. II. In Two Parts, pp. 522, sewed. 1866-7. 16«.

Contents. — ^I. Contributions to a Knowledge of Vedic Theogony and Mythology. No. 2.
By J. Muir, Esq. —II. Miscellaneous Hymns from the Rig- and Atharva-Vedas. By J. Muir,
Esq.— III. Five hundred questions on the Social ConcUtion of the Natives of Bengal. By the
Rev. J. Long.— IV. Short account of the Malay Manuscripts belonging to the Royal Asiatic
Society. By Dr. H. N. van der Tuuk.— V. Translation of the Amit&bha Sfttra from the Chinese.
Bv the Rev. S. Beal, Chaplain Royal Navy.— VI. Tbe initial coinage of Bengal. By Edward
Thomas, Esq.— VII. Specimens of an Assvrian Dictionary. By Edwin Norris, Esq.— VIII. On
the Relations of the Priests to the other classes of Indian Society in the Vedic age By J. Muir,
Esq.— IX. On the Interpretation of the Veda. By the same. — X. An attempt to Translate
from the Chinese a work known as the Confessional Services of the great com passionate Kwan
Tin, possessing 1000 hands and 1000 eyes. By the Rev. S. Beal, Chaplain Royal Navy.
—XI. The Hymns of the Gaupftyanas and the Leg^id of King Asam&ti. By Professor Max
Miiller, M.A., Honorary Member Royal Asiatic Society.— XII. Specimen Chapters of an Assyrian
Grammar. By the Rev. £. Hincks, D. D., Honorary Member Royal Asiatic Society.

Vol.111. In Two Parts, pp. 516, sewed. With Photograph. 1868. 228.

CoNTBNTS.— I. Contributions towards a Glossary of the Assyrian Language. By H. F. Talbot.
— II. Remarks on the Indo-Chinese Alphabets. By Dr. A. Bastian.— III. The poetry of
Mohamed Rabadan, Arragoneee. By the Hon. H. E. J. Stanley.— IV. Catalogue of the Oriental
Manuscripts in the Library of King's College, Cambridge. By Edward Henry Palmer, B.A ,
Scholar ox St. John's College, Cambridge ; Member of the Royal Asiatic Society ; Membre de la


lAngtuxtic Publieatians of Trubrur if Co.,


fneiM: A«istiqae de Pnia.— ▼. DeKeriptiaa of the Amumnti Tope m Gontiir. Bj J. F« _
h^., V,1L»^Vh Remarks on Prot BroeUuiw* ecfitioa of the Kathl«rit-iMa», T j mlwk a IX.
XVtlU Bt Dr. H. K€Tl^ ProfnK>r of iteiwknt in the Vmrenixj of Leydm-— TIL The aooree
of CWlebrooke's Emaj *• Od the Duties of a Faithful Hiadii Widow." Bj Fitzedwud Hall, Eaq^
M.A.^ D.C.L. OzoD. Supplement: Further detail of proofs that Odfetacooke's Esaaj. *«On the
Duties of a Faithful Hindu Widow,** was not indebted to the YiTidahharigimaTa. By Fits-
«^«ard Hall, Esq.— Till. The Sixth Hrmn of the Fim Book of the Bi^ Teda. Bj Profeonr
M4X MQUer, M,A. Hon. M.B.A^.— IX. SasMuian Inscriptioaa. Bt E. Tbomaa, Esq.— X. Ae-
t*/nnt of aa Embassr from Moroeeo to Spain in 1090 and 1691. ^the Hon. H. E. J. Staaier^ —
XI. The Poetrj of Mofaamed Babadan, of Arragoo. Bj the Hon. H. E. J. StaDlcy.— XH.
Materials tor the History of India for the Six Hundred Years of Mohsmmadait rule, prerioas to
tte Foundation of the British Indian Eaipire. By Jf ^or W. Xasaan Lees, LL.D., Ph.D.— XIII.
A Few Words eoneemine the Hill people inhabiting the FosesU of the Coefain State. By
raptain G. E. Fryer, Madras StafT Corps, M.R.A.8.-X1T. Notes on the Bhnjpoif Dialeet of
Ilmdr, spoken in Western Bebar. By John Beanies, Esq., B.as., Magistrate of Cbamfmrmu

Vol. IV. InTwoPartf. pp. 521,iewed. 1669-70. 16«.

Co«TSVTS.~I. Contribution towards a Glossary of the Assyrian Language. By H. F. Talbot.
Part II.— II. On Indian Chronology. By J. Fergusson, Esq., F.R.S.~HI. The Poetry of
Mohamed Bahadan of Arragon. By the Hon. H. E. J. Stanley.— IT. On the Magar Lan^iiage
of NepaL By John Beames, Esq., B.C.S.— T. Contriliations to the Knowledge of Parsee late-
ratnre. By Edward Sachan, Ph.D.— VI. Illustrations of the Lamaist System in Tibet, drawn
from Chinese Sources. By Wm. Frederick Mayers, Esq., of H.B.M. Consular Serrioe, China. —
Til. Khuddaka Pitba, a Pili Text, with a Translation and Notes. By &. C. ChilderB, late of
the Cerlon CSril Serrice.— Till. An Endearour to elucidate Bashidnddin's Geographical Notices
of India. By Col. H. Tule, C.B.~IX. Sassanian Inscriptions explained by tbe Pahla^l of the
PArsis. By E. W. Went, E«q.— X. Some Account of the Senbya Pagoda at MengOn, near the
Burmese Capital, in a Memorandum by Capt. E. H. Sladan, Political Agent at Mandal6; with
Bemarks on the Subject by Col. Henry Yule, C.B.— XI. The Brhat-Sanhiti ; or. Complete
SfTdtem of Natural Astrology of Tarftha-Mihira. Translated from Sanskrit into Engfish by Dr.
II. Kern. -XII. Tbe Mohammedan Law of Evidence, and its influence on the Administration of
Justice fai India. By N. B. E. Baillie, Esq.— XIII. The Mohammedan Law of Evidence in con-
nection with the Administration of Justice to Foreigners. By N. B. E. Baillie, Esq.— XIT. A
Translation of a Bactrian PAU Inscription. By Prof. J. Dowson.— XV> iddo-Parthian Gcnns
By E. Thomas, Esq.

Vol. v. In Two Parts, pp. 463, gemed. With 10 fbll-page aod folding Plates.
1871-2. lSa,6d,

CoKTEMTs.— I. Two J&tskas. The original P^ Text, with an English Translation. By T.
Faunbdll.— II. On an Ancient Buddhist Inscription at Keu-yung ^wan, in North China. By A.
Wylie.— III. Tbe Brbat Sanhiti; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Tar&ha-Mihira
Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dj. H. Kern.— IT. The Pongol FestiTal in Sonthem
India. By Charles E. <}0Ter.— T. The Poetry of Mohamed Rabadan, oi Arragon. By the Right
Ilun. Lord Stanley of Alderley.— TI. Essay on the Creed and Customs of the Jangama. By
Charles P. Brown.— TIL On Malabar, Coromandel, Quilon, etc. By C. P. Brown.— Till. On
tbe Treatment of the Kexus in the Neo-Ai^an Languages of India. By John Beames, B.C.S.—
IX. Some Bemarks on the Great Tope at Sanchi. By the Her. 8. Beat.— X. Ancient Inscriptions
from Mathura. Translated by Professor J. Dow8Qn.HNote to the Mathura Inscriptions. By
Msjor-General A. Cunningham. — XI. Specimen of a Translation of the Adi Granth. By Dr.
Ernest Trumpp.— XII. Notes on Dhanunapada, with Special Reference to the Question of Nir-
▼4na. By U. C. Childers, late of the Ceylon Civil Serrice.— XIII. The Brhat.Sanhit& ; or,
(Complete System of Natural Astrology of Var&ba-mihira. Translated from Sanskrit into English
bv Ur. H. Kcm.— XIT. On the Origin of the Buddhist Arthakathfis. By the Mudliar L.Comrilla
viJuHinha. Oovernmeivk Interpreter to the Ratnap.ura Court, Ceylon. With an Introduction by
R. C. Childers, late of the Ceylon Civil Serrice.— X^. The Poetry of Mobamed Rabadan, of
Arragon. Bv tbe Right Hon. Lord Stanley ,of Alderley.— XTI. Proverbia Communia Svriaca.
By Captain R. F. Burtiju. — XTII. Notes on an Aixeient Indian Tase, with an Account of the En-
graving thereupon. By Charles Home, M.R.A.S., late of the Bengal Civil Serrice. — XTIII.
The Bhar Tribe. By the Rev. AI. A. Sherriog, LL.D., Benares. Communicated by C. Home,
M.K.A.S., late B.C.S.— XIX. Of Jihad in Mohammedan Law, and its application to British
Iiiiiia. By N. B. E. Baillie. — XX. Comments on Recent Pehlvi Decipherments. With an Inci-
d<Mi(al Sketch of the Derivation of Aryan Alphabets. And Contributions to the Early History
and Geography of TabaristAn. Illustrated by Ooinei. By E. Thomas, F.R.fi.

Vol. YI., Part 1, pp. 212| iewe4# with two plates and a map. 1872. 8t.

CoNTKNTS.— The Ishmaelites, and the Arabic Tribes who Conquered their Country. By A.
Sprenger.— A Brief Account of Four Arabic Works on the Histonr and Geography of Arabia.
Bv Captain 8. B. Miles.— On tbe Methods of Disposing of the Dead at Llassa, Thibet, etc. By
ChRrlos Homo, late B.C.S. The Brhat-Sanhitft ; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of
Var&ha-mihirat Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.— Notes on Hwen
Thfang's Account of the Principalities of Tokh&rist&n, in which some Prerious Geographical
Idontifications are Reconsidered. By Colonel Ynle, C.B.— The Campaign of iBlius Gallus in
Arabia. ByA.Sprenger.— An Account of Jerusalem, Translated for the late Sir H. M. Elliot
from the Persian 'i'ext of N&sir ibn Kbusrd's Safanfimah by the late Major A. R. Fuller. — ^I'ha
Poetry of Mohamed Rabadan, of Arragon. By the Right Hon. Lord Stanley of Alderley.


67 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E. C. 7

Vol. VL, Part IT., pp. 218 to 400 and Ixxxiv., sewed. lUastrated with a Map,
Plates, and Woodcuts. 1873. Ba,

Contents. - On Hiouen-Thsang's Journey from Patna to BallabW. By James Fergusson,
D.C.L., F.R.S. - Northern BuddhUm. [Note from Colonel H. Yule, addresned to the Secretary.]
— Hwen Thsang's Account of the Principalities of Tokhirietdn, etc. By Colonel H. Yule, C.B.—
The Bfhat-SaAhiti; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Var&ha-mlhira. Translated
from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.— The Initial Coinage of Bengal, under the Early
Muhammadan Conquerors. Part II. Embracing the preliminary period between a.h. 614-684
(a.d. 1217-1236-7). By Edward Thomas, F.R.8.— The Legend of Dipafikara Buddha. Translated
from the Chinese (and intended to illustrate Plates xxix. and l., * Tree and Serpent "Worship ').
By S. Beal.— Note on Art. IX., antd pp. 213-274, on Hiouen-Thsang's Journey from Patna to
Ballabhi. By James Fergusson. D.C.L., F.B.S.— Contributions towards a Glossary of the
Assyrian Language. By H. F. Talbot.

Vol. VII., Part I., pp. 170 and 24, sewed. With a plate. 1874. St,

CoNTBNTS. — ^The UpaaampadA'Kammavdedf being the Buddhist Manual of the Form and
Manner of Ordering of Priests and Deacons. The P&li Text, with a Translation and Notes.
By J. F. Dickson, B.A., sometime Student of Christ Church. Oxford, now of the Ceylon Civil
Service.— Notes on the Megalithic Monuments of the Coimbatore District, Madras. By M. J.
Walhouse, late Madras C.S.— Notes on the Sinhalese Language. No. I. On the Formation of
the Plural of Neater Nouns. By R. C. Childers, late of the Ceylon Civil Service.— The Pali
Text of the Mahdpeurin^bdna Sutta and Commentary, with a Translation. By R. C. Childers,
late of the Ceylon Civil Service —The Brihat-8anhit& ; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology
of Variha-mihira. Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.— Note on the
Valley of Choombi. By Dr. A. Campbell, late Superintendent of Daijeeling.— The Name of the
Twelfth ImAm on the Coinage of Egypt. By H. Sauvaire and Stanley Lane Poole.— Three
Inscriptions of Par&krama B&bu the Great from Pulastipura, Ceylon (date circa 1180 a.d.). Bt
T. W. Rhys Davids.— Of the Khar&j or Muhammadan Land Tax ; its Application to British
India, and Effect on the Tenure of Land. By N. B. E. BaiUie.— Appendix : A Specimen of a
Syriac Version of the Kalilah wa-Dimnah, with an English Translation. By W. Wright.

Vol. yil., Part II., pp. 191 to 394, sewed. With seven plates and a map. 1875. 8*.

CoNTBNTS.— Stgiri, the Lion Rock, near Pulastipura, Ceylon ; and the Thirty-nintb Chapter
of the Mah&vamsa. By T. W. Rhys Davids.— The Northern Frontagers of China. Part I.
The Origines of the Mongols. By H. H. Howorth.— Inedited Arabic Coins. By Stanley Lan-
Poole.— Notice on the Dinftrs of the Abbasside Dynasty. By Edward Thomas Rogers.— The
Northern Frontagers of China. Part II. The Origines of the Manchus. By H. H. Howorth.
—Notes on the Old Mongolian Capital of Shangtn. By S. W. Bushell, B.Sc., M.D.— Oriental
Proverbs in their Relations to Folklore, History, Sociology ; with Suggestions for their Collec-
tion, Interpretation, Publication. By the Rev. J. Long.— Two Old SinoSialese Inscriptions. The
Sahasa Malla Inscription, date 1200 a d., and the Ruwanweeli Dagaba Inscription, date 1191 a.d.
Text, Translation, and Notes. By T. W. Rhys Davids.— Notes on a Bactrian Pali Inscription
and the Samvat Era. By Prof. J. Dowson. — ^Note on a Jade Drinking Vessel of the Emperor
Jab&nglr. By Edward Thomas, F.R.S.

Vol. VIII., Part I., pp. 156, sewed, with three plates and a plan. 1876. St.

CoNTSNTS. — Catalogue of Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Possession of the Royal
Asiatic Society (Hodgson Collection). By Professors E. B. Cowell and J. Eggeling. — On the
Ruins of Stgiri in Ceylon. By T. H. Blakesley, Esq., Public Works Department, Ceylon.— The
Patimokkha, being the Buddhist Oi&ce of the Confession of Priests. The Pali Text, with a
Translation, and Notes. By J. F. Dickson, M.A., sometime Student of Christ Church, Oxford,
now of the Cevlon Civil Service. — Notes on the Sinhalese Language. No. 2. Proofs of the
Sanskritic Orighi of Sinhalese. By R. C. Childers, late of the Ceylon Civil Service.

Vol. VIII., Part II., pp. 157-308, sewed. 1876. St.

CoNTRNTS.— An Account of the Island of Bali. By R. Friederich.— The Pali Text of the MahA-
parinibb&na Sutta and Commentary, with a Translation. By R. C. Childers, late of the Ceylon
avil Service.— The Northern Frontagers of China. Part II I. The Kara Khitai. By H. H.
Howorth.— Inedited Arabic Coins. II. By Stanley Lane Poole.— On the Form of Government
under the Native Sovereigns of Ceylon. By A. de Silva Ekan&yaka, Mudaliyar of the Depart-
ment of Public Instruction, Ceylon.

Vol. IX., Part I., pp. 156, sewed, with a plate. 1877. St,

CoNTXMTS.— Bactrian Coina and Indian Dafcea. By E. Thomas, F.R.S.— The Tenses of the
AssjTian Verb. By the Rev. A. H. Sayce, ^.A.— An Account of the Island of Bali By R.
Friederich (continued from Vol. VIII. n.s. p. 218).— On Ruins in Makran.* By Major Mookler.
—Inedited Arabic Coins. III. By Stanley Lane Poole, — Further Note on a Bactrian Pali Inscrip-
tion and the Samvat Era. By Prof. J. Dowson.—Notes on Persian Beldchistan. From the
Persian of Miraa Mehdy Kh&a. By A. H. Schindler.

VoL IX., Part II., pp. 292. sewed, witii three plates. 1877. lOa. ed.

CoMTBiiTS.- The Early Faith of Asoka. By E. Thomas, F.R.S.— The Northern Frontagers
of China. Part II. The Manchua (Supplementary Notice). By H. H. Howorth.— The Northern
Frontagers of China. Part IV. The Kin or Golden Tatars. By H. H. Howorth. -On a Treatise
on Weights and Measures by Eliy&, Archbishop of NisIUn. By M. H. Sauvaire.- On Imperial
and other Titles. By Sir T. E. Colebrooke, Bart., M.P.— Affinities of the Dialects of the Chepang


8 Linguistic Publications of Trubner ^ Co.,

and Kusundah Tribes of NipAl with tho« of the Hill Tribes of Arraean. By Captain C. J. F.
Forbes. F.R.G.B , M.A.S. Bengal, etc.— Notes on Some Antiquities found in a Mound near
Damghan. By A. H. Schindler.

Vol. X., Part I., pp. 156, sewed, with two plates and a map. 1878. 6«.

OonTBiiTs.— On the Non-Aryan Languages of India. By E. L. Brandreth, Esq.— A Dialogroe
on the Vedantic Conception of Brahma. By Pramad& D&sa Mittra,.late Officiating Profeaaor of
AnglO'Sanskrit, Government College, Benares.— An Account of the Island of Bali. By B.
Friederich (continued from Vol. IX. N. 8. p. J 20). —Unpublished Glass Weights and Measures.
By Edward Thomas Rt>gers.— Chma rik Tibet. By S. C. Boulger.— Notes and ReodUeotions on
Tea Cultivation in Kumaon and Garhw&l. By J. H. Batten, F.IL0.8., Bengal Civil Serrioe
Retired, formerly Commissioner of Kumaon.

Vol. X., Part II., pp. 146, sewed. 1878. 6t.

Contents.— Note on Pliny's Geography of the East Coast of Arabia. By Mi^Jor-General
8. B. Miles, Bombay Staflf Corps. The Maldive Islands ; with a Vocabulary taken firom Pran9oiB
Pyrard de Laval, 1602—1607. By A. Gray, late of the Ceylon avll 86nrioe.— On Tibeto-Burman
Languages. By Captain C. J. F. 8. Forbes, of the Burmese Civil Service Cominission.— Burmese
Transliteration. By H. L. St. Barbe, Esq., Resident at Mandelay.— On the Connexion of the
Mons of Pegu with the Koles of Central India. By Captain C. J. F. 8. Forbes, of the Burmese
Civil Commission.— Studies on the Comparative Grammar of the Semitic Languages, with
Special Reference to Assyrian. By Paul Haupt. The Oldest Semitic Verb-Form.— Arab Metro-
logy, n. ElDjabarty. By M. H. Sauvalre.— The Migrations and Early History of the White
Huns ; principally from Chinese Sources. By Thomas W. Kingsmill.

Vol. X., Part III., pp. 204, sewed. 1878. 8«.

Contents.- On the Hill Canton of S&l&r,— the most Easterly Settlem^it of the Turk Baca.
By Robert B. Shaw. - Geological Notes on the River Indus By Griffin W. Vyse, B.A., M.R.A.S.,
etc.. Executive Engineer P.W.D. Panjab.— Educational Literature for Japanese Women. By
Basil Hair Chamberlain, Esq., M.R.A.3.— On the Natural Phenomenon Known in the East by
the Names Sub-hi-Kazib, etc., etc. By J. W. Redhouse, M.R.A.8., Hon. Memb. R.S.L.— On
a Chinese Version of the S&nkhya K&riki, etc., found among the Buddhist Books oomprising
the Trlpitaka and two other works. By the Rev. Samuel Beal, M.A.— The Rock-out Plu^gian
Inscriptions at Doganlu. By Edward luiomas, F.R.S.— Index.

Vol. XI., Part. I., pp. 128, sewed. 5a.

Contents.— On the Position of Women in the East in the Olden Time. By Edward Thomas,
F.R.8.— Notice of the Scholars who have Contributed to the Extension of our Knowledge of the
Languages of British India during the last Thirty Years. By Robert N. Oust, Hon. Librarian
R.A.8.— Ancient Arabic Poetry: its Genuineness and Authenticity. By Sir William Muir, K.C.S.I.,
LL.D.— Note on Manrique*s Mission and the Catholics in the time of 8h4h Jah&n. By H. G.
Keene, Esq.— On Sandhi in Pali. By the late R. C. Childers.— On Arabic Amulets and Mottoes.
By E. T. Rogers, M.R.A.8.

Asiatic Society. — Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Soctett op

Great Britain and Ireland. Complete in 3 vols. 4to., 80 Plates of Fac-

•imiles, etc., cloth. London, 1827 to 1835. Published at £9 5«. ; reduced to

£6 68.

The above contains contributions by Professor Wilson, G. C. Haughton, Davis, Morrison,
Colebrooke, Humboldt, Dom, Grotefend, and other eminent Oriental scholars.

Asiatic Society of Bengal. — Journal op the Asiatic Society of

Bengal. Edited by the Honorary Secretaries. Bvo. 8 numbers per annum,
48. each number.

Asiatic Society of Bengal. — Peoceedinqs op the Asiatic Societt

OF Bengal. Published iMonthly. \8. each number.

Asiatic Society of Bengal. — JotrEtsrAL of the Asiatic SociKrr op

Bengal. A Complete Set from the beginning in 1832 to the end of 1878,
being Vols. 1 to 47. Proceedings of the same Society, from the commencement
in 1865 to 1878. A set quite complete. Calcutta, 1832 to 1878. Extremely
scarce. £100.

Asiatic Society of Bombay. — The Journal of the Bombay Bbakch

OP THE Royal Asiatic Society. Edited by the Secretary. Nos. 1 to 35.
7«. 6d. to 108. 6d. each number. Several Numbers are out of print.

Asiatic Society. — Bombay Branch. — Jottenal of the Bombay Branch

OF THE Royal Asiatic Society. Nos. 1 to 35 in 8to. with many plates.
A complete set. Extremely scarce. Bombay, 1844!-78. £13 lOs.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.G. 9

Asiatic Society. — Ceylon Branch. — Jotjbnal op the Ceylon Branch

OP THE Royal Asiatic Society (Colombo). Part for 1845. 8vo. pp. 120,
sewed. Price 7*. 6rf.

CoNTEKTS :— Oij Buddhism. No. 1. By the Rer. D. J. Gogerly.— General Obaervatlons on
the Translated Ceylonese Literature. By W. Knighton, Esq.—On the Elements of the Voice
in reference to the Roman and Singalese Alphabets. By the Rev. J. C. Macvicar.^On the State
of Crime in Ceylon.— By the Hon. J. Stark.— Account of some Ancient Coins. By 8. C. Chitty,
Esq.— Remarks on the Collection of Statistical Information in Ceylon. By John Capper, Esq.—
On Buddhism. No 2. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.

1846. 8to. pp. 176, sewed. Price 7«. 6^.

Contents :— On Buddhism. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.— The Sixth Chapter of the Tiruva-
thavur Purana, translated with Notes. By 8. Casie Chitiy, Esq.— The Discourse on the Minor
Results of Conduct, or the Discourse Addressed to Subba. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.— On the
State of Crime in Ceylon. By the Hon. Mr. J. Stark.— The Language and Literature of the
Singalese. By the Rev. 8. Hardy.— The Education Establishment of the Dutch in Ceylon. By
the Rev. J. D. Palm.— An Account of the Dutch Church in Ceylon. By the Rev. J. D. Palm.—
Notes on some Experiments in Electro- Agriculture. By J. Capper, Esq.— Singalo Wada, trans-
lated by the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.— On Colouring Matter Discovered in the husk of the Cocoa Nut.
By Dr. R. Gygax.

1847-48. 8vo. pp. 221, sewed. Price 7«. 6dL

Contents :— On the Mineralogy of Ceylon, ^y Dr. R. Gygax.— An Account of the Dutch
Church in Ceylon. By the Rev. J. D. Palm.— On the History of Jaffna, from the Earliest Period
to the Dutch Conquest. By S. C. Chitty.— The Rise and Fall of the Calany Ganga, from 1843
to 1846. By J. Capper.— The Discourse respecting Ratapala. Translated by the Rev. D. J.
Gogerly.— On the Manufacture of Salt in the Chilaw and Putlam Districts. By A. O. Brodie.—
A Royal Grant engraved on a Copper Plate. Translated, with Notes. By the Rev. D. J.
Gogerly.— On some of the Coins. Ancient and Modem, of Ceylon. By the Hon. Mr. J. Stark.—
Notes on the Climate and Salubrity of Putlam. By A. O. Brodie.— The Revenue and Expendi-
ture of the Dutch Government in Ceylon, during the last years of their Administration. By
J. Capper.— On Buddhism. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.

1853-55. 3 parts. Bto. pp. 56 and 101, sewed. Price £1.

Contents of Part I. :— Buddhism : Chariya Pitaka. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.— The Laws
of the Buddhist Priesthood. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly. To be continued.— Statistical
Account of the Districts of Chilaw and Putlam, North Western Province. By A. O. Brodie,
Esq.— Rock Inscription at Gooroo Godde Wihare, in the Magool Korle, Seven Korles. By A. O.
Brodie, Esq.— Catalogue of Ceylon Birds. By £. F. Kelaart, Esq., and E. L. Layard, Esq. (To
be continued.)

Contents of Part II. Price 7«. 6<f.

Catalogue of Ceylon Birds. By E. F. Kelaart, Esq., and E. L. LayarA.— Notes on some of the
Forms of Salutations and Address known among the Singalese. By the Hon. Mr. J. Stark.—
Rock Inscriptions. By A. O. Brodie, Esq.— On the Yeddhas of Bintenne. By the Rev. J.
Gillings.— Rock Inscription at Piramanenkandel. By S. C. Chitty, Esq.— Analysis of the Great
Historical Poem of the Moors, entitled Surah. By S. C. Chitty, Esq. (To be continued).

Contents of Part III. 8vo. pp. 150. Price 7«. 6<f.

Analysis of the Great Historical Poem of the Moors, entitled Surah. By S. C. Chitty, Esq.
(Concluded). — Description of New or little known Species of Reptiles found in Ceylon. By
E. F. Kelaart.— The Laws of the Buddhist Priesthood By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly. (To be
continued).— Ceylcm Ornithologv. By E F. Kelaart.— Some Account of the Rodiyas, with a
Specimen of their Language. By S. C. Chitty, Esq.— Rock Inscriptions in the North-Western
Province. By A. O. Brodie, Esq.

1865-6. 8vo. pp. xi. and 184. Price 7«. 6rf.

Contents :— On Demonology and Witchcraft in Ceylon. By Dandris de Silva Gooneratne
Modliar.— The First Discourse Delivered by Buddha. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly. Pootoor
Well. — On the Air Breathing Fish of Ceylon. By Barcroft Boake, B.A. (Vice President
Asiatic Society, Ceylon).— On the Origin of the Sinhalese Language. By J. D'Alwis, Assistant
Secretary.- A Few Remarks on the Poisonous Properties of the Calotropis Gigantea, etc. By
W. C. Ondaa^ie, Esq., Colonial Assistant Surgeon.— On the Crocodiles of Ceylon, By Barcroft
Boake, Yice-ftesident, Asiatic Society, Ceylon.— Native Medicinal Oils.

1867-70. Part I. 8vo. pp. 150. Price lOt.

Contents :— Cte the Oridn of the Sinhalese Language. By James De Alwis.— A Lecture on
Buddhism. By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.— Description of two Birds new to the recorded Fauna
of Ceylon. By H. Nevil. — Description of a New Genus and Five New Species of Marine Uni-
valves from the Southern Provinee, Ceylon. By G. Nevill.— A Brief Notice of Robert Knox and
his Companions in Captivity in Kuid^ for the space of Twenty Years, dii>oovered among the
Dutch Records preserved in the Golomal Secretary's Office, Colombo. By J. R. Blake..

1867-70. Part II. 8vo. pp. xl. and 45. Price 7«. 6(f.

. Contents : — Summary of the Contents of the First Book in the Buddhist Canon, called the
F&r^ika Book.— By the Rev. 8. Gdes.— P&rijika Bo<A— No. l.^P&r^ika Book—No. 3,


10 Linguistic Publications of Triibner ^ Co.,

1871-72. 8vo. pp. 66 and miv. Price It. M.

CoHTBVTs:— Extracts from a Memoir left by the Dutch Ooremor, Thomas Van Bhee, to his
successor, Governor Gerris de Heer, 1697. Translated from the Dutch Records preserved in the
Colonial Secretariat at Colombo. By R. A. van Cuylenberg, Government Record Keeper. — ^The
Food Statistics of Ceylon. By J. Capper.— Specimens of Sinhalese Proverbs. By L. de Zoysa,
3f udaliyar, Chief 'I'ranslator of Government.— Ceylon Reptiles : being a preliminary Catalogue
of the Reptiles found in, or supposed to be in Ceylou, compiled from various authoritiee. By
W. Ferguson.— On an Inscription at Dondra. No. 2. By T. W. Rhys Davids, Esq.

1873. Part I. 8to. pp. 79. Price 7*. 6rf.

CoNTBHTS :— On Oath aad Ordeal, By Bertram Fulke Hartshome.— Notes on Prinochilus
Vincens. By W. V. Legge.— The Sports and Games of the Singhalese. By Leopold Ludovici. —
On Miraeles. By J. De Alwis.— On the Occurrence of Scolopax Rusdoola and Gallinago Seolo-
pacina in Ceylon. By W. V. Legge.— Transcript and Translation of an Ancient Copper-plate
Sannaa. By Mudliyar Louis de Zoysa, Chief Translator to Government.

1874. Part I. 8to. pp. 94. Price 7«. 6d,

CoKTSKTS :— Description of a supposed New Genus of Ceylon. Batraohians. By W. Ferguson.
—Notes on the Identity of Piyadasi and Asoka. By Mudaliyar Louis de Zoysa, Chief Translator
to Government.— On the Island Distribution of the Birds in the Society's Museum. By W.
Tincent Legge.— Brand Marks on Cattle. By J. De Alwis.— Notes on the Occurrence of a rare
Eagle new to Ceylon; and other interesting or rare birds. By S. Bligh, Esq., Kotmal^ —
Extracts from the Records of the Dutch Government in Ceylon. By R. van Cuylenberg, Esq.—
The Stature of Ootama Buddha. By J. Pe Alwis.

Asiatic Society (North China Branch). — Journal of the Nobth

China Branch or ths Royal Asiatic Socibtt. Old Series, 4 numbers, and
New Series. Parts 1 to 12. The following numbers are sold separately :
Old Sebie6— No. II. May, 1659, pp. 145 to 256. No. III. December, 1859,
pp. 257 to 368. 78. 6d. each. YoL II. No. I. September, 1860, pp. 128. 78.60.
PJEW Sebies — No. I. December, 1864, pp. 174. 7«. 6d. No. 11. December,
1865, pp. 187, with maps. 78. 6d. No. III. December, 1866, pp. 121. 9«.
No. IV. December, 1867, pp 266. lOs. 6d. No. VI. for 1869 and 1870, pp.
zv. and 200. 7«. 6d. No. VII. for 1871 and 1872, pp. is. and 260. 10«.
No. VIII. pp. zu and 187. 10«. 6d. No. IX. pp. zzxiii. and 219. lOs. ed.
No. X. pp. zii. and 324 and 279. £1 U. No. XI. (1877) pp. zvL and 184.
10«. 6d, No. XII. (1878) pp. 337, with many maps.

Asiatic Society of Japan. — Trai^sactions of the Asiatic Societt

OP Japan. Vol. I. From SOth October, 1872, to 9th October, 1873. !8vo.
pp. 110, with plates. 1874. VoL II. From 22nd October, 1873, to 15th
July, 1874. 8vo. pp. 249. 1874. Vol. III. Part I. From 16th July, 1874,
to December, 1874, 1875. Vol. III. Part II. From 13th January, 1876, to
SOth June, 1876. Vol. IV. From 20th October, 1876, to 12th July, 1876.
Vol. V. Part I. From 25th October, 1876, to 27th June, 1877. Vol. V. Part
II. (A Summary of the Japanese Penal Codes. By J. H. Longford.) Vol.
VI. Part I. pp. 190. Vol. VI. Part II. From 9th February, 1878, to 27th
April, 1878. Vol. VI. Part III. From 25th May, 1878, to 22nd May, 1879.
7«. 6^. each Part. — Vol. VII. Part I. (Milne's Journey across Europe and
Asia.) 5«.— Vol. VII. Part II. March, 1879. 6«.— Vol. VII. Part III. June,
1879. 78. ed.

Asiatic Society. — Straits Branch.— Journal op the Sthaits Bbakch

OF THE Koyal Asiatic Society. No. 1. 8to. pp. 130, sewed, 3 folded

Maps and 1 Plate. July, 1878. Priee 9«.

CoNTKNT8.~ Inaugural Address of the President. By the Yen. Archdeacon Hoee, H.^.—
Distribution of Minerals in Sarawak. By A. Hart Everett.— Breeding Pearls. By N. B.
Dennys, Ph.D. — Dialects of the Melan«slan Tribes of the Malay Peninsula. By M. de Miklnho*
Maclay.— Malay Spelling in English, ^portof Government Committee (reprinted). — Gteonraphj
of the Malay Peainsula. Part I. By A. M. Skinner.— Chinese Secret Societies. Part I. By
'W. A. Pickering.— Malay Proverbs. Part. I. By W. E. Maxwell.— The Snake-eating
Humadryad. By N.B. Dennys, Ph.D.— Gutta Percha. By H.I Murton.— Miscellaneous Notioea.

No. 2. 8vo. pp. 130, 2 Plates, sewed. December, 1879. Price 9«.

C0NTXNT8:— The Song of the Dyak Head-feast. By Rev. J. Perham.— Malay Proverbs. PartU.
By £. W. Maxwell.— A Malay Nautch. By F. A. Swettenham.— Pidgin English. By N. B.
Dennys, Ph.D.— The Founding of Singapore. By Sir T. S. RafBes.- Notes on Two Perak
Manuscripts. By W. E. Maxwell.— The Metalliferous Formation of the Peninsula. By D. D.
Daly.— Suggestions regarding a new Malay Dictionary. By the Hon. C. J. Irving.— Ethnological
hxcurbionBUL the Malay Peninsula. By N. von Mikluho*Maclay.— Miscellaneous Notioea.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, £.C. 11

No. 3. 8yo. pp. iy. and 146, sewed. Price 9^.

Contents :— Chinese Secret Societiee, bv W. A. Pickering^— Malay Proverbs, Part Tfl., by W.
£. Maxwell.— Notes on Gutta Percha, by F. W. Burbidge, w. H. Treacher. H. J. Morton.— The
Maritime Code of the Malays, repiinted from a translation by Sir S. Raffles.— A Trip to Gunong
Blumut, by D. F. A. Hervey.— Caves at Sungei Batu in Selangor, by D. P. Daly.— Geography
of Aching, translated from the German by Dr. Beiber.— Account of a Naturalist's Visit to Selan-
gor, by A. J. Hornady.— Miscellaneous Notices; Geographical Notes, Rouies from Selangor to
Pahang. Mr. Deane's Survey Report, A Tiger's Wake, Breeding Pearls, T^e Maritime Code, and
Sir F. Raffles' Meteorological B«,tums.

American Oriental 8k)eiety. — Journal of the American Oriental

Society. Vols. I. to IX. and Vol. X. No. 1 (nil published). 8yo. Boston
and New Hay en, 18^ to J.879. A complete set. Yery rare. ^12 12«.

YolumeB 2 to 5 and 8 to 10 ipay be had separately at £1 S«.. each.

Anthropological Institnte of Ori^at Britain and Ireland (The Jonmal

of the). Published Quarterly.

Vol I., No. 1. January- July, 1871. 8vo. pp. 120-KJlix, sewed. Illustrated
with 1 1 full page Plates, and numerouf Woocbsuts ; and accompanied by several
folding plates of Tables, etc. 7«.

Vol. I., No. 2. October, 1871. 8vo. pp. 121-264, sewed. 4«.

Vol. I., No. 3. January, 1872. 8vo. pp. 265-427, sewed. 1 6 full-page Plates. 4*.

Vol. IF., No. 1. April, 1872. 8to. pp. 186, sewed. Eight two-page plates and
two four-page plates. 48,

Vol. II., No. 2. July and Oct , 1872. Byo. pp. 137-312. 9 plates and a map. 6«.

Vol. II., No. 3. January, 1873. 8vo. pp. 143. With i plates. 4«^

VoL III., No. 1. April, 1873. 8vo. pp. 136. With 8 plates *nd two mt^s. 4*.

Vol. III., No. 2. July and October, 1873. 8vQ. Pp. J68, sewed. With 9 plates. 4».

Vol. II I., No. 3. January, 1874. 8vo. pp. 238, sewed. With 8 plates, etc. 6«.

Vol. IV., No. 1. April and July, 1874. 8vo. pp. 308, sewed. With 22 plates. 8t.

Vol. IV., No. 2. April, 1876. Svo. pp.. 200, sewed^ With 11 plates. 6«.

Vol. v., No. 1. July, 1875. 8ve. pp. 120, sewod. With 3 plates. 4«.

Vol. v., No. 2. October, 1875. 8vo. pp. 132, sewed. With 8 plates. 4*.

Vol. v., No. 3. January, 1876. 8vo. pp. 156, sewed. With 8 plates. 6t.

Vol. v., No, 4. April, 1876. 8to. j)p. 128, sewed. With 2 plates. 5*,

Vol. VI., No. 1. July^ 1876. Syo. pp. 100, sewed. With 6 plates. 6s,

Vol. VI., No. 2. October^ 1876. JBjo. pp. 98, sewed. With 4 platos and a map.

58.

Vol. VI., No. 3> January, 1877. 8vo. pp. 14$, sewed. With 11 |>lates. $s.
Vol. VI., No. 4^ May, 1877- 8vo. pp. iv. and 184,;«cw^. With 7 plates. 6*.
Vol. VII., No. 1. August. 1877. 8vo. pp. 116, sewed. With three plaJtes. 5*.
Vol. VI I., No. 2. Noyember, 1877. 8vo. pp. 84, sewed. With one plate. 5*.
Vol., VII., No. 3. February, 1878. 8yo. pp. 193, sewed. With throe plates. 5«.
Vol. VII., No. 4. May, 1878. 8yo. pp. iy. and 158, sewed. With nine plates. 5«.
Vol. VIII., No. 1. August, 187B. 8yo. pp. 103, sewed. W4th one plate. 5«.
Vol. VIII., No. 2. Noyember, 1878. 8yo. pp. 126, sewed. With three plates. 58,

Sibliotheca Indica. A Collection o( (Meatal W.oi^s published by

the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Old Series. Fasc. I to 235. New Series.
Fasc. 1 to 408. (Special List of Contents to be had on application.) Each
Fsc in 8yo., 2«. ; in 4to.., is.

Calcntta Beview (The). — ^P.ublished Quarterly. Price Be. 6d. per

number.

Calcutta Beview. — A Complete Set trom the Commencemeite ix

1844 to 1879. Vols 1. to 69, or Numbers 1 to IZB, A fine clean copy.
Calcutta, 1844-79. Index to the first fifty yolumes of the Calcutta Review,
2 parts. (Calcutta, 1873). Nos. 39 and 40 have never been published. £60.
Co mplete sets are of great rarity.


12 Linguistic Publications of Trubner ^ Co.,

China Review; or, Kotes and Queries on the Far East. Published

bi-monthly. 4to. Subscription £1 10«. per volume.

Chinese Recorder and Missionary Jonmal. — Shanghai. Subscription

per volume (of 6 parts) 15«.

A complete set from the beginning. Vols. 1 to 10. 8vo. Foochow and

Shanghai, 1861-1879. £9.

Containing important contribations on Chinese Philolog^y, Mythology, and Geography, by
EdkinB, Giles, Bretschneider, Scarborough, etc. The earlier volumes are out of print.

Oeographical Society of Bombay. — Journal and Tbansacxions. A

complete set. 19 vols. Bvo. Numerous Plates and Maps, some coloored.
Bombay, 1844-70. £\Q 10«.

An important Periodical, containing grammatical sketches of several languages and dialects,
as well as the most valuable contributions on the Natural Sciences of India. Since 1871 the
above is amalgamated with the *' Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society."

Indian Antiquary (The). — A Journal of Oriental Eesearch in Archaeo-
logy, History, Literature, Languages, Philosophy, Religion, Folklore, etc.
Edited by James Burgess, M.R. A. 3., F.R.G.S. 4to. Published 12 numbers
per annum. Subscription £2, A complete set. Vols. 1 to 7* £^'Z. (The
earlier volumes are out of print.)

Indian Evangelical Review. — A Quarterly Joxtrnal of Missionaby

Thought and Effobt. Bombay. Subscription per voL 12«.
Containing valuable Articles on the Native Literature, Science, Geography, etc.

Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia. — Edited' hy

J. R. Logan, of Pinang. 9 vols. Singapore, 1847-55. New Series. Vols.
I. to IV. Part 1, (all published), 1856-59. A complete set in IS vols. 8vo.
with many plates. £^0,

Vol. I. of the New Series consists of 2 parts ; Vol. II. of 4 parts ; Vol. III. of
No. 1 (never completed), and of Vol. lY. also only one number was
published.
A few copies remain of several volumes that may be had separately.

Madras Journal of Literature and Science. — Published hy the

Committe of the Madras Literary Society and Auxiliary Royal Asiatic Society,

and edited by Morris, Cole, and Brown. A complete set of the Three Series

(being Vols. I. to XVI., First Series; Vols. XVII. to XXII. Second Series;

Vol. XXIII. Third Series, 2 Numbers, no more published). A fine copy,

uniformly bound in 23 vols. With numerous plates, half calf. Madras,

1834-66. £42.

Equally scarce and important. On all South-Indian topics, especially those relating to
Natural History and Science, Public Works and Industry, this Periodical is an unrivalled
authority.

The Madras Journal of literature and Science for the year 1878

(or the Ist Volume of the Fourth Series). Edited by Gustav Oppert, Ph.D.
8vo. pp. vi. and 234, and xlviL with 2 plates. 1879. 10«. 6(^.

Contents.— I. On the Classification of Languages. By Dr. G. Oppert.— 11. On the Ganga
Kings. By Lewis Rice.

Memoirs read before the Antheopological Society op London, 1 863

1864. 8vo., pp. 542, cloth. 2U.

Memoirs read before the Anthropological Society op London, 1865-6.

Vol. II. 8vo., pp. X. 464, cloth. 21«.

The Pandit. — A Monthly Journal of the Benares College, devoted to
Sanskrit Literature. Old Serits. 10 vols. 1866-1876. New Series, 3 vols,
(all out) 1876-1879. £i \s. per volume.

Peking Gazette. — Translations of the Peking Gazette for 1872, 1873,
1874, 1875, 1876, 1877, and 1878. 8vo. cloth. I0«. U, each.


57 ani 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 13

Philological Society (Transactions of The). A Complete Set, in-
cluding the Proceedings of the Philological Society for the years 1842-1853.
6 vols. The Philological Society's Transactions, 1864 to 1876. 16 vols. The
Philological Society's Extra Volumes. 9 vols. In all 30 vols. 8vo. £19 13«. 6^.

Proceedings (The) of the Philological Society 1842-1853. 6 vols. 8vo. £3.

Transactions of the Philological Society, 1864-1876. 16 vols. 8vo. £10 16».

*»• The Volumes for 1867, 1868-9, 1870-2, and 1873-4, are only to he had in
complete sets, as ahove.

Separate Volumes.

For 1864 : containing papers by Rev. J. W. Blakesley, Rev. T. 0. Cockayne,
Rev. J. Davies, Dr. J. W. Donaldson, Dr. Theod. Goldstiicker, Prof. T. Hewitt
Key, J. M. Kemble, Dr. R. G. Latham, J. M. Ludlow, Hensleigh Wedgwood,
etc. 8vo. cl. £1 U,

For 1865 : with papers by Dr. Carl Abel, Dr. W. Bleek, Rev. Jno. Davies, Miss

A. Gurney, Jas. Kennedy, Prof. T. H. Key, Dr. R. G. Latham, Henry Maiden,
W. Ridley, Thos. Watts, Hensleigh Wedgwood, etc. In 4 parts. 8vo. £11*.

* y* Kamilaroi Language of Australia, by W. Ridley ; and False Etymologies, by
H. Wedgwood, separately. It.

For 1866-7: with papers by Prof. Aufrecht, Herbert Coleridge, Lewis Kr. Daa,
M. de Haan, W. C. Jourdain, James Kennedy, Prof, Key, Dr. G. Latham, J. M .
Ludlow, Rev. J. J. 8. Perowne, Hensleigh Wedgwood, R. F. Weymouth, Jos.
Yates, etc. 7 parts. 8vo. (The Papers relating to the Society s Dictionary
are omitted.) £1 la. each volume.

For 1858 : including the volume of Early English Poems, Lives of the Saints,
edited from MSS. by F. J. Fumivall; and papers by Era. Adams, Prof.
Aufrecht, Herbert Coleridge, Rev. Francis Crawford, M, de Haan Hettema,
Dr. R. G. Latham, Dr. Lottner, etc. 8vo. cl. 12«.

For 1859: with papers by Dr. E. Adams, Prof. Aufrecht, Herb. Coleridge, F. J.
Furnivall, Prof. T. H. Key, Dr. C. Lottner, Prof. De Morgan, F. Pulszky,
Hensleigh Wedgwood, etc. 8vo. cl. 12*.

For 1860-1 : including The Play of the Sacrament; and Pascon agau Arluth, the
Passion of our Lord, in Cornish and English, both from MSS., edited by Dr.
Whitley Stokes ; and papers by Dr. E. Adams, T. F. Barham, Rev. Derwent
Coleridge, Herbert Coleridge, Sir John F. Davis, Danby P. Fry, Prof. T. H.
Key, Dr. C. Lottner, Bishop Thirlwall, Hensleigh Wedgwood, R. F. Wey-
mouth, etc. 8vo. cl. 128.

For 1862-3 : with papers by C. B. Cayley, D. P. Fry, Prof. Key, H. Maiden,
Rich. Morris, F. W. Newman, Robert Peacock, Hensleigh Wedgwood, R. F.
Weymouth, etc. 8vo. cl. 12*.

For 1864 : containing 1. Manning's ^Jas.) Inquiry into the Character and Origin
of the Possessive Augment in English, etc. ; 2. J^ewman*s (Francis W.) Text of
the Iguvine Inscriptions, with Interlinear Latin Translation ; 3. Barnes's (Dr.
W.) Grammar and Glossary of the Dorset Dialect; 4. Gwreans An Bys — The
Creation : a Cornish Mystery, Cornish and English, with Notes by Whitley
Stokes, etc. 8vo. cl. 12«.

*»* Separately : Manning's Inquiry, 3». — ^Newman's Iguvine Inscription, 8«. —
Stokes's Gwreans An Bys, Bs.

For 1865 : including Wheatley's (H. B.) Dictionary of Reduplicated Words in the
English Language; and papers by Prof. Aufrecht, Ed. Brock, C. B. Cayley,
Rev. A. J. Church, Prof. T. H. Key, Rev. E. H. Knowles, Prof. H. Maiden,
Hon. G. P. Marsh, John Rhys, Guthbrand Vigfusson, Hensleigh Wedgwood, H.

B. Wheatley, etc. 8vo. cl. 12*.

For 1866 : including 1. Greer's (Rev. Walter) Banffshire Dialect, with Glossary
of Words omitted by Jamieson ; 2. Edmondston's (T^ Glossary of the Shetland
Dialect ; and papers by Prof. Cassal, C. B. Cayley, Danby P. Fry, Prof. T. H.
Key, Guthbrand Vigfusson, Hensleigh Wedgwood, etc. 8yo. cL 12«.


14 Linguistic PubUcaiians of Truhner /• Co.^

«,« The Yolnmes for 1867, 1868-9, 1870-2, and 1873-4, are ont of print.
Besides contribntions in the shape of yaluable and interesting papers, the ▼olonie for
1867 also inelndes: 1. Peacock's (Rob. B.) Glossary of the Hundred of Lonsdale;


and **The Prisoner's Prayer," Lyrics of the XIII. Century, with Glossary; and 2.
Stokes's (Whitley) Cornish Glossary. That for 1870-2—1. Murray's (Jas. A. H.)
Dialect of the Southern Counties of Scotland, with a lingodstical map. That for
1873-4--Sweet's (H.) History of English Sounds.

For 1875-6 : containing the Rev. Richard Morris (President), Fouiih and Fifth
>wnnAl Adikesses. 1. Some Sources of Aryan Mytholo^by £. L. Brandreth ;

2. C. B. Cayley on Certain Italian Diminutives; 3. Changes made hy four
young Children m Pronouncing English Words, by Jas. M. Menzies ; 4. The
Manx Language, by H. Jenner; 6. The Dialect of West Somerset, by F. T.
£1 worthy; 6. English Metre, by Prof. J. B. Mayor; 7. Words, Logic, and
Grammar, by H. Sweet ; 8. The Russian Language and its Dialects, by W. R.
MorfiU ; 9. Relics of the Cornish Language in Mount's Bay, by H. Jenner.

10. Dialects and Prehistoric Forms of Old English. By Henry Sweet, Esq.;

11. On the Dialects of Monmouthshire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire,
Gloucestershire, Berkshire, Oxfordshire, South Warwickshire, South North-
amptonshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, and Surrey, with a
New Classification of the English Dialects. By Prince Louis Lucien Bonaparte
(with Two Maps), Index, etc. Part I., 6«. ; Part II., 6«. ; Part III., 2#.

For 1877 8-9: containing the President's (Henry Sweet, Esq.) Sixth and Seventh
Annual Addresses. 1. Accadian Phonology, by Professor A. H. Sayce; 2. On
Mere and There in Chaucer, by Dr. R. Weymouth ; 3. The Grammar of the
Dialect of West Somerset, by F. T. Elworthy, Esq. ; 4. English Metre, by
Professor J. B. Mayor; 5. The Malagasy Language, by the Rev. W. B.
Cousins; 6. The Anglo-Cymric Score, by A. J. Ellis, Esq., F.R.S. 8vo.
Part I., 3ff. ; Part II., 7«.

The Society^ 8 Extra Volumes.

Early English Volume, 1862-64, containing*. 1. Liber Cure Cocomm, a.d. e,
1440. -2. Ilampole's (Richard Rolle) Pricke of Conscience, a.d. e. 1340.—

3. The Castell oflf Love, a.d. c. 1320. 8vo. cloth. 1865. ;^1.

Or separately : Liber Cure Cocomm, Edited by Rich. Morris, Zs. ; Hampole's
(Rolle) Pricke of Conscience, edited by Rich. Morris, 12«. ; and The Castell off
Love, edited by Dr. R. F. Weymouth, 6«.

Dan Michers Ayenbite of Inwyt, or Remorse of Conscience, in the Kentish
Dialect, a.d. 1340. From the Autograph MS. in Bric. Mus. Edited with
Introduction, Marginal Interpretations, and Glossarial Index, by Richard
Morris. 8vo. cloth. 1866. 12$.

Levins's (Peter, a.d. 1570) Manipulus Vocabulorum ; a Rhyming Dictionary of
the English Language. With an Alphabetical Index by U. B. Wheatley. 8vo.
cloth. 1867. 16«.

Skeat's (Rev. W. W.) Moeso-Gothic Glossary, with an Introduction, an Outline of
Moeso-Gothic Grammar, and a List of Anglo-Saxon and old and modem Eng-
lish Words etyraologically connected with Moeso-Gothic. 1868. 8vo. cl. 9«.

Ellis (A. J.) on Early English Pronunciation, with especial Reference to
Shakspere and Chaucer : containing an Investigation of the Correspondence of
Writing with Speech in England from the Anglo-Saxon Period to the Present
Day, etc. 4 parts. 8vo. 1869-76. £2.

Mediaeval Greek Texts: A Collection of the Earliest Compositions in Vulgar
Greek, prior to a.d. 1600. With Prolegomena and Critical Notes by W.
Wagner. Part I. Seven Poems, three of which appear for the first time'
1870. 8vo. 10«. 6rf.


67 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 15

Beyal Society of Literature of the United Eingdom (Transactioiis

of The). First Series, 6 Parts in 3 VoU., 4to., Plates ; 1827-39. Second
Series, 10 Vols, or 30 Parts, and Vol. XI. Parts 1 and 2, 8vo., Plates; 18*3-76.
A complete set, as fkr as published, jglO 10«. Very scarce. The first series of
this important series of contributions of many of the most eminent men of the
day has long been out of print and is very scarce. Of the Second Series, Vol.
I. -I v., each containing three parts, are quite out of print, and can only be had
in the complete series, noticed above. Three Numbers, price 4«. 6d. each, form
a volume. The price of the volume complete, bound in cloth, is IZa. 6d,

Separate Fuhlicationa.

I. Fasti Monastici Aevi Saxon ici : or an Alphabetical List of the Heads of
Religious Houses in England previous to the Norman Conquest, to which is
prefixed a Chronological Catalogue of Contemporary Foundations. By Walter
DE Gbay Birch. Royal Svo. cloth. 1872. 7». 6i.

II. Li Chantari di Lancellotto; a Troubadour's Poem of the XIV. Cent.
Edited from a MS. in the possession of the Royal Society of Literature, by
"Walter db Gray Birch. Royal 8vo. cloth. 1874. 7*.

III. Inquisitio Comitatus Cantabrigiensis, nunc primura, d Manuscripto
unico in Bibliotheca Cottoniensi asservato, typis mandata : subjicitur Inquisitio
Eliensis : cura N. E. S. A. Hamilton. Royal 4to. With map and 3 facsimiles.
1876. £2 28,

IV. A Commonplace-Book of John Milton. Reproduced by the autotype
process from the original MS. in the possession of Sir Fred. U. Graham, Bart.,
of Netherby Hall. With an Introduction by A. J. Horwood. Sq. folio.
Only one hundred copies printed. 1876. £2 2«.

V. Chhonicon A-dm de Usk, a.d. 1377-1404. Edited, with a Translation and
Notes, by Ed. Maunde Thompson. Royal 8vo. 1876. 10«. 6d,

Transactions of the Koyal Society oe Liteeattire of the United

Kingdom. First Series, 6 parts in 3 vols. 4to. plates; 1827-39. Second
Series, 10 vols, or 30 parts, and vol. xi. parts 1 and 2, 8vo. plates, 1843-76.
A complete set, as far as published, £10 10«. A list of the contents of the
volumes and parts on application.

Society of Biblical Archseology. — Transactions of the. Svo. Vol. I.

Part. I., 12«. 6d, Vol. I., Part II., 12«. 6d, (this part cannot be sold
separately, or otherwise than with the complete sets). Vols. II. and III.,
2 parts, 10*. 6d. each. Vol. IV., 2 parts, 12«. 6d. each. Vol. V., Part. I., 158. ;
Part. II., 12*. 6rf. Vol. VI , 2 parts, 12». 6d, each.

Syro-Egyptian Society. — Original Papers read before the Syro-
£gyptian Society of London. Volume I. Part 1. 8vo. sewed, 2 plates and a
map, pp. 144. 3«. 6<i.

Trnbner*s American and Oriental Literary Eecord. — A Eegister of

the most important works published in North and South America, in India,
China, and the British Colonies ; with occasional Notes on German, Dutch,
French, etc., books. 4 to. In Monthly Numbers. Subscription da, per
annum, or 6d, per number. A complete set, Nos. I to 142. London, 1865 to
1879. i;i2 128,


16


Linffuistic Publications of Ihibner /• Co.,


History, Geography, Travels, Ethnography,
Archaeology, Law, Numismatics.

Badley. — ^Indian Misseonaet Record and Memoetal Yoltimb. By

the Itev. B. H. Badley, of the American Methodist Mission. 8vo. pp. zii.
and 280, cloth. 1876. 10«. 6d.

Balfour. — ^Waifs and Strays prom the Far East ; being a Series of

Disconnected Essays on Matters relatinji^ to China. By Frbdkric Hbnbt
Balfour. 1 vol. demy 8yo. cloth, pp. 224. lOs. 6d,

Bake. — The late Dr. Charles Beke's Discoveries of Sinat in Arabia

and in Midian. With Portrait, Geological, Botanical, and Conchological He-
ports, Plans, Map, and 13 Wood Engravings. Edited by his Widow. Roy. 8vt>.
pp. xz. and 606, cloth. 1878. 3Ss, Morocco, £2 IOa.

Bellew. — ^From the Indus to the Tigris: a Narrative of a Journey
through the Countries of Balochistan, Afghanistan, Khorassan, and Iran, in
1872 ; together with a Synoptical Grammar and Vocabulary of the Brahoe
Language, and a Record of the Meteorological Observations and Altitudes on
the March from the Indus to the Tigris. By H. W. Bellew, C.S.I. , Snrg^n
Bengal Staff Corps, Author of " A Journal of a Mission to Afghanistan in
1857-58," and *^A Grammar and Dictionary of the Pukkhto Language."
Demy Svo. cloth. 14*.

Bellew. — Kashmir and Kashgar. A iN'arrative of the Journey of the
Embasy to Kashgar in 1873-74. By H. W. Bellew, C.S.I. Demy 8to. cloth,
pp. xxxii. and 420. I6s,

Beveridge. — The District of Bakarganj ; its History and Statistics.
By H. Beveridge, B.C.S. 8yo. cloth, pp. xx. and 460. 21*.

Bibliotheca Orientalis: or, a Complete List of Books, Pamphlets,

Essays, and Journals, published in France, Germany, England, and the
Colonies, on the History and the Geography, the Religions, the Antiquities,
Literature, and Languages of the East. Edited by Charles Friedbhici.
Part I., 1876, sewed, pp. 86, 2*. 6d, Part II., 1877, pp. 100, 3*. 6d, Part
III., 1878, 3*. 6d,

Blochmann. — School Geography of India and British Bxtrmah. By

H. Blochmann, M.A. 12mo. pp. vi. and 100. 2*. 6d,

Bretschneider. — Notes on Chinese Medleval Travellers to thb

West. By E. Bretschneider, M.D. Demy 8vo. sd., pp. 130. 5*.

Bretschneider. — On the Knowledge Possessed by the Anctent

Chinese of the Arabs and Arabian Colonies, and other Western Coun-
tries mentioned in Chinese Books. By E. Bbetschn eider, M.D., Physician
of the Russian Legation at Peking. 8vo. pp. 28, sewed. 1871. 1*.

Bretschneider. — Notices of the Medieval Geography and Histobt

OP Central and Western Asia. Drawn from Chinese and Mongol Writings,
and Compared with the Observations of Western Authors in the Middle Ages.
By E. Bretschneider, M.D. 8vo. sewed, pp. 233, with two Maps. I2«. 6d,

Bretschneider. — Arch^ological and Historical Eese arches ok

Peking and its Environs. By E. Bretschneider, M.D., Physician to the
Russian Legation at Peking. Imp. 8to. sewed, pp. 64, with 4 Maps. 5«.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E. C. 17

Biihler. — Eleven Land-Grants of the Chaulukyas of 'Anhxlvad.

A Contribution to the History of Gujarat. By G. Buhler. 16mo. sewed,
pp. 126, with Facsimile. 38. 6d,

Burgess. — Aeceleological Suevet of Western India. Vol. 1. Report

of the First Season's Operations in the Belgam and Kaladgi Districts. Jan. to

May, 1874. By James Burgess. With 56 photographs and lith. plates.

Koyal 4to. pp. viii. and 46. £2 2*.
Vol. 2. Report of the Second Season's Operations. Report on the Antiquities of

KathiawM and Kachh. 1874-5. By James Burgess, F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., etc.

"With Map, Inscriptions, Photographs, etc. Roy. 4to. half bound, pp. x. and
242. £3 3».
Vol. 3, Report of the Third Season's Operations. 1875-76. Report on the

Antiquities in the Bidar and Aurangabad District. Royal 4to. half bound

pp. viii. and 138, with 66 photographic and lithographic plates. £2 28,

Surnell. — Elements of South Indian PALiEOGRAPHY. From the

Fourth to the Seventeenth Century a.d. By A. C. Burnell. Second Corrected
and Enlarged Edition, 34; Plates and Map, in One Vol. 4to. pp. xiv.-148.
£2 128. 6d.

Carpenter. — The Last Days in England of the Rajah Eammohun
Roy. By Mary Carpenter, of Bristol. With Five Illustrations. Svo. pp.
272, cloth. 7*. 6d.

Colebrooke. — The Life and Miscellaneous Essays of Henry Thomas

Colebrookb. The Biography by his Son, Sir T. E. Colebrooke, Bart., M.P.,

The Essays edited bv Professor Cowell. In 3 vols.
Vol. 1. The Life. With Portrait and Map. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 492.

14^.
Vols. II. and III. The Essays. A New Edition, with Notes by E. B. Cowell,

Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge. Demy Svo. cloth, pp.

xvi.-544, and X.-520. 1873. 28*.

Cunningliain. — The Sttipa of Bharhut. A Buddhist Monument,

ornamented with numerous Sculptures illustrative of Buddhist Legend and
History in the third century B.C. By Alexander Cunningham, C.S.I., CLE.,
Director-General Archaeological Survey of India, etc. Royal .4to. cloth, gilt,
pp. viii. and 144, with 51 Photographs and Lithographic Plates. 1879. £3 Ss,

Cunningham. — The Ancient Geography of India. I. The Buddhist

Period, including the Campaigns of Alexander, and the Travels of Hwen-Thsang.
By Alexander Cunningham, Major-General, Royal Engineers (Bengal Re-
tired). With thirteen Maps. 8vo. pp. xx. 590, cloth. 1870. 28*.

Cunningham. — Arch^ological Survey of India. Four Eeports,

made during the years 1862-63-64-^)5. By Alexander Cunningham, CS.I.,
Major-General, etc. With Maps and Plates. Vols. 1 to 8. Svo. cloth. £12.

Dalton. — Descriptiye Ethnology of Bengal. By Edward Tuite

Dalton, C.S.I., Colonel, Bengal Staff Corps, etc. Illustrated hy Lithograph
Portraits copied from Photographs. 3S Lithograph Plates. 4to. half- calf,
pp. 340. £6 6».

Da Gunha. — Notes on the History and Antiquities of Chatjl and
Bassein. By J. Gerson da Cunha, M.R.C.S. and L.M. Eng., etc. Svo.
cloth, pp. xvi. and 262. With 1 7 photographs, 9 plates and a map. £l 5s.

Dennys. — China and Japan. A complete Guide to the Open Ports of

those countries, together with Pekin, Yeddo, Hong Kong, and Macao ; forming
a Guide Book and Vade Mecum for Travellers, Merchants, and Residents in
general; with 56 Maps and Plans. By Wm. Frederick Mayers, F. R.G.S.
H.M.'s Consular Service ; N. B. Dbnnys, late H.M.'s Consular Service; and
Charles Kino, Lieut. Royal Marine Artillery. Edited by N. B. Dennys.
In one volume. Svo. pp. 600, cloth. £2 2«.

1


18 Linguistic Publications of Trubner /• Co.,

DowsoD. — A Classical Dicttonaet of Hindu Mythology and History,

Geography and Literature. By John Dowson, M.E.A.S., late Professor in the
Staff College. In One Volume, post 8vo. cloth, pp. xx. and 412. 1879. 16«.

Dutt. — ^HisTOKTCAL Studies aj^d Recreations. By Shoshee Chttntder
DuTT, E&i B&h§.door. 2 vols, demy 8to. pp. Tiii. and 469, and viii. and 588.
1879. 32*.

Contents :— Vol. I. The World's History retold— I. The Ancient World. II. The Modem
World. Vol. II. Bengal. An Account of the Country from the Earliest Times.— The Great Wars
of India.— The Ruins of the Old World, read as Milestones of Ciyilization.

Elliot. — Memoirs on the History, Folklore, and Distribution of
THE Races of the North Western Provinces of India; being an
amplified Edition of the original Supplementary Glossary of Indian Terms.
By the late Sir Henry M. Elliot, K.C.B., of the Hon. East India Company's
Bengal Civil Service. Edited, revised, and re-arranged, by John Beames,
M.R.A.S., Bengal Civil Service; Member of the German Oriental Society, of
the Asiatic Societies of Paris and Bengal, and of the Philological Society of
London. In 2 vols, demy 8vo., pp. zz., 370, and 396, cloth. Witb two
Lithographic Plates, one full-page coloured Map, and three large coloured
folding Maps. 3 65.

Elliot. — The History oe India, as told by its own Historians. The

Muhammadan Period. Complete in Eight Vols. Edited from the Posthumous
Papers of the late Sir H. M. Elliot, K.C.B., East India Company's Bengal
Civil Service, by Prof. John Dowson, M.R.A.S., Staff College, Sandburst.

Vols. I. and II. With a Portrait of Sir H. M. Elliot. 8vo. pp. xxxii. and 542,
X. and 580, cloth. 18«. each.

Vol. III. 8vo. pp. xii. and 627, cloth. 24«.

Vol. IV. 8vo. pp. X. and 563 cloth 21*

Vol. V. 8vo. pp. xii. and 576, cloth. 21*.

Vol. VI. Svo. pp. viii. and 574, cloth. 21*.

Vol. VII. 8vo. pp. viii. and 674, cloth. 21*.

Vol. VIII. Svo. pp. xxxii., 444, and Ixviii. cloth. 24j.

Farley. — Egypt, Cyprtis, and Asiatic Turkey. By J. Lewis Fakley,

Author of " Tbe Resources of Turkey," etc. Demy 8vo. cl., pp. xvi.-270. 10*. 6cL

Famham. — Homeward. Being Notes of a Jouniey through China,
India, Egypt, and Europe. By the Rev. J. M. W. Farnham. Svo. clotb, pp.
400, with numerous illustrations. 10*. 6d.

Fomander. — An Account or the Polynesian Race : Its Origin and

Migrations. By A. Fornander. Vol. I. Post 8vo., cloth. 7*. 6«f.

Forsyth. — Report of a I^ission to Yarkund in 1873, under Command

of Sir T. D. Forsyth, K.C.S.I., C.B., Bengal Civil Service, with Historical
and Geographical Information regarding the Possessions of the Ameer of
Yarkund. With 45 Photographs, 4 Lithographic Plates, and a large Folding
Map of Eastern Turkestan. 4to. cloth, pp. iv. and 573. £5 5*.

Oarrett. — A Classical Dictionary op India, illustrative of the My-
thology, Philosophy, Literature, Antiquities, Arts, Manners, Customs, etc., of
the Hindus. By John Garrett. 8vo. pp. x. and 798. cloth. 28s.

Oarrett. — Supplement to the above Classical Dictionary of India.
By John Garrett, Director of Public Instruction at Mysore. Svo. cloth, pp.
160. 78, 6d,

Gazetteer of the Central ProTinces of India. Edited hy Chaeies

Gkant, Secretary to the Chief Commissioner of the Central Provinces. Second
Edition. With a very large folding Map of the Central Provinces of India.
Demy Svo. pp. clvii. and 582, cloth. 1870. £1 4*.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hilly London, E, C.


19


Ooldstucker. — On the Deficiencies in the Pbesent Administration

OF Hindu Law; being a paper read at the Meeting of the East India As-
sociation on the 8th June, 1870. By Thbodoh Goldstuckbr, Professor of
Sanskrit in University College, London, &c. Demy 8vo. pp. 56, sewed. Is. 6d.

Gover. — The Polk-Sonos of Southern India. By Charles E. Gover.

8vo. pp. xxiii. and 299, cloth lOs, 6d,

Griffin. — The Rajas of the Punjab. Being the History of the Prin-
cipal States in the Punjab, and their Political Relations with the British Govern-
ment. By LefeL H. Griffin, Bengal Civil Service; Under Secretary to the
Government of the Punjab, Author of " The Punjab Chiefs," etc. Second
edition. Royal 8vo., pp. ziv. and 630. 21«.

Griffis. — The Mikado's Empire. Book I. History of Japan from
660 B.C. to 1872 A.D. Book II. Personal Experiences, Observations, and
Studies in Japan, 1870-74. By "W, E. Griffis. Illustrated. 8vo el., pp.
626. £1.

Hodgson. — Essays on the Languages, Literature, and Religion

OF Nepal and Tibet j together with further Papers on the Geography,
Ethnology, and Commerce of those Countries. By B. H« Hodgson, late
British Minister at Nep&l. Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. 288. 14».

Hodgson. — Miscellaneous Essays Relating to Indian Subjects. By
B. H. HoDciSON, late British Minister at Nepal. In Two Yoiumes. Post 8vo.
cloth, pp. viii. and 408^ and viii. and 348. 1880. 28 «.

Hunter. — A Statistical Account of Bengal. By W. W. Hunter, B.A.,

LL.D. Director-General of Statistics to the Government of India; one of
the Council of the Royal Asiatic Society; M.R.G.S. ; and Honorary Member
of various Learned Societies.

vot.

X. D&rj fling, Jalp&ig«rl and Each Behar
XI. Patn& and S&ran. I State.

XII. Gay& and Sh&h&Md.

XIII. Tirhiit and Champ&ran.

XIV. Bhfigalpur and Sant&I Pargan&s.
XV. Monghyr and Pumiah.

XVI. Haz&Fib&^h and Lohfirdagfi.
XVII. Singbhdm, Chutifi, N&gpur Tributary

States and M&nbhdm.
XVIII. Cuttack and Balasor.
XIX. Purf, andOrissa tributary States.
XX. Fisheiies, Botany, and General Index.

Published by command of the Government of India. In 20 Vols. 8vo. half-
morocco. £5.

Hunter (F. M.) — An Account of the British Settlement of Aden

in Arabia. Compiled by Captain F. M. Hunter, F.R.G.S., F.R.A.S.,
Assistant Political Resident, Aden. Demy 8vo. half-morocco, pp. xii.-232.

7*. Qd.

Hunter. — Famine Aspects of Bengal Districts. A System of Famine
Warnings. By W. W. Hunter, B.A., LL.D. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 216. 1874.
7s. ed.

Hunter. — The Indian Musalmans. By W. W. Hunter, B.A., LL.D.,

Director-General of Statistics to the Government of India, etc.. Author of "The
Annals of Rural Bengal,'' etc. Third Edition. 8vo. cloth, pp. 219. 1876.
lOs. 6d.

Japan. — Map of Nippon (Japan) : Compiled from Native Maps, and
the Notes of most recent Travellers. By R. Henry Brunton, M.IC.E.,
F.R.G.S. 1877. In 4 sheets, £3 ; roller, yarnished, JS3 10«. ; Folded, in case, £4.


VOL.

I. 24 Pargan&s and Sandai1)an9.
II. Nadiyfi, and Jessor.
III. Midnapur, Hfigll and Hourah.
IV. Bardwfin, Birbhtim and B&nkur&.
Y. Dacca, B&karganj. Farldpur and Mai-

mansinh.
VI. Chittagongr Hill Tracts, Chittagong,
No&bLhdll, Tipperah, and Ilili Tipperah
state.
VII. Meldah, Rangpur and Din&jpur.
YIII. Rfijshdhf and BogrA.
IX. Murshiddb&d and P&bn&.


20 Linguistic Publications of Truhner 8f Co.,

Leitner. — Sinin-I-Islam:. Being a Sketch of the History and

Literature of Muhammadanism and their place in Universal History. -For the
use of Maulvis. By G. W. Leitner. Part I. The Rarly History of Arabia
to the fall of the Abassides. 8vo. sewed. Lahore. 68,

Leland. — Fitsang ; or, the Discovery of America by Chinese Buddhist
Priests in the Fifth Century. By Cuaelbs G. Leland. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp.
xix. and 212. 78.6d.

Leonowens. — The Bomance op Siamese Hahem Lipe. By Mrs. Aitbta

H. Leonowens, Author of "The English Governess at the Siamese Court'*
With 17 Illustrations, principally from Photographs, by the permission of J.
Thomson, Esq. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 278. 14«.

Leonowens. — The English Governess at the Siamese Coubt :

being Recollections of six years in the Royal Palace at Bangkok. By Anna
Hakriette Leonowens. With Illustrations from Photographs presented to
the Author by the King of Siam. 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 332. 1870 12«.

McCrindle. — The Commerce and Navigation of the Erythraean Sea,
Being a Translation of the Periplus Maris Erythraei, by an Anonymous Writer,
and of Arrian's Account of the Voyage of Nearkhos, from the Mouth of the
Indus to the Head of the Persian Gulf. With Introduction, Commentary,
Notes, and Index. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. iv. and 238. 1879. 7». 6d,

McCrindle. — Ancient India as Described by Megasthen:^s ajtd
Arrian. Being a Translation of the Fragments of the Indika of Megasthenes
collected by Dr. Schwanberk, and of the First Part of the Indika of Arrian.
By J. W. McCrindle, M.A., Principal of the Government College, Patna,
etc. With Introduction, Notes, and Map of Ancient India. Post 8vo. cloth,
pp. xii.-224. 1877. 7s. 6d.

Markham. — The Narratives of the Mission op George Bogle,

B.C.S., to the Teshu Laraa, and of the Journey of Thomas Manning to Lhasa.
Edited, with Notes and Introduction, and lives of Mr. Bogle arid Mr. Manning,
by Clements R Marxham, C.B,, F.R.S. Demy 8vo., with Maps and Illus-
trations, pp. clxi. 314, el. 21«.

Marsden's Nmnismata Orientalia. New International Edition.

See under Numismata Orientalia.
Matthews. — Ethnology and Philology of the Hidatsa Indiaj^^s.

By Washington Matthews, Assistant Surgeon, U.S. Army. Contents: —
Ethnography, Philology, Grammar, Dictionary, and English- Hidatsa Voca-
bulary. 8vo. cloth. £1 lis, 6d.

Mayers. — Treaties between the Empire of China and Foreign Powers.

Together with Regulations for the Conduct of Foreign Trades. By W. F.
Mayers, Chinese Secretary to H. B. M/s Legation at Peking. 8vo. pp. viii.
225 and xi. 1877. Cloth £2.

Mayers. — China and Japan. See Dennts.

Mitra. — The Antiqfities of Orissa. By Eajendralala Mitra.

Vol. I. Published under Orders of the Government of India. Folio, cloth,
pp. 180. With a Map and 36 Plates. £4; 4s.

Mitra — Buddha Gaya ; the Hermitage of Sakya Muni. By Rajek-
dralala Mitra, LL.D., CLE. 4to, cloth, pp. xvi. and 258, with 51 plates
1878. ^3.

Moor. — The Hindf Pantheon. By Edward Moor, F.R.S. A new

edition, with additional Plates, Condensed and Annotated by the Rev. W. O.
Simpson. 8vo. cloth, pp. xiii. and 401, with 62 Plates. 1864. ^3.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.G. 21

Morris. — A Descriptive and Historical Account of the GoDAVERr

District in the Presidency of Madras By Henry Morris, formerly of the
Madras Civil Service. Author of a "History of India for Use in Schools"
and other works. 8vo. cloth (with a map), pp. xii. and 390. 1878. 12«.

Notes, EoTTGH, OF JoFRNPTS made in the years 1868, 1869, 1870, 1871,
1872, 1873, in Syria, down the Tigris, India, Kashmir, Ceylon, Japan, Mon-
golia, Siberia, the United States, the Sandwich Islands, and Australasia.
Demy 8vo. pp. 624, cloth. 1875. 14*.

Numismata Orientalia. — The International Nitmismata Orientalia.

Edited by Edward Thomas, F.R.S., etc. Vol. I. Illustrated with 20 Plates
and a Map. Royal 4to. cloth. £3 13«. Gcf.

Also in 6 Parts sold separately, viz.: —

Part I. — Ancient Indian Weights. By E. Thomas, F.R.S., etc. Royal 4to. sewed,
pp. 84, with a Plate and a Map of the India of Manu. 9^-. Qd.

Part II. — Coins of the Urtuki Turkumans. By Stanley Lane Poole, Corpus
Christi College Oxford. Royal 4to, sewed, pp. 44, with 6 Plates. 9*.

Part III. The Coinage of Lydia and Persia, from the Earliest Times to the Fall
of the Dynasty of the Acheemenidee^ By Barclay V. Head, Assistant-
Keeper of Coins, British Museum. Royal 4to. sewed, pp. viii. and 56, with
three Autotype Plates. \Qs. 6d.

Part IV. The Coins of the Tuluni Dynasty. By Edward Thomas Rogers.
Royal 4to. sewed, pp. iv. and 22, and 1 Plate. 5s.

Part V. The Parthian Coinage. By Percy Gardner, M.A. Royal 4to. sewed,
pp. iv. and 65, with 8 Autotypte Plates. ISs.

Part VI. On the Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon. With a Discussion of
the Ceylon Date of the Buddha's Death. By T. W. Rhys Davids, Barrister-
at-Law, late of the Ceylon Civil Service. Royal 4t04 sewed, pp. 60, with Plate.
lOs.

Osbnm. — The Monumental History of Egypt, as recorded on the

Ruins of her Temples, Palaces, and Tombs. By William Osburn. Illustrated
with Maps, Plates,, etc. 2 vols. 8vo. pp. xii. and 461; vii. and 643, cloth.
£2 2s. Out of print.

Vol. I. — From the Coloni^tion of the YaUey to' the Visit of the Patriarch Abram.
Yol. II. — From the Visit of Abram to the Exodus.

Palmer. — Egyptian Chronicles, with a haxmoiiy of Sacred and

Egyptian Chronology, and an Appendix on Babylonian and Assyrian Antiquities.
By William Palmer, M.A., and late Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford.
2 vols.. 8vo. cloth, pp. Ixxiv. and 428, and viii. and 636. 1861. 12s,

Fatell. — Cowasjee Patell's Chronology, containing corresponding

Dates of the different Eras used by Christians, Jews, Greeks, Hindis,
Mohamedans, Parsees, Chine!s6, Japanese, etc. By Cowasjeb Sorabjee
Patell. 4to. pp. viii. and 184, cloth. 50s,

Faton. — A History of the Egyptian Revoltttion, from the Period of

the Mamelukes to the Death of Nfohatmitfed Ali ; from Arab and European
Memoirs, Oral I'radition, and Local Research. By A. A. Paton. Second
Edition. 2 vols, demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 395^ viii. and 446. 1870. 18«.

Ffoimdes. — Fu So Mimi Bnkuro. — A Budgei' op Japanese Notes.

By Oapt. Pfoundbs, of Yokohama. 8vo. sewed, pp. 184. 7«. 6d.

Earn Baz. — Essay on the Architectttre of the Hindus. By Eam Raz,
Native Judge and Magistrate of Bangalore. With 48 plates. 4to. pp. ziv. and
64, sewed. London, 1834. £2 28,


^


22 Linguistic Publications of Trubner ^ Co.»

Ravenstein. — The Eussians on the Amite ; its Discovery, Conquest,

and Colonization, with a Description of the Country, its Inhabitants, Produc-
tions, and Commercial Capabilitiss, and Personal Accounts of Russian Trayel-
lers. By E. G. Ravenstein, F.R.G.S. With 4 tinted Lithographs and 3
Maps. 8vo. cloth, pp. 500. 1861. 15.

Roe and Fryer. — Travels in India in the Seventeenth Centurt.

By Sir Thomas Roe and Dr^ John Fryer. Reprinted from the "Calcutta
Weekly Englishman." 8vo. cloth, pp. 474. 7«. ^,

Routledge. — ^English Rule and Native Opinion in India. Prom
Notes taken in the years 1870-74. By Jam^bs Routledge. Post 8yo.
cloth, pp. 344. 10*. Qd.

Schlagintweit. — Glossary of Geographical Terms fkom India and

Tibet, with Native Transcription and Transliteration. By Hbrmanit db
Schlagintweit. Forming, with a ** Route Book of the Western Himalaya,
Tibet, and Turkistan,"the Third Volume of H., A., andR. de Schlagintweit*8
*'Resultsof a Scientific Mission to India and High Asia." With an Atlas in
imperial folio, of Maps, Panoramas, and Views. Royal 4to., pp. zxiv. and
293. £4.

Sherring. — Hindu Tribes and Castes as represented in Eenares. By
the Rev. M. A. Sherring. With Illustrations. 4to. Vol. I. pp. xxiv. and
408. 1872. 4Jloth. Now £4 4«. Vol. II. pp. Ixviii. and 376. 1879.
Cloth £2 8«.

Sherring — The Sacred City op the Hindus. An Account of
Benares in Aiuiient and Modern Times. By the Rev. M. A. Sherring, M.A.,
LL.D. ; and Prefaced with an Introduction oy Fitzedward Hall, Esq., D.C.L,
8vo. cloth, pp^. xxxvi. and 388, with numerous full^page illustrations. 21«.

Sibree. — The Great African Island. Chapters on Madagascar. A

Popular Account of Recent Researches in the Physical Geography, Geology,
and Exploration of the Country, and its Natural History and Botany, and in
the Origin and Division, Customs and Language, Superstitions, Folk-Lore and
Religious Belief, an.d Practices of the Different Tribes. Together with Illus-
trations of Scripture and Early Church History, from Native Statists and
Missionary Experience. By the Rev. Jas. Sibree, jun., F.R.G.S., of the
London IVIissionary Society, etc. Demy 8vo. cloth, with Maps and Illus-
trations, pp. xii. and 372. 12s.

Smith. — Contributions towards the Materia Medica and Natural

History of China. For the use of Medical Missionaries and Native Medical
Students. By F. Porter Smith, M.B. London, Medical Missionary in
Central China. Imp. 4to. cloth, pp. viiLund 240. 1870. £\ Is,

Strangford. — Original Letters and Papers of the late Tiscoxtnt
Strangford, «pon Philological and Kindred Subjects. Edited byViscouNTBSs
Strangford. Post Svo. cloth, pp. xxii. and 284. 1878. Via, hd.

Thomas. — Comments on Kecent Pehlvi Decipherments. With an

Incidental Sketch of the Derivation of Aryan Alphabets, and contributions to
the Early History and Geography of Tabarist&n. Illustrated by Coins. By
Edward Thomas, F.R.S. 8vo. pp. 56', and 2 plates, cloth, sewed. 3«. 6<?,

Thomas. — Sassanian Coins. Communicated to the Numismatic Society
of London. By E. Thomas, F.R.S. Two parts. With 3 Plates and a Wood-
cut. I2mo, sewed, pp. 43. 5«.

Thomas. — Jainism ; or. The Early Faith of Asoka. With Illustrations
of the Ancient Religions of the East, from the Pantheon of the Indo-Scythians.
To which is added a Notice on Bactrian Coins and Indian Dates. By Edward
Thomas, F.R.S. 8v. pp. viii., 24 and 82. With two Autotype Plates and

Woodcuts. 78. M,


57 and 59, Ludgate HllU London^ E. G. 23

Thomas. — ^Records of the Gupta Dynasty. Illustrated by Inscrip-
tions, Written History, Local Tradition and Coins. To which is added a
Chapter on the Arabs in Sind. By Edward Thomas, F.R.S. Folio, with a
Plate, handsomely bound in cloth, pp. iv. and 64. Price 14«.

Thomas. — The Cheonicles of the PathIn Kings of Dehli. Illus-
trated by Coins, Inscriptions, and other Antiquarian Remains. By Edward
Thomas, F.R.S., late of the East India Company's Bengal Civil Service. With
numerous Copperplates and Woodcuts. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. zziv. and 467.
1871. £\ 8*.

Thomas.— ^The Retenue Eesoubces of the Mughal Empiee in India,

from a.d. 1593 to a.d. 1707. A Supplement to *' The Chronicles of the Paih&a
Kings of Delhi." By Edward Thomas, F.R.S. Demy 8yo., pp. 60, cloth.
3«. 6^.

Thorbnm. — BanniJ ; or, Our Afghan Frontier. By S. S. Thoebtten,
I.C.S., Settlement Officer of the Bannd District. 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 480.
18«.

Watson. — Index to the Native and Scientific Names op Indian and
OTHER Eastern Economic Plants and Products, originally prepared
under the authority of the Secretary of State for India in Council. By John
FouBES Watson, M.A., M.D., F.L.S., F.II.A.S., etc., Reporter on th«
Products of India. Imperial 8vo., cloth, pp. 650. £\ Ws, Qd,

West and Buhler. — A Digest of the Hindu Law of Inheeitanck

and Partition, from the Replies of the S^stris in the several Courts of the
Bombay Presidency. With Introduction, Notes and Appendix, fc^dited by
Raymond West and J. G. Buhler. Second Edition. Demy 8vo. sewed,
pp. 674. £1 11«. Gd.

Wheeler. — The Histoet' of India from the Earliest Ages. By J.

Talboys Wheeler, Assistant Secretary to the Government of India in the

Foreign Department, Secretary to the Indian Record Commission, author of

** The Geography of Herodotus," etc. etc. Demy 8vo. cl.
Vol. I. The Vedic Period and the Maha Bharata. pp. Ixxy. and 576.
Vol. II., The liamayana and the Brahmanic Period, pp. Izzzviii. and 680, with

two Maps. 21«.
Vol. III. Hindu, Buddhist, Brahmanical Revival, pp. 484, with two maps. 18«.
Vol. IV. Part I. Mussulman Rule. pp. xxxii. and 320. 14«.
Vol. iV. Part II. In the press.

Wheeler. — Eaelt Recoeds of Beitish India. A History of the

English Settlement in India, as told in the Goyernment Records, the works of
old travellers and other contemporary Documents, from the earliest period
down to the rise of British Power in India. By J. Talboys Wheeler.
Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. zzziL and 392. 1878. I5s.

Williams. — Modeen India and the Indians. Being a Series of
Impressions, Notes, and Essays. By Monier Williams, D.C.L. Third
Edition, Revised and Augmented by considerable Additions. Post 8yo. cloth,
pp. 366. With Map. 1879. 14«.

Wise. COMMENTAEY ON THE HiNDU StSTEM OF MeDICINE. By T. A.

Wise, M.D., Bengal Medical Service. Svo., pp. xx. and 432, cloth, la, 6d.

Wise. — Ueyiew of the Histoby of Medicine. By Thomas A.
Wise, M.D. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth. Vol. I., pp. icviii. and 397; Vol. IL,
pp. 674. 10«.


24 Linguistic Publications of Triibner 8f Co.,


THE RELIGIONS OF THE EAST.

Adi Oranth (The) ; oe, The Holy Sckiptuees op the Sikhs, trans-
lated from the original Gurmukhi, with Introductory Essays, by Dr. Grnbst
Trumpp, Professor Regius of Oriental Languages at the Uaiyersity of Munich,
etc. Roy. 8vo. cloth, pp. 866. £2 l2s. 6d,

Alabaster. — The Wheel of the Law : Buddhism illustrated from

Siamese Sources by the Modern Buddhist, a Life of Buddha, and an account of
H.M. Consulate-General in Siam. Demy 8vo. pp. Iviii. and 324<. 1871.
14«.

Amberley. — An Analysis of Keligioxis Belief. By Yisoount

Amberlet. 2 yols. 8yo. cl., pp. xvi. 496 and 512. J 876. 30«.

Apastambiya Dharma Sutram. — Aphobisms of the Sacked ILaws of

THE HiN Dus, by Apastamba. Edited, with a Translation and Notes, by G. Biihler.
By order of the Government of Bombay. 2 parts. 8vo. cloth, 1868-71.
£1 4s. 6d.

Arnold (Edwin). — The Light of Asia ; or, The Great Renunciation

(Mahabhinishkramana). Being the Life and Teaching of Gautama, Prince of
India, and Founder of Buddhism (as told by an Indian Buddhist). By Edwin
Arnold, M.A., F.R.G.S., etc. Third Edition. Crown 8yo. pp. zyL and 238.
1880. 7s. 6d.

Baneijea. — The Arian Witness, or the Testimony of Arian Scriptures

in corroboration of Biblical History and the Rudiments of Christian Doctrine.
Including Dissertations on the Original Home and Early Adventures of Indo-
Arians. By the Rev. K. M. Banerjea. 8vo. sewed, pp. xviii. and 236. Ss. 6d.

Beal. — Trayels of Fah Hian and Sitng-Yun, Buddhist Pilgrims

from China to India (400 a.d. and 518 a.d.) Translated from the Chinese,
by S. Beal (B.A. Trinity College, Cambridge), a Chaplain in Her Majesty's
Fleet, a Member of the Royal Asiatic Society, and Author of a Translation of
the Pratimoksha and the Amithdba Sdtra from the Chinese. Crown 8yo. pp.
Ixxiii. and 210, cloth, ornamental, with a coloured map. Out of print.

Beal. — A Catena of Buddhist Scriptuees from the Chinese. By S.
Beal, B. A., Trinity College, Cambridge; a Chaplain in Her Mejesty's Fleet,
etc. 8vo. cloth, pp. xiv. and 436. 1871. I5s.

Beal. — The Romantic Legend of Sakhta Buddha. Prom- the
Chinese-Sanscrit by the Rev. Samuel Beal, Author of " Buddhist Pilgfrims,"
etc. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 400. 1875. 12*.

Beal. — Texts from the Buddhist Canon, commonly known as
Dhammapada. Translated from the Chinese by S. Beal, B.A., Professor of
Chinese, University of London. With accompanying Narrative. Post 8vo,
pp. viii. and 176, cloth. 7s. 6d.

Bigandet. — The Life or Legend of Gaudama, the Buddha of the

Burmese, with Annotations, the Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the
Phongyies, or Burmese Monks. By the Right Reverend P.- Bioandet, Bishop of
Ramatha, Vicar Apostolic of Ava and Pegu. Third Edition. In two Yolumes.
Post 8vo. cloth, pp. 288 and 336. 21^.

Brockie. — Indian Philosophy. Introductory Paper. By "Wxluam
Brockie, Author of '* A Day in the Land of Scott," etc., etc. Svo. pp 26
sewed. 1872. 6d. '

Brown. — The Dervishes; or, Oriental Spiritualism. By Joitn" P.

Brown, Secretary and Dragoman of the Legation of the United States of
America at Constantinople. With twenty-four Illustrations. Svo. cloth,
pp. viii. and 415. 14«.


57 and 69, Ludgate Hill, London^ E,C. 26

Callaway. — Tkb Eeligious System op the Amazflu.

Part I. — Unkalunkulu ; or, the Tradition of Creation as existing among the

Amazulu and other Tribes of South Africa, in their own words, with a translation

into English, and Notes. By the hev. Canon Callaway, M.D. 8vo. pp. 128,

sewed. 1868. 4».
Part II. — Amatongo; or. Ancestor Worship, as existing among the Amazulu, in

their own words, with a translation into English, and Notes. By the Rev.

Canon Callaway, M.D. 1869. 8vo. pp. 197, sewed. 1869. 4*.
Part III. — Izinyanga Zokubula ; or. Divination, as existing among the Amazulu, in

their own words. With a translation into English, and Notes. By the Rev.

Canon Callaway, M.D. 8vo. pp. 150, sewed. 1870. 4«.
Part IV. — Abatakati, or Medical Magic and Witchcraft, 8vo. pp. 40, sewed. 1*. M.
Chalmers. — The Origin op the Chinese; an Attempt to Trace the

connection of the Chinese with Western Nations in their Religion, Superstitions
Arts, Language, and Traditions. By John Chalmers, A.M. Foolscap 8vo.
cloth, pp. 78. 6s,

Clarke. — Ten Geeat Religions : an Essay in Comparative Theology.

By James Freeman Clarke. 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 528. 1871. 15«.
Clarke. — Seepent and Siva Woeship, and Mythology in Central

America, Africa and Asia. By Htoe Clarke, Esq. 8vo. sewed. \s.

Conway. — The Saceed Anthology. A Book of EthDical Scriptures.

Collected and edited by M. D. Conway. 4th edition. Demy 8vo. cloth,
pp. xvi. and 480. 12«.

Coomara Swamy. — The DathXvansa ; or, the History of the Tooth-
Relic of Gotama Buddha. The Pali Text and its Translation into English,
with Notes. By Sir M. Coomara Swamy, Mudeli&r. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp.
174. 1874. 10«. M.

Coomara Swamy. — The DathIvansa ; or, the History of the Tooth-
Relic of Gotama Buddha. English Translation only. With Notes. Demy
8vo. cloth, pp. 100. 1874. 6*.

Coomara Swamy. — Sutta NipIta; or, the Dialogues and Discourses
of Gotama Buddha. Translated from the Pali, with Introduction and Notes.
By Sir M. Coomara Swamy. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp. xxxvi. and 160. 1874. 6*.

Coran. — Exteacts feom the Coean in the Oeiginal, with English
Rendering. Compiled hy Sir William Muir, K.C.S.I., LL.D., Author of
the *' Life of Mahomet." Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 68. 2«. 6rf. (Nearly ready.)

Cuimingham. — The JBhilsa Topes ; or, Buddhist Monuments of Central

India : comprising a brief Historical Sketch of the Kise, Progress, and Declin^
of Buddhism ; with an Account of the Opening and Examination of the yariou^
Groups of Topes around Bhilsa. By Brev.- Major Alexander Cunningham >
Bengal Engineers. Illustrated with thirty- three Plates. 8yo. pp. xxxvi. 370,
cloth. 1854. £2 2«.

Da Cnnha. — Memoir on the Histokt op the Tooth-Reuc of Ceylon ;

with an Essay on the Life and System of Gs^utama Buddha. By J. GiiBsoN
DA CuNHA. 8yo. cloth, pp.xiv.and 70. With 4 photographs and cuts. 7«. 6</.
Dickson. — The PaTiMOxzHA, being the Buddhist Office of the Con-
fession of Priests. The Pali Text, with a Translation, and Notes, by J. F.
Dickson, M.A. 8vo. sd., pp. 69. 2«.

Edkins. — Chinese Buddhism. A Volume of Sketches, Historical and

Critical. By J. Edkins, D.D., Author of " China's Place in Philology,*'
** Religion in China," etc., etc. Post 8to. cloth (In preparation.)
Edkins. — Eeligion in China, containing a Brief Account of the
Three Religions of the Chinese, with Observations on the Prospects of
Christian Conversion amongst that People. By Joseph Edkins, D.D. Second
Edition. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. 276. 7*. 6rf.

Eitel. — Handbook foe the Student of Chinese Buddhism. By the
Rev. E. J. Eitel, L. M. S. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 224. 18^.


26 Linguistic Publications of Truhner ^ Co.,

Eitel. — Buddhism: its Historical, Theoretical, and Popular Aspects.
In Three Lectures. By Rev. E. J. Eitel, M.A. Ph.D. Second Edition.
Demy 8vo. sewed, pp. 130. 5«.

Examination (Candid) of Theism. — ^By Physicus. Post 8vo. cloth, pp.

zviii. and 198. 1878. Is. 6d.

Faher. — A sytematica.l Digest op the Doctrines op CoBrpucnrs,

according to the Anai^bcts, Great Learning, and Doctrine of the Mean,

with an Introduction on the Authorities v^on Confucius and Confucianism.

By Ernst Fabeb, Rhenish Missionary. Translated from the G-erman by P.

Or. von Mollendorff. 8vo. sewed, pp, viii. and 131. 1875. 12*. 6d,
Oiles. — Eecoed of the Buddhist Kingdoms. Translated from the

Chinese by H. A. Giles, of H.H. Consular Service. 8vo. sewed, pp.

x.-r29 58,
Oiles — Hebeew and Cheistian Recoeds. An Historical Enquiry

concerning the Age and Authorship of the Old and New Testaments. By the

Rev. Dr. Giles, Rector of Sutton, Surrey. Now first published complete,

2 Vols. Vol. I., Hebrew Records ; YoL II., Christian Records. 8to. cloth,

pp. 442 and 440. 1877. 24*.

Ouhematis. — Zoological Mythology; or, the Legends of Animals.
By Anoelo de GUBERNATIS4 Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Literature
in the Instituto di Studii Superiori e di Perfezionamento at Florence, etc. In
2 vols. 8vo. pp. xxvi. and 432, vii. and 442. 2Qs.

Hardy. — Cheistianity and Bfddhism Compaeed. By the late Rev.

R. Spencb Hardy, Hon, Member Royal Asiatic Society. 8vo. sd. pp. 138. 6«.

Hang. — Essays on the Saceed Language, Weitings, and RELieioN

OF THE Parsis. By Martin Haug, Ph D. Second Edition. £dited by
E. W. West, Ph.D. Post 8vo. pp. xvi. and 428, cloth, 16*.
Haug. — The Aitaeeya Beahmanam of the Rig Veda : containing the
Earliest Speculations of the Brahmans on the meaning of the Sacrificial Prayers,
and on the Origin, Performance, and Sense of the Rites of the Vedic Religion.
Edited, Translated, and Explained by Martin Hauo, Ph.D., Superintendent of
Sanskrit Studies in the Poona College, etc., etc. In 2 Vols. Crown 8vo.
Vol. I. Contents, Sanskrit Text, with Preface, Introductory Essay, and a Map
of the Sacrificial Compound at the Soma Sacrifice, pp. 312. Vol. II. Transla-
tion with Notes, pp. 544. £2 2*.

Hawken. — Upa-Sastea : Comments, Linguistic and Doctrinal, on
Sacred and Mythic Literature. By J. D. Hawken. 8vo. cloth, pp. viii.— 288.
7*. 6rf.

Inman. — Ancient Pagan and Modeen Cheistian Symbolism Exposed
AND Explained. By Thomas Inman, IVf.D. Second Edition. With Illustra-
tions. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xl. and 148. 1874. Is. 6d.

Johnson. — Oeiental Religions and their Relation to Universal Reli-
gion. By Samuel Johnson. First Section — India. In 2 Volumes, post 8yo.
cloth, pp. 408 and 402. 21»

Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. — ^Eor

Papers on Buddhism contained in it, see page 9.
Eistner. — Buddha and his Docteines. A Bibliographical Essay. By
Otto Kistner. Imperial 8vo., pp. iv. and 32, sewed. 2^. 6d,

Koran (The) ; commonly called The Alcoean of Mohammed. Trans-
lated into English immediutely from the original Arabic. By Georob Salb,
Gent. To which is prefixed the Life of Mohammed. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 472. 7«.

Lane. — Selections feom the Kuban. By Edwaed William Lajte.

A New Edition, Revised and Enlarged, with an Introduction by SxANiiST Lanb
Poole. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xxii. and 172. 9s.

I«egge. — Confucianism in Delation to Cheistianity. A Paper read

before the Missionary Conference in Shanghai, on May 11, 1877. By Rer.
James Leqge, D.D. 8vo. sewed, pp. 12. 1877. 1«. 6d,


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, JE. C. 27

I-Cgge. — The Life and Teachings of Coiotjcius. With Explanatory
Notes. By James Legge, D,D. Fifth Edition. Crown 8¥0. cloth, pp. vi.
and 338. 1877. IQs, ed. ,

Legge. — The Life and Woeks op Mencius. "With Essaya and Notes.
By James Legge. Crown 8yo. cloth, pp. 402. 1875. 12».

Legge. — Chinese Classics, v. under '* Chinese/' p. 39.

Leigh. — The RfiLioioN of the Would. By H, Stone Leigh. 12mo.

pp. xii. 66, cloth. 1869. 2*. 6rf. .

M'Clatchie. — Confucian Cosmogony. A Translation (with the

Chinese Text opposite) of Section 49 (Treatise on Ceismogony) of the ** Com-
plete Works " of the Philosopher Choo-Foo-T^e. With Explanatory Notes by
theRev.TH. M*Ci.ATCHfE, M,A. Small 4to. pp. xviii. and 162. 1874. 12*. 6rf.

Mills. — The Indian Saint; or, Buddha and Buddhism. — A Sketch
Historical and Critical. By C. D. B. Mills, 8to. cL, pp. 192. 7«. 6rf.

Mitra.— Buddha Gaya, the Hermitage of Sakya Muni. By Rajen-
DRALALA MiTRA, LL.D,, CLE. 4to. cloth, pp. xvi. and 258, with 51 Plates.
1878. £3.

Muhammed. — The Life of Muhammed. Based on Muhammed Ibn

Ishak By Abd El Malik Ibn Hisham. Edited by Dr. Ferdinand Wusten-
FBLD. The Arabic Text. 8vo. pp. 1026, sewed. Priee 21«. introduction,
Notes, and Index in German. Svo. pp. Ixxii. and 266, sewed. Is, 6d» Each
part sold separately.
The text based on the Mamiscripts of the Berlin, Leipsic, Gotha and Leyden Libraries, has
been carefully revised by the learned editor, and printed with the utmost exactness.

Mnir. — Metrical Tbanslations from Sanszbit Wkitees. With an

Introduction, Prose Version, and Parallel Passages from Classical Authors.
By J. MuiR, D.C.L., LL.D., ftc. Post Svo. cloth, pp. xliv. and 376. 14«.
.... A volume which may be taken as a fair illustration alike of the religious and moral
sentiments, and of the legendary lore of the best Sanskrit writers — Edinburgh Daily Review,

Mnir. — Okiginal Sansjcrit Texts — v. under Sanskrit.

Miiller. — The Sacred Hymns of the Bbahmtns, as preserved to ns

in the oldest collection of religious poetry, the Rig- Veda 'Sanhita, translated and
explained. By F. Max MiiLLER, M.A., Fellow of All Souls' College ; Professor
of Comparative Philology at Oxford. Volume I. Hymns to the Maruts or
the Storm Gods. Svo. pp. clii. and 264. 12«. 6d,

Miiller. — LECTinBtE on Buddhist I^ihilism. By F. Max MiLller,

M.A., Professor of Comparative Philology in the University of Oxford ; Mem-
ber of the French Institute, etc. Delivjered before the General Meeting of the
Association of German Philologists, at Kiel, 28th September, 1869. (Translated
from the German.) Sewed.* 1869. Is,

Newman. — Hebrew Theism. By F, W. I^ewman. Royal Svo. stiff

wrappers, pp. viii. and 1 72. 1874. As. Qd.
Friaulx — Qu^stiones Mosaic-e ; or, the first part of the Book of
Genesis compared with the remains of ancient religions. By Osmond db
Beauyoir Priaulx. 8vo. pp. yiii. and 548, cloth. I2s.

Rig-Veda Sanhita. — A Collection of Ancieistt Hindu Hymns. Con-
stitutine; the First Ashtaka, or Book of the Rig-veda ; the oldest authority for
the religious and social institutions of the Hindus. Translated from the Original
Sanskrit by the late H. H. Wilson, M.A. 2nd Ed., with a Postscript by
Dr. FiTZBDWARD Hall. Vol. I. Svo. cloth, pp. lii. and 348, price 2U.

Eig-Veda Sanhita. — A Collection of Ancient Hindu Hymns, constitut-
ing the Fifth to Eighth Ashtakaa, or books of the Rig- Veda, the oldest
Authority for the Religious and Social Institutions of the Hindus. Translated
from the Original Sanskrit by the late Horace Hayman Wilson, M.A.,
F.R.S., etc. Edited by B. B. Cowell, M.A., Principal of the Calcutta
Sanskrit College. Vol. IV., Svo., pp. 214, cloth. 14«.
A few copies of Vols, IL and III, still left, [ Fols. V» and VL in the Fress,


28 Linguistic Publications of 7'rubner Sf Co.,

Sacred Books (The) of the East. Translated by various Oriental

Scholars, and Edited by F. Max Miiller.
Vol. I. The Upanishads. Translated by F. Max MUUer. Part I. The KhSn-

dogya-Upanisbad. The Talavak^lra-Upanishad. The Aitareya-Aranyaka.

The Kaushitaki-Br^hmana-Upanishad and the V^gasaQsji-Sanihitd.-Upaiii8had.

Post Svo. cloth, pp. xii. and S20. lOs, 6d,
Vol. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught in the Schools of Apastamba,

Gantama, Yasishtha, and Baudhayana. Translated by Georg Biihler. Part I.

Apastamba and Gautama. Post 8yo. cloth, pp. Ix. and 312. 1879. lOs, 6d»
Vol. III. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Confucianism. Translated

by James Leg^e. Part I. The Shii King. The Religious Portions of the Shih

King The Hsi^o King. Post Svo. cloth, pp. xxxii. and 492. 1879. I2s. e<L

Schlag^tweit. — Bitddhism in Tibet. Illustrated by Literary Docu-
ments and Objects of Religious Worship. With an Account of the Buddhist
Systems preceding it in India. By Bmil Schlaointweit, LL.D. With a
Folio Atlas of 20 Plates, and 20 Tables of Native Prints in the Text. Royal
8vo., pp. xxiv. and 404. £2 2s.

Sherring. — The Hindoo Pilgrims. By the Rev. M. A. SKEBBiNe^

Fcap. Svo. cloth, pp. vi. and 125. 5s.

Singh. — Sakhee Book ; or, the Description of Gooroo Gobind Singh's
Religion and Doctrines, translated from Gooroo Mukhi into Hindi, aad after-
wards into English. By Sirdar Attar Singh, Chief of Bhadour. With the
Author's photograph. Svo. pp. xviii. and 205. Benares, 1873. 15«.

Syed Ahmad. — A Series of Essays on the Life of Mohammed, and

Subjects subsidiary thereto. By Sted Ahmad Khan Bahador, C.S.I., Author
of the " Mohammedan Commentary on the Holy Bible/' Honorary Member of
the Royal Asiatic Society, and Life Honorary Secretary to the AUygurh Scien-
tific Society. Svo. pp. 532, with 4 Genealogical Tables, 2 Maps, and a Coloured
Plate, handsomely bound in cloth. £i lOs.

Thomas. — Jainism ; or, The Eurly Faith of Asoka. With Illustrations
of the Ancient Religions of the East, from the Pantheon of the Indo-Scythians.
To which is added a Notice on Bactrian Coins and Indian Dates. By Edwab,d
Thomas, F.R.S. Svo. pp. viii., 24 and 82. With two Autotype Plates and
Woodcuts. 7s. 6d.

Tiele. — Outlines op the HisTosr of Religion to the Spread of the

Universal Religions. By C. P. Tiele, Dr. Theol. Professor of the History of
Religions in the University of Leiden. Translated from the Dutch by J.
EsTLiN Carpenter, M.A. Post Svo. cloth, pp. xix. and 249. 7s. 6rf.
Vishnu-Purana (The) ; a System of Hindu Mythology and Tradition.

Translated from the original Sanskrit, and Illustrated hy Notes derived chiefly
from other Pur§,na8. By the late H. H. Wilson, M.A., F.R.S., Boden Pro-
fessor of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford, etc., etc. Edited by Fitzedward
Hall. In 6 vols. Svo. Vol. I. pp. cxl. and 300 : Vol. II. pp. 343 ; Vol. III.,
pp.348; Vol. IV. pp. 346, cloth; VoL V.Part I. pp. 392, cloth. lOs. 6rf. each.
Vol. v., Part 2, containing the Index, compiled by Fitzedward HalL Svo. cloth,
pp. 268. I2s.

Wake. — The Evolution op Moealitt. Being a History of the
Development of Moral Culture. By C. Staniland "Wake, author of
** Chapters on Man," etc. Two vols. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 506, xii. and 474.
2U.

WHson. — Works of the late Horace Hayman Wilson, M.A., F.R.S.,

Member of the Royal Asiatic Societies of Calcutta and Paris, and of the Oriental
Soc. of Germany, etc., and Boden Prof, of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford,
Vols I. and II. Essays and Lbctores chiefly on the Religion of the Hindus,
by the late H. H. Wilson, M.A., F.R.S., etc. Collected and edited by Dr.
Reinhold Rost. 2 vols, cloth, pp. ziii. and 399, vi. and 416/ 21«.


67 and 59, Ludgate Hill^ London, E,C. 29

COMPAEATIVE PHILOLOGY.

POLYGLOTS.

Beames. — Outlines op Indian Philology. "With a Map, showing the
Distribution of the Indian Languages. BjtJohn Bbambs. Second enlarged and
revised edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 96. 6s,

Beames. — A Comparative Geammar of the Modern Aryan Languages

OF India (to wit), Hindi, Panjabi, Sindhi, Qujarati, Marathi, Uriya, and

Bengali. By John Beames, Bengal C.S., M.K.A.S., &c.
Vol. I. On Sounds. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi and 360. \6s.
Vol. II. The Noun and the Pronoun. 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 348. 16«.
Vol III. The Verb. 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 316. 16*.

Bellows. — English Outline Vocabulary, for the use of Students of the
Chinese, Japanese, and other Languages. Arranged by John Bellows. With
Notes on the writing of Chinese with Roman Letters. By Professor Summers,
King's College, London. Crown 8vo., pp. 6 and 368, cloth. 6«.

Bellows. — Outline Diction ary,por the use op Missionaries, Explorers,
and Students of Language. By Max MUller, M.A.,Taylorian Professor in the
University of Oxford. With an Introduction on the proper use of the ordinary
English Alphabet in transcribing Foreign Languages. The Vocabulary compiled
by John Bellows. Crown 8vo. Limp morocco, pp. xxxi. and 368. 7*. Gd.

Caldwell. — A Comparative Grammar of the Drayidian, or South-
Indian Family of Languages. By the Rev. R. Caldwell, LL.D. A
Second, corrected, and enlarged Edition. Demy 8vo. pp. 805. 1875. 285.

Calligaris. — Le Compagnon de Tous, ou Dictionnaire Polyglotte.

ParleColonel Louis Callig a iiis, Grand Officier, etc. (French — Latin — Italian —
Spanish — Portuguese — German — Knglish — Modern Greek — Arabic — Turkish.)
2 vols. 4to., pp. 1157 and 746. Turin. £4 4«.

Campbell. — Specimens op the Languages of India, including Tribes

of Bengal, the Central Provinces, and the Eastern Frontier, By Sir G.
Campbell, M. P. Folio, paper, pp. 308. 1874. £1 Us. 6d.

Clarke. — Researches in Pre- historic and Proto-historic Compara-
tive Philology, Mythology, and Archaeology, in connexion with the
Origin of Culture in America and the Accad or Sumerian Families. By Hyde
Clark-E. Demy 8vo. sewed, pp. xi. and 74. 1875. 2«. 6d.

Cust. — A Sketch of the Modern Languages op the East Indies.
Accompanied by Two Language Maps. By R. Cust. Post 8vo. pp. xii. and
198, cloth. 12».

Douse. — Grimm's Law; A Study: or. Hints towards an Explanation
of the so-called *' Lautyerschiebung." To which are added some Remarks on
the Primitive Indo-European K, and several Appendices. By T. Le Marchant
Douse. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 230. 10*. 6rf.

Dwight. — Modern Philology : Its Discovery, History, and Influence.
New edition, with Maps, Tabular Views, and an Index. By Benjamin W.
DwiOHT. In two vols. cr. 8vo. cloth. First series, pp. 360 ; second series,
pp. xi. and 554. £l.

EdMns. — China's Place in Philology. An Attempt to show that the

Languages of Europe and Asia have a Common Origin. By the Rev. Joseph
Edkins. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xxiii. and 403. 10s. 6d.

Ellis. — Etruscan Numerals. By Robert Ellis, JB.D. 8vo. sewed,

pp. 52. 2s. 6d.

Ellis. — The Asiatic Apfinities of the Old Italians. By Robert

Ellis, B.D., Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, and author of '^Ancient
Routes between Italy and Gaul." Crown 8vo. pp. iv. 156, cloth. 1870. 5s.
Ellis. — On Numerals, as Signs of Primeval Unity among Mankind.
By Robert Ellis, B.D., Late Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge.
Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. yiii. and 94. 3«. 6d,


30


Linguistic Publications of Trubner ^ Co.^


Ellis. — Perutia Scythica. The Quichua Language of Peru : its

deriyation from Central Asia with the American languages in general, and with
the Turanian and Iberian languages of the Old World, including the Basque,
the Lycian, and the Pre-Aryan language of Etruria. By Robeut £i.lis, B.J}»
8vo. cloth, pp. zii. and 219. 1875. 6«.

English and Welsh Languages. — The Influence op the English and

Welsh Languages upon each other, exhibited in the Vocabularies of the two
Tongues. Intended to suggest the imprortance to Philologers, Antiquaries,
Ethnographers, and others, of giving due attention to the Celtic Branch of the
Indo-Germanic Family of Languages. Square, pp. 30, sewed. 1869. 1«.

Oranunatography. — A Manual of Refeeence to the Alphabets of

Ancient and Modern Languages. Based on the German Compilation of F.

Ballhorn. Royal SVo. pp. 80, cloth, la. 6d.

The " Grammatography" is oflFered to the public as a compendious introduction to the reading
of the most important ancient and modem languages. Simple in its design, U will be consulted
-with advantage by the philological student, the amateur ling^uat, the bookseller, the corrector of
the press, and the diligent compositor.

AI^BAS^BtlGAX# INDEX.


Afghan (or Pushto).

Amharic.

Anglo-Saxon.

Arabic.

Arabic Ligatures.

Aramaic.

Archaic Characters.

Armenian.

Assyiian Cuneiform.

Bengali.

Bohemian (Czechian).

Bfigfs.

Burmese.


Czechian(or Bohemian). Hebrew (current hand). Polish.


Danish.

Demotic.

Estrangelo.

Ethiopic.

Etruscan.

Georgian.

German.

GlagolitiC.

Gothic.

Greek.

Greek Ligatures.


Hebrew (JudsBO-Ger- Pushto (or Afghan).
Hungarian. [man). Romaic(Modem Greek
lUyrian. Russian.

Irish. "Runes.

Italian (Old). Samaritan.

Japanese. Sanscrit.

Javanese. Servian.

Lettish. Slavonic (Old).

Mantsho. Sorbian (or Wendish).

Median Cuneiform. Swedish.
Modem Greek (Romaic) Syriac.
Mongolian. Tamil.


Greek (Archaic).
Canarese (or Camataca). Gujerati(orGuzzeratte). Numidian. Telugn.

Chinese. Hieratic. OldSlavonic(orCyrillic). Tibetan


Palmyrenian.

Persian.

Persian Cuneiform.

Phoenician.


Turkish.

Wallachian.

Wendish for Serbian).

Zend.


Coptic. Hieroglyphics.

Croato-Glagolitic. Hebrew.

Cuftc. Hebrew (Archaic).

Crillic (or Old Slavonic). Hebrew (Rabbinical).

Grey. — Handbook of Afeican, Austealian, and Polynesian Phi-
lology, as represented in the Library of His Excellency Sir George Grey,
K.C.B., Her Majesty's High Commissioner of the Cape Colony. Classed,
Annotated, and Edited by Sir George Grey and Dr. H. I. Bleek.

Vol. I. Part 1.— South Africa. 8vo. pp. 186. 20s.

Vol. I. Part 2. — Africa (North of the Tropic of Capricorn). Svo. pp. 70. 4».

Vol. I. Part 3.— Madagascar. Svo. pp. 24. 2s.

Vol. II. Part 1. — Australia. Svo. pp. iv. and 44. 3a.

Vol. II. Part 2. — Papuan Languages of the Loyalty Islands and New Hebrides, compris-
ing those of the Islands of Nengone, Lifu, Aneitum, Tana, and
others. Svo. p. 12. Is.

Vol. II. Part 3.— Fiji Islands and Rotuma (with Supplement to Part II., Papuan Lan-
guages, and Part I., Australia). Svo. nn. 34. 2s.

Vol. II. Part 4.— New Zealand, the Chatham Islands, and Auckland Islands. Svo. pp.

76. 7s.

Vol. II. Part 4 {continuation). — Polynesia and Borneo. Svo. pp. 77-154. 7a,

Vol. III. Part 1.— Manuscripts and Incunables. Svo. pp. viii. and 24. 2j.

Vol. IV. Part 1.— Early Printed Books. England. Svo. pp. vi. and 266. I2a.

Oubematis. — Zoological Mythology; or, the Legends of Animals.

By Angelo de Gubebnatis, Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Literature
in the Instituto di Studii Superior! e di Perfezionamento at Florence, etc. la
2 vols. Svo. pp. xxxvi. and 432, vii. and 442. 28*.
Hunter. — A Comparative Dictionary of the Non- Aryan Languages of
India and High Asia. With a Dissertation, Political and Linguistic, on the
Aboriginal Races. By W. W. Hunter, B A., M.R.A.S., Hon. Fell. EthnoL
Soc, Author of the "Annals of Rural Bengal," of H.M.'s Civil Seryice.
Being a Lexicon of 144 Languages, illustrating Turanian Speech. Compiled
from the Hodgson Lists, Government Archives, and Original MSS., arranged
with Prefaces and Indices in English, French, German, Russian, and Latin.
Large 4to. cloth, toned paper, pp. 230. 1869. 42«.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 31

Kilgonr. — The Hebeew oe Iberian B,a.ce, including the Pelasgians,

the Pheniciaasy the Jews, the Britisb, and others. By Henkt Kilgoub. 8vo.
sewed, pp. 76. 1872. 2«. 6rf.

March. — A Compara^tiye Grammar of the Anglo-Saxon Language ;

in which its forms are illustrated by those of the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin,
Gothic, Old Saxon, Old Friesic, Old Norse, and Old High-German. By
Francis A. Mabch, LL.D. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xi. and 253. 1877. 10».

Notley. — A Comparative Grammar of the French, Italian, Spanish,
and Portuguese Languages. By Edwin A. Notlet. Crown oblong 8vo.
cloth, pp. XV. and 396. 7«. ^d,

Oppert (G. ) — On the Classification of Languages. A Contribution to
Comparative Philology. 8vo. pp vL and 146. 1879. 6».

Oriental Congress. — Report of the Proceedings of the Second Interna-
^ tional Congress of ( )rientalists held in London, 1 874. Roy. 8vo. paper, pp. 76. 5*.

Oriental Congress — Transactions of the Second Session op the

International Congress op Orientalists, held in London in September,
1874. Edited by Robert K. Boi^glas, Honorary Secretary. Demy 8vo.
cloth, pp. viii. and 456. 21«.

Fezzi. — Aryan Philology, according to the most recent Researches
(Glottologia Aria Recentissima), Remarks Historical and Critical. By
DoMENico Pezzi, Membro della Facolta de Filosofta e lettere della R.
Universit. di Torino. Translated by E. S. Roberts, M.A., Fellow and Tutor
of Gonville and Caius College. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 199. 6*.

Sayce. — An Assyrian Grammar for Comparative Purposes. By A. H.
Sayce, M.A. 12mo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 188. 1872. 7*. 6rf.

Sayce. — The Principles of Comparative Philology. By A. H.
Sayce, Fellow and Tutor of Queen's College, Oxford. Second Edition. Cr.
8vo. cl., pp. xxxii. and 416. 10«. 6rf.

Schleicher. — Compendium op the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-
European, Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin Languages. By August
Schleicher. Translated from the Third German Edition by Herbert
Bend ALL, B.A., Chr. Coll. Camb. Part I. Grammar. 8vo. cloth, pp. 184.
7^. 6J.
Part II. Morphology. 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 104. 6«.

Tmmpp. — Grammar of the P^sto, or Xanguage of the Afghans, com-
pared with the Iranian and North-Indian Idioms. By Dr. Ernest Trumfp.
8vo. sewed, pp. xvi. and 412. 21«.

Weber. — The History of Indian Literature. By Albrecht Weber.

Translated from the German by John Mann, M.A., and Dr. Theodor Zachariae,
with the Author's sanction. PostSvo. cloth, pp. xxv. and 360. 1878. 18«.

Wedgwood. — On the Origin of Language. By Hensleigh Wedgwood,

late Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge. Fcap. 8vo. pp. 172, cloth. 3«. 6rf.

Whitney. — Language and its Study, with especial reference to the
Indo-European Family of Languages. Seven Lectures by W. D. Whitney,
Professor of Sanskrit, and Instructor in Modern Languages in Yale College.
Edited with Introduction, Notes, Tables of Declension and Conjugation,
Grimm's Law with Illustration, and an Index, by the Bev. R. Morris, M.A.,

LL.D. Cr. 8vo. cl., pp. xxii. and 318. 5«.

Whitney. — Language and the Study of Language : Twelve Lectures
on the Principles of Linguistic Science. By W. D. Whitney. Third Edition,
augmented by an Analysis. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 504. 10«. 6rf.

Whitney. — Oriental and Linguistic Studies. By William Dwight

Whitney, Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology in Yale College.
First Series. The Veda; the Avesta ; the Science of Language. Cr. 8vo. cl.,
pp. X. and 418. 12«.
Second Series. — The East and West — Religion and Mythology — Orthography and
Phonology — Hindti Astronomy. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 446. 12«.


:-■ --. - - *t


-


•^"K.


«


•


u


—


■^—


.L


l_


♦«,


'f •


.


1^.


1 ..... . ■


n- . - y.i


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E. C. 33

Grey. — ^Handbook of African, Austealian, and Polynesian Phi-
lology, as represented in the Library of His Excellency Sir George Grey,
K.C.B., Her Majesty's High Commissioner of the Cape Colony. Classed,
Annotated, and Edited by Sir Geobob Grey and Br. H. 1. Blbek.

Vol. I. Part 1.— South Africa. 8vo. pp. 186. 20».

"Vol. I. Part 2.— Africa (North of the Tropic of Capricorn). Svo. pp. 70. 4«.

Vol. I. Part 3.— Madagascar. Svo. pp. 24. 5».

Vol. II. Part I.— Australia. Svo. pp. iv. and 44.

Vol. II. Part 2. — Papuan Languages of the Loyalty Islands and New Hehrides, compris-
ing those of the Islands of Nengone, Lifn, Aneitum, Tana, and
others. Svo. pp. 12. la.

Vol. II. Part. 8.— Fiji Islands and Rotutna (with Supplement to Part II., Papuan Lan-
guages, and Part I., Australia). Svo. pp. 34. 2«.

Vol. II. Part 4.— New Zealand, the Chatham Islands, and Auckland Islands. Svo. pp.

76. Is.

Vol. II. Part 4 (continuation).— Polynesia and Borneo. Svo. pp. 77-154. 7».

Vol. III. Part 1. — ^Manuscripts and Inounables. Svo. pp. viii. and 24. 2s.

Vol. IV. Part 1.— Early Printed Books. England. Svo. pp. vi. and 266. 125.

Grout. — The Isizulu : a Grammar of the Zulu Language ; accompanied
with an Historical Introduction, also with an Appendix. By Rcy. Lewis Grout.
Svo. pp. lii. and 432, cloth. 21«.

Steere. — Shokt Specimens of the Yocabtjlaeies of Theeb Un-
published African Languages (Gindo, Zaramo, and Angazidja). Collected
by Edward Steere, LL.D. l2mo. pp. 20. 6^.

Steere. — Collections foe a Handbook of the Ntamwezi Language,
as spoken at Unyanyembe. By Edward Steers, LL.D. Fcap. cloth, pp. 100.

Tindall. — A Geammae and Yocabulaey of the Namaqua-Hottentot

Language. By Henry Tindall, Wesleyan Missionary. Svo. pp. 124, sewed. 6s.


AMERICAN LANGUAGES.
Byington. — Geammae of the Choctaw Language. By the Eev. Ctbus

Btington. Edited from the Original MSS. in Library of the American
Philosophical Society, by D. G. Brinton, M.D. Gr. Svo. sewed, pp. 56. Is. 6d,

Ellis. — Peeuvia Sctthica. The Quichua Language of Peru : its
derivation from Central Asia with the American languages in general, and with
the Turanian and Iberian languages of the Old World, incluoing the Basque,
the Lycian, and the Pre- Aryan language of Etruria. By Robert Ellis, B.B.
Svo. cloth, pp. xii. and 219. 1875. 6s.

Howse. — A Geammae op the Ceee Language. "With which is com-
bined an analysis of the Chippeway Dialect. By Joseph Howse, Esq.,
F.R.G.S. 8 vo. pp. XX. and 324, cloth. 7s. 6d.

Markham. — Ollanta: A Deama in the Quichua Language. Text,

Translation, and Introduction, By Clements R. Markham, F.R.G.S. Crown
8vo., pp. 128, cloth. 78. 6d.

Matthews. — Ethnology a.nd Philology of the Hidatsa Indians.
By Washington Matthews, Assistant Surgeon, U.S. Army. 8yo. cloth,
£1 11«. 6d.
Contents :— Ethnography, Philology, Grammar, Dictionary, and English-Hidatsa Tocabulary.

Nodal. — Los Yinculos de Ollanta t Cusi-Kcutlloe. Deama en

Quichua. Obra Compilada y Espurgada con la Version Castellana al Frente
de su Teste por el Dr. Jose Fernandez Nodal, Abogado de los Tribunales
de Justicia de la Rep^blica del Perd. Bajo los Auspicios de la Redentora
Sociedad de Fii&ntropos para Mejoror la Suerte de los Aborijenes Peruanos.
Roy. Svo. bds. pp. 70. 1874. 7s. 6d.

3


34 Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co.,

Nodal. — Elementos de GeamItica Quichtja 6 Idioma de los Yncas.

fiajo los Auspicios de la Redentora, Sociedad de Fil&ntropos para mejorar la
suerte de los Aborijenes Peruanos. Per el Dr. Jose Fernandez Nodal,
Abogado de los Tribunales de Justicia de la Eept!tblica del PerQ. Royal 8vo.
cloth, pp. xvi. and 441. Appendix, pp. 9. £1 Is,

OUanta: A Dbama in the Quichua Language. See under Mabkham
and under Nodal.

Fimentel. — Cuadeo desceiptivo t compaeatito de las Lenguas

IndIoenas de Mexico, o Tratado de Filologia Mexicana. Par Fbancisco
PiMENTEL. 2 Edicion unica completa. 3 Yolsume Svo. Mexico, 1875.
£2 28.

Thomas. — The Theoet and Peactice op Ceeole Gbammae. By J. J-

Thomas. Port of Spain (Trinidad), 1S69. 1 vol. 8yo. bds. pp. viii. and 135. 12<*


ANGLO-SAXON.

March. — A Compaeative Geammae op the Anglo-Saxon Language ;
in which its forms are illustrated by those of the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, Gothic,
Old Saxon, Old Friesic, Old Norse, and Old High-German. By Fbancis A.
March, LL.B. Demy 8yo. cloth, pp. xi. and 253. 1877. lOs.

£ask. — A Geammae op the Anglo-Saxon Tongue. From the Danish

of Erasmus Rask, Professor of Literary History in» and Librarian to, the
University of Copenhagen, etc. By Benjamin Thorpe. Second edition,
corrected and improved. ISmo. pp. 200, cloth. Ss. 6d.

Wright. — Anglo- IS AXON and Old- English Vocabulaeees, Illustrating
the Condition and Manners of our Forefathers, as well as the History of the
Forms of Elementary Education, and of the Languages spoken in this Island
from the Tenth Century to the Fifteenth. Edited by Thomas Wright, Esq.,
M.A., F.S.A., etc. Second Edition, edited, collated, and corrected by Eichajld
Wijlckeb. [In the press,

ARABIC.
Ahlwardt. — The DivIns op the Six Ancient Aeabic Poets, Ennabiga,

'Antara, Tarafa, Zuhair, 'Algama, and Imruolgais ; chiefly according to the
MSS. of Paris, Gotha, and Ley den, and the collection of their Fragments : with
a complete list of the various readings of the Text. Edited by W. Ahlwardt,
Svo. pp. XXX. 340, sewed. 1870. 12*.

Alif Lallat wa Lailat. — The Aeabian Wights. 4 vols. 4to. pp. 495,

493,442, 434. Cairo, a.h. 1279 (1862). £S 3s.
This celebrated Edition of the Arabian Nights is now, for the first time, offered at a price
which makes it accessible to Scholars of limited means.

Arabic and Persian Books (A Gatalogne of). Printed in the East.

Constantly for sale by Trubner and Co., 57 and 69, Ludgate Hill, London.
1 6mo. pp. 46, sewed. Is.

Athar-nl- Adhar — Teaces of Centuetes ; or, Geographical and Historical

Arabic Dictionary, by Selim Khuri and Selim Sh-hade. Geographical
Parts I. to IV., Historical Parts I. and II. 4to. pp. 788 and 384. Price
78. 6d. each part. [/n course of publication.

Butrus-al-Bustany.— «^jU;;!l |^lj c-^lu^ An Arabic Encylopsedia

of Universal Knowledge, by fiuTRUs-AL-BuBTANY, the celebrated compiler
of Mohit ul Mohit {\su^\ \a^^), and Katr el Mohtt (ixj^l U3).

This work will be completed in from 12 to 15 Vols., of which Vols. I. to III.
arp ready, Vol. I. contains letter \ to C— >1 ; Vol. II. C— >| to jl; Vol. III.
j] to cl. Small folio, cloth, pp. 800 each. £1 Us. 6d. per Vol.


67 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E, C. 35

Cotton. — Arabic Primee. Consisting of 180 Short Sentences contain-
ing 30 Primary Words prepared according to the Vocal System of Studying
Language. By General Sib Arthuk Cotton, K.C.S.I. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp.
38. 2«.

Hassoun. — The Diwan of Hatim Tai. An Old Arabic Poet of the
Sixth Century of the Christian Era. Edited by R. Hassoun. With Illustra-
tions. 4to. pp. 43. 3«. 6<f.

Jami, Mnlla. — SalamIn TJ Absai». An Allegorical Romance ; being
one of the Seven Poems entitled the Haft Aurang of Mulla JamT, now first
edited from the Collation of Eight Manuseripts in the Library of the India
House, and in private collections, with various readings, by Forbes
Falconer, M.A., M.R.A.S. 4to. cloth, pp. 92. 1850. 7«. 6U

Eoran (The). Arabic text, lithographed in Oudh, a.h. 1284 (1867).

16mo. pp. 942. 9«r

Koran (The) ; commonly called The Alcoran of Mohammed.
Translated into English immediately from the original Arabic. By George
Sale, Gent. To wmch is prefixed the Life of Mohammed. Crown 8vo. cloth,
pp. 472. 7a.

Koran. — Exteacts feom tke Coean in the Original, with English
Eendering. Compiled by Sir William Muir, K.C.S.I., LL.D., Author of
the *' Life of Mahomet/' Crown 8vo. pp. 58^, cloth. 2«. 6^. (Nearly ready.)

Eu-ran (Selections from the). — Translated by the late Edwaed

"William Lane, Author of an *' Arabic-English Lexicon," etc. A New
Edition, Eevised and Enlarged. With an Introduction on the History and
Development of Islam, especially with reference to India. By Stanley Lane
Poolb. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. cxii. and 176^ 1879. 9*.

Leitner. — Inteoduction to a Philosophical Geammab of Aeabic.

Being an Attempt to Discover a Few Simple Principles in Arabic Grammar.
By G. W. Lbitnbr. 8vo^ sewed, pp. 52^ Lahore. 4«.

Morley. — A Desceiptive CATALoeuE of the Histoeical ISfTANuscEiPTS

in the Arabic and Persian Languages preserved in the Library of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. By William H. Morlbt,
M.R.A.S. 8vo. pp. viii. and ItiO, sewed. London^ 1854. 2^. ^d,

Mnhammed. — The Life of !Mi7HAiiM:tei). Based on Muhammed Ibn
Ishak. By Abd El Malik Ibn Hisham. Edited by Dr. Ferdinand "WiisTEN-
feld. The Arabic Text. 8vo. pp. 1026, sewed. Price 21*. Introduction,
Notes, and Index in German. 8vo. pp. Ixxii. and 266, sewed. 7*. M, Each
part sold separately.
The text based on the Manuscripts of the Berlin, LeipRic, Gotha and Leyden Libraries, has

been carefully revised by the learned editor, and printed with the utmost exactness.

Newman. — ^A Handbook of Modeen Aeabic, consisting of a Practical

Grammar, with numerous Examples, Dialogues, and Newspaper Extracts, in a
European Type. By F. W. Newman, Emeritus Professor of University
College, London ; formerly Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford. Post Bvo. pp.
XX. and 192, cloth. London, 1866. 6$.

Newman. — A Diction aet of Mobebn Aeabic — 1. Anglo- Arabic

Dictionary. 2. Anglo- Arabic Vocabulary. 3. Arabo-Englisli Dictionary. By
F. W. Newman, Emeritus Professor of University College, London. In 2
vols, crown 8vo., pp. xvi. and 376 — 464, cloth. £'1 1*.

Palmer. — The Song of the Eeed; and other Pieces. By E. H.

Palmer, M. A., Cambridge. Crown 8vo. pp. 208, handsomely bound in cloth. 5«.
Among the Contents will be found translations from Hafiz, from Omer el Kheiyftm, and
from other Persian as well as Arabic poets.

Bogers. — Notice on the Dinaes of the Abbasside Dynasty. By
Edward Thomas Rogers, late H.M. Consul, Cairo. 8vo. pp. 44, with a
Map and four Autotype Plates. 5«.


36 . Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co.,

Sohemeil. — El Mubtakek; or, First Born. (In Arabic, printed at
Bey rout). Containing Five Comedies, called Comedies of Fiction, on Hopes
and Judgments, in Twenty-six Poems of 1092 Verses, showing the Seven Stages
of Life, from man*8 conception unto his death and burial. By Emin Ibrahim
Sohemeil. In one volume, 4to. pp. 166, sewed. 1870. 5«.

Syed Ahmad. — A Series of Essays on thk Life op Mohammed, and
Subjects subsidiary thereto. By Syed Ahmad Khan Bahadob, C.S.I., Author of
the ** Mohammedan Commentary on the Holy Bible,*' Honorary Member of the
Royal Asiatic Society, and Life Honorary Secretary to the Allygurb Scientific
Society. 8vo. pp. 632, with 4 Genealogical Tables, 2 Maps, and a Coloured
Plate, handsomely bound in cloth. £1 10s.


ASSAMESE.

Bronson. — ^A Dictionary in Assamese and English. Compiled by
M. Bronson, American Baptist Missionary. Svo. calf, pp. viii. and 609. £2 2«.


ASSYRIAN (Cuneiform, Accad, Babylonian).

Budge. — AssYEiAN Texts, Selected and Arranged, with Philological
Notes. By Ernest A. Budge, M.R.A.S., Assyrian Exhibitioner, Christ's
College, Cambridge. Crown 4to. cloth. (New Volume of the Archaic Classics.)
(Nearly ready.)

Budge. — The History of Esaehaddon (Son of Sennacherib), King of
Assyria, B.C. 681-668. Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions upon
Cyhnders and Tablets in the British Museum Collection. Together with a
Grammatical Analysis of each Word, Explanations of the Ideographs by Ex-
tracts from the Bi- Lingual Syllabaries, and Eponyms, etc. By Ernest A.
Budge, M.R.A.S., etc. (In preparation).

Catalogue (A), of leading Books on Egypt and Egyptology, and on
Assyria and Assyriology, to be had at the affixed prices, of Triilmer and Co. pp.
40. 1880. U.

Clarke. — Researches in Pre-histoeig and Proto-historic Compaea-
TivE Philology, Mythology, and Abxjhjeology, in connexion with the
Origin of Culture in America and the Accad or Sumerian Families. By Htdb
Clarke. Demy 8vo. sewed, pp. xi. and 74. 1875. 2». Qd.

Cooper (W. R.) — An Archaic Dictionary, Biographical, Historical and

Mythological ; from the Egyptian and Etruscan Monuments, and Papyri.

London, 1876. 8vo. cloth. 16«.
Hincks. — Specimen Chapters of an Assyrian Geammae. By the

late Rev. E. Hinoks, D.D., Hon. M.R.A.S. 8vo., sewed, pp. 44. Is.
Lenormant (F.) — Chaldean Magic; its Origin and Development.

1 ranslated from the French. With considerable Additions by the Author

London, 1877. 8vo. pp. 440. 12*.

Luzzatto. — Grammar of the Biblical Chaldaic Language and the
Talmud Babylonical Idioms, By S. D. Luzzatto. Translated from the
Italian by J. S. Goldammer. Cr. 8vo. cl., pp. 122. 7*. 6ef.

Eawlinson. — Notes on the Early Histoet of Babylonia. By

Colonel Rawlinson, C.B. 8vo. sd., pp. 48. 1*.
Bawlinson. — A Commentaey on the Cuneiform Inscbiptions of
Babylonia and Assyria, including Readings of the Inscription on the Nimrud
Obelisk, and Brief Notice of the Ancient Kings of Nineveh and Babylon,
by Major H. C. Rawlinson. 8vo. pp. 84, sewied. London, 1850. 2s. 6<L

Bawlinson. — Inscription of Tiglath Pilesee I., King of Assyria,
B.C. 1150, as translated by Sir H. Rawlinson, Fox Talbot, Esq., Dr. Hincks,
and Dr. Oppebt. Published by the Royal Asiatic Society. 8yo. sd., pp. 74. 2s.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C, 37

Bawlinson. — Outlines of Assyrian Histort, from the Inscriptions of

Nineveh. By Lieut. Col. Rawlinson, C.B. , followed by some Remarks by
A. H. Latakd, Esq., D.C.L. 8vo., pp. xliv., sewed. London, 1852. 1«.

Becords of the Past : being English Translations of the Assyrian and
the Egyptian Monuments. Published under the sanction of the Society of
Biblical Archaeology. Edited by S. Birch. Vols. 1 to 9. 1874 to 1879.
£1 1 U. 6rf. or 3». 6rf. each vol.

The Same. Vol. I. Assyrian Texts, 1. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3*. 6rf.

C!oNTENTs: {Second Edition.) Inscription of Rimmon-Nirari; Monolith Inscription of
Bamas-Rimmon ; Babylonian Exorcisms ; Private Will of Sennacherib ; Assyrian Private
Contract Tablets ; Assjrrian Astronomical Tablets ; Assyrian Calendar ; Tables of Assyrian
' Weights and Measures. By Rev. A. H. Sayce, M. A.— Inscription of Khammurabi; BeU
lino's Cylinder of Sennacherib ; Taylor's Cylinder of Sennacherib ; Legend of the Descent
of Ishtar. By H. Fox Talbot, F.R.8.— Annals of Assnrbanipal (Cylinder A). By George
Smith.— Behistun Inscription of Darius. By Sir Henry Rawlinson, K.C.B., D.C.L.— Lists
of further Texts, Assyrian and Egyptian. Selected by George Smith and P. Le Page
Renouf.

— — The Same. VoL III. Assyrian Texts, 2. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3*. 6rf.

Contents: Early History of Babylonia. By (George Smith — Tablet of Ancient Accadian
Laws ; Synchronous History of Assyria and Babylonia ; Kurkh Inscription of Shalmaneser :
An Accadian Liturgy ; Babylonian Charms. By Rev. A. H. Sayce, M.A.— Inscription of
Assur-nasir-pal. By Rev. J. M. Rodwell, M.A. — Inscription of Esarhaddon; Second
Inscription of Esarhaddon ; Sacred Assyrian Poetry. By H. F. Talbot, F.R.S.^List of
further Texts.

The Same. Vol. V. Assyrian Texts, 3. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3«. ^d.


Contents : Legend of the infancy of Sargina I. ; Inscription of Nabonidus. Inscription
of Darius at Nakshi-Rustam ; War of the Seven Evil Spirits against Heaven. By B. F.
Talbot, F.R.S.— Inscription of Tiglath-Pileser I. By Sir Henry Rawlinson, K.C.B.,D.C.L.,
etc. Black Obelisk Inscription of Shalmaneser II. ; Accadian Hymn to Istar ; Tables
of Omens. By Rev. A. H. Sayee,- M.A. — Inscription of Tiglath-Pileser II. ; Inscription of
Nebuchadnezzar; Inscription of Nefiglissar. By Rev. J. M. Rodwell, M.A. —Early
History of Babylonia, Part II. By George Smith. — List of further Texts.

The Same. Vol.- VII. Assyrian Texts, 4. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3». 6<f.


Contents: Inscription of Agu-kak-rimi; Legend of the Tower of Babel. By W. St.
Chad Boscawen.— Standard Inscription of Ashur-akh-bal ; Monolith of Ashur-akh>bal ; A
Prayer and a Vision ; Senkereh Inscription of Nebuchadnezzar ; Birs-Nimrud Inscription
of Nebuchadnezzar) The Revolt in Heaven. By H. Fox Talbot, F.R.S.— Annals of Sargon;
Busian Texts ; Median Version of the Behistun Inscription ; Three Assyrian Deeds. By
Dr. Julius Oppert. Bull Inscription of Sennacherib. By Rev. J. M. Rodwell, M.A. —
Ancient Babylonian Moral and Political Precepts; Accadian Penitential Psalm; Baby-
lonian Saints' Calendar. By Rev. A. H^ Sayce, M.A. — Eleventh Tablet of the Izdubar
Legends. By the late George Smith.-^Lists of further Texts.

The Same. Vol. IX. Assyrian Texts, 5. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3s. 6^.


Contents: Great Inscription in the Palace of Khorsabad; Inscriptions of the Persian
Monarchs : Inscription on the Sai^cophagtis of King Esmunazar. By Prof. Dr. Julius
Oppert. — The Bavian Inscription of Sennacherib. By Theophilus Goldridge Pinches— .
Inscription of Merodach Baladan III. By Rev. J. M. Rodwell, M.A. — Annals of Assnr-
banipal. By the late George Smith. — Babylonian Public Documents. By MM. Oppert and
Menant.— Chaldean Account of the Creation ; Ishtar and Izdubar^ The Fight between
Bel and the Dragon. By H. FoX Talbot, F.R.S. The Twelfth Izdubar Legend. By
William St. Chad Boscawen— Aceadian Poem on the Seven Evil Spirits; Fragment of an
Assyrian Prayer after a Bad Dream. By the Rev. A. H. Sayce.— Lists of further Texts.

The Same. Vol. XI. Assyrian Texts, 6. Crown 8vo. cloth 3*. Qtf.


Contents: Inscription of Rimmon-Nivari I. By Rev. A. H. Sayce.— Record of a
Hunting Expedition. By Rev. W. Houghton. — Inscription of Assur-izir-pal. By W.
Booth Finlay. Bull Inscription of Khorsabad. By Prof. Dr. Julius Oppert— Inscription
of the Harem of Khorsabad. By Prof. Dr. Julius Oppert. Texts on the Foundation-stone
of Khorsabad. By Prof. Dr. Julius Oppert.— Babylonian Legends found at Khorsabad.
By Prof. Dr. Julius Oppert. — Nebbi Yunus Inscription of Sennacherib. By Ernest A.
Budge.— Oracle of Istar of Arbela. By Theo. G. Pinches.— Report Tablets. By Theo. G*
Pinches.— Texts relating to the Fall of the Assyrian Empire. By Rev. A. H. Sayce. —
The Egibi Tablets. By rheo. G. Pinches.— The Defence of a Magistrate falsely accused.
By H. Fox Talbot, F.R.S. — The Latest Assyrian Inscription. By Prof. Dr. Julius
Oppert.— Ancient Babylonian Legend of the Creation. By Rev. A. H. Sayce.— The
Overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah. By Rev. A. H. Sayce.— Chaldean Hymns to the
Sun. By Fran9ois Lenormant.— Two Accadian. Hymns. By Rev. A. H. Sayce.— Assyrian
Incantations to Fire and Water. By Ernest A. Budge— Assyrian Tribute Lists. By
Rev. A. H. Sayce.— Assyrian Fragment on Geography. By. Rev. A. H. Sayce. Accadian
Proverbs and Songs. By Rev. A. H. Sayce.— Assyrian Fragments. By J. Hal^vy.—
The Moabite Stone. By C. D. Ginsburg, LL.D.


38 Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co.,

Eenan. — An Essay on the Age and ANTiaTnTT of the Book op

NABATHiBAN AGRICULTURE. To which is added an Inaugural Lecture on the
Position of the Shemitic Nations in the History of Civilization. By M. Ernest
Kenan, Membre de Tlnstitut. Crown Svo., pp. xvi. and 1.48, cloth. Ss. 6d,

Sayce. — An Assteian Geammar foe Compaeative Ptteposes. By

A. H. Sayce, M.A.. 12 mo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 188. 7s, 6d,

Sayce. — An Elementaet Gbammae and Reading Book of the Assyrian
Language, in the Cuneiform Character : containing the most complete Syllabary
yet extant, and which will serve also as a Vocabulary of both Accadian and
Assyrian. London, 1875. 4to. cloth, 9«.

Sayce. — Lecttjees upon the Assyrian Language and Syllabary.
London, 1877. Large 8vo. 9». 6d.

Sayce. -^Babylonian Liteeatuee. Lectures. London, 1877. Svo. 4«.

Smith (E.) — The Assyeian Epontm Canon; containing Translations
. of the Documents of the Comparative Chronology of the Assyrian and Jewish
Kingdoms, from the Death of Solomon to Nei)iichadnezzar. London, 1876.
8vo. 9*.


AUSTRALIAN LANGUAGES.

Grey. — Handbook op Afeican, Atjsteauan, and Polynesian Phi-
lology, as represented in the Library of His Ex.cellency Sir Greorge Grey,
K.C.B., Her Majesty's High Commissioner of the Cape Colony. Classed,
Annotated, and Edited by $ir George Gbbt and Dr. H. 1. Bleek.

Vol. I. Part 1.— South Africa. Svo. pp. 186. 20«.

Vol. I. Part 2. — Africa (North of the Tropic of Capricorn). Svo.pp. 70. 4a

Vol. I. Part 3.— Madagascar. Svo. pp. 24 la.

Vol. II. Part 1.— Australia. Svo. pp. iv. and 44. 3*.

Vol. II. Part 2.— Papuan Languages of t^e Loyalty ^[slands and New Hebrides, compris-
ing those o^ the Islands of Nengone, Lifu, Aneitum, Tana, and
others. Svo. pp. 12. la.

Vol. II. Part 3.— Fiji Islands and Eoturaa (with Supplement to Part II., Papuan Lan-
guages, and Part 1., Australia). Svo. pp. 34. 2a.

Vol. II. Part 4.— New Zealand, the Chatham Islands, and Auckland Islands. Svo. pp.

76. 7*.

Vol. II. Part 4 (tfOM^inua^ton).— Polynesia and Borneo, fivo. pp. 77-154. 7a.

VoL III. Part 1.— Manuscripts and Incwnables. Svo. pp. viiL and 24. 2a.

Vol. IV. Part 1.— Early Printed Books. England. Svo. pp. vi. and 366. I2a.

Bidley. — KImilaroi, and othee Australian Languages. By the
Rev. William Bidley, M.A. Second Edition. Revised and enlarged by the
Author; with Comparative Tables of Words from twenty Australian language',
and Songs, Traditions, Laws, and Customs of the Australian Race. Small 4to.,
cloth, pp. vi. and 172. 1877. 10a. 6d,


BENGALL

Tates. — A BevgIiI Gbammae. By the late Rev. W. Yates, D.D.
Reprinted, with improvements, from his Introduction to the Beng&li Language.
Edited by I. Wengek. Fcap. Svo. bds, pp. iv. and 160. Cdcutta, 1864. 3a. 6d.


BRAHOE.

Bellew. — From the Indus to the Tigris. A Narrative of a Journey
through the Countries of Balochistan, Afghanistan, Khorassan, and Iran, in
1872; together with a Synoptical Grammar and Vocabulary of the Brahoe
Language. By H. W. Bellbw, C.S.L, etc. Demy 8vo., cloth, lis.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hilly London, E^C. 39

BURMESE (AND SHAN).
Cashing (Eev. J. N.) — Gbammae of the Shan Language. Large

8vo. pp. xii. and 60. Rangoon, 1871. 9».

Hough's General Outlines op Geography (in Burmese). Re-written
and enlarged by Eev. Jas. A. Haswell. Large Svo. pp. 368. Rangoon,
1874. 9«.

Jndson. — ^A Dictionart, English and Burmese, Burmese and English.
By A. JuDSON. 2 toIs. 8vo. pp. iv. and 968, and viii. and 786. £3 3».

Sloan (W. H.) — A Practical Method with the Burmese Language.
Large 8vo. pp. 232. Rangoon, 1876. 12». ^d.


CHINESE.


Baldwin. — A Manual of the Foochow Dialect. By Rev. C. C.

Baldwin, of the American Board Mission. 8to. pp. Tiii.-256. 18«.

Beal. — The Buddhist Tbipitaka, as it is known in China and Japan.
A Catalogue and Compendious Report. By Samuel Beal, B.A. Folio, sewed,
pp. 117. 7«. 6rf.

Beal. — Texts from the Bu1)dhist Canon, commonly known as
Dharamapada. With accompanying Narratives. Translated from the Chinese
By S. Beal, B.A., Professor of Chinese, University College, London. Post
8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 176. 1878. 7a. 6<f.

Chahners. — The Speculations on Metaphysics, Politt, and Morality
OP " The Old Philosopher" Latj Tsze. Translated from the Chinese, with
am Introduction hy John Chalmers, M.A. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, xx. and 62. 4«. 6e^.

Chalmers. — The Origin of the Chinese ; an Attempt to Trace the
connection of the Chinese with Western Nations, in their Religion, Superstitions,
Arts Language, and Traditions. By John Chalmers, A.M. Foolscap 8vo.
cloth, pp. 78. 5s.

Chalmers. — A Concise Khang-hsi Chinese Dictionary. By the Rev.
J. Chalmers, LL.D., Canton. Three Vols. Royal 8yo. boand in Chinese
style, pp. 1000. £1 10«.

China Eeview; or, Notes and Queries on the Far East. Pub-
lished bi-monthly. Edited by £. J. Eitel. 4to. Subscription, £\ 10«.
per volume.

Dennys. — A Handbook of the Canton Yernacular of the Chinese
Language. Being a Series of Introductory Lessons, for Domestic and
Business Purposes. By N. B. Dennts, M.R.A.S., Ph.D. Bvo. cloth, pp. 4,
195, and 31. £\ 10«.

Dennys. — The Folk-Lore of China, and its Affinities with that of

the Aryan and Semitic Races. By N. B. Dennys, Ph.D., F.R.G.S., M,R.A.S.,
author of ** A Handbook of the Canton Vernacular,*' etc. Bvo. cloth, pp. 168.
10*. ^d.

Doolittle. — A Vocabulary and Handbook of the Chinese Language.

Romanized in the Mandarin Dialect. In Two Volumes comprised in Three
arts. By Rev. Justus Doolittle, Author of " Social Life of the Chinese."
Vol. I. 4to. pp. viii. and 548. Vol. 11. Parts II. and III., pp. vii. and 695.
£1 11«. 6^. each vol.

Douglas. — Chinese Language and Literature. Two Lectures de-
livered at the Royal Institution, by R. E. Douglas, of the British Museum,
and Professor of Chinese at King's College. Cr. Bvo. el., pp. 118. 1875. 5«.


40 Linguistic Publications of TrUbner ^ Co.

Douglas. — Chinese-English Dictionabt op the Ybrnaculab or Spoken

Language of Amoy, with the principal variations of the Chang-Chew and
Chin-Chew Dialects. By the Rev. Carstairs Douglas, M.A., LL.D., Glasg.,
Missionary of the Presbyterian Church in England. 1 vol. High quarto,
cloth, double columns, pp. 632. 1873. £3 98,

Douglas. — The Lipe op Jenghiz Khan. Translated from the Chinese,
with an Introduction, by Robert Kbnnawat Douglas, of the British Museum,
and Professor of Chinese, King's College, London. Cr. 8to. doth, pp.
xxivi.-106. 1877. 5*.

Edkins. — A Geammab op Colloquial Chinese, as exhibited in the

Shanghai Dialect. By J. Edsjns, B.A. Second edition, corrected. 8vo.
half-calf, pp. viii. and 225. Shanghai, 1868. 2U.

Edkins. — A Yocabtjxabt op the Shanghai Dialect. By J. Edsins.

8vo. half-calf, pp. vi. and 151. Shanghai, 1869. 2]«.

Edkins. — Eeligion in China. A Brief Account of the Three Keligious
of the Chinese. By JosEf u Edkins, D.D. Post 8yo. cloth. 7«. 6d,

Edkins. — A Gkaitmab op the Chinese Colloquial Language^ com-
monly called the Mandarin Dialect. By Joseph Edkins. Second edition.
8to. half-calf, pp. yiii. and 279. Shanghai, 1864. £1 \0s,

Edkins. — Inteoduction to the Study op the Chinese Characters.
By J. Edkins, D.D., Peking, China. Roy. 8vo. pp. 340, paper boards. ISs.

Edkins. — China's Place in Philology. An attempt to show that the
Languages of Europe and Asia have a common origin. By the Rev. Joseph
Edkins. Crown 8vo , pp. xxiii. — 403, cloth. 10s. 6d,

EiteL-T-A Chinese Dictionary in the Cantonese Diai^ect. By
Ernest John Eitel, Ph.D. Tubing. Will be completed in four parts. Part
I. (A— K). 8vo. sewed, pp. 202. 12s. 6rf. Part II. (K— M). pp. 202. 12«. 6rf.

Eitel. — Handbook por the Student op Chinese Buddhism. By the Key.
E.J. Eitel, of the London Missionary Society. Crown 8vo. pp. yiii., 224, cl.,
18«

Eitel. — FENG-SHxn: or, The Rudiments of Natural Science in China.
By Rev. E. J. Eitel, M.A., Ph.D. Demy Svo. sewed, pp. vi. and 84. 6«.

Faber. — A systematical Digest op the Doctrines op Confucius,
according to the Analects, Great Learning, and Doctrine of the Mean, with an
Introduction on the Authorities upon Confucius and Confucianism. By Ernst
Faber, Rhenish Missionary. Translated from the German by P. G. yon
Mollendorflf. Svo. sewed, pp. viii. and 131. 1875. 12a. 6d.

Oiles. — A Dictionary op Colloqitial Idioms in the Mandarin Dialect.
By Heurert A. Giles. 4to. pp. 65. £1 8«.

Oiles. — The San Tzu Ching ; or, Three Character Classic ; and the
Ch*Jen Tsu Wen ; or, Thousand Character Essay. Metrically Translated by
Herbert A. Giles. 12mo. pp. 28. 2«. 6d.

Giles.— ^Synoptical Studies in Chinese Character, By Herbert A.
Giles. Svo. pp. 118. 158.

Oiles. — Chinese Sketches. By Herbert A. Giles, of H.B.M.'s

China Consular Service. Svo. cl., pp. 204. 10s. 6d,

Oiles. — A Glossary op Eeperence on Subjects connected with the
Far East. By H. A. Giles, of H.M. China Consular Service. Svo. sewed,
pp. v.- 183. 78. 6d,

Giles. — Chinese without a Teacher. Being a Collection of Easy and
Useful Sentences in the Mandarn Dialect. With a Vocabulary. By Hbrbbkt
A, Giles. 12mo. pp. 60. 5«.


67 and 59 Ludgate Sill, London^ E,C. 41

Hemisz. — A Guide to ComrEESATioisr in the English aitd Chinese

Lanouaoes, for the use of Americans and Chinese in California and elsewhere.

By Stanislas Hernisz. Square 8vo. pp. 274, sewed. 10«. Qd,

The Chinese characters contained in this work are from the collections of Chinese groups,
engraved on steel, and cast into moveable types, by Mr. Marcellin Legrand, engraver of the
Imperial Printing Office at Paris. They are used by most of the missions to Chhia.

Kidd. — Catalogue op the Chinese Libraet of the Eotal Asiatic

SociETT. By the Rev. S. Kidd. 8to. pp. 58, sewed. Is,

Legge. — The Chinese Classics. With a Translation, Critical and
Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes. By James Legoe,
D.D., of the London Missionary Society. In seven vols.
Vol. I. containing Confucian Analects, the Great Learning, and the Doctrine of
the Mean. 8vo. pp. 526, cloth. £2 2«.

Vol. II., containing the Works of Mencius. 8vo. pp. 634, cloth. £2 2«.

Vol. III. Part I. containing the First Part of the Shoo- King, or the Books of
Tang, the Books of Yu, the Books of Hea, the Books of Shang, and the Pro-
legomena. Royal 8vo. pp. viii. and 280, cloth. £2 2s.

Vol. III. Part II. containing the Fifth Part of the Shoo-King, or the Books of
Chow, and the Indexes. Royal 8vo. pp. 281—736, cloth. £2 2$

Vol. IV. Part I. containing the First Part of the She- King, or the Lessons from
the States; and the Prolegomena. Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. 182-244. £2 2s,

Vol. IV. Part II. containing the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Parts of the She-King, or the
Minor Odes of the Kingdom, the Greater Odes of the Kingdom, the Sacrificial
Odes and Praise-Songs, and the Indexes. Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. 540. £2 28.

Vol. V. Part I. containing Dukes Yin, Hwun, Chwang, Min, He, Wan, Seuen,
and Ohing ; and the Prolegomena. Royal 8to. cloth, pp. xii., 148 and 410.
£2 2s,

Vol. V. Part II. Contents : — Dukes Seang, Ch'aon, Ting, and Gal, with Tso's
Appendix, and the Indexes. Royal 8yo. cloth, pp. 526. £2 2s,

Legge. — The Chinese Classics. Translated into English. With.
Preliminary Essays and Explanatory Notes. By James Leoob, D.D., LL.D.

Vol. I. The Life and Teachings of Confucius. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. vi. and
338. \0s, 6d,

Vol. II. The Life and Works of Mencius. Crown Svo. cloth, pp. 412. 12s.

Vol. III. The She King, or The Book of Poetry. Crown 8vo., cloth, pp. viii.
and 432. I2s.

Legge. — Inatjgueal Lectitre on the Constituting op a Chinese Chaie

in the University of Oxford. Delivered in the Sheldonian Theatre, Oct. 27th,
1876, by Rev. James Legge, M.A., LL.D., Professor of the Chinese Language
and Literature at Oxford. 8vo. pp. 28, sewed. 6d,

Legge. — Confucianism in Relation to Cheistianitt. A Paper

Read before the Missionary Conference in Shanghai, on May 11, 1877. By
Rev. Jambs Leggb, D.D., LL.D. 8vo. sewed, pp. 12. 1877. Is. 6d,

Leland. — ^Fusang ; or, the Discovery of America by Chinese Buddhist
Priests in the Fifth Century. By Charles G. Leland. Cr. 8vo. cloth,
pp. xix. and 212. 7s. 6d,

Lobscheid. — English and Chinese Diction aey, with the Punti and
Mandarin Pronunciation. By the Rev. W. Lobscheid, Knight of Francis
Joseph, C.M.I.R.G.S.A., N.Z.B.S.V., etc. Folio, pp. viii. and 2016. In Four
Parts. £8 Ss,

Lobscheid. — Chinese and English Dictionaet, Arranged according to

the Radicals. By the Rev. W. Lobscheid, Knight of Francis Joseph,
C.M.I. R.G.S.A., N.Z.B.S.y., &c. 1 vol. imp. 8vo. double columns, pp. 600,
bound. £2 Ss,


42 Linguistic Publications of TrUbner 8f Co.

M'Clatchie. — CoNFirciAisr Cosmogony. A Translation (with the Chinese
Text opposite) of section 49 (Treatise on Cosmogony) of the " Complete "Works"
of the Philosopher Choo-Foo-Tze, with Explanatory Notes. By the Rev.
Thomas M^Clatchie, M.A. Small 4to. pp. zviii. and 162. 1874. 12«. 6d,

Macgowan. — A Manual op the Amo^" CoLLoauiAL. By Rev. J.

Macoowan, of the London Missionary Society. 8vo. sewed, pp. xvii. and 200.
Amoy, 1871. £1 Is.

Maclay and Baldwin. — An Alphabetic Dictionaky of the Chinese
Language in the Foochow Dialect. By Rev. R. S. Maclay, D.D., of th6
Methodist Episcopal Mission, and Rev. C. C. Baldwin, A.M., of the Americim
Board of Mission. 8 vo. half-bound, pp. 1132. Foochow, 1871. £4 4«.

Mayers. — ^The Anglo-Chinese Calendab Manual. A Handbook of

Reference for the Determination of Chinese Dates during the period from
1860 to 1879. With Comparative Tables of Annual and Mensnal Designations,
etc. Compiled by W. F. Mayers, Chinese Secretary, H.B.M.'s Legation,
Peking. 2nd Edition. Sewed, pp. 28. 7«. 6d.

Mayers — The Chinese Reader*s Manual. A Handbook of Bio-
graphical, Historical, Mythological, and General Literary Reference. By W.
F. Mayeks, Chinese Secretary to H. B. M.'s Legation at Peking, F.R.G.S.,
fete, etc. Demy 8vo. pp. xxiv. and 440. £1 5s.

Mayers. — The Chinese Government. A Manual of Chinese Titles,

Categorically arranged, and Explained with an Appendix. By W. F. Maye&s,
Chinese Secretary to H.B.M.*s Legation at Peking. Royal 8vo. cloth,
pp. viii.-160. 1878. £\ 10*.

Mayers. — Treaties between the Empire of China and Foreign

Powers, together with Regulations for the Conduct of Foreign Trade, etc.
Edited by W. F. Mayers, Chinese Secretary to H.B.M.'s Legation at Peking.
8vo. cloth, pp. 246. 1877. £2.

Medhnrst. — Chinese Dialogues, Questions, and Familiar Sentences,

literally translated into English, with a view to promote commercial intercourse
and assist beginners in the Language. By the late W. H. Medhubst, D.D.
Anew and enlarged Edition. 8vo. pp. 226. 18*.

MoUendorff. — Manual of Chinese Bibliography, being a List of
Works and Essays relating to China. By P. G. and O. F. von Mollendorff,
Interpreters to H.I.G..\l.'s Consulates at Shanghai and Tientsin. 8vo. pp. viii.
and 378. £\ lOs.

Morrison. — A Dictionary of the Chinese Language. By the Rev.
R. Morrison, D.D. Two vols. Vol. I. pp. x. and 762; Vol. II. pp.828,
cloth. Shanghae, 1865. £6 6s,

Peking Gazette.— Translation of the Peking Gazette for 1872, 1873,
1874, 1875, 1876, 1877, and 1878. 8vo. cloth. 10«. 6rf. each.

Piry. — Le Saint Edit, Etude de Litt6rature Chinoise. Pr^paree par
A. Theophile Piry, du Service des Douanes Maritimes de Chine. Chinese
Text with French Translation. 4to. cloth, pp. xx. and 320. 21«.

Eosny. — A Grammar of the Chinese Language. By Professor

Leon DE RoSNY. 8vo. pp. 48. 1874. Zs:6d.
Boss. — A Mandarin Primer. Being Easy Lessons for Beginners,

Transliterated according to the European mode of using Roman Letters. By
Rev. John Rose, Newcfaang. 8vo. wrapper, pp. 122. 6a.

Eudy. — The Chinese Mandarin Language, after Ollendorff's New
Method of Learning Languages. By Charles Rudy. In 3 Volumes.
Vol. I. Grammar. 8vo. pp. 248. £1 1*.

Scarbofongb. — A Collection of Chinese Proverbs. Translated and
Arranged by William Scarborough, Wesleyan Missionary, Hankow. With
an Introduction, Notes, and Copious Index, Cr. 8vo. pp. xliv. and 278. I08,6d,


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.G. 43

Smith. — A VocABTTLAET OF Peopeb Names ts Chinese and English.

of Places, Persons, Tribes, and Sects, in China, Japan, Corea, Assam, Siam,
Burmab, The Straits, and adjacent Countries. By F. Porter Smith, M.B.,
London, Medical Missionary in Central China. 4to. half-bound, pp. vi., 72,
and X. 1870. 10«. 6^. «

Stent. — A Chinese and Enxjlish Vocabttlabt in the Pekinesb
Dialect. By G. E. Stent. 8vo. pp. ix. and 677. 1871. £1 lO*.

Stent. — A Chinese and Engli«h Pocket DiciioNiJaT^ By G. E.
Stent. 16mo. pp. 250.. 1874. 10*. 6<f.

Stent. — The Jade Chaplet, in Twenty- four Beads. A Collection of
Songs, Ballads, etc. (from the Chinese). By George Car^bb. Stbnt,
M.N.C.B.R.A.S., Author ©f " Chinese and English Vocabulary," ** Chinese and
English Pocket Dictiopary," " Chinese Lyrics,'^ *' Chinese Legends," etc. Cr.
8o. cloth, pp. 176. 5s.

Vissering (W.) — Oy Chinese Cujibenct.. Coin and Paper Money.
With a Facsimile of a Bank No^. Jtoyal 8?o^ cloth, pp. xv. and 219. Leiden,
1877. 18*.

Wade. — Yu-Yen TziJ-Erh Chi. A progressive course designed to
assist the Student of Colloquial Chinese, as spoken in the Capital and the
Metropolitan Department. In eight parts, with Key, Syllabary, and Writing
Exercises. By Thomas Francis Wade, C.B., Secretary to Her Britannic
Majesty's Legation, Peking. 3 vols. 4to. Progressive Course, pp. xx. 296 and
16 ; Syllabary, pp. 126 and 36 ; Wjriting Exercises, pp. 48; Key^ pp. 174 and
140, sewed. £4.

Wade. — Wen-Chien Tzu-Erh Chi. A series of papers selected as

specimens of documentary Chinese, designed to assist Students of the language,
as written by the officials of China. In sixteen parts, with Key. Vol. I. By
Thomas Francis Wape, C.B., Secretary to Her Britannio Majesty's Legation
at Peking. 4to., hal&'cloth^ pp. xii. and 455 ; and iy., 72, ^nd 52. £,\ 16«.

Williams. — A Syllabic Dictionakt op the Chinese Language
arranged according to the Wu-Fang Yuen Yin, with the pronunciation of the
Characters as heard in Peking, Canton, Amoy, and Shanghai By S. Wells
Williams. 4.to^ cloth, pp. Ixxxiv. and 1252. 1874^ £5 ^8,

Wylie. — Notes on Chinese JiiTEEATUBE ; with introductory Remarks
on the Progressive Advancement of the Art ; and a list of translations from the
Chinese, into various Ekiropean Languages. By A. Wylie, Agent of the
British and Foreign Bible Society in Chinft. 4to. pp. 296, cloth. Price, £1 16«.


COREAIf.

Boss — A Core AN Pbimeb. Being Lessons in Corean on all Ordinary
Subjects. Transliterated on the principles of the Mandarin Primer by the
same author. By the Rev. John Ross, Newchang. Demy 8vo. stitched,
pp. 90. 10«.

EGYPTIAN (Coptic, Hieroglyphics).

Birch (S.) — Egyptian Te;s[ts: I. Text, Transliteration and Transla-
tion. — II. Text and Transliteration.— III. Text dissected for analysis. — IV.
Determinatives, etc. London, l$77. Large 8vo. 12*.

Catalogue (A) of leading Books on Egypt and Egyptology on Assyria
and Assyriology. To be had at the affixed prices of Triibner and Co. 8vo., pp.
40. 1880. U,

Clarke. — Memoie on the CoMPAEATiyE Gbammab op Egyptian, Coptic,

AND Ude. By Htde Clarke, Cor. Member American Oriental Society ; Mem.
German Oriental Society, etc., etc. Demy 8vo. sd., pp. 32. 2sr


44 Linguistic Publications of Trubner ^ Co.

BeCOrds of the Fast* being English translations of the Abstbian
AND THE EoTPTiAN MONUMENTS. FubUthed Under the Sanction of the Society of
JBiblieal Arehaology. Edited bt Dr. S. Bibch.

Vols. I. to XII., 1874-79. Za. 6d. each. (Vols. I., HI., V., VII., IX., XI., contain
Auyrian Texts.) A

— The Same. Vol. II. Egyptl^n Texts, I. Crown 8yo. cloth. 3#. 6A

Contents {Second JEdition).
Inscription of Una; Statistical Tablet ; Tablet of Thothmes HI.; Battle of Megiddo;
Inscription of Amen-em-heb. By 8. Birch, LL.D.

Instructions of Amenemhat. By G. Maspero.

The Wars of Rameses II. with the Khita. By Trof. E. L. Lnshington.

Inscription of Pianchi Mer-Amon. By ReT. F. C. Cook, Mjk., Canon of Exeter.

Tablet of Newer-Hotep. By Paul Pierret.

Travels of an Eg^yptian. By Francois Cbabas.

The Lamentations of Isls and Nephthys. By P. J. De Horrack.

Hymn to Amen-Ra ; The Tale of the Doomed Prince. By C. W. Goodwin, M JL.

Tale of the Two Brothers. By P. Le Page Renouf.

Egyptian Calendar ; Table of Dynasties ; Egyptian Measures and Weights.

Lists of further Texts, Assyrian and Egyptian. Selected by George Smith and P. Le Page
Eenouf.

■ The Same. Vol. IV. Egyptian Texts, 2. Crown 8vo. cloth. Zt, 6d.

Contents.

Inscription of Anebni ; Inscription of Aahmes ; Obelisk of the Lateran ; Tablet of 400
years ; Invasion of Egypt by the Greeks in the Reign of Menephtah ; Dirge of Menephtah ;

PoRsessed Princess ; Rosetta Stone. By S. Birch, LL.D.

Obelisk of Rameses II. ; Hymn to Osiris. By Franfois Chabas.

Treaty of Peace between Rameses II. and the Hittites ; Neapolitan Stele ; Festal Dirge
of the Egyptianf). By C. W. Goodwin, M.A.

Tablet of Ahmes ; Inscription of Queen M adsenen. By Paul Pierret.

Stele of the Dream ; Stele of the Excommunication. By G. Maspero.

Hymn to the Nile. By Rev. F. C. Cook.

Book of Respirations. By Rev. P^ J. De Horrack.

Tale of Setnau. By P. Le Page Renouf.

List of further Texts.

— The Same. Vol. VI. Egyptian Texts, 3. Crown 8yo. cloth. 3#. Sd.

Contents.
Sepulchral Inscription of Ameni ; The Conquests in Asia; Egyptian Magical Text. By S.
Birch, LL.D.
Great Harris Papyrus, Part I. By Professor Eisenlohr and S. Birch, LL.D.
Inscription of Aahmes, son of Abana. By P. Le Page Renouf.

Letter of Panbesa ; Hymns to Amen ; The Story of Saneha. By C. W. Goodwin, M.A.
Stele of the Coronation ; Stele of King Horsiatef. By G. Maspero.
The Inscription of the Governor Nes-hor. By Paul Pierret.
Inscription of the Destruction of Mankind. By Edouard Naville.
The Song of the Harper. By Ludwig Stern.
The Tale of the Garden of Flowers. By Fran9oi8 Chabas.
List of further Texts.

■ The Same. Vol. VII f. Egyptian Texts, 4. Crown 8vo. cloth. 3#. 6d,

Contents.

Inscription of the Gold Mines at Rhedesieh and Kuban ; Decree of Canopus ; Inscription
of Darius at El-Khargeh; The Praise of Learning. By S. Birch, LL.D.

Great Harris Papyrus, Part II. By Profesgor Eisenlbhr and 8. Birch, LL.D.

Fragment of the First Sallier Papyrus ; Hymn to Ra-Harmachis. By Prof. £. L. Lnsh-
ington, LL.D., D.C.L.

Abstract of a Case of Conspiracy. By P. Le Page Renouf.

Great Mendes Stele. Translated from Brugsch-Bey.

The Litany of Ra. By Edouard Naville.

The Papyrus of Moral Precepts. By M. Theod. Deveria.

List of Further Texts.

■ The Same. Vol. X. Egyptian Texts, 5. Crown 8yo. cloth. Zt, eel.

Contents.
Inscription of Haremhebi. By S. Birch, LL.D.

The Stele of Beka ; Obelisk of Alexandria ; The Magic Papyrus. By Francois Chabaa.
The Stele of Iritesen ; Inscription of King Nastosenen. By Prof. G. Maspero.
The PastophoruA of the Vatican. By P. Le Puge Renouf.
Addresses of Horus to Osiris. By Edouard Naville.
The Book of Hades. By E. Lef^bure.
Ancient Festivals of the Nile. By Ludwig Stem.
Inscriptions of Qeeen Hatasu. By Johannes Dumichen.
Contract of Marriage. By E. Revillout.
Tablet of Alexander JEgns II. By S. M. Drach.
List of further Texts.
i— The Same. Vol. XII. Egyptian Texts, 6. In preparation.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E,C. 46

Benonf (Le Page) — Elementaet Geammae of the Ancient Egyptian

Language, in the Hieroglyphic Type. 4to., cloth. 1876. 12».


ENGLISH (Early and Modern English and Dialects).

Ballad Society (The). — Subscription — Small paper, one guinea, and
large paper, three guineas, per annum. List of publications
on application.

The Boke of Nurtnre. By John Russell, about 1460-1470 Anno

Domini. The Boke of Keruynge. By Wynkyn de Worde, Anno Domini
1513. The Boke of Nurture. By Huoh Rhodes, Anno Domini 1577. Edited
from the Originals in the British Museum Library, by Frederick J. Furni-
TALL, M.A., Trinity Hall, Cambridge, Member of Council of the Philological
and Early English Text Societies. 4to. half- morocco, gilt top, pp. xix. and 146,
28, xxviii. and 56. 1867. H. Us. U.

Chamock. — Veeba I^ominalia ; or Words derived from Proper Names.
By Richard Stephen Cuarnock, Ph. Dr. F.S.A., etc. 8vo. pp. 326, cloth. 14««

Chamock. — Ltjdus Pateokymicus; or, the Etymology of Curious Sur-
names. By Richard Stephen Charnock, Ph.D., F.S.A,, F.R.G.S. Crown
8vo., pp. 182, clothr Is. 6d.

Chamock (E. S.) — A Glossaet of the Essex Dialect. By B. S.

Charnock. 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 64, , 1880. 3«. 6d.

Chaucer Society's (The). — Subscription, two guineas per annum.

List of Publications on application.

Eger and Grime; an Early English Eomance. Edited from Bishop

Percy's Folio Manuscript, about 1650 a.d. By John W. Hales, M.A.,
Fellow and late Assistant Tutor of Christ's College, Cambridge, and Frederick
J. Furnivall, M.A., of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. 1 vol. 4to., pp. 64, (only
100 copies printed), bound in the Roxburghe style. 10«. 6d,

Early English Text Society's Publications. Subscription, one guinea
per annum.

1. Eaely English Alliteeative Poems. In the "West-Midland

Dialect of the Fourteenth Century. Edited by R. Morris, £sq., from an
unique Cottonian MS. 16«.

2. Aethtje (about 1440 a.d.). Edited by F. J. Ftjenivall, Esq.,

from the Marquis of Bath's unique MS. 4<.

3. Ane Compendious and Beeue Teactate conceentng tb Office

and Dewtie of Kyngis, etc. By William Lauder. (1556 a.d.) Edited
byF. Hall, Esq., D.C.L. 4«.

4. SiE Gawatne and the Geeen Knight (about 1320-30 a.d.).

Edited by K. Morris, Esq., from an unique Cottonian MS. 10^.

6. Of the Oethographie and Congextitie of the Beit an Tongite ;
a treates, noe shorter than necessarie, for the Schooles, be Alexander Hume,
Edited for the first time from the unique MS. in the British Museum (about
1617 A.D.), by Henry B. Wheatley, Esq. 4*.

6. Lancelot of the Laik. Edited from the unique MS. in the Cam-

bridge University Library (ab. 1500), by the Rev. Walter W. Skeat,
M.A. 8^.

7. The Stoey of Genesis and Exodus, an Early English Song, of

about 1250 a.d. Edited for the first time Arom the unique MS. in the Library
of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, by R. Morris, Esq. &«•


46 Linguistic Publications of Tfiibner 8f Co,

8 MoRTE Arthtjee ; the Alliterative Yersion. Edited from Kobert
Thornton^s unique MS. (about 1440 a.d.) at Lincoln, by the Rev. Qborob
Perry, M.A., Prebendary of Lincoln. 7s,

9. Animadversions uppon the Annq9|Oions and Coebections of
SOME Imperfections of Impressiones m Chauorr'b Workes, reprinted
in 1598; by Francis Thynnb. Edited from the unique MS. in the
Bridge water Library. By G. H. Kinoslet, Esq., M.D«, and F. J. Furnivall,
Esq., M.A. 10*.

10. Merlin, or t^e Eablt History of Ktsq Arthur. Edited for the

first time from the unique MS. in the Cambridge Uuiversity Library (about
14S0 A.]>.), by Henry B. WueatlRt, Esq. Part I. 2#. 6d.

11. The Monabohe, and other Poems of Sir Bavid Lyndesay. Edited

from the first edition by Joune Skott, in 1552, by Fitzedward Hall,
Esq., D.C.L. Part I. 3».

12. The Wright's Chaste Wife, a Merry Tale, by Adam of Cobsam

(about 1462 a.d.), from the unique Lambeth MS. 306. Edited for the first
time by F. J. Furnivall, Esq., M.A. Is,

13. Seinte Marherete, Jte Meiden ant Martyr. Three Texts of ab.

1200,1310, 1330 A.D. First edited in 1862, by the Rev. Oswald Cookatne,
M.A., and now re-issued. 2s.

14. Kyng Horn, witli fragments of Floriz and Blauncheflur, and the

Assumption of the Blessed Virgin. Edited from the MSS. in the Library of
the University of Cambridge and the British Museum, by the Rev. J. Rawson
LuMBT. 3«. fid

15. Political, Eeligioits, and Love Poems, from the Lambeth MS.

No. 306, and other sources. Edited by F. J. Furnivall, Esq., M.A.
7*. dd,

16. A Tretice in English breuely drawe out of )? book of Quintis

essencijs in Latyn, p Hermys ]> prophete and king of Egipt after ]> flood
of Noe, fader of Philosophris, hadde by reuelacioun of an aungil of God to him
seote. Edited from the Sloane MS. 73, by F. J. Furnivall, Esq., M.A. is,

17. Parallel Extracts from 29 Manuscripts of Piers Plowman, with

Comments, and a Proposal for the Society's Three-text edition of this Poem.
By the Rev. W. Skeat, M.A. Is.

18. Hali Meidenhead, about 1200 a.d. Edited for the first time from

the MS. (with a translation) by the Rev. Oswald Cockayne, M.A. is,

19. The Monarche, and other Poems of Sir David Lyndesay. Part II.,

the Complaynt of the King's Papingo, and other minor Poems. Edited from
the First Edition by F. Hall, Esq., D.C.L. 3s. 6d,

20. Some Treatises by Kichard B^lle de Hampole. Edited from

Robert of Thornton's MS. (ab. 1440 a.d.), by Rev. George G. Perry,
M.A. Is.

21. Merlin, or the Early History of King Arthur. Part II. Edited

by Henry B. Wheatley, Esq. is.

22. The Eomans of Partenay, or Ltjsignen. Edited for the first time

from the unique MS. in the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge, by the
Rev. W. W. Skeat. M.A. 6*.

23. Dan Michel's Ayenbite of Inwyt, or Remorse of Conscience, in

the Kentish dialect, 131-0 a.d. Edited from the unique MS. in the British
Museum, by Richard Morris, Esq. lOs. 6d.

24. Hymns of the Virgin and Christ ; The Parliament of Devils,

and Other Religious Poems. Edited from the Lambeth MS. 853, by F. J.

FURNFVALL, M.A. d«.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E,C. 47

25. The Sta.cions of Rome, and the Pilgrim's Sea- Voyage and Sea-

Sickness, with Clene Maydenhod. Ehiited from the Vernon and Porkington
MSS., etc., by F. J. Furnivall, Esq., M.A. U.

26. E.ELIGIOI78 Pieces in Pbose and Veese. Containing Dan Jon

Gaytrigg's Sermon ; The 4taye of S. Spirit ; Sayne Jon, and other pieces
in the Northern Dialect. Edited from Robert of Thomtone's MS. (ab. 1460
A.D.), by the Rev. G. Perry, M.A. 2«.

27. Manipulus Vocabtjloeum : a Rhyming Dictionary of the English

Language, by Petek Levins (1570). Edited, with an Alphabetical Index
by Henry B. Whbatlby. 12*.

28. The Vision op William concerning Piees Plowman, together with

Vita de Dowel, Dobet et Dobest. 1362 a.d., by William Langi«and. The
earliest or Vernon Text ; Text A. Edited from the Vernon MS., with full
Collations, bv Rev. W. W. Skbat, M.A. 7«.»

29. Old English Homilies and Homiletic Treatises. (Sawles "Warde

and the Wohunge of Ure Lauerd : XJreisuns of lire Louerd and of Ure Lefdi,
etc.) of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Edited from MSS. in the Bnl-
ish Museum, Lambeth, and Bodleian Libraries ; with Introduction, Transla-
tion, and Notes. By Richard Morris. First Series, Part I. Is,

30. Piees, the Ploughman's Crede (ahout 1394). Edited from the

MSS. by the Rev. W. W. Skbat, M.A. 2*.

31. Instructions FOR Parish Priests. By John Mtrc. Edited from

Cotton MS. Claudius A. II., by Edward Peacock, Esq., F.S.A., etc., etc. 4«.

32. The Babees Book, Aristotle's ABC, Urhanitatis, Stans Puer ad

Mensam, The Lytille Childreues Lytil Boke. The Bokes of Nurture of
Hugh Rhodes and John Russell, Wynkyn de Worde*s Boke of Kervynge, The
Booke of Demeanor, The Boke of Curtasye, Seager*s Schoole of Vertue, etc.,
etc. With some French and Latin Poems on like subjects, and some Fore-
words on Education in Early England. Edited by F. J. Furnivall, M.A.,
Trin. Hall, Cambridge. 15«.

33. The Book of the Knight de la Tour Landry, 1372. A Father's

Book for his Daughters, Edited from the Harleian MS. 1764, by Thomas
Wright Esq., M. A., and Mr. William Rossiter. 8«.

34. Old English Homilies and Homiletic Treatises. (Sawles "Warde,

and the Wohuuge of Ure Lauerd : Ureisuns of Ure Louerd and of ITre Lefdi,
etc.) of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Edited from MSS. in the
British Museum, Lambeth, and Bodleian Libraries ; with Introduction, Trans-
lation, and Notes, by Richard Morris. First Series. Part 2. Ss,

36. Sir Dayid Ltndesat's Works. Part 3. The Historie of ane
Nobil and Wailzeand Sqvyer, William Meldrum, umqvhyle Laird of
Gleische and Bynnis, compyUt be Sir Dauid Lyndbsay oi the Mont alias
Lyoun King of Annes. With the Testament of the said Williame Mel-
drum, Squyer, compylit alswa be Sir Dauid Lyndesay, etc. Edited by F.
Hall, D.C.L. 2s.

36. Merlin, or the Early History of King Arthur. A Prose

B.omance (about 1450-1460 a.d.), edited from the unique MS. in the
University Library, Cambridge, by Henry B. Wheatley. With an Essay
on Arthurian Localities, by J. S. Stuart Glennie, Esq. Part III. .1869. I2s,

37. Sir David Lyndesay's Works. Part IV. Ane Satyre of the

thrie estaits, in commendation of vertew and vitvperation of vyce. Maid
be Sir David Lindesay, of the Mont, alias Lyon King of Armes. At
Edinbvrgh. Printed be Robert Charteris, 1602. Cvm privilegio regis.
Edited by F. Hall, Esq., D.C.L. As,


48 Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co.


38. The Vision op William conceeninq Piees the Plowmaw,

together with Vita de Dowel, Dobet, et Dobest, Secondum Wit et Resoun,
by William Langland (1377 a.d.). The "Crowley" Text; or Text B.
Kdited from MS. Laud Misc. 581, coUa^ with MS. Rawl. Poet. 38, MS.
B. 15. 17. in the Library of Trinity C(«k Cambridge, MS. Dd. 1. 17. in
the Cambridge Univereity Library, the M». in Oriel College, Oxford, MS.
Bodley 814, etc. By the Rev. Walter W. Skbat, M.A., late Fellow of
Christ's College, Cambridge. 10«. 6d,

39. The "Gest Htstoeiale" of the Destetjction op Tbot. An

Alliterative Romance, translated from Guido De Colonna's '* Hystoria
Troiana.*' Now first edited from the unique MS. in the Hunterian Museum,
University of Glasgow, by the Rev. Geo A. Panton and David Donaldsok.
Part I. 10«. 6d.

40. English Gilds. The Original Ordinances of more than One

Hundred Early English Gilds : Together with the olde usages of the cite of
Wynchestre ; The Ordinances of Worcester ; The Office of the Mayor of
Bristol ; and the Customary of the Manor of Tettenhall- Regis. From
Original MSS. of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries. Edited with
Notes by the late Toulmin Smith, Esq., F.II.S. of Northern Antiquaries
(Copenhagen). With an Introduction and Glossary, etc., by his daughter,
Lucy Toulmin Smith. And a Preliminary Essay, in Five Parts, On thb
History and Development of Gilds, by Lujo Brentano, Doctor Juris
XJtriusque et Philosophise. 21«.

41. The Minob Poems of William Latjdee, Playwright, Poet, and

Minister of the Word of God (mainly on the State of Scotland in and about
1568 A.D., that year of Famine and Plague). Edited from the Unique
Orieinals belonging to S. Christie-Miller, Esq., of Britwell, by F. J.
Furnivall, M.A., Trin. Hall, Camb. Bs.

42. Bebnaedus de Cuea eei Pamttliaeis, with some Early Scotcli

Prophecies, etc. From a MS., KK L 5, in the Cambridge University
Library. Edited by J. Rawson Lumbt, M.A., late Fellow of Magdalen
College, Cambridge. 2s,

43. E.ATIS Eaving, and other Moral and Eeligious Pieces, in Prose and

Verse. Edited from the Cambridge University Library MS. KK 1. 5, by J.
Rawson Lumby, M.A., late Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge. 3s.

44. Joseph of Aeimathie : otherwise called the Romance of the

Seint Graal, or Holy Grail: an alliterative poem, written about a.d. 1350,
and now first printed from the unique copy in the Vernon MS. at Oxford.
With an appendix, containing "The Lyfe of Joseph of Armathy," reprinted
from the black-letter copy of Wynkyn de Worde ; " De sancto Joseph ab
Arimathia,'* first printed by Pynson, a.d. 1516 ; and *' The Lyfe of Joseph of
Arimathia," first printed by Pynson, a.d. 1520. Edited, with Kotes and
Glossarial Indices, by the Rev. Walter W. Skbat, M.A. 5*.

45. King Alfbed's West- Saxon Veesion of Gkegoey's Pastoeal Caee.

With an English translation, the Latin Text, Kotes, and an Introduction
Edited by Henrt Sweet, Esq., of Balliol College, Oxford. Part I. 10*.

46. Legends of the Holt Rood ; Symbols of the Passion and Ckoss-

PoF.MS. In Old English of the Eleventh, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Cen-
turies. Edited from MSS. in the British Museum and Bodleian Libraries;
with Introduction, Translations, and Glossarial Index. By Ricuaiu
MoRKis, LL.D. lOs.

47. Snt Datid Lyndesat's "Woeks. Paet V. The Minor Poems of

Lyndesay. £dited by J. A. H. Mubrat, Esq. 3t,


67 and 59, Ludgate Hilly London, E,C. 49

48. The Times' Whistle: or, A I^ewe Daunce of Seven Satires, and

other Poems : Compiled by R. C, Gent. Now first Edited from MS. Y. 8. 3.
in the Library of Canterbury Cathedral; with Introduction, Notes, and
Glossary, by J. M. Cowjra^ 65.

49. An Old English Miscellany, containing a Bestiary, Kentish

Sermons, Proverbs of Alfred, Religious Poems of the 13th century. Edited
from the MSS. by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. 10».

60. King Alfred's West-Saxon Version of Gregory's Pastoral Care.
Edited from 2 MSS., with an English translation. By Henry Sweet, Esq.,
Balliol College, Oxford. Part II. IO5.

51. J?e Liflade op St. Juliana, from two old English Manuscripts of

1230 A.D. "With renderings into Modern English, by the Rev. O. Cockaynb
and Edmund Brock. Edited by the Rev. O. Cockayne, M.A. Price 2«.

52. Palladius on Husbondrie, from the unique MS., ab. 1420 a.d.,

ed. Rev. B. Lodge. Part I. ]0«.

53. Old English Homilies, Series II., from the unique 13th-century

MS. in Trinity Coll. Cambridge, with a photolithograph ; three Hymns to
the Virgin and God, from a unique 13th-century MS. at Oxford, a photo-
lithograph of the music to two of them, and transcriptions of it in modern
notation by Dr. Rimbault, and A. J. Ellis, Esq., F.R.S. ; the whole
edited by the Rev. Richard Morris, LL.D. 8«,

54. The Vision of Piers Plowman, Text C (completing the three

versions of this great poem), with an Autotype ; and two unique alliterative
Poems: Richard the Redeles (by William, the author of the Vision) \ and
The Crowned King ; edited by the Rev. W. VV. Skeat, M.A. 18s.

55. Generydes, a Eomance, edited from the unique MS., ah. 1440 a.d.,

in Trin. Coll. Cambridge, by W. Aldis Wright, Esq., M.A., Trin. Coll.
Cambr. Part 1. 3».

56. The Gest Hystoriale of the Destruction op Troy, translated

from Guido de Colonna, in alliterative verse ; edited from ihe unique MS. in
the Hunterian Museum, Glasgow, by D. Donaldson, Esq., and the late Rev.
G. A. Panton. Part II. 10«. 6«/.

57. The Early English Yersion of the '* Cursor Mundi,'* in four

Texts, from MS. Cotton, Vesp. A. iii. in the British Museum ; Fairfax MS.
14. in the Bodleian ; the Gottingen MS. Theol. 107 ; MS. R. 3, 8, in Trinity
College, Cambridge. Edited by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. Part I. with
two photo-lithographic facsimiles by Cooke and Fotheringham. 10«. Qd.

58. The Blickling Homilies, edited from the Marquis of Lothian's

Anglo-Saxon MS. of 971 a.d., by the Rev. R. Mohris, LL.D. (With a
Photolithograph). Part 1. 8».

59. The Early English Version of the ** Cursor Mundi;" in four

Texts, from MS. Cotton Vesp. A* iii. in the British Museum; Fairfax MS.
14. in the Bodleian ; the Gottingen MS. Theol. 107 ; MS. R. 3, 8, in Trinity
College, Cambridge. Edited by the Rev. R. Mobris, LL.D. Part II. lbs,

60. Meditacyuns on the Soper of our Lorde (perhaps by Robert

OP Brunnb). Edited from the MSS. by J. M. Cowper, Esq. 2*. 6d.

61. The Romance and Prophecies of Thomas of Erceldoune, printed

from Five MSS. Edited by Dr. James A. H. Murray. 10». 6rf.

62. The Early Engpjsh Yersion of the '* Cursor Mundi,'* in Pour

Texts. Edited by the Rev. R. Morris, M.A., LL.D. Part III. 15».

63. The Blickling Homilies. Edited from the Marquis of Lothian's
Anglo-Saxon MS. of 971 a.d., by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. Part II. As.


60 Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co.^

64. Feancis Thtnne's Emblemes and Epigrams, a.d. 1600, from tha
Earl of Ellesmere*8 unique MS. Edited by F. J. Furnivall, M.A. 4#.

65. Be Domes DiEOE (Bede's De Die Judicii) and other short Anglo-
Saxon Pieces. Edited from the unique MS. Jr^ the Rev. J. Rawson Lumby,
B.D. 2».

66. The Early English Version of the " Cursor Mtjndi," in Pour
Texts. Edited by Rev. R. Morris, M.A., LL.D. Part IV. IDs.

67. Notes on Piers Plowman. By the Kev. W. W. Skeat, M.A.

Parti. 2U.

68. The Early English Version of the "Cursor Mundi," in Pour

Texts. Edited by Rev. R. Morris, M.A., LL.D. Part V. 25».

69. Adam Davy*s Five Dreams about Edward II. The Life op

Saint Alexius. Solomon's Book of "Wisdom. St. Jerome's 15 Tokens
before Doomsday. The Lamentation of Souls. Edited from the Laud MS.
622, in the Bodleian Library, by F. J. Furnivall, M.A. 6».

Extra Series, Subscriptions — Small paper, one guinea ; large paper

two guineas, per annum.

1. The Romance op "William of Palernb (otherwise known as the

Romance of William and the Werwolf). Translated from the French at the
command of Sir Humphrey de Bohun, about a.d. 1350, to which is added a
fragment of the Alliterative Romance of Alisaunder, translated from the
Latin by the same author, about a.d. 1340 ; the former re-edited from the
unique MS. in the Library of King*8 College, Cambridge, the latter now
first edited from the unique MS. in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. By the
Rev. Walter W. Skeat, M.A. 8vo. sewed, pp. xliv. and 328. £\ 6».

2. On Early English Pronunciation, with especial reference to

Shakspere and Chaucer ; containing an investigation of the Correspondence
of Writing with Speech in England, from the Anglo-Saxon period to the
present day, preceded by a systematic Notation of all Spoken Sounds by
means of the ordinary Printing Types ; including a re-arrangement of Prof.
F. J. Child's Memoirs on the Language of Chaucer and Gower, and reprints
of the rare Tracts by Salesbury on English, 1547, and Welsh, 1567, and by
Barcley on French, 152 J By Alexander J. Ellis, F.R.S. Part L On
the Pronunciation of the xivth, xvith, xviith, andxviiith centuries. 8vo.
sewed, pp. viii. and 416. 10«.

3. Caxton's Book of Curtesye, printed at "Westminster ahout 1477-8,

A.D., and now reprinted, with two MS. copies of the same treatise, from the
Oriel MS. 79, and the Balliol MS. 354. Edited by Frederick J. Furni-
vall, M.A. Bvo. sewed, pp. xii. and 58. 5«.

4. The Lay of Hayelok the Dane; composed in the reign of

Edward L, about a. d. 1280. Formerly edited by Sir F. Madden for the
Roxburghe Club, and now re-edited from the unique MS. Laud Misc. 108, in
the Bodleian Library, Oxford, by the Rev. Walter W. Skeat, M.A. Svo.
sewed, pp. Iv. and 160. 10«.

5. Chaucer's Translation of Boethitts's "De Consolationb

Philosophie.'' Edited from the Additional MS. 10,340 in the British
Museum. Collated with the Cambridge Univ. Libr. MS. 11. 3. 21. By
Richard Morris. Svo. 12«.

6. The Komance of the Chevelere Assigne. Ee-edited from the

unique manuscript in the British Museum, with a Preface, Notes, and
Glossarial Index, by Henry U. Gibes, Esq., M.A. Svo. sewed, pp.
xviii. and 38. 3«.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill^ London E,G. 51

7. On Eaelt English Peonfnciation, with especial reference to

Shakspere and Chaucer. By Alexander J. Ellis, F.R.S., etc., etc.
Part II. On the Pronunciation of the xiii th and previous centuries, of
Anglo-Saxon, Icelandic, Old IVorse and Gothic, with Chronological Tables of
the Value of Letters and Sxpression of Sounds in English Writing. 10«.

8. QuEENE Elizabethes Achademy, by Sir Humphrey Gilbebt.

A Booke of Precedence, The Ordering of a Funerall, etc. Varying Versions
of the Good Wife, The Wise Man, etc., Maxims, Lydgate's Order of Fools,
* A Poem on Heraldry, Oecleve on Lords' Men, etc.. Edited by F. J.
FuRNivALL, M.A., Trin. Hall, Oamb. With Essays on Early Italian and
German Books of Courtesy, by W. M. Rossetti, Esq., and £. Oswald,
Esq. 8vo. 13s« $

9. The Featernitye op Vacabondes, by John Awbeley (licensed

in 1560-1, imprinted then, and in 1565), from the edition of 1575 in the
Bodleian Library. A Caueat or Warening for Commen Cursetors vulgarely
called Vagabones, by Thomas H arman, EsauiERE. From the 3rd edition of
1567, belonging to Henry Huth, Esq., collated with the 2nd edition of 1567,
in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and with the reprint of the 4th edition of
1673. A Sermon in Praise of Thieves and Thievery, by Pakson Haben ok
Htberdtne, from the Lansdowne MS. 98, and Cotton Vesp. A. 25. Those
parts of the Groundworke of Conny>catching (ed. 1592), that differ from
Harman^a Caueat, Edited by Edward Viles & F. J. Furnivall. 8yo.
7s. 6d.

10. The Fyrst Boke op the Introduction op Knowledge, made by

Andrew Borde, of Physycke Doctor. A Compendyotjs Regymbnt op a
Dyetary op Helth made in Mountpyllier, compiled by Andrewe Boorde,
of Physycke Doctor. Barnes in the Defence of the Berde : a treatyse
made, answerynge the treatyse of Doctor Borde upon Berdes. Edited, with
a life of Andrew Boorde, and large extracts from his Breuyary, by F. J
Furnivall, M.A., Trinity Hall, Camb. 8vo. 18*.

11. The Bruce ; or, the Book of the most excellent and noble Prince,

Robert de Broyss. King of Scots : compiled by Master John Barbour, Arch-
deacon of Aberdeen, a.d. 1375. Edited from MS. G 23 in the Library of St.
John's College, Cambridge, written a.d. 1487 ; collated with the MS. in the
Advocates' Library at Edinburgh, written a.d. 1489, and with Hart's
Edition, printed a.d. 1616 ; with a Preface, Notes, and Glossarial Index, by
the Rev. Walter W. Skeat, M.A. Part I 8vo. 12*.

12. Ek^gland in the Reign op King Henry the Eighth. A

Dialogue between Cardinal Pole and Thomas Lupset, Lecturer in Rhetoric
at Oxford. By Thomas Starkey, Chaplain to the King. Edited, with
Preface, Notes, and Glossary, by J. M. Cowper. And with an Introduction,
containing the Life and Letters of Thomas Starkey, by the Rev. J. S. Brewer,
M.A. Part II. 12». {Fart I, , Starkey* s Life and Letters, is in preparation.

13. A SupPLiCACYON FOR THE Beggars. Written about the year 1529,

by Simon Fish. Now re-edited by Frederick J. Furnivall. With a
Supplycacion to our moste Soueraigne Lorde Kynge Henry the Eyght
(1544 A.D.), A Supplication of the Poore Commons (1546 a.d.). The Decaye
of England by the great multitude of Shepe (1550-3 a.d.). Edited by J.
Meadows Cowper. 6^.

14. On Early English Pronunciation, with especial reference to

Shakspere and Chaucer. By A. J. Ellis, F.R.S., F.S.A. Part III.
Illustrations of the Pronunciation of the xi vth and xvith Centuries. Chaucer,
Gower, Wycliffe, Spenser, Shakspere, Salesbury, Barcley, Hart, BuUokar,
Gill. Pronouncing Vocabulary. 10».

15. Robert Crowley's Thirty-one Epigrams, Yoyce of the Last
Trumpet, Way to Wealth, etc., 1550-1 a.d. Edited by J. M. Cowpbr, Esq.

128.


54 Lififfuistic Publications of Triibner 8f Co.,

1878.

20. A Glossary of Cumberland Words and Phrases. By William

Dickinson, F.L.S. 6«.

21. Tusser's Five Hundred Pointes of Good Husbandrie. Edited
with Introduction, Notes and Glossary, hj W. Paine and Sidney J.
Herhtaob, B.A. 12«. 6d.

22. A Dictionary of English Plant Names. By James Beittew,
F.L.S., and Robert Holland. Part I. (A to F). 8«. 6d,

1879.

23. Five Reprinted Glossaries, including Wiltshire, East Anglian,
Suffolk, and East Yorkshire Words, and Words from Bishop Kennett's
Parochial Antiquities. Edited hj the Rev. Professor Skeat, M. A. Is,

24. Supplement to the Cumberland Glossary (No. 20). By W.
Dickinson, F.L.a. 1».

Fomivall. — EDiroATiojf jy Ea»lt Englanp. Sonue Notes used as

Forewords to a Collection of Treatises on " Manners and Meals in the Olden
Time," for the Early English Text Society. By Frederick J. PuaNiVALL,
M.A., Trinity Hall, Cambridge, Member of Council of the Philological and
Early English Text Societies. 8vo. sewed, pp. 74. 1«.

Hall. — On English Adjectives in -Able, with Special Reference to
Reliable. By Fitzedw4.rd Hall, C.E., M.A., Hon.D.C.L. Oxon. ; formerly
Professor of Sanskrit Language and liiterature, and of Indian Jurisprudence,
in King's College, London. Crown Svo. cloth, pp. viii. and 233. 7s. 6d,

Hall. — MoDEEN ENGLisd. By Fixzedwari) Hall, M.A., Hon. D.C.L.,

Oxon. Cr. Svo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 394. 10«. 6d.

Hall. — DocTOB Indoctus: Strictures on Professor John Nichol, of
Glasgow, with Reference to his " English Composition." By F. H. Reprinted,
with Additions and Emendations, from "The Statesman." Foolscap 8to.
sewed, pp. 64. 1880. Is,

Jackson. — Shropshiee Word-Book; A Glossary of Archaic and Pro-
vincial Words, etc., used in the County. By Gboroina F. Jack«on. Part I.
Svo. pp. xcvi. and 128. 1879^ 7». 6d,

Koch. — A Historical Grammar op the English Language. By C. F.
EocH. Translated into English. Edited, Enlarged, and Annotated hy the Rev.
R. Morris, LL.D., M.A. [Kearly ready,

Manipnlns Vocabnlomm; A Ehyming Dictionary of the English

Language. By Peter Levins (1570) Edited, with an Alphabetical Index, by
Henry B. Wheatley. Svo. pp. xvi. and 370, cloth. 14«.

Manning. — An Inqtjiry into the Character and Origin of the

Possessive Augment in English and in Cognate Dialects. By the late
James Manning, QA.S., Recorder of Oxford. Svo.pp. Iv. and 90. 2s.

Palmer. — Leaves from a Word Hunter's Note Book. Being some
Contributions to English Etymology. By the Rev. A. Smythe Palmer, B.A.,
sometime Scholar in the University of Dublin. Cr. Svo. cL pp. xii.-316. 7». 6rf.

Percy. — Bishop Percy's Pouo Manuscripts — Ballads and Romances.
Edited by John W. Hales, M.A., Fellow and late Assistant Tutor of Christ's
College, Cambridge; and Frederick J. Furnivall, M.A., of Trinitjr Hall, Cam-
bridge ; assisted by Professor Child, of Harvard University, Cambridge, U.S.A.,
W. Chappell, Esq., etc. In 3 volumes. Vol. I., pp. 610; Vol. 2, pp. 681. ;
Vol. 3, pp. 640. Demy Svo. half-bound, £4 4». Extra demy Svo. half-bound,
on Whatman's ribbed paper, £6 6«. Extra royal Svo., paper covers, on What-
man's best ribbed paper, £10 10». Large 4to., paper covers, on Whatman's
best ribbed paper, £12,


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 65

Stratmann.— A Dictionaey op the Old English Language. Compiled

from the writings of the xiiith, xivth, and xvth centuries. By Francis
Henry Stratmann. Third Edition. 4to. In wrapper. £1 lOs.

Stratmann.— An Old English Poem of the Owl and the Nightingale.
Edited by Francis Henry Stratmann. 8vo. cloth, pp. 60. 3^.

Sweet. — A History op English Sounds, from the Earliest Period,
including an Investigation of the General Laws of Sound Change, and full
Word Lists. By Henry Sweet. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. iv. and 164. 4«. 6d,

Transactions of the Philological Society contaiiiH several valuable

Papers on Early English. For contents see under Periodicals and Serials.
De Vere. — Studies in English ; or, Glimpses of the Inner Life

of our Language. By M. Schelb de Verb, LL.D., Professor of Modern
Languages in the University of Virginia. 8vo. cloth, pp. vi. and 365. V2s, 6d,

Wedg^ifrood. — A Dictionary of English Etymology. By Hensleigh

Wedgwood. Third Edition, thoroughly revised and enlarged. With an Intro-
duction on the Formation of Language. Imperial 8vo., double column, pp. Ixzii.
and 746. 21^.

Wright. — Feudal Manuals of English History. A Series of

Popular Sketches of our National Historv, compiled at different periods, from
the Thirteenth Century to the Fifteenth, lor the use of the Feudal Gentry and
Nobility. (In Old French). Now first edited from the Original Manuscripts. By
Thomas Wright, Esq., M.A. Small 4to. cloth, pp. xxiv. and 184. 1872. 15*.

Wright. — Anglo-Saxon and Old-English Yocabularies, Illustrating

the Condition and Manners of our Forefathers, as well as the History of the
Forms of Elementary Education, and of the Languages Spoken in this Island
from the Tenth Century to the Fifteenth. Edited by Thomas Wright, Esq.,
M.A., F.S. A., etc. Second Edition, edited, collated, and corrected by Richard
WuLCKBR. [i« the press,

FRISIAN.

Oera Linda Book, from a Manuscript of the Thirteenth Century,
with the permission of the Proprietor, C. Over de Linden, of the Helder.
The Original Frisian Text, as verified by Dr. J. 0. Ottema; accompanied
by an English Version of Dr. Ottema's Dutch Translation, by William R.
Sandbach. 8vo. cl. pp. xxvii. and 223. 5«.

OLD GERMAN.

Douse. — Geimm*s Law ; A Study : or, Hints towards an Explanation
of the PO-calUd " Lautverschiebung." To which are added some Remarks on
the Primitive Indo-Eur»pean JST, and several Appendices. By T. Lb Marchant
Douse. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 230. lOs. 6d,

Kroeger. — The Minnesinger of Geemant. By A. E. Keoegee. 12mo.

cloth, pp. vi. and 284. 7«.

Contents.— Chapter I. The Minnesinger and the Minnetrong.— IT. The Minnelay.— III. The
Divine Minnesong.— IV. Walther von der Vogelweide.— V. Ulrich von Lichtenstein.— VI. The
Metrical Komances of the Minnesinger and Gottfried von Strassburg's * Tristan and Isolde."


GIPSY.

Leland. — English Gipsy Songs. In Rommany, with Metrical English
Translations. By Charles G. Leland, Author of " The English Gipsies,"
etc.; Prof. E. H. Palmer; and Janet Tuckey. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xii.
and 276. 7«. 6d,


66 Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co.

Leland.^THE English Gipsies and their Language. By Chables

G. Leland. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 276. 7*. 6d,

Faspati. — Etudes sub les TcHiNGHiANfes (Gypsies) ou Boh:§:mien8 db
L' Empire Ottoman. Par Alexandre G. Paspati, M,D. Large 8vo. sewed,
pp. xii. and 652. Constantinople, 1871. 28«.


GEEEK (Modern and Classic).
Bnttmann. — A Gbammae op the New Testament Grebx. By A.

BuTTMANN. Authorized translation by Prof J. H. Thayer, with namerous
additions and corrections by the author. Demy 8to. cloth, pp. xx. and 47 K
1873. Us,

Contoponlos. — A Lexicon of'Modebn Gbeek-English and Engmsh

Modern Greek. By N. Contopoulos. In 2 vols. Svo. cloth. Part I.
Modern Greek- English, pp. 460. Part II. English-Modem Greek, pp. 582.

£1 78.

Sophocles. — A Glossary of Lateb and Byzantine Greek. By E. A.
Sophocles. 4to., pp. iv. and 624, cloth. £2 2«.

Sophocles. — Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine Periods
(from B.C. 146 to a.d. 1100). By £. A. Sopuoclbs. Imp. Svo. pp. xvi. 1188,
cloth. 1870. £2 10«.

Sophocles. —Romaic or Modern Greek Grammar. By E. A. Sophocles.

8vo. pp. xxviii. and 196.


GTJJARATI.
Minocheherji. — Pahlavi, Gujarati and English Dictionary. By

Jamaspji Dastur Minocheherji Jamasp A^ana. 8yo. Vol. I., pp. clxii.
and 1 to 168. Vol. II., pp. xxxii and pp. 169 to 440. 1877 and 1879. Cloth.
14*. each. (To be completed in 6 vols.)

Shapurji Eda\jf. — A Grammar op the GujARATf Language. By

SHAPURjf EoALjf. Cloth, pp. 127. lOs. 6d,

Shdpnrji Edaljf. — A Dictionary, Gujrati and English. By SniCpuBjf
£dalj£. Second Edition. Crown Svo. cloth, pp. xxiv. and 874. 2U.


GTJRMUKHI (Punjabi).

Adi Oranth (I he); or, The Holy Scbiptubes op the Sikhs, trans-
lated from the original Gurmuki, with Introductory Essays, by Dr. Ernest
Trumpp, Professor Regius of Oriental Languages at the University of Munich,
etc. Roy. Svo. cloth, pp. 866. £2 12«. 6rf.

Singh. — Sakhee Book; or, The Description of Gooroo Gobind Singh's
Religion and Doctrines, translated from Gooroo Mukhi into Hindi, and after-
wards into English. By Sirdar Attar Singh, Chief of Bhadour. "With the
author*s photograph. Svo. pp. xviii. and 205. 1 5s,


HAWAIIAN.
Andrews. — A Dictionary of the Hawaiian Language, to which is

appended an English- Hawaiian Vocabulary, and a Chronological Table of
Remarkable Events. By Lorrin Andrews. Svo. pp. 560, cloth. £l ll8,6d.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E. C. 57

HEBREW.

Bickell. — Outlines of Hebrew Geammae. By Gustavtjs Bickell,
D.D. Revised by the Author; Annotated by the Translator, Samuel Ives
CuRTiss, junior, Ph.D. With a Lithographic Table of Semitic Characters by
Dr. J. EuTiNG. Cr. 8vo. sd., pp. xiv. and 140. 1877. 3». 6<f.

Oesenins. — Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament,
including the Biblical Chaldee, from the Latin. By Edward Robinson.
Fifth Edition. Syo. cloth, pp. xii. and 1160. £1 16«.

Oesenins. — Hebrew Grammar. Translated from the Seventeenth

Edition. By Dr. T. J. Con ant. With Grammatical Exercises, and a
Chrestomathy by the Translator. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi.-864. £1.

Hebrew Literatnre Society (Fnblications of). Subscription £1 Is.
per Series. 1872-3. First Series.

Vol. I. Miscellany of Hebrew Literature. Demy 8to. cloth, pp. viii. and

228. 10».
Vol. II. The Commentary of Ibn Ezra on Isaiah. Edited from MSS., and

Translated with Notes, Introductions, and Indexes, by M. FriedlcLnder,

rh.D. Vol. I. Translation of the Commentary. Demy 8vo. cloth,

pp. xxviii. and 332. 10«. Qd.
Vol. III. The Commentary of Ibn Ezra, Vol. II. The Anglican Version of

the Book of the Prophet Isaiah amended according to the Commentary of

Ibn Ezra. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. 112. 45. &d,

1877. Second Series.

Vol. I. Miscellany of Hebrew Literature. Vol. II. Edited by the Rev. A.

LowY. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. vi. and 276. lO*. Qd.
Vol. II. The Commentary of Ibn Ezra. Vol. III. Demy 8vo. cloth,

pp. 172. Is.
Vol. III. Ibn Ezra Literature. Vol. IV. Essays on the Writings of Abraham

Ibn Ezra. By M. FriedlsLnde, Ph.D. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. X.-252

and 78.' 128. Qd.

Land.-^THE Principles of Hebrew Grammar. By J. P. N. Land,
Professor of Logic and Metaphyeic in the University of Leyden. Translated
from the Dutch by Reginald Lane Poole, Balliol College, Oxford. Part I.
Sounds. Part II. Words. Crown 8vo. pp. xx. and 220, cloth. 78. 6d.

Mathews. — ^Abraham ben Ezra's Unedited Commentary on the Can-
ticles, the Hebrew Text after two MS., with English Translation by H. J.
Mathews, B.A., Exeter College, Oxford. 8vo. cl. limp, pp. x., 34, 24. 28. 6d,

Nntt. — Two Treatises on Verbs containing Peeble and Double
Letters by R. Jehuda Hayug of Fez, translated into Hebrew from the original
Arabic by R. Moses Gikatilia, of Cordova; with the Treatise on Punctuation
by the same Author, translated by Aben Ezra. Edited from Bodleian M SS.
with an English Translation by J. W. Nuit, M.A. Demy 8vo. sewed, pp. 312.
1870. Is. 6d.

Semitic (Songs of The). In Eoglish Verse. By G. E. W. Cr. 8vo.

cloth, pp. 140. 58.


HINDI.
Ballantyne. — Elements of Hind! and Braj BhXka Grammar. By the

late James R. Ballantyne, LL.D. Second edition, revised and corrected
Crown 8vo., pp. 44, cloth. 68,


68 Linguistic Publications of Trubner 8f Co,,

Bate. — A Dictionaey of the Hindee LANGxrAaE. Compiled by J.

D. Bate. 870. cloth, pp. 806*. £2 12«. 6^.

Beames. — Notes on the Bhojpubi Dialect op Hikdi, spoken in

Western Behar. By John Beames, Esq., B.C.S., Magistrate of Champanin.
8to. pp. 26, sewed. 1868. U. %d,

Ethering^n. — The Student's Gbahhab of the Btanf LAnrGhirAGE.

By the Rev. W. Etherington, Missionary, Benares. Second edition. Crown
8vo. pp. ziv., 255, and ziii., cloth. 1873. 129.

Kellogg. — A Gbammab of the Hindi Language, in which are treated
the Standard Hindi, Brai, and the Eastern Hindi of the Ramayan of Tulsi
Das ; also the Colloquial Dialects of Marwar, Kumaon, Avadh, Baghelkhand,
Bhojpur, etc., with Copious Philological Notes. By the Rev. S. H. Ksll(^gg,
M.A. Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. 400. 21«.

M ahabharata. Translated into Hindi for Madan Mohun Bhatt, by

£Bi8HNACHANDBADHABBiADHiKAB,iN of Benares. (Containing all but the
HarivansSi.) 3 vols. 8vo. cloth, pp. 674, 810, and 1106. £3 3«.

Mathuraprasada Misra. — A Trilingual Dictionaey, being a Compre-
hensive Lexicon in English, Urdu, and Hindi, exhibiting the Syllabication, Pro-
nunciation, and Ktymology of English Words, with their Explanation in English,
and in Urdii and Hindi in the Roman Character. By Mathueapbasada Misra,
Second Master, Queen's College, Benares. 8vo. cloth, pp. xv. and, 1330.
Benares, 1865. £2 2s,


HINDUSTANI.


Ballantyne. — Hindustani Selections in the N'askhi and Deyanagaei

Character. With a Vocabulary of the Words. Prepared for the use of the
Scottish Naval and Military Academy, by James R. Ballantyne. Royal 8vo
cloth, pp. 74. 3«. 6^.

Dowson. — A Grammae of the XJedu or Hindustani Language. By
John Dowson, M.R.A.S. 12mo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 264. 10«. 6^.

Dowson. — A Hindustani Exercise Book. Containing a Series of

Passages and Extracts adapted for Translation into Hindustani. By John
Dowson, M.R.A.S., Professor of Hindustani, Staff College. Crown 8vo. pp.
100. Limp cloth, 2«. 6^.

Eastwick. — Khirad Afroz (the Illuminator of the Understanding).
By Maulavi Hafizu'd-din. A New Edition of Hindfistani Text, carefully revised,
with Notes, Critical and Explanatory. By Edward B. Eastwick, F.R.S.,
F.S.A., M.R.A.S., Professor of Hindfistani at Haileybury College. Imperial
8vo. cloth, pp. xiv. and 319. Re-issne, 1867. 18«.

Fallon. — A New Hindustani-English Dictionary. With Illustra-
tions from Hindustani Literature and Folk-lore. By S. W. Fallon, Ph.D.
Halle. Parts I. to XXII. Roy. 8vo. Price 4«. 6rf. each Part.
To be completed in about 25 Parts of 48 pages each Part, forming together One Volume.

Ikhwanu-s Safa ; or, Brothers of Purity. Describing the Contention
between Men and Beasts as to the Superiority of the Human Race. Translated
from the Hindust&.ni by Professor J. Dowson, Staff College, Sandhurst.
Crown 8 vo. pp. viii. and 156, cloth. 7*.

Khirad-Afroz (The Illuminator of the Understanding). By Ma\ilav(

Heffzu'd-din. A new edition of the Hind(ist&ni Text, carefully revised, with
Notes, Critical and Explanatory. By Edward B. Eastwick, M.P., F.R.S.,
F.8.A., M.R.A.S., Professor of HindQst&ni at the late East India Company's
College at Haileybury. 8vo. cloth, pp. xiv. and 321. 18«.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, B.C. 59

The Lutaifi Hindee ; os, HmDOosTANEE Jest-Book, containing a

Choice Collection of Humorous Stories in the Arabic and Roman Characters ;
to which is ad(Je<J a Hindoos tanee Poem by Meek Moohummud Tuqubb.
2nd edition, revised by "W. C. Smyth. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 160. 1S40. 10*. Qd. ;
reduced to 5^.

Mathnraprasada MisFa. — A Tmlingital Dictionaet, being a compre-
hensive Lexicon in English, Urd(i, and Hindi, exhibiting the Syllabication,
Pronunciation, and Etymology of English Words, with their Explanation in
English, and in Urdfi and Hindi in the Roman Character. By MathurX-
frasXda Misra, Second Master, Queen's College, Benares. 8ve. pp. xy. and
1330, cloth. Benares, 1865. £2 2^.


ICELANDia
Cleasby, — Air Icelandic-English Dictionary. Based on the MS.

Collections of the late Richard Cleasby. Enlarged and completed by G.
ViGFtjssoN. With an Introduction, and Life of Richard Cleasby, by Gr. "Webbb
Dasbnt, D.C.L. 4to. £3 la,

Cleasby. — Appendix to an Icelandic'' English Dictionaby. See

Skeat.

Edda Saemtindar Hinns Froda — The Edda of Saemund the Learned.

From the Old Norse or Icelandic. By Benjamin Thorpe. Part I. with a Mytho •
logical Index. 12mo. pp.152, cloth, Zs. 6d. Part II. with Index of Persons and
Places. 12mO;. pp. viii. and 172, doth. 186^. As. : or in 1 Vol. complete, Is, 6d,

Publications of the Icelandic Literary Society of Copenhagne. For

Numbers 1 to 64, see " Record," No. Ill, p. 14.

55. SkIrnee TfDiNDi. Hins Islenzka BokmentafMags, 1878. 8vo.
pp. 176. Kaupmannahofn, 1878. Pjice bs,

66. XJm Sidb6tina i. Islandi eptir porkel Bj'arnason, prest a Reyni-
voUum. Utgefid af Hinu Islenzka Boknientafelagi. 8vo^ pp. 177. Reyk-
javik, 1878. Price 7*. 6d.

57. BisKTJPA SoGUB, gefnar ut af Hinu Tslenzka B6kmentaf61agi.
Annat Bindi IIL fl878. 8vo. pp. 509 to ^4. Kaupmannahofn. Price 10*.

58. Skyesltje og Reikningae Hins Islenzka Bokmentafelags, 1877 to
1878. 8vo. pp. 28^ Kaupmannahofn, 1878. Price 2*.

69. Fejettie tea Islandi, 1877, eptir Y. Briem. 8yo, pp. 50.
Reykjavik, 1878. Price 2«. 6d,

60. ALj?fNGissTADiTE HijirN PoENT ViD Oxara, med XJppdrattum eptir
Sigurd Gudmundsson. 8vo. pp. 66, with Map. Kaupmannahofn, 1878. Price
6s,

Skeat. — A List of English 'Woed5, the Etymology of which is illus-
trated by Comparison with Icelandic. Prepared in the form .of an Appendix to
Cleasby and Vigfusson*^ Icelandic-English Dictionary. By the Rev. Walter
W. Skeat, M.A., English Lecturer and late Fellow of Christ's College, Cam-
bridge ; and M.A. of Exeter College, Oxford ; one of the Vice-Presidents of
the Cambridge Philological Society ; and Member of the Council of the Philo-
logical Society of London. 1876. Demy 4to. sewed. 2s,


60 Linguistic Publications of Trubner ^T Co.

JAPANESE.
Aston. — A Graumab of the Japaihese Writtek Language. By "W. G.

Aston, M.A., Assistant Japanese Secretary, H.B.M.'s Legation, Yedo, Japan.
Second edition. Enlarged and Improved. Royal 8vo. pp. 306. 28«.

Aston. — A Shoet Grammar op the Japanese SpoKEif Language. By
W. O. Aston, M.A., H. B. M.'s Legation, Yedo, Japan. Third edition.
12mo. cloth, pp. 96. 12«.

Baba. — An Elementary Grammar of the Japanese Language, with
Easy Progressive Exercises. By Tatuj Baba. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and
92. 5«.

Hepburn. — A Japanese and English Dictionary. With an English
and Japanese Index. By J. C. Hepburn, M.D., LL.D. Second edition.
Imperial 8vo. cloth, pp. xzxii., 632 and 201. £^ 8«.

Hepburn. — Japanese-English and English-Japanese Dictionary. By
J. C. Hepburn, M.D., LL.D. Abridged by the Author from his larger work.
Small 4to. cloth, pp. vi. and 209. 1&73. Ids.

Hoffinann, J. J. — A Japanese Grammar. Becond Edition. Largo
8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 368, with two plates. £1 1«.

Hofimann. — Shopping Dialogues, in Japanese, Dutch, and English.
By Professor J. Hoffmann. Oblong Svo. pp. xiii. and 44, sewed. 5«.

Satow. — An English Japanese Dictionary of the Spoken Language.
By Ernest Mason Satow, Japanese Secretary to H.M. Legation at Yedo, and
IsHiBASHi Masakata, of the Imperial Japanese Foreign Office. Second
edition. Imp. 32mo., pp. xvi. and 416, cloth. 12«. M.


KELTIC (CoRKisH, Gaelic, Welsh, Irish).
Bottrell. — Traditions and Hearthside Stories op West Cornwall.

By W. Bottrell (an old Celt). Demy 12mo. pp. vi. 292, cloth. 1 870. Scarce.

Bottrell. — Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall.
By William Bottrell. With lUastrations by Mr. Joseph Blight. Second
Series, Crown Svo. cloth, pp. iv. and SCO. Qs,

English and Welsh Languages. — The Influence of the English

and Welsh Languages upon each other, exhibited in the Vocabularies of the two
Tongues. Intended to suggest the importance to Philologers, Antiquaries,
Ethnographers, and others, of giving due attention to the Celtic Branch of the
Indo-Germanic Family of Languages. Square Svo. sewed, pp. 30. 1869. 1*.

Mackay. — The Gaelic Etymology of the Languages of Western

Europe, and more especially of the English and Lowland Scotch, and of their
Slang, Cant, and Colloquial Dialects. By Charles Mackay, LL.D. Royal
Svo. cloth, pp. xxzii. and 604. 42«.

Ehys. — Lectures on Welsh Philology. By John Rhys, M.A.,

Professor of Celtic at Oxford. Second edition, revised and enlarged. Crown
Svo. cloth, pp. viii. and 466. 1.5«.

Spnrrell. — A Grammar of the Welsh Language. By William

Spuskell. drd Edition. Fcap. cloth, pp. viii.-206. 1870. 3«.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 61

Spmrell.— A Welsh DrenoNAET. English- Welsh and Welsh-EogliBh.

With PrelimiQary Observations on the Elementary Sounds of tbe English
I^ngunge, a copious Voobulttrj of the Roots of Englbh Words, ■ list at
Scripture Proper Namea and English Sjnonyma and EiplanaiioQB. By
■William Spchrell. Third Edition. Fcap. cloth, pp. ny. and 732. 8*. fid.

Stokes.— GorDKLTCA— Old and Early-Middle Irish GlosBea : Prose and

\erBe. Edited by Whitley Stokes. Second edition. Medium 8vo, cloth,
pp. 193. 189,

Stokes. — Behnans Uebiasee. The Life of Saint Meriaaek, Bishop

and Confessor. A Cornish Drams. Edited, with a TranaUtioo and Notes, by
WuiTLBY Stous. Medium 8vo. cloth, pp. mi., 280, and Faesimile. 1872.


MAHRATTA.


Ballantyne. — A Qbammar op the ItAHEiiTA tAtroijAaB. For the
use of the East India College at Haileybury. By J*>ck8 E. BuiLAmirNB, of
the Scottish Nasal and Military Academy. *to. cloth, pp. 56. 6*.

Sellairs. — A GRiirjiiK op the Maeathi LisaiTABE. By H. S. K.

Bbllaihs, M.A., and Laiuan Y. Askkeukar, B.A. 12mo. cloth, pp. 90. Sa.

Molesworth. — A Dictionary, ilAiiATHr and Enoiish. Compiled by

J. T. MuLKswOBTH. assisted by Giohqe and Thohas Candy. Second Edi^n,
revised and enlarged. By J. T. Molemiorth. Royal iia. pp. iii and 922,
boards. Uombay, ISST, £i St.

Uolesworth. — A Cohpenwdm of Moleswoeth's ^ARATHiAin) Esolish
Dictio:jaut. By Bika rAr)MANji. Secoud Edition. Kflvised and Enlarged.
Dem; 8to. cloth, pp. ii. and 621. 21i.

Tnkamilia. — A Complete Collectioit of the Foema of Tukarama
(the Poet of the Mah&rlishtra). Id Marathl. Edited by Vishnu Pakabuu-
BtM Shastiii Fanuit, Under the supervision of Sankar Fanduran^ Fandit,M,A.
Wilh a complete Indei 10 tlie Poems and aGlossaryof difficult Words. To
which is preliied a Life of the Foet in English, by JaDgrdon Sakhgr&m G&dgil.
2 vols, in larj^ 8vo. cloth, pp. iiiii. and HI, and pp. 728, 18 and 72. Bombay
1873. £1 Ui. 6rf. each vol.


Van der Tttnk. — Outlines of a Geammae oe the Malaoast LAsauAOE
By H. N.TAH debTude. Svo., pp. 28, seved. It.


MALAY.

Dennys. — A Handbook of Malax CoLLoamAi, as Bpoken in Singapore,
Being a Series of Introdnctorr t«aions for Domestic and Biuiueii rorpoiea.
By ff. B. DENNY6, I'h.D., F.U.G.S., M.ll.A.S., etn., Author of *• Ihe
Folklore of China," "Handbook of Cantonese,'' etc., etc. 8vo. cloth, pp.
201. £1 If.

Van der Took. — Short Account ofthe Malay ilANTrscRiPTBHEioiiaiKo
tothbEoyalAsu-tioSocibtv. ByH.N.vASDEKTuDK. Bro.,(eJ' ■ " '


62 Linguistic Publications of Tricbner ^ Co.,

MALAYALIM.
Onndert. — A Malayalam and English Dictionakt. By Bev. H.

GuNDEKT, D. Ph. Royal 8to. pp. viii. and 1116. £2X08,


MAORI.

Grey. — Maori Mementos: being a Series of Addresses presented by
the Native People to His Excellency SIf George Grey, K.C.fi., F.R.S. With
Introductory Remarks and Explanatory Notes ; to which is added a small Collec-
tion of Laments^ etc. By Ch. Oliver B. Davis. 8vo. pp. iv. and 228, cloth. 12«.

Williams. — Fibst Lessons in the Maoei Langttage. With a Short
Vocabulary. By W. L. Williams, B.A. Fcap. 8vo. pp. 98, cloth. 6s,


PALI.

D'Alwis. — A Desceiptive Catalogue of Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese
Literary Works of Ceylon. By James D'Alwis, M.R.A.S., etc., Vol. I. (all
published), pp. xxxii. and 244. 1870. Ss. 6d.

Biihler. — Tbeee iN'Ew Edicts of A^oka. By G. BiiHLEB. 16mo.

sewed, with Two Facsimiles. 2«. 6d.

Childers. — A Pau-English Dictionaby, with Sanskrit Equivalents,
and with numerous Quotations, Extracts, and References. Compiled by the late
Prof. R. C. Chilbeks, late of the Ceylon Civil Service. Imperial Bvo. Double
Columns. Complete in 1 Vol., pp. xxii. and 622, cloth. 1875. £3 3*.

The first Pali Dictionary ever published.

Childers. — The Mahapabinibbanasutta of the Sutta-Pitaia. The

Pali Text. Edited by the late Professor R. C. Childeks. 8vo. cloth, pp.
72. 5s,

Childers. — On Sandht in Pali. By the late Prof. K. C. Childebs.

8vo. sewed, pp. 22. Is.

Coomara Swamy. — Sutta NIpIta ; or, the Dialogues and Discourses
of Gotama Buddha. Translated from the Pali, with Introduction and Notes.
By Sir M. Coomara Swamy. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp. xxxvi. and 160. 1874. 6*.

Coomara Swamy. — The DathXyansa ; or, the History of the Tooth-
Relic of Gotama Buddha. English Translation only. With Notes. Demy
8vo. cloth, pp. 100. 1874. 6s.

Coomara Swamy. — The DathIvansa ; or, the History of the Tooth-
Relic of Gotama Buddha. The Pali Text and its Translation into English,
with Notes. By. Sir M. Coomara Swamt, MudeU&r. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp.
174. 1874. 10«. 6d,

Davids. — SIgibi, the Lion Rock, neab Pttlastiptjba, and the 39ih

Chapter of the Mahay amsa. By T. W. Rhts Davids. Bvo. pp. 30. Is, 6d,

Dickson. — ^The Patimokkha, being the Buddhist Office of the Con-
fession of Priests. The Pali Text, with a Translation, and Notes, by J. F.
Dickson. 8vo. sd., pp. 69. 2«.


67 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 63

FausboU. — JlTAZA. See under JItaza.

FausboU. — The Dasaeatha-Jataka, being the Buddhist Story of King
B&ma. The original P&li Text, with a Translation and Notes by V. Fausboll.
8vo. sewed, pp. iv. and 48. 2«. 6e/.

FansboU. — Fite JXtakas, containing a Fairy Tale, a Comical Story,
and Three Fables. In the original P&li Text, accompanied with a Translation
and Notes. By V. Fausboll. 8yo. sewed, pp. viii. and 72. 69.

Fausboll. — Ten Jatakas. The Original Pali Text, with a Translation
and Notes. By V. Fausboll. Svo. sewed, pp. xiii. and 128. 78, 6d,

Fryer. — ^Vuttodaya. (Exposition of Metre.) By Sanghaeakkhita
Thera. a Pali Text, Edited, with Translation and Notes, by Major 6. £.
Fkyer. Svo. pp. 44. 28. 6d,

Haas. —Catalogue of Sanskbit and Pam Books in the Libeaey op
THB British Museum. By Dr. Ernst Haas. Printed by Permission of the
Trustees of the British Museum. 4to. cloth, pp. 200. £1 i«.

Jataka (The) ; together with its Commentary. Being Tales of the

Anterior Birth of Gotama Buddha. For the first time Edited in the original

Pali by V. Fausboll, and Translated by T. W. Rhys Davids. Vol. I. Text.

Demy Svo. cloth, pp. 512. 28«. Vol. II., Text, cloth, pp. 452. 288.

The " Jataka " is a collection of legends in Pali, relating the history of Buddha's trans-
migration before he was bom as Qotaraa. The great antiquity of this work is authenticated
by its forming part of the sacred canon of the Southern Buddhists, which was finally settled at
the last Council in 246 B.C. The collection has long been known as a storehouse of ancient
fables, and as the most original attainable source to which almost the whole of this kind of
literature, from the Panchatantra and Pilpay's fables down to the nursery stories of the present
day, is traceable ; and it has been considered desirable, in the interest of Buddhistic studies as
well as for more general literary purposes, that an edition and translation of the complete
work should be prepared. The present publication is intended to supply this waxit.—Athenceum.

Mahawansa (The) — The Mahawai^sa. From the Thirty-Seventh
Chapter. Revised and edited, under orders of the Ceylon Government, bv
H. SuMANOALA, and Don Andkis de Silva Batuwantudawa. Vol. I. Pali
Text in Sinhalese character, pp. xxxii. and 436. Vol. II. Sinhalese Transla-
tion, pp. lii. and 378 half bound. Colombo, 1877. £2 28.

Mason. — The Pali Text op Kachchatano*s Gbammab, with English
Annotations. By Francis Mason, D.D. I. The Text Aphorisms, I to 673.
1 1. The English Annotations, including the various Readings of six independent
Burmese Manuscripts, the Singalese Text on Verbs, and the Cambodian Text
on Syntax. To which is added a Concordance of the Aphorisms. In Two
Parts. 8vo. sewed, pp. 208, 75, and 28. Toongoo, 1871. £i lis. 6d,

Minayeff (J.) — Geammaire Palie. Esqniase d'une Phonetique et
d'une Morpholo^e de la Langue Palie. Traduite du Busse par St. Guyard.
8vo. pp. 128. Paris, 1874. 8».

Senart. — Kaccayana et la Litt^eatttre Geammaticale du Pali.

Iro Partie. Grammaire Palie de EaccS,yana, Sutras et Commentaire, publics
avec une traduction et des notes par E. Sbnakt. 8vo. pp. 338. Paris, 1871.

128.


PAZAND.
Maino-i-Ehard (The Book of the). — The Pazand and Sanskrit

Texts (in Roman characters) as arranged by Neriosengh Dhaval, in the
fifteenth century. With an English translation, a Glossary of the Pazand
texts, containing the Sanskrit, Rosian, and Pahlavi equivalents, a sketch of
Pazand Grammar, and an Introduction. By £. W. VVest. 8vo. sewed, pp.
484. 1871. 16«.


64 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

PEGTJAK
Haswell. — Grammatical Notes and Yocabttlaet of the Pegttait

Language. To which are added a few pages of Phrases, etc. lij Rev. J. M.
Haswell. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 160. 1 5a.


PEHLEWI.
Dinkard (The). — The Original Pehlwi Text, the same transliterated

in Zend Characters. Translations of the Text in the Gujrati and English
Languages; a Commentary and Glossary of Select Terms. By Peshotun
DuaTooii Behuamjee Sunjana. Vols. L and II. 8vo. cloth. £2 2s.

Hang. — An Old Pahlavi-Pazand Glossary. Ed., with Alphabetical
Index, by Destuk Hosuakoji Jamaspji Asa, High Priest of the Parsis in
Malwa. Rev. and Enl., with Intro. Essay on the Pahlavi Language, by M. HauO,
Ph.D. Pub. by order of Gov. of Bombay. 8vo. pp. xvi. 152,268,sd. 1870. 2&f.

Hang. — A Lecture on an Original Speech of Zoroaster (Yasna 45),
with remarks on his age. By Martin Haug, Ph.D. 8vo. pp. *28, sewed.
Bombay, 1865. 2g.

Hang — Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the
Parsis. By Martin Halg, Ph.D., late Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative
Philology at the University of Munich. Edited by Dr. E. W. West. Second
Edition. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 428. 1878. 16«.

Hang. — An Old Zand-Pahlavi Glossary. Edited in the Original

Characters, with a Transliteration in Roman Letters, an English Translation,
and an Alphabetical Index. By Destur Hoshengji Jamaspji. High-priest of
the Parsis in Malwa, India. Rev. with Notes and Intro, by Martin Haug,
Pli.D. Publ. by order of Gov. of Bombay. 8vo. sewed, pp. Ivi. and 132. 15*.

Hang. — The Book of Arda Yiraf. The Pahlavi text prepared hy
Destur Hoshangji Jamaspji Asa. Revised and collated with further MSS., with
an English translation and Introduction, and an Appendix containing the Texts
and Translations of the Gosht-i Fryano and Hadokht Nask. By Martin
Haug, Ph.D., Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology at the Uni-
versity of Munich. Assisted by E. W. West, Ph.D. Published by order of
the Bombay Government. 8vo. sewed, pp. Ixxx., v., and 316. £1 58.

Minocheherji. — Pahlayi, Gujarati and English Dictionary. By

Jamaspji Dastuu Minocherji, Jamasp Asana. 8vo. Vol. I. pp. clxii.
and 1 to 168, and Vol. II. pp. xxxii. and pp. 169 to 440. 1877 and 1879.
Cloth. 14*. each. (To be completed in 6 vols.)

Snnjana. — A Grammar of the Pahlvi Language, with Quotations

and Examples from Original Works and a Glossary of Words bearing affinity
with the Semitic Languages. By Peshotun Dustoor Behramjee Sunjana,
Principal of Sir Jamsetjee Jejeeboy Zurthosi Madressa. 8vo. cl., pp. 18-457.
258.

Thomas. — Early Sassanian Inscriptions, Seals and Coins, illustrating

the Early History of the Sassanian Dynasty, containing Proclamations of Arde-
shir Babek, Sapor I., and his Successors. With a Critical Examination and
Explanation of the Celebrated Inscription in the H6^ji&bad Cave, demonstrating
that Sapor, the Conqueror of Valerian, was a Professing Christian. By Edward
Thomas, F.R.S. Illustrated. 8vo. cloth, pp. 148. 7*. Qd.


67 and 59, Ludgate Sill, London, E.C. 65

Thomas. — Comments on Eecent Pehlvi Deoiphebments. With an

Incidental Sketch of the Derivation of Aryan Alphabets, and Contributions to
the Early History and Geography of Tabarist&n. Illustrated by Coins. By
Edward Thomas, F.B.S. 8vo. pp. 56, and 2 plates, cloth, sewed. 3f. Qd,

West. — Glossary and Index of the Pahlatt Texts op the Book op

Arda Viraf, The Tale of Gosht-I Fryano, The Hadokht Nask, and to some
extracts from the Din-Kard and Nirangistan ; prepared from Destur Hoshangji
Asa's Glossary to the Arda Viraf Namak, and from the Original Texts, witn
Notes on Pahlavi Grammar. By E. W. West, Ph.D. Revised by Martin
Haug, Ph.D. Published by order of the Government of Bombay. 8vo. sewed,
pp. viii. and 352. 258,


PENNSYLVANIA DUTCH.


Haldeman. — Pennsylvania Dutch: a Dialect of South Germany

with an Infusion of English. By S. S. Haldeman, A.M., Professor of Com-
parative Philology in the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. 8vo. pp.
viii. and 70, cloth. 1872. 3«. 6^.


PERSIAN.

Bal]a]it3rii6. — ^Peinciples oe Pebsian;, Caligbapht, illustrated by

Lithographic Plates of the TA"LIK characters, the one usually employed in
writing the Persian and the Hindustani. Second edition. Prepared for the
use of the Scottish Naval and Military Academy, by James R. Ballanttne.
4to. cloth, pp. 14*, 6 plates. 2«. Qd,

Blochmann. — The Peosody op the Pbbsians, accordiDg to Saifi, Jami,

and other Writers. By H. Blochmann, M.A. Assistant Professor, Calcutta
Madrasah. 8vo. sewed, pp. 166. 10«. Qd.

Blochniaiiii.— A Teeatise on the Euba'i entitled Eisalah i Taranah.

By AoHA Ahmad 'All With an Introduction and Explanatory Notes, by H.
Blochmann, M.A. 8vo. sewed, pp. 11 and 17. 2«. 6^.

Bloclmiann. — The Peesian Metbes by Saifi, and a Treatise on Persian

Bhyme by Jami. Edited in Persian, by H. Blochmann, M.A. 8vo. sewed
pp. 62. Zs, 6d,

Catalogue of Arabic and Persian Books, Printed in the East. Con-
stantly for sale by Triibner and Co. 16mo. sewed, pp. 46. U,

H^ifiz of Shiraz. — Selections fbom his Poehs. Translated from the

Persian by Herman Bicknell. With Preface by A. S. Bicknell. Demy
4to., pp. XX. and S84, printed on fine stout plate-paper, with appropriate
Oriental Bordering in gold and colour, and Illustrations by J. B. Uebbert,
R.A. £2 28.

.Mirkhond. — The Histoey op the AtIbeks of Syria and Peesia.

By Muhammed Ben KhawendsHah Ben Mahmud, commonly called
MfiiKH6ND. Now first Edited from the Collation of Sixteen MSS., by
W. H. Morley, Barrister-at-law, M.R.A.S. To which is added a Series
of Facsimiles of the Coins struck by the At&beks, arranged and described
by W. S. W. Vaux, M.A., M.R.A.S. Roy. 8vo. cloth, 7 plates, pp. 118.
1»48. 78, 6d,


66 Linguistic Publications of Truhner & Co.y

Moriey. — A Descriptive Catalogue of the Historical Mannscripts in
the Arabic and Persian Languages preserved in the Library of the Koyal Asintic
Society of Great Britain and Ireland. By William H. Morlby, AJ.B.A.S.
8vo. pp. yiii. and 160, sewed. London, 1864. 2«. 6<^.

Palmer. — The Son© of the Keed; and other Pieces. By E. H.
Palmsr, M.A., Cambridge. Crown 8to. pp. 208, handsomely bound in doth. 6#.

Among the Contents will be found translations from £[aflz, from Omer el KheiyAm, and firom
other Persian as well as Arabic poets.

Palmer. — A Concise Dictionabt op the Pebsian Language. By E.

H. Palmes, M.A., Professor of Arabic m the University of Cambridge.
Square 16mo. pp. viii. and 364, cloth. 10« %d.

Palmer. — The Poems op Hapiz op Shieaz. Translated from the
Persian into English Verse by E. H. Palmeb, M.A., Professor of Arabic in the
Uniyersity of Cambridge. Post 8yo. doth. (In preparation.)

Eieu. — Catalogue of the Pebsian Manuscripts in the Bhitish
Museum. By Chables Rieu, Ph.D., Keeper of the Oriental MSS. Vol. I.
4to. cloth, pp. 432. 1879. £1 5«.


PIDGIN-ENGLISH.


Leland. — Pidgin-English Sing-Song ; or Songs and Stories in the
China-English Dialect. With a Vocabulary. By Chables G. Leland. Fcap.
8yo. cl., pp. yiii. and 140. 1876. 6«.


PRAKRIT.
Cowell. — A SHOBT Introduction to the Obdinabt Pbakbit op the

Sanskrit Dramas. With a List of Common Irregular Prakrit Words. By
Prof. £. B. CowELLt Cr. 8yo. limp cloth, pp. 40. 1875. 3«. 6^.

Cowell. — PBAKRiTA-PBABLiSA ; OF, The Prakrit Grammar of Yararuchi,
with the Commentary (Manorama) of Bhamaha ; the first complete Edition of the
Original Text, with various Eeadings from a collation of Six MSS. in the Bod-
leian Library at Oxford, and the Libraries of the Royal Asiatic Society and tlie
East India House ; with Copious Notes, an English Translation, and Index of
Prakrit Words, to which is prefixed an Easy Introduction to Prakrit Grammar.
By Edward Btles Cowell, of Magdalen Hall, Oxford, Professor of Sanskrit at
Cambridge. New Edition, with New Preface, Additions, and Corrections. Second
Issue. 8?o. cloth, pp. xxxi. andf 204. 1868. 14«.


PUKSHTO (Pakkhto, Pashto).
Bellew. — A Grammar op the Pukxhto or Pukshto Language, on a

New and Improved System. Combining Brevity with Utility, and Illustrated by
Exercises and Dialogues. By H. W. Bellew, Assistant Surgeon, Bengal Army.
Snper-royal 8vo., pp. xii. and 156, cloth. 21«.


57 and 69, LudgaU Hill, London, E.C. 67

Bellew. — A Dictionaet of the Pttkkhto, oe Pukshto Language, on a

New and Improved System. With a reversed Part, or English and Pnkkhto^
By H. W. Bellew, Assistant Surgeon, Bengal Army. Snper Royal 8to.
T>p. xii. and 356, cloth. 42«.

Plowden. — Teanslation op the Kalid-i-Apghani, the Text Book for
the Pakkhto Examination, with Notes, Historical, Geographical, Grammntical,
and Explanatory. By Tbeyob Chiohele Plowdbn, Captain H.M. Bengal
Infantry, and Assistant Commissioner, Panjah. Small 4to. doth, pp. zz. and
395 andix. With Map. Lahore, 1875. £2 10«.

Thorbum (S. S.)— BANNtJ ; or, Our Afghan Frontier. By S. S. Thor-
EVBN, I.C.S., Settlement Officer of the Bannti District. 8to. dloth, pp. x. and
480. 1876. 18».
pp. 171 to 230: Popular Stories, Ballads and Bfiddlea, and pp. 231 to 413:
Pashto Proverbs Translated into English, pp. 414 to 473 : Pai^to Proverbs
in Pashto.

Tmmpp. — Gbauilab of the Pa§to, or Language of the Afghans, com-
pared with the Iranian &nd North-Indian Idkymcr. By Dr. Ebnest Tbumpp.
8vo. sewed, pp. xvi. and 412. 21«.


RUSSIAN.

Kiola. — A Gbaditatei) Russian Readeb, with a Vocabulary of all the
Russian Words contained in it. Crawn 8-vo. pp. viii. and 314. 1&. %d,

Biola. — How to Leabn Russian. A Manual for Students of Russian,

based upon the Ollendorfian system of teaching languages, and adapted for
self instruction. By Hen&y Riola, Teacher of the Rnssiaa Language. With
a Preface by W. R. S. Ralston, M.A. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 576. 1878.
12«.

Key to the above. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 126. 1878. 5«.


SAMARITAN.
Butt. — A Sketch of Samabitan Histoby, Dogxa, and Litebatttbe.

Published as an Introduction to ** Fragments of a Samaritan Targum. By
J. W. NuTT, M.A. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 172. 1874. 6«.

Nutt. — Fbagmenis of a Samabitan Taboum. Edited from a Bodleian

MS. With an Introduction, containing a Sketch of Samaritan History,
Dogma, and Literature. By J. W. Nutt, M.A. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. viii.,
172, and 84. With Plate. 1874. 15«.


SAMOAN.
Ptatt. — A Gbakmab aitd Dictionaby of the Samoan Language. By

Rey. Gbo&ob Pratt, Forty Years a Missionary of the London Missionary
Society in Samoa. Second Edition. Edited by Rev. S.J. Whitmee, F.R.G.S.
Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 380. 1878. 18«.


k.


68 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,


SANSKRIT.

Aitareya Brahmanam of the Eig Yeda. 2 yoK See under Haug.
D^Alwis. — A Descetptive Catalogue op Sanskbit, Pali, and Sinhalese

LiTBRABT Works of Cetlon. By Jambs D'Alwis, M.R.A.S., Advocate of
the Supreme Conrt, &c., &c. In Three Yokimes. Vol. I., pp. zzzii. and 244,
sewed. 1870. 8«. 6d.

Apastambiya Pharma Sntram.^-ApQOBisics of tee Sacd&ed Laws of

TUB Hindus, by Afastamba. Edited, with p, Translation and Notes, by G.
Biihler. By order of the Govemment of Bombay. 2 parts. 8vo. (doth.
1868-71. £1 4«. 6d,

Arnold. — The Indian Song of Songs. From the Sanskrit of the Gita

Govinda of Jayadeva. By Edwin Arnold, M.A., C.S.I., F.R.G.S. (of
University College, Oxford), formerly Principal of Poena College, and Fellow
of the University of Boipbay. Cr. 8vo. cL, pp^ zvi. and 144. 1875. bs.

Arnold. — The Iliad and Odyssey of India. By Edwin Aknold,

M.A., C.S,I., F.R.G.S., etc. Fcap. 8vo. sd., pp. 24. 1«.

Atharva Veda Prdti9akhya. — See under Whitney.

Auctores Sanscriti. Edited for the Sanskrit Text Society, under the

supervision of Theopor GoLDSTiicxBR. Vol. I., containing the Jaiminiya-
NyEya-M^^-Vistara. Parts I, to YIJ., pp. 582, large 4to. sewed. 10«.
each part. Complete in one vol., cloth, £Z I'Ss, 6d, Vol. II. The Institutes
of Gautama. Edited with an Index of Words, by A. F. Stenzlbr, Ph.D.,
Professor of Oriental Languages in the University of Breslau. 8vo. clcth,
pp. iv. 78. 48, ed. Vol. 111. Yait^na Sl^tra. The Ritual of the Atharva
Veda. Edited with Critical I^otes and Indices, by Dr. Richard Garbe.
8 vo. sewed, pp. 119. 5t.

Ballantyne. — Fiest Lessons in Sanseeit Gbammab ; together with an
Introduction to the Hitopad^sa. Second edition. Second Impression. By
James R. Ballantyne, LL.D., Librarian of the India Office. 8vo. pp. viii.
and 110, cloth. 1873. Zs, 6d,

Benfey. — A Pkactical Gbahmab of the Sanskeit Langitage, for the

use of Early Students. By Theodor Benfet, Professor of Sanskrit in the
University of Gottingen. Second, revised and enlarged, edition. Royal 8iro.
pp. viii. and 296, cloth. 10«. 6d.

Benfey. — A Gbahmab of the Langitage of the Yedas. By Dr.

Theodor Benfey. In 1 vol. 8vd., of about 650 pages. ^In preparation.

Benfey. — Yedica und Veewandtes. Yon Theodob Benfey. Cr.
8vo. 7s. 6rf.

Bhagavat-Oeeta. — See under Wilkins.

Bibliotheca Indie a. — A Collection of Oriental Works published by
the Asiatic Society, of Bengal. Old Series. Fasc. 1 to 235. New Series.
Fasc. 1 to 408. (Special List of Contents to be had on application.) Each
Fasc. in 8vo., 2s. ; in 4to., is,

Bibliotheca Sanskrita. — See TBrsNEB.


67 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 69

Bombay Sanskrit Series. Edited under the superintendence of G.

BuHLER, Ph. D., Professor of Oriental Languages, Mphinstone College, and
F. KiELHOHN, Ph. D., Superintendent of Sanskrit Studies, Deccan College.
1868-70.

1. Panchatantea it. and v. Edited, with Notes, by G. BiiKL^,

Ph. D. Pp. 84, 16. 6#.

2. NloojfBHA7TA's PabibhXshenb^^ekhaba. Edited and explained

by F. KiELHOiiN, Ph. D. Part I., the Sanskrit Text and Various Eeadingi.
pp.116. 10«. 6^.

3. Panchatantka n. and iii. Edited, with l^otes, by G. BiLhleb, Ph. D.

Pp. 86, 14, 2. 7«. 6^.

4. Panchatantba i. Edited, with Ifotes, by P. Kielhoen, Ph.D.

Pp. 114, 53. 18. 60.

5. KIlidIsa's Eaghtjyamsa. "With the Commentary of Mallinatha.

Edited, with Notes^by Shanka&P. Pan^i^, M.A^ Part I. Cantos I.-VI. lO^.G^^.

6. KIltdIsa's MXlavikIgnimitil^. Edited, with Notes, by Shankae

P. PA1J9IT, M.A. 10*. 6rf.

7. NIgojIbhatta's PabibhIshendu^ekhaba Edited and explained

by F. KiELHos^, Ph.D^ Part II. Translation and Notes. (Paribh^sh^s,
i.-zxzvii.) pp. 184. 10«. 6d,

8. K^LiDiCsA's Eaghutam^ia. With the Commentary of Mallinatha.

Edited, with Notes, by Shankas P. Pai^dit, M.A. Part II. Cantos VII.-
XIII. 10«. 6d.

9. NAGOjfBHATTA's PabibhIshendxt^ekhaba. Edited and explained

by P. EiELHOBK. Part II. Translation and Notes. (ParibhslshSs xzzviii-
Ixix.) 78. 6d,

10. Bandin's DASAKTTMABACHABfTA. Edited with critical and explana-

tory Notes by G. Buhler. Part I. 78. 6d.

11. Bhabtbihabi's Nitisataka and Yaibagyasataka, with Extracts

from Two Sanskrit Commentaries. Edited, with Notes, by Kasinath T.
Telano. 9«.

12. Nagojibhatta's PabibhIshendusezhaba. Edited and explained

by F. KiBLHO&N. Part II. Translation and Notes. (ParibhslshlU kx.-
cxxii.) 7«. 6d.

13. Kalidasa's EA6HTJTAid§iA, with the Commentary of Mallinatha.
Edited, with Netes^ by Shankar P. Pandit. Part III. Cantos XIV.-
XIX. 10«. 6d.

14. YiKBAMANKADEVACHABitA. Edited, with an Introduction, by G.
BUhler. 78. 6d.

15. BHAVABHtri's MiLATi-MADHAVA. With the Commentary of
Jagaddhara, edited by Ramkbishna Gopal Bhandabkab. 14«.

16. The YiKBAMOBVAsiTAM. A Drama in Five Acts. By KalidIsa.
Edited with English Notes by Shankar P. Pandit, M.A. pp. xii. and 129
(Sanskrit Text) and 148 (Notes). 1879. 10«. 6d.


70 Linguistic Publications of Truhner & Co.y

Borooah. — A Companion to the Sanskmt-Reading TJndebgeadttates

of the Calcutta University, being a few notes on the Sanskrit Texts selected
for examination, and their Commentaries. By Anundobam Bobooah. 8vo.
pp. 64. 8«. 6c/.

Borooah. — A Pbactical English-Sanskrit Dictionary. By Antjn-

DORAM Bobooah, B.A., B.C.S., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law.
Vol. I. A to Falseness, pp. xx.-580-10. Vol. II. Falsification to Oyster, pp.
681 to 1060. With a Supplementary Treatise on Higher Sanskrit Qrammar or
Gender and Syntax, with copious illustrations from standard Sanskrit Authors
and References to Latin and Greek Qramoars, pp. vi. and 296. 1879. iA 1 1«. 6</.

Borooah. — ^Bhayabhvti and his Px.ace in Sanskrit Ltteraiurs. By

Anundobam Borooah. 8vo. sewed, pp. 70. 6«.

Brhat-SanMta (The). — See under Kern.

Brown. — Sanskrit Prosody and IS'xtmerioal Stvbols Explained. By

Chablbs Philip Brown, Author of the Teluga Dictionary, Grammar, etc.. Pro-
fessor of Telugu in the Uniyersity of London. Demy 8to. pp. 64, cloth. 3«. 6<i.

Bumell. — Eiktantravyakarana. A PHlti9akhya of the Samaveda.
Edited, with an Introduction, Translation of the Sutras, and Indexes, by
A. C. BuBNELL, Ph.D. Vol. L Post 8fo. boards, pp. Iviii. and 84. 10<. 6<^.

Bumell. — A Classified Index to the Sanskrit MSS. in the Palace at
Tanjore. Prepared for the Madras Goyemraent. By A. O. Bu&nell, Ph.D.
In 4to. Part I. pp. iv. and 80, stitched, stiff wrapper. Vedic and Technical
Literature. Part 11. pp. iv. »nd 80. Philosophy and Law. 1879. 10«. each part.

Bumell. — Catalogtje of a Collection of Sanskrit Manuscripts. By
A. C. Bu&NELL, M.R.A.S., Madras Civil Service. Pabt 1. Vedic Manuscripts,
Fcap. 8?o. pp. 64, sewed. 1870. 28,

BumelL — Dayadaqaqloki. Ten Slokas in Sanskrit, with English
^ Translation. By A. C. Burnell^ 8vo. pp. 11. 2s.

Bumell. — On the Aindra School of Sanskrit Grammarians. Their
Place in the Sanskrit and Subordinate Literatures. By A. 0. Buhnell. 8vo.
pp. 120. lOs. 6d,

Bumell. — The SamavidhInabrahmana (being the Third Brahma na)
of the Sama Veda. Edited, together with the Commentary of S^yana, an
English Translation, Introduction, and Index of Words, by A. C. Burnell.
Volume I. — Text and Commentary, with Introduction. 8v6. pp. zxxviii. and
104. 12«. 6rf.

Bumell. — The Arsheyabrahmana (being the fourth Brahman a) of
the Sama Veda. The Sanskrit Text. Edited, together with Extracts from the
Commentary of Sayana, etc. An Introduction and Index of Words. By A. C.
Buenell, Ph.D. 8vo, pp. 51 and 109. 10«. 6d,

Bumell. — The DEVATaDHYaYABRaHMANA (being the Fifth Brahmana)
of the Sama Veda. The Sanskrit Text edited, with the Commentary of Sayana,
an Index of Words, etc., by A. C. Burnell, M.R.A.S. 8yo. and Trans. ,
pp. 34. 58,

Bumell. — The JaiminIya Text of the Arsheyabrahmana of the

Sama Veda. Edited in Sanskrit by A. C. Bu knell, Ph. D. 8?o. sewed, pp.
56. 7«. 6d.


67 and 69, Ludgate Hilly London^ E,C. 71

Burnell. — Thb Sa^hitopanishadbrahmana (Being the Seventh.

Brahmana) of the Sama Veda. The Sanskrit Text. With a Commentary, an
Index of Words, etc. £dited by A, 0. Bubnell, V\LD. Syo. stiff boards,
pp. 86. 7«. 6rf.

Bumell. — The VAM9ABRiHMANA (being the Eighth Br&hmana) of the

Sdma Veda. Edited, together with the Commentary of SSya^a, a Preface and
Index of Words, by A. C. Burnbll, M.B.A.S., etc. 8vo. sewed, pp. zliii.,
12, and zii., with 2 coloured plates. 10«. 6(2.

A Catalogue op Sanskrit Works Printed in India, o£fered for

Sale at the affixed nett prices by TaUrnbr & Co. 16mo. pp. 52. 1«.

Chintamon.— A Commentary on the Text of the BnAGAVAD-GfTX ;

or, the Discourse between Krishna and Arjuna of Divine Matters. A Sanscrit
Philosophical Poem. With a few Introductory Papers. By Hurrychund
Chintamon, Political Agent to H. H. the Guiicowar Mulhar Rao Maharajah
of Baroda. Post 8vo. qlotb, pp, 118. 6«.

Colebrooke. — The Life and Miscellaneous Essays of Henry Thomas
Colebrooke. The Biography by his son, Sir T. E. Colebrookb, Bart., M.P.
The Essays edited by Professor Cowell. In 3 vols.

Vol. I. The Life. With Portrait and Map. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 492.
14«.

Vols. II. and III. The Essays. A New Edition, with Notes by E. B. Cowell,
Professor of Sanskrit at Cambridge. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 544, and x.
and 620. 1873. 28«.

Cowell and Eggeling. — Catalogitb op Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts

in the Possession of the Royal Asiatic Society (Hodgson Collection). By Pro-
fessors E. B. Cowell and J. Eggeling. 8vo. sd., pp. 56. 2«. 6^.

Da Ciinha. — The Sahyadri Khanda op the Skanda Purana; a

Mythological, Historical and Geographical Account of Western India. First
edition of the Sanskrit Text, with various readings. By J. Gerson da Cuxha,
M.R.C.S. and L.M. Eng., L.R.C.P. Edinb., etc. 8vo. bds. pp. 580. £1 I«.

Oautama. — The Institutes op Gautama. See Auctorea Sanscritu
Goldstuoker. — A Dictionary, Sanskrit and English, extended and

improved from the Second Edition of the Dictionary of Professor H. H. Wilson,
with his sanction and concurrence. Together with a Supplement, Grammatical
Appendices, and an Index, serving as a Sanskrit- English Vocabulary. By
Theodor GoLDSTiicKER. Parts I. to yi. 4to. pp. 400. 1856-1863. 6«. each.

Goldstucker. — Panini : His Place in Sanskrit Literature. An Inves-
tigation of some Literary and Chronological Questions which may be settled by
a study of his Work. A separate impression of the Preface to the Facsimile of
MS. No. 17 in the Library of Her Miyesty's Home Government for India,
which contains a portion of the Manava-Kalpa-Sutra, with the Commentary
of KvMARiLA-SwAMiN. By Theodob GoldstUckeb. Imperial 8vo. pp.
268, cloth. £2 2«.

GrifGLtli. — Scenes prom the Bamatana, Meghaduta, etc. Translated
by Ralph T. H. Gkiffith^ M.A., Principal of the Benares College. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. pp. zviii., 244, cloth. 6«.

Contents. — Preface — Ayodhya — Ravan Doomed— The Birth of Rama-rThe Heir apparent —
Manthara*s Guile— Dasaratha's Oath — The Step-mother— Mother and Son-rThe Triumph of
Love— Farewell?— The Hermit's Son— The Trial of Truth— The Forest— The Rape of Sita^
Rama's Despair— The Messenger Cloud— Khumbakama^The Suppliant Dove— True Glory —
Feed the Poor— The Wise Scholar.


72 lAnguiatic Publications of Triibner & Co ,

Griffith. — The EImIyan op YiLMiKi. Translated into English verse.
By Ralph T. H. Gbiffith, M.A., Principal of the Benares College. 6 vols.
Vol. I., containing Books I. and II. Demy 8to. pp. xxzii. 440, cloth.

1870. 18*. Out of print.
Vol. II., containing Book II., with additional Notes and Index of Names.

Demy 8vo. pp. 504, cloth. 18*. Out of print.
Vol. III. Demy 8vo. pp. y. and 371, cloth. 1872. 15*.
Vol. IV. Demy 8vo. pp. Yiii. and 432. 1873. 18*.
Vol. V. Demy 8vo. pp. 868, cloth. 1875. 15*.

Griffith. — The Bieth op the Wak God. A Poem by KIlidIsa.

Translated from the Sanskrit into English Verse. By Ralph T. H. Gbifpitu
M.A., Principal of Benares College. Second edition, post 8yo. cloth, pp. xii
and 116. 5*.

Haas. — Catalogue of Sanskrit and Pali Books in the Library of the
British Museum. By Dr. Ernst Haas. Printed by Permission of the British
Museum. 4to. cloth, pp. 200. £1 1*.

Hang. — The Aitaeeta Brahmanah op the Rig Yeda. : containing the
Earliest Speculations of the Brahmans on the meaning of the Sacrificial Prayers,
and on the Origin, Performance, and Sense of the mtes of the Vedic Religion.
Edited, Translated, and Explained by Martin Hauo, Ph.D., Superintendent of
Sanskrit Studies in. the Poona College, etc., etc. In 2 vols. Crown 8yo.
Vol. I. Contents : Sanskrit Text, with Preface, Introductory Essay, and a Map
of the Sacrificial Compound at the Soma Sacrifice^ pp. 312. Vol. II. Transla-
tion with Notes, pp. 544. £2 2*.

Jaiminiya-ITyaya-Mal^-Vistara. — See under Auctores Sansceiti.

Kai^ika. — A Commentabt on Pantni's Geammatical Aphoeisms. By
Pandit Jayaditya. Edited by Pandit Bala Sastr!, Prof. Sansk. Coll.,
Benares. First part, 8vo. pp. 490. Part II. pp. 474. 16*. each part.

Kern. — The Aetabhatita, witli the Commentary Bhatadipik^ of
Paramadiyvara, edited by Dr. H. Kebn. 4to. pp. xii. and 107. 9*.

Kern. — The Behat-SanhitI ; or, Complete System of l^atural

Astrology of Var^ha-Mihira. Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H.
Kern, Professor of Sanskrit at the University of Leyden. Part I. 8yo. pp. 50,
stitched. Parts 2 and 3 pp. 51-154. Part 4 pp. 155-210. Part 5 pp. 211-266.
Part 6 pp. 267-330. Price 2*. each part. [ Will be completed in Nine Parte,

Kielhom. — A Gbammae op the Sanseeit Language. By P. Ejelhoen,

Ph.D., Superintendent of Sanskrit Studies in Deccan College. Registered
under Act zxy. of 1867. Demy Svo. pp. xvi. 260. cloth. 1870. 10*. 6d,

Kielhom. — KIttItana and Patanjali. Their Eelation to each other
and to Panini. By F. Kielhobn, Ph. D. , Prof, of Orient. Lang. Poona. 8yo.
pp. 64. 1876. 3*. 6d,

LaghuEanmndf. A Sanskrit Grammar. ByVaradardja. With an English
Version, Commentary, and References. By Jakes R. Ballantyne, LL.D.,
Principal of the Sanskrit College, Benares. 8yo. pp. xzzvi. and 424, cloth.
£} 11*. 6d.

Mahabharata. — Teanslated into Hindi for Madan Mohun Bhatt, by

Krishnachandradharmadhixabin, of Benares. Containing all hut the
Harivansa. 8 vols. 8yo. cloth, pp. 674, 810, and 1106. £3 3*.


57 and 59, Ludgate Sill, London, E.C. 73

Mahdbhdrata (in Sanskrit), with the Commentary of ]^ilakantha. In
Eighteen Books : Book I. Adi Parvan, fol. 248. II. Sabhk do. fol. 82.* III. Vana
do. fol. 312. IV. Vir&ta do. fol. 62. V. Udyoga do. fol. 180. VI. Bhfshma do.
fol. 189. VII. Drona do. fol. 216. VIII. Karna do fol. 116. IX. §alya do.
fol. 42. X. Sauptika do. fol. 19. XI. Strf do. fol. 19. XII. Sfinti do.: —
0. R&jadharma, fol. 128; K Apadharma, fol. 41; e, Mokshadharma, fol. 290.
XIII. Anu^&sana Paryan, fol. 207. XIV. Aswamedhika do. fol. 78. XV. A^ra-
xnav&sika do. fol. 26. XVI. Mausala do. fol.' 7. XVII. Mkh&prasth&aika do.
fol. 3. XVIII. Swargarokana do. fol. 8. Printed with movable types. Oblong
folio. Bombay, 1863. £12 12«.

Maha-Vira-Charita ; or, the Adventures of the Great Hero Eama.

An Indian Drama in Seven Acts. Translated into English Prose from the
Sanskrit of Bhavabhijti. By John Pickfohd, M.A. Crown 8vo. cloth. St.

Maino-i-Ehard (The Book of the).— The Pazand and Sanskrit Texts
(in Roman characters) as arranged by Neriosengh Dhaval, in the fifteenth
century. With an English translation, a Glossary of the Pazand texts, con-
taining the Sanskrit, Eosian, and Pahlavi equivalents, a sketch of Pazand Gram-
mar, and an Introduction. By £. W. West. 8vo. sewed, pp. 484. 1871. 16«.

Manava-Ealpa-Sutra ; heing a portion of this ancient Work on Yaidik
Rites, together with the Commentary of Kumarila-Swamin. A Facsimile of
the MS. No. 17, in the Library of Her Majesty's Home Government for India.
With a Preface by Theodor GoLDSTiicKSR. Oblong folio, pp. 268 of letter-
press and 121 leaves of facsimiles. Cloth. £4 4«.

Megha-Duta (The). (Cloud-Messenger.) By Kalidasa. Translated
from the Sanskrit into English verse, with Notes and Illustrations. By the
late H. H. Wilson, M. A., F.R.S., Boden Professor of Sanskrit in the Uni-
versity of Oxford, etc., etc. The Vocabulary by Francis Johnson, sometime
Professor of Oriental Languages at the College of the Honourable the East India
Company, Haileybury. New Edition. 4to. cloth, pp. zi. and 180. 10«. 6<f.

Muir. — ^Meteical Teanslations from Sanskrit Writers. With an In-
troduction, Prose Version, and Parallel Passnges from Classical Authors. By
J.MuiB, D.C.L., LL.D., etc. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xliv. and 376. 14«.

Mnir. — Obiginal Sanskrit Texts, on the Origin and History of the

People of India, their Religion and Institutions. Collected, Translated, and
Illustrated by John Mum, Esq., D.C.L., LL.D., Ph.D.

Vol. I. Mythical and Legendary Accounts of the Origin of Caste, with an Inquiry
into its existence in the Vedic Age. Second Edition, re-written and greatly enlarged.
8vo. pp. zx. 532, cloth. 1868. 21«.

Vol. II. The Trans- Himalayan Origin of the Hindus, and their Affinity with the
Western^ Branches of the Aryan Race. Second Edition, revised, with Additions.
8vo. pp. zxxii. and 512, cloth. 1871. 21«.

VoL III. The Vedas: Opinions of their Authors, and of later Indian Writers, on
their Origin, Inspiration, and Authority. Second Edition, revised and enlarged.
8vo. pp. xxxii. 312, cloth. 1868. 16«.

Vol. IV. Comparison of the Vedic with the later representations of the principal
Indian Deities. Second Edition Revised. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 524, cloth. 1873. 21j.

Vol. V. Contributions to a Knowledge of the Cosmogony, Mythology, Religious
Ideas, Life and Manners of the Indians in the Vedic Age. 8vo. pp. xvi. 492, cloth,
1870. 21«.


74 Linguistic Publicationa of Trubner & Co.,

Hagananda ; ob the Jot ow thb Bkaks-'Wobld. A Buddhist Drama

in Fire ApU. Translated into English Prose, with Explanatory Notes, from the
Sanskrit df Sri-Harsha-De^a. By Palmer Botd, B.A., Sanskrit Scholar of
Trinity CoIl^;e, Csmbridge. With an Introduction by Professor Co:wxll.
Crown 8¥0., pp. ZTi. and 100, cloth. 4«. 6d.


mSkbj&nam. — Stoby of Nala ; loi Episode of the Maha-Bharata.
rhe Sanskrit Text, with Yocabalary, Analysis, and Introduction. By Monibb


Nalo]

Williams, M.A. The Metrical Trandation by the Very Bct. H. H.' Mxlman,
D.D. 8to. el. Ids,


Naradiva Dharma Sastram; ob, the iNsnTUTEs of Nababa. Trans-
lated for the First Time from the unpublished Sanskrit originaL By Dr. Julius
Jolly, UniTersity, Wurzbnrg. With a Prefoce, Notes ouefly critical, an Index
of Quotations from Narada in the principal Indian Digests, and a general Index.
Crown 8vo., pp. xxxy. 144, cloth. lOs. 6d.

Pataigali. — The Ytababana-Mahabhashta of Patakjali. Edited

by F. KiELHOSN, Ph.D., Professor of Oriental Languages, Deccan College.
YoL I., Part I. pp. 200. St. 6d.

BimdyaiL of Vdlmiki. — 5 yols. See under Gbifftth.

Bam Jasan. — A Saksbbit and English DicnoKABr. Being an

Abridgment of Professor Wilson's Dictionary. With an Appendix explaining
the use of Affixes in Sanskrit. By Pandit Ram Jasan, Queen's College,
Benares. Published under the Patronage of the Government, N.W.P, B^oyal
8to. cloth, pp. ii. and 707. 28«.

Big- Veda SanMta. — ^A Collection" of Ancient Hindu Hymns.

Constituting the First Ashtaka, or Book of the Rig-veda ; the oldest authority
for the religious and social institutions of the Hindus. Translated from the
Original Sanskrit by the late H. H. Wilson, M.A. Second Edition, with a
Postscript by Dr. Fitzedward Hall. Vol. I. 8vo. cloth, pp. lii. and 348.
Price 2U.

Eig-Veda SanMta. — ^A Collection of Ancient Hindu Hymns, consti-
tuting the Fifth to Eighth Ashtakas, or books of the Rig-Veda, the oldest
Authority for the Religious and Social Institutions of the Hindus. Translated
from the Original Sanskrit by the late Horacb Hatman Wilson, M.A.,
F.R.S., etc. Edited by E. B» Cowell, M.A., Principal of the Calcutta
Sanskrit College. Vol. IV. 8vo. cloth, pp. 214. 14«.

A few copies of Vols. II. and III. still left. [ Vols. V* and 71. in the JPress.

Eig-Veda-SanMta : The Sacbed Hthns of the Bbahhans. Trans-
lated and explained by F. Max MiJLLBn, M.A., LL.D., Fellow of AH Souls'
College, Professor of Comparative Philology at Oxford, Foreign Member of the
Institute of France, etc., etc. Vol. I. Hymns to the Mamts, or the Storm-
Gods. 8vo. cloth, pp. clii. and 264. 1869. 12«. ^d.

Big- Veda. — TheHymnsoftheEig-Yeda in the SamhitaandPada Texts.

Reprinted from the Editio Princeps. By F. Max MOllbs, M.A., etc. Second
edition. With the Two Texts on Parallel Pages. In 2 yols. 8yo., pp. 1700,
sewed. 32«.

Sabdakalpadnuna, the well-known Sanskrit Dictionary of BajXh

Radhakanta Deya. In Bengali characters. 4to. Parts 1 to 40. (In
course of publication.) %s. M. each part.


67 and 59, Ludgate Sill, London, E.G. 75

Sama-Vidhana-Brdhmana. With the Commentary of Sayana. Edited,

with Notes, Translation, and Index, by A. G. Burnell, M.ILA.S. Vol. I.
Text and Commentary. With Introduction. 8¥0. ck)th, pp. xxlyiii. and 104.
12$. ed.

Saknntala. — A Savsebit Drilua is Seten Acts, Edited by Monieb

Williams, M.A. Second Edition. 8ro. cl. £1 1«.

Sakimtala. — Kaltd Asa's CAKTrNTAiA. The BengaK BecenBion. With
Critical Notes. Edited by Kichabd Puchbl. 8?o. eloth, pp. xL and 210. 14«.

Sarva-Sabda-Sambodhini ; on, The Complete Saitskrit DicTioirABY.

In Teluga characters. 4to. doth, pp. 1078. £2 IBs.

Surya-Siddhanta (Translation of the). — See Whitney.

Taittir£ya-Prati9akhya. — See WHrrarET,

TarkaTachaspati. — ^Vachaspatta, a Comprehensive Dictionary, in Ten

Parts. Compiled by Tarakatha Tarkavachaspati, Professor of Grammar
and Philosophy in the Government Sanskrit College of Calcutta. An Alpha-
betically Arranged Dictionary, with a Grammatical Introduction and Copious
Citations from the Grammarians and Scholiasts, from the Vedas, etc. Parts I.
to XIII. 4to. paper. 1873-6. 18«. each Part.

Thibant. — The StJLVAstJTKAS. English Translation, with an Intro-
duction. By G. Thibavt, Ph.D., Anglo- Sanskrit Professor Benares College.
8vo. cloth, pp. 47, with 4 Plates, bs.

Thibaut. — Contribtttions to the Explanation op Jtotisha-Yedanga
By G. Thibaut, Ph.D. 8vo. pp. 27. 1«. Orf.

Triibner's Bibliotheca Sanscrita. A Catalogue of Sanskrit Litera-
ture, chiefly printed in Europe. To which is added a Catalogue of Sanskrit
Works printed in India ; and a Catalogue of Pali Books. Constantly for sale
by Triibner & Co. Cr. 8vo. sd., pp. 84. 2». Qd. ^*

Vedarthayatna (The) ; or, an Attempt to Interpret the Yedas. A

Marathi and English Translation of the Big Veda, with the Original SaSihitd
and Pada Texts in Sanskrit. Parts I. to :^VIII. 8vo. pp. 1—896. Price
3«. 6d. each.

Vishnu-Porana (The) ; a System of Hindu Mythology and Tradition.
Translated from the original Sanskrit, and lUustrated hy Notes derived chiefly
from other Pur&^as. By the late H. H. Wilson, M.A., F.R.S., fioden Pro-
fessor of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford, etc, etc. Edited by Fitz-
BDWARD Hall. In 6 vols. 8vo. Vol. I. pp. cxl. and 200 ; Vol. II. pp. 343 :
Vol. III. pp. 348: Vol. IV. pp. 346, cloth; Vol. V. Part I. pp. 392, cloth.
10«. 6d. each. Vol. V., Part II, containing the Index, compiled by Fitzedward
Hall. 8vo. cloth, pp. 268. 12«.

Weber. — On the Eakatana. By Dr. Albbecht VTebek, Berlin.

Translated from the German by the Rev. D. C. Boyd, M .A. Reprinted from
*' The Indian Antiquary." Fcap. 8vo. sewed, pp. 130. 5«.

Weber. — The Histoet of Indian Liteeatuee. By Albbecht Webeb.

Translated from the German by John Mann, M.A., andTsEODOB Zachariar,
Ph.D., with the sanction of the Author. Post 8yo. cloth, pp. xxiii. and 360
1878. 18*.


76 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Whitney. — Athabva Veda PbItiqIkhta ; or, Caunakfyd Caturadhy^-x
jikk (Thek Text, Translation, and Notes. By William D. Whitnby, Pro-
fessor of fanskrit in Yale College. 8vo. pp. 286, boards. £1 lU, 6d.


Whitney. — Subta-Seddhanta (Translation of the): A Text-book of
Hindu Astronomy, with Notes and an Appendix, containing additional Notes
and Tables, Calculations of Eclipses, a Stellar Map, and Indexes. By W. D.
Whitney. 8vo. pp. iv. and 354, boards. £l ll«. 6d,

Whitney. — TlrrriEfTA-PitlTiqlKHTA, with its Comraentary, the
Tribh&shyaratna : Text, Translation, and Notes. By W. D. Whitnbt, Prof,
of Sanskrit in Yale College, New Haven. 8vo. pp. 469. 1871. £l 5i,

Whitney. — A Sanskeit GRAMiiAB, including both the Classical Lan-
guage, and the Older Language, and the Older Dialects, of Veda and Brahmana.
Svo. cloth, pp. viii. and 486. 1879. 12«.

Williams. — A Dictionabt, English and Sanscbtt. By Monies

Williams, M.A. Published under the Patronage of the Honourable East India
Company. 4to. pp. zii. 862, cloth. 1851. £3 3s.

Williams. — ^A Sanskbit-English Dictionabt, Etymologically and

Philologically arranged, with special reference to Greek, Latin, German, Anglo-
Saxon, English, and other cognate Indo-European Languages. By Monier
Williams, M.A., Boden Professor of Sanskrit. 4to. cloth, pp. zzy. and 1186.
£4 lis, 6d.

Williams. — A Pbactical Gbammab op the Sanskbit Language, ar-
ranged with reference to the Classical Languages of Europe, for the use ol
English Students, by Monieb Williams, M.A. 1877. Fourth Edition,
Revised. 8yo. cloth. ]5«.

Wilson. — ^Works of the late Hobace Hayman "Wilson, M.A., F.R.S.,

Member of the Roji^ Asiatic Societies of Calcutta'and Paris, and of the Oriental
Soc. of Germany, etc., and Boden Prof, of Sanskrit in the University of
Oxford.

Vols. I. and II. Essays and Lectures chiefly on the Religion of the Hindus,
by the late H. H. Wilson, M.A., F.R.S., etc. Collected and Edited by Dr.
Reinhold Rost. 2 vols, cloth, pp. ziii. and 399, vi. and 416. 2ls.

Vols. Ill, lY. and Y. Essays Analytical, Critioal, and Philological, on
8uBJsq|% connected -with Sanskrit Literature. Collected and Edited by
Dr. Reinhold Rost. 3 vols. 8vo. pp. 408, 406, and 390. cloth. Price 36«.

Yols. YL, YII., YIII, IX. and X., Part I. Yishnu PueXnX, a System or
Hindu Mythology and Tradition. Yols. I. to Y. Translated from the
original Sanskrit, and Illustrated by Notes derived chiefly from other Pur&^&s.
By the late H. H. Wilson, Edited by Fitzedward Hall, M.A., D.C.L.,
Oxon. 8vo., pp. cxl. and 200 ; 344 ; 344 ; 346, cloth. 2/. I2s, 6d,

Yol. X., Part 2, containing the Index to, and completing the Yishnu Piir&n&,
compiled by Fitzedward Hall. 8yo. cloth, pp. 268. 12«.

Yols. XI. and XII. Select Specimens op the Theatre of the Hindus. Trans-
lated from the Original Sanskrit. By the late Horace Hayman Wilson, M. A.,
F.R.S. drd corrected Ed. 2 vols. 8vo. pp. Ixi. and 384 ; and iv. and 418, cl. 2ls.


57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London^ E.C. 77

Wilson. — Select Specimens op the Theatbe op the Hikdus. Trans-
lated from the Original Sanskrit. By the late Horace Hayman Wilson,
M.A.,F.R.S. Third corrected edition. 2 vols. 8vo., pp. Ixi}^ and 384; iv.
and 418, cloth. 21«.

OOKTSNTS.

Tol, I.— Preface— Treatise on the Dramatic System of the Hindus— Dramas translated from the
Original Sanskrit— The Mrichchakati, or the Toy Cart— Vikram aand Urvasi, or the
Hero and the Nymph— Uttara R&ma Charitra, or continuation of the History of
Bfima.

Tol. II.— Dramas translated from the Original Sanskrit— Mal&ti and M&dhava, or the Stolen
Marriage— Mudr& Rakshasa, or the Signet of the Minister— Batn&vall, or the
Necklace— Appendix, containing short accounts of different Dramas.

Wilson. — A DiCTiONAET in Sanskrit and English. Translated,
amended, and enlarged from an original compilation prepared by learned Natives
for the College of Fort William by H. H. Wii^son. The Third Edition edited
by Jagunmohana Tarkalankara and Ehettramohana Mookerjee. Published by
Gyanendrachandra Bayachoudhuri and Brothers. 4to. pp. 1008. Calcutta,
1874. £3 3*.

Wilson (H. H.).— See also Megha Duta, Eig-Yeda, and Vishnu-

Pur&n4.

Tigurveda. — Thb White YAJimvEDA in the Madhtandina Becen-

8I0N. With the Commentary of Mahidhara. Complete in 36 parts. Large
square 8yo. pp. 671. £4 10«.


SINDHI.

Tmmpp. — Grammab op the Sindhi Language. Compared with the
Sanskrit- Prakrit and the Cognate Indian Vernaculars. By Dr. Ernest
Trumpp. Printed by order of Her Majesty's Go?ernment for India. Demy
8vo. sewed, pp. zvi. and 590. 15«.


SINHALESE.
D'Alwis. — A DESCBEPTiyE Catalogue of Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese

Literary Works of Ceylon. By James D'Alwib^ M.R.A.S. Vol. I. (aU pub-
lished) pp. zxxii. and 244, sewed. 1877. ^«. Qd*

Childers. — Notes on the Sinhalese Langitage. No. 1. On the

Formation of the Plural of Neuter Nouns. By the late Prof. R. 01 Childers.
Demy 8vo. sd., pp. 16. 1873. 1«.

Mahawansa (The) — The Mahawansa. From the Thirty-Seventh

Chapter. Revised and edited, under orders of the Ceylon Government, by
H. Sumangala, and Don Andris de Silva Batuwantudawa. Vol. I. Pali Text
in Sinhalese Character, pp. zzzii. and 436. — ^Yol. II. Sinhalese Translation,
pp. lii. and 378, half-bound. Colombo, 1877. £2 2«.

Steele. — ^An Eastebn Love-Stoet. Kusa Jatakaya, a Buddhistic

Legend. Rendered, for the first time, into English Verse (with notes) from the
Sinhalese ' Poem of Alagiyavanna Mohottala, by Thomas Steele, Ceylon
Civil Serrice. Crown Sto? cloth, pp. xii. and 260. London, 1871. 6«.


78 Linguistic Publications of Triiiner & Co.,

SYRIAO.

PIiillip8.---4EHE DocTEiNE OP Addai THE Apostle. Now first Edited
in a Complete Form in the Original Syriac, with an English Translation and
Notes. By Georob Phillips, D.D,, President of Queen's College, Cambridge.
8vo. pp. 122, cloth, la. 6d.

Stoddard. — Gbahmab op the Modebn Stbiao Langttage, as spoken in
Oroomiah, Persia, and in Koordistan. By Key. D. T. Stoddard, Missionary of
the American Board in Persia. Demy 8vO. bds., {^. 190. 10«. 6d.


TAMIL.
Besohi. — Clatis Httmakiobum Litteraeum Sublimioeis Tamitlici Idio-

HATis. Auctore K. P. Constantio Josepho Beschio, Soc. Jesn, in Madnrensi
Regno Missionario. Edited by the Rev. K. Ihlefeld, and printed for A.
Burnell, Esq., Tranquebar. 8vo. sewed, pp. 171. 10«. 6^.

Lazarus. — A Tamil Geahhae designed for use in Colleges and Schools.
By John Lazabvs, B.A. Small Syo. cloth, pp. viii. and 230. 1878. 5«. 6^.

Pope. — A Tamil Handbook; or, Pull Introduction to the Common
Dialect of that Language, on the plan of Ollendorff and Arnold. With copious
Vocabularies, Appendices, containing Reading Lessons, Analyses of Letters,
Deeds, Complaints, Official Documents, and a Key to the Exercises. By Rev.
G. U. Pops. Third edition, 8yo. cloth, pp. It. and 388. 21«.


TELUGIT.
Arden. — A Peogeessite Geammae op the Telitgtt Langitage, with

Copious Examples and Exercises. In Three Parts. Part I. Introduction. —
On the Alphabet and Orthography.— Outline Grammar, and Model Sentences.
Part II. A Complete Grammar of the Colloquial Dialect. Part ill. On the
Grammatical Dial^ used in Books. By A. H. Arden, M.A., Missionary of
the C« M. S. Masunpatam. 8vo. sewed, pp. xiv. and 380. 148.

Arden. — A Compaiqon Telugu Reader to Arden's Telugu Grammar.
8?o. cloth, pp. 130. 1876. 7s. 6d.

Carr. — e-o|j^er*§ J^"0'ol©S'. a Collection op Telugu Peoveebs,

Translated, Illustrated, and Explained ; together with some Sanscrit Proverbs
printed in the Devan%ari and Telugu Characters. By Captain M. W. Cahr,
Madras Staff Corps. One Vol. and Supplemnt, royal 8yo. pp. 488 and 148. 31«. 6d


w


TIBETAN.


Ceoma de Koros (Alex.) — A Dictionaet Tihetan and English (only).

4to. cloth, pp. zxii. and 862. Calcutta, 1834. £2 2«.

Csoma de Koros (Alex.) — A Geammae of the Tibetan Language. 4to.
sewed, pp. xii. and 204, and 40. 1834. 25s,

Lewin. — ^A Manual of Tibetan, being a Guide to the Colloquial Speech
of Tibet, in a Series of Progressive Exercises, prepared with the assistance of
Yapa Ugyen Gyatsho, by Major Thomas Hbbbb&t Lbwin. Oblong 4to. cloth,
pp. xi. and 176. 1879. £1 U.


67 and 59, Ludgate Sill, London^ E.G. 79

TURKI.

Shaw. — A Skbtch of the Tubki Langitage. As Spokef. in Eastern
Turkistan (K^hghar and Yarkand). By Robert Babklay Shaw, F.U.G.S.,
Political Agent. In Two Parts. With Lists of Names of Birds and Plants
by J. Scully, Surgeon, H.M. Bengal Army. 8vo. sewed. Part I., pp. 130.
18, ed.


TURKISH,
Arnold. — A Simple TRAKSLirEEAL Gbammab op the Tuekish Language.

Compiled from various sources. With Dialogues and Vucabulary. By Edwin
Arnold, M.A., C.S.I., F.R.G.S. Pott 8vo. cloth, pp. 80. 2«. 6d,

Hopkins. — Elementaby Geammab of the Ttjkkish Language. With

a few Easy Exercises. By F. L. Hopkins. M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Trinity
Hall, Cambridge. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp. 48. 3s. 6d*

Bedhouse. — On the History, System, and Varieties of Turkish Poetry,
Illustrated by Selections in the Original, and in English Paraphrase. With a
notice of the Islamic Doctrine of the Immortality of Woman's Soul in the
Future State. By J. W. Bedhouse, M.R.A.S. Demy 8vo. pp, 64. 1879.
(Reprinted from the Transactions of the Boyal Society of Literature) sewed,
1«. 6d. ; cloth, 2«. 6^.

Bedhouse. — The Turkish Campaignee's Yade-Mecum of Ottoman

CoLLoauiAL Language; containing a concise Ottoman Grammar; a carefully
selected Vocabulary, alphabetically arranged, in two parts, English and Turkish,
and Turkish and English; also a few Familiar Dialogues; the whole in English
characters. By J. W. Redhouse, F.R.A.S. Oblong 32mo. limp cloth, pp.
Iy. and 332. 6«.


UMBRIAN.
Newman. — The Text op the Iguvine Insceiptions, with interlinear

Latin Translation and Notes. By Francis W. Newman, late Professor of
Latin at Uni?ersity College, London. 8vo. pp. zvi. and 54, sewed. 28,


ITRIYA.

Kaltby. — A Peactical Handbook op the Ubiya ob Odita Language.
By Thomas J. Maltbt, Esq., Madras C.S. 8vo. pp. xiii. and 201. 1874.
10*. 6d,

1000
28,7,80


BTSPHUr AUBTIV AMD SONS, PaUTTESS, HXaTVOaD.


■


^^^^^^^^^^^^^^1 .E3.I


\


DATE DUE 1


SPRING T9f5


■


STANFORD UNIV
STANFORD,
94


ERSITY UBRARIES

CALIFORNIA

05


#
