The Mechanical Theory of Heat (Rudolf Clausius (Walter R. Browne, trans.), 1879)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1879 Macmillan edition, Browne's English translation (https://archive.org/details/mechanicaltheor00claugoog). Rudolf Clausius (1822-1888), Browne 1879 - the mechanical theory of heat: entropy named and formulated.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



i , 



THE 



MECHANICAL THEOKY 



OF 



HEAT. 



THE 



MECHANICAL THEOEY 



OP 



HEAT. 



:;'■''"■ ''4;,:;., 
.■•' '\1f~U. . ' 



THE 



MECHANICAL THEOKY 



OF 



HEAT. 



BY 

R CLAUSIUS. 



MAY 1^80 



TRANSLATED BY 

WALTER R. BROWNE, M.A., 

LATE FELLOW OF IBINITY COLLEQE, CAMBBIDOE. 



'Eontfon : 
MACMILLAN AND CO. 

1879 



IFL . / . ^ 6 



Camtrdrge: 

PRIKTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. 
AT THE UNIVEESITY PAE8P. 



TEANSLATOK'S PREFACE. 



The following translation was undertaken at the instance 
of Dr T. Archer Hirst, F.R.S., the translator of the first 
collected edition (mentioned in the Author's Preface below) 
of Professor Clausius' papers on the Mechanical Theory of 
Heat. The former work has however been so completely re- 
written by Professor Clausius, that Dr Hirst's translation has 
been found scarcely anywhere available ; and I must there- 
fore accept the full responsibility of the present publication. 
I trust it may be found to supply a want which I have 
reason to believe has been felt, namely, that of a systematic 
and connected treatise on Thermodynamics, for use in 
Universities and Colleges, and among advanced students 
generally. With the view of rendering it more complete for 
this purpose, I have added, with the consent of Professor 
Clausius, three short appendices on points which he had left 
unnoticed, but which still seemed of interest, at any rate 
to English readers. These are, (1) The Thermo-elastic pro- 



vi translator's preface. 

perties of Solids ; (2) The application of Thermo-dynamical 
principles to Capillarity ; (3) The Continuity of the Liquid 
and Gaseous states of Matter. My best thanks are due to 
Dr John Hopkinson, F.RS., both for the Suggestion of these 
three points, and also for the original and very elegant 
investigation from first principles, contained in the first 
Appendix, and in the commencement of the second. My 
thanks are also due to Lord Rayleigh, F.R.S., E. J. Routh, 
Esq., and Professor James Stuart, for kindly looking through 
the first proof of the translation, and for various valuable 
suggestions made in connection with it. 

WALTER K BROWNE. 



10, Victoria Chambebs, Westminster, 
NovemheTj 1879. 



AUTHOE'S PREFACE. 



Many representations having been made to the author from 
different quarters that the numerous papers " On the Me- 
chanical Theory of Heat/' which he had published at different 
times during a series of years, were inaccessible to many who, 
from the widespread interest now felt in this theory, were 
anxious to study them, he imdertook some years back to 
publish a complete collection of his papers relating to the 
subject. 

As a fresh edition of this book has now become necessary, 
he has determined to give it an entirely new form. The 
Mechanical Theory of Heat, in its present development, forms 
already an extensive and independent branch of science. 
But it is not easy to study such a subject from a series of 
separate papers, which, having been published at different 
times, are unconnected in their form, although they agree 
in their contents. Notes and additions, however freely used 
to explain and supplement the papers, do not wholly over- 
come the diflBculty. The author, therefore, thought it best 
so to re-model the papers that they might form a connected 
whole, and enable the work to become a text-book of the 
science. He felt himself the more bound to do this because 



viii author's preface. 

his long experience as a lecturer on the Mechanical Theory 
of Heat ^t a Polytechnic School and at several Universities 
had taught him how the subject-matter should be arranged 
and represented, so as to render the new view and the new 
method of calculation adopted in this somewhat difficult 
theory the more readily intelligible. This plan also enabled 
him to make use of the investigations of other writers, and 
by that means to give the subject greater completeness and 
finish. These authorities of course have been in every case 
duly recognized by name. During the ten years which have 
elapsed since the first volume of papers appeared, many fresh 
investigations into the Mechanical Theory of Heat have been 
published, and as these have also been discussed, the contents 
of the volume have been considerably increased. 

Therefore in submitting to the public this, the first part 
of his new investigation of the Mechanical Theory of Heat, 
the author feels that, although it owes its origin to the second 
edition of his former volume, still, as it contains so much 
that is fresh, he may in many respects venture to call it a new 
work. 

R CLAUSIUS. 



Bonn, December, 187a. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



MATHEMATICAL INTRODUCTIOK 

ON MECHANICAL WORK, ON ENERGY, AND ON THE TREATMENT OP 
NON-INTEGRABLE DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. 

PAGE 
§ 1. Definition and Measurement of Mechanical Work . . . 1 
§ 2. Mathematical Determination of the Work done by variable com- 
ponents of Force 2 

§ 3. Integration of the Differential Equations for Work done . . 4 
§ 4. Geometrical interpretation of the foregoing results, and obser- 
vations on Partial Differential Coefficients .... 8 
§ 5. Extension of the foregoing to three Dimensions .... 9 

§6. OntheErgal 11 

§ 7. General Extension of the foregoing 13 

§ 8. Eelation between Work and Vis Viva 17 

§9. On Energy 19 



CHAPTER I. 

FIRST MAIN PRINCIPLE OP THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. — 

EQUIVALENCE OP HEAT AND WORK. 

§ 1. Starting Point of the theory 21 

§ 2. Positive and Negative Values of Mechanical Work ... 22 

§ 3. Expression for the First Main Principle 23 

§ 4. Numerical Relation between Heat and Work .... 24 

§ 5. The Mechanical Unit of Heat 25 

§ 6. Development of the First Main Principle 27 

§ 7. Different Conditions of the quantities J, IF, and U . . .27 

§8. Energy of the Body 30 

§ 9. Equations for Finite Changes of Condition — Cyclical Processes . 82 

§ 10. Total Heat— Latent and Specific Heat 33 

§ 11. Expression for the External Work in a particular case . . 35 



X CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER II. 

ON PERFECT GASES. 

PAGK 

§ 1. The Gaseous Condition of Bodies 38 

§ 2. Approximate Principle as to Heat absorbed by Gases ... 42 
§ 3. On the Form which the equation expressing the first Main Prin- 
ciple assumes in the case of Perfect Gases .... 43 
§ 4. Deduction as to the two Specific Heats and transformation of the 

foregoing equations 46 

§ 5. Belation between the two Specific Heats, and its application to 

calculate the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat .... 48 
§ 6. Various Formulae relating to the Specific Heats of Gases . . 52 
§ 7. Numerical Calculation of the Specific Heat at Constant Volume . 66 
§ 8. Integration of the Differential Equations which express the First 

Main Principle in the case of Gases 60 

§ 9. Determination of the External Work done during the change of 

Volume of a Gas 64 



CHAPTER III. 

SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE OP THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 1. Description of a special form of Cyclical Process .... 69 

§ 2. Result of the Cyclical Process .71 

§ 3. Cyclical Process in the case of a body composed partly of Liquid 

and partly of Vapour .73 

§ 4. Camot's view as to the work performed during the Cyclical 

Process 76 

§ 5. New Fundamental Principle concerning Heat .... 78 
§ 6. Proof that the Relation between the Heat carried over, and that 

converted into work, is independent of the matter which 

forms the medium of the change 79 

§ 7. Determination of the Function <f> (T^T^ 81 

§ 8. Cyclical Processes of a more complicated character ... 84 
§ 9. Cyclical Processes in which taking in of Heat and change of 

Temperature take place simultaneously 87 



CHAPTEE lY. 

THE SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE UNDER ANOTHER FORM; OR PRIN- 
CIPLE OF THE EQUIVALENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 

§ 1. On the different kinds of Transformations 91 

§ 2. On a Cyclical Process of Special Form 92 

^ 3. On Equivalent Transformations &6 



CONTENTS. XI 

ft 

PAOS 

§ 4. Equivalence Yaloes of the Transformations 97 

§ 5. Combined value of all the Transformations which take place 

in a single Cyclical Process 101 

§ 6. Proof that in a reversible Cyclical Process the total value of all 

the Transformations must be equal to nothing • . . 102 
§ 7. On the Temperatures of the various quantities of Heat ; and the 

Entropy of the body 106 

§ 8. On the Function of Temperature, t 107 



CHAPTER V. 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 

§ 1. Discussion of the Variables which determine the Condition of 

the body 110 

§ 2. Elimination of the quantities TJ and S from the two fundamental 

equations 112 

§ 3. Case in which the Temperature is taken as one of the Independent 

Variables ' . 116 

§ 4. Particular Assumptions as to the External Forces . . . 116 
§ 6. Frequently occurriug forms of the differential equations , .118 
§ 6. Equations in the case of a body which undergoes a partial change 

in its condition of aggregation 119 

§ 7. Clapeyron's Equation and Camot's Function .... 121 



CHAPTER YI. 

APPLICATION OF THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT TO SATURATED 

VAPOUR. 

§ 1. Fundamental equations for Saturated Vapour .... 126 

§ 2. Specific Heat of Saturated Steam 129 

§ 3. Numerical Value of h for Steam 133 

§ 4. Numerical Value of h for other vapours 135 

§ 5. Specific Heat of Saturated Steam as proved by experiment . . 139 

§ 6. Specific Volume of Saturated Vapour 142 

§ 7. Departure from the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac in the case 

of Saturated Steam 143 

§8. Differential-coefficients of ^ 148 

§ 9. A Formula to determine the Specific volume of Saturated Steam, 

and its comparison with Experiment . . . . . - 150 

§ 10. Determination of the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat from the 

behaviour of Saturated Steam 155 



Xll CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

§ 11. Complete Differential Equation for Q in the case of a body 

composed both of Liqnid and Vapour 156 

§ 12. Change of the Gaseous portion of the mass .... 167 

§ 13. Belation between Volume and Temperature .... 159 

§ 14. Determination of the Work as a function of Temperature . . 160 



CHAPTER YII. 

FUSION AND VAPORIZATION OP SOLID BODIES. 

§ 1. Fundamental Equations for the process of Fusion . . . 163 
§ 2. Belation between Pressure and Temperature of Fusion . . 167 
§ 3. Experimental Verification of the Foregoing Besult . . . 168 
§ 4. Experiments on Substances which expand during Fusion . . 169 
§ 5. Belation between the Heat contained in Fusion and the Tempe- 
rature of Fusion 171 

§ 6. Passage from the solid to the gaseous condition .... 172 



CHAPTER VIII. 

ON HOMOGENEOUS BODIES. 

§ 1. Changes of Condition without Change in the Condition of Aggre- 
gation 175 

§ 2. Improved Denotation for the differential coefficients . . . 176 
§ 3. Belations between the Differential Coefficients of Pressure, 

Volume, and Temperature . « 177 

§ 4. Complete differential equations f or Q 178 

§ 5. Specific Heat at constant volume and constant pressure . . 180 

§ 6. Specific Heats under other circumstances 184 

§ 7. Isentropic Variations of a body 187 

§ 8, Special form of the fundamental equations for an Expanded Bod 188 

§ 9. Alteration of temperature during the extension of the rod . . 190 

§ 10. Further deductions from the equations 192 



CHAPTER IX. 

DETERMINATION OF ENERGY AND ENTROPY. 

§ 1. General equations 195 

.§ 2. Differential equations for the case in which only reversible 
changes take place, and in which the condition of the Body is 
determined by two Independent Variables .... 197 



CONTENTS. XIU 

FAOB 

§ 3. Introduction of the Temperature as one of the Independent 

Variables 200 

§ 4. Special case of the differential equations on the assumption that 

the only External Force is a uniform surface pressure . . 203 
§ 5. Application of the foregoing equations to Homogeneous Bodies 

and in particular to perfect Gases 205 

§ 6. Application of the equations to a body composed of matter in 

two States of Aggregation 207 

§ 7. Belation of the expressions Dxy and Ax^ 209 



CHAPTER X. 

ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 

§ 1. Completion of the Mathematical Expression for the Second 

Main Principle 212 

. . 214 

. 215 

. 218 

. 220 



§ 2. Magnitude of the Uncompensated Transformation 

§ 3. Expansion of a Gas unaccompanied by Work 

§ 4. Expansion of a Gas doing partial work 

§ 5. Methods of experiment used by Thomson and Joule 

§ 6. Development of the equations relating to the above method . 221 

§ 7. Besults of the experiments, and the equations of Elasticity for 

the gases, as deduced therefrom 224 

§ 8. On the Behaviour of Vapour during expansion and under various 

circumstances 228 



CHAPTER XI. 

APPLICATION OP THE THEORY OP HEAT TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 

§ 1. Necessity of a new investigation into the theory of the Steam- 

Engine 234 

§ 2. On the Action of the Steam-Engine 236 

§ 3. Assumptions for the purpose of Simplification .... 23d 
§ 4. Determination of the Work done during a single stroke . . 230 
§ 5. Special forms of the expression found in the last section . . 241 
§ 6. Imperfections in the construction of the Steam-Engine . . 241 
§ 7. Pambour's FormulsB for the relation between Volume and Pres- 
sure 24.2 

§ 8. Pambour's Determination of the Work done during a single 

stroke 244 

§ 9. Pambour's Value for the Work done per unit- weight of steam . 247 
§ 10. Changes in the Steam during its passage from the Boiler into 

the Cylinder 248 



Xir CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

§ 11. Divergence of the Besnlts obtained from Pambonr's Assumption 251 
§ 12. Determination of the work done during one stroke, taking into 

consideration the imperfections already noticed . . . 252 
§ 13. Pressure of Steam in the Cylinder during the different Stages 
of the Process and corresponding Simplifications of the 

Equations 255 

§ 14. Substitution of the Volume for the corresponding Tempera- 
ture in certain cases 257 

§15. Work per Unit-weight 'of Steam 259 

§ 16. Treatment of the Equations 259 

§ 17. Determination of -~ and of the product Tg .... 260 

§ 18. Introduction of other measures of Pressure and Heat . . 261 

§ 19. Determination of the temperatures Tg and Ts . . . . 262 

§ 20. Determination of c and r 264 

§ 21. Special Form of Equation (32) for an Engine working without 

expansion . . . . • . . . . . 265 

§ 22. Numerical values of the constants 267 

§ 23. The least possible value of V and the corresponding amount of 

Work 268 

§ 24. Calculation of the work for other values of F . . . . 269 

§ 25. Work done for a given value of F by an engine with expansion . 271 

§ 26. Summary of various cases relating to the working of the engine 273 

§ 27. Work done per unit of heat delivered from the Source of Heat . 274 

§28. Friction 275 

§ 29. General investigation of the action of Thermo-Dynamio Engines 

and of its relation to a Cyclical Process 276 

§ 30. Equations for the work done during any cyclical process . . 279 
§ 31. Application of the above equations to the limiting case in which 

the Cyclical Process in a Steam-Engine is reversible . . 281 

§ 32. Another form of the last expression 282 

§ 33. Influence of the temperature of the Source of Heat . . . 284 

§ 34. Example of the application of the Method of Subtraction . . 286 



CHAPTER XII. 

ON THE CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OP LIGHT AND HEAT, AND ON 

THE LIMITS OP ITS ACTION. 

§ 1. Object of the investigation 293 

I. Reasons why the ordinary method of determining the mutual 
radiation of two surfaces does not extend to the present 

case 296 

§ 2. Limitation of the treatment to perfectly black bodies and to 

homogeneous and unpolarized rays of heat .... 296 
§ 3. Eirchhoff's Formula for the mutual radiation of two Elements of 

surface 297 

§ 4. Indeterminateness of the Formula in the case of the Concen- 
tration of rays 300 



CONTENTS. XV 

FAGB 

II. Determination of corresponding points and corresponding 

Elements of Surface in three planes cut by the rays . 301 
§ 5. Equations between the co-ordinates of the points in which a ray 

cuts three given planes 801 

§ 6. The relation of corresponding elements of surface . . . 304 
§ 7. Various fractions formed out of six quantities to express the 

Belations between Corresponding Elements . . . . 3C9 

III. Determination of the mutual radiation when there is no 

concentration of rays 810 

§ 8. Magnitude of the element of surface corresponding to cf«« on a 

plane in a particular position ....... 310 

§ 9. Expressions for the quantities of heat which ds, and dsc radiate 

to each other 812 

§ 10. Badiation as dependent on the surrounding medium . . . 814 

IV. Determination of the mutual radiation of two Elements of 

Surface in the case when one is the Optical Image of the 

other 316 

§ 11. Eelations between B, D, F, and E 316 

§ 12. Application of A and C to determine the relation between the 

elements of surface 818 

§ 13. Eelation between the quantities of Heat which ds^, and ds^ 

radiate to each other 819 

V. Relation between the Increment of Area and the Eatio of 

the two solid angles of an Elementary Pencil of Bays . 321 
§ 14. Statement of the proportions for this case 321 

VI. General determination of the mutual radiation of two sur- 

faces in the case where any concentration whatever may 

take place 324 

§ 16. General view of the concentration of rays 824 

§ 16. Mutual radiation of an element of surface and of a finite surface 

through an element of an intermediate plane . . . . 3f 5 

§ 17. Mutual radiation of entire surfaces 3: 8 

§ 18. Consideration of various collateral circumstances . . . 32^ 

§ 19. Summary of results 330 



CHAPTER XIII. 

DISCUSSIONS ON" THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT AS HERE 
DEVELOPED AND ON ITS FOUNDATIONS. 

§ 1. Different views of the relation between Heat and Work . . 332 

§ 2. Papers on the subject by Thomson and the author . . . 3r3 

§ 3. On Rankine's Paper and Thomson's Second Paper . . . 384 

§ 4. Holtzmann's Objections . , 337 

§ 5. Decher's Objections . . " 339 

§ 6. Fundamental principle on which the author's proof of the second 

main principle rests 340 

§ 7. Zeuner's first treatment of the subject 341 

§ 8. Zeoner's second treatment of the subject 342 



XVI CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

§ 9. Bankine's treatment of the subject 345 

§ 10. Him'8 Objections 348 

§ 11. Wand's Objections «63 

§ 12. Tait'8 Objections 860 



Appendix I. Thermo-elastic Properties of Solids .... 363 

II. Capillarity 369 

„ III. Continuity of the Liquid and Gaseous states . . . 373 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



MATHEMATICAL INTRODUCTION. 

ON MECHANICAL WORK, ON ENERGY, AND ON THE 
TREATMENT OF NON^INTEQRABLE DIFFERENTIAL 

EQUATIONS. 

§ 1. Definition and Measurement of Mechanical Work. 

Every force tends to give motion to the body on which 
it acts; iut it may be prevented from doing so by other 
opposing forces, so that equilibrium results, and the body 
remains at rest. In this case the force performs no work. 
But as soon as the body moves under the influence of the 
force, Work is performed. 

In order to investigate the subject of Work under the 
simplest possible conditions, we may assume that instead 
of an extended body the force acts upon a single material 
point. If this point, which we may call p, travels in the 
same straight line in which the force tends to move it, 
then the product of the force and the distance moved 
through is the mechanical work which the force performs 
during the motion. If on the other hand the motion of 
the point is in any other direction than the line of action 
of the force, then the work performed is represented by 
the product of the distance moved through, and the com- 
ponent of the force resolved in the direction of motion. 

This component of force in the line of motion may be 
positive or negative in sign, according as it tends in the 

c. 1 



2 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

same direction in which the motion actually takes place, 
or in the opposite. The work likewise will be positive in 
the first case, negative in the second. To express the 
diflference in words, which is for many reasons convenient, 
recourse may be had to a terminology proposed by the 
writer in a former treatise, and the force may be said to 
do or perform work in the former case, and to destroy work 
in the latter. 

From the foregoing it is obvious that, to express quan- 
tities of work numerically, we should take as unit that 
quantity of work which is performed by an unit of force 
acting through an unit of distance. In order to obtain a 
scale of measurement easy of application, we must choose, 
as our normal or standard force, some force which is 
thoroughly known and easy of measurement. The force 
usually chosen for this purpose is that of gravity. 

Gravity acts on a given body as a force always tending 
downwards, and which for plapes not too far apart may be 
taken as absolutely constant, If now we wish to lift a 
weight upwards by means of any force at our disposal, 
we must in doing so overcome the force of gravity; and 
gravity thus gives a measure of the force which we must; 
exert for any slow lifting action. Hence we take as our 
unit of work that which must be performed in order to 
lift a unit of weight through a unit of length. The units of 
weight and length to be chosen are of course matter of indif- 
ference; in applied mechanics they are generally the kilo- 
gram and the metre respectively, and then the unit of work 
is called a kilogrammetre. Thus to raise a weight of a 
kilograms through a height of b metres ab kilogrammetres' 
of work are required ; and other quantities of work, in cases 
where gravity does not come directly into play, can also be 
expressed in kilogrammetres, by comparing the forces em- 
ployed with the standard force of gravity. 

§ 2. Mathematical determination of the Work done by 
variable components of Force, 

In the foregoing explanation it has been tacitly assumed 
that the active component of force "has a constant value 
throughout the whole of the distance traversed. In reality 
this is not usually true for a distance of finite length. Oa 



HATHEMTATICAL INTRODUCTION. . S 

the one hand the force need not itself be the same at diffe- 
rent points of space ; and on the other, although the force 
may remain constant throughout, yet,., if the path be not 
straight but curved; the component of f6rce in the direction 
of motion will still vary. For this reason it is allowable to ex- 
press work done by a simple product, only when the distance 
traversed is indefinitely stnallj t»e, for an element of space. 

Let ds be an element of space, and 8 the component in 
the direction of d.s' of the force acting on the point p. We 
have then the following equation to , obtain d W, the work 
done during the movement through the indefinitely small 
space ds: . : 

dW=-Sds .: (1). 

« 

If P be the total resultant force acting' on the point p, and 
<!> the angle which the direction of this resultant makes with 
the direction of motion at the point under consideration, 
then 

S=^Pt6a<f>, 

whence we have, by (1), 

dW=^Pcos^d8 (2). 

It is convenient for calculation to employ a system of 
rectangular co-ordinates, and to consider the projections of 
the element of space upon the axes of co-ordinates, and the 
components of force a& resolved parallel to those axes. 

For the sake of simplicity we will assume that the motion 
takes place in a plane in which both the initial direction of 
motion and the line of force are situated. We will employ 
rectangular axes of co-ordinates lying in this plane, and will 
call X and y the co-ordinates of the moving point ^ at a 
given time. If the point moves from this position in the 
plane of co-ordinates through an indefinitely small space ds, 
the projections of this motion on the axes will be called dx 
and dy, and will be positive or negative, according as the 
co-ordinates x and y are increased or diminished by the 
motion. The components of the force P, resolved in the 
directions of the axes, will be called X and Y. Then, if a 
and b are the cosines of the angles which the line of force 
makes with the axes of w and y respectively, we have 

1—2 



4 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Again, if a and /8 are the cosines of the angles which the 
element of space da makes with the axes, we have 

dx ss ads ; dy = fids. 

From these equations we obtain 

.Xdx-{- Ydy = (aa + hfi) Pds. 
But by Analytical Geometry we know that 

aa + J)8 = cos ^, 

where ^ is the angle between the line of force and the. 
element of spape : hence 

Xdx + Ydy = cos <f> Pds, 

and therefore by equation (2), 

dW^Xdx+Ydy (3). 

This being the equation for the work done during an indefi* 
nitely small motion, we must integrate it to determine the 
work done during a motion of finite extent. 

§ 3. Integration of the Differential Equation for Work 
done. 

In the integration of a differential equation of the form 
given in equation (3), in which X and Y are functions of a? 
and y, and which may therefore be written in the form 

dW = (f> (psy) dx -{- yjr (xy) dy (3a), 

a distinction has to be drawn, which is of great importance, 
not only for this particular case, but also for the equations 
which occur later on in the Mechanical Theory of Heat ; and 
which will therefore be examined here at some length, so 
that in future it will be sufficient simply to refer back to the 
present passage. 

According to the nature of the functions <f> (pay) and 
^]r{xy), differential equations of the form (3) fall into two 
classes, which differ widely both as to the treatment which 
they require, and the results to which they lead. To the 



MATHEMATICAL INTRODUCTION. 5 

first class belong the cases, in which the functions X and Y 
fulfil the following condition : 

dX ^dY , - V 

dy dx ^ ^' 

The second class comprises all cases, in which this condition 
is not fulfilled. 

If the condition (4) is fulfilled, the expression on the 
light-hand side of equation (3) or (3a) becomes immediately 
integrable ; for it is the complete differential of some func- 
tion of X and y, in which these may be treated as indepen- 
dent variables, and which is formed fi:om the equations 

dFjxy) ^^ dF(xt/) ^y^ 
dx * dy ' 

Thus we obtain at once an equation of the form 

w=^F(xy) + const,* (5). 

If condition (4) is not fulfilled, the right-hand side of the 
equation is not integrable ; and it follows that W cannot be 
expressed as a function of x and y, considered as independent 
variables. For, if we could put W^ F {xy)^ we should have 

^^dW^ dF{xy) 
dx dx 

" dy"^ dy ' 

whence it follows that 

dX ^ d^Fjpcy) 
dy " dxdy ' 

.dY^ d^F(xy) 
dx dydx 

But since with a function of two independent variables the 
order of dififerentiation is immaterial, we may put 

d'F{xy) ^ d*F{xy) ^ 
dxdy dydx ' 



i 



6 ON TSE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

whence it follows that-r- ^-j~.> ^'^' condition (4) is fulfilled 

for the functions X and Y\ which is contrary to the assump- 
tion. 

In this case then the integration is impossible, so long as 
X and y are considered as independent variables. If however 
we assume any fixed relation to hold between these, two 
quantities, so that one may be expressed as a function of the 
other, the integration again becomes possible. For if we 
put 

/(^y) = (6), 

in which / expresses any function whatever, then by means 
of this equation we can eliminate one of the variables and 
its differential from the differential equation. (The general 
form in which equation (6) is given of course comprises the 
special case in which one of the variables is taken a^ 
constant ; its differential then becomes zero, and the variable 
itself only appears as: part of the constant coefficient). Sup- 
posing y to be the variable eliminated, the equation (3) 
takes the form dW ^ (f> {x) dx, which is a simple differential 
^equation, and gives on integration an equation of the form 

. w = F (a:) + const .....(7). ' 

The two equations (6) and (7) may thus be treated as form- 
ing together a solution of the differential equation. As the 
form of the function f{xy) may be anything whatever, it is 
clear that the number of solutions thus to be obtained is 
infinite. 

The form of equation (7) may of course be modified. 
Thus if we had express.ed x in terms of y by means of equa- 
tion (6), and then eliminated x and dx from the differential 
equation, this latter would then have taken the form 

dW^4>,(y)dy, 

and on integrating we should have had an equation 

W^F^iy)-{- const .(7a). 

This same equation can be obtained from equation (7) by 
substituting y for x in that equation by means of equation (6). 
Or, instead of completely eliminating x from (7), we may 



MATHEMATICAL INTRODUCTION. 7 

prefer a partial elimination. For if the function F {x) con- 
tains X several times over in different terms, (and if this does 
not hold in the original form of the equation, it can be easily 
introduced into it by writing instead of x an expression such 

as (1 — a)aj + cw:, — ^, &c.) then it is possible to substitute 

x 

y for X in some of these expressions, and to let x remain in 

others. The equation then takes the form 

Tr=i?;(a?,y) + const. (76), 

"which is a more general form, embracing the other two as 
special cases. It is of course understood that the three equa- 
tions (7), (7a), (76), each of which has no meaning except 
when combined with equation (6), are not different solutions, 
but diflferent expressions for one and the same solution of 
the diflferential equation. 

Instead of equation (6), we may also employ, to integrate 
the differential equation (3), another equation of less simple 
form, which in addition to the two variables x and y also 
contains TT, and which may itself be a dififerential equation ; 
the simpler form however suffices for our present purpose, 
and with this restriction we may sum up the results of this 
section as follows. 

When the condition of immediate integrability, expressed 
by equation (4), is fulfilled, then we can obtain directly an 
integral equation of the form: 

F=-F(a?, y) + const. (A). 

When this condition is not fulfilled, we must first assume 
some relation between the variables, in order to make inte- 
gration possible; and we shall thereby obtain a system of 
two equations of the following form : 

/(^,y)=o, \ ^. 

F=i^(ir,y) + const.J ^ ^' 

in which the form of the function F depends not only on 
that of the original diflferential equation, but also on that of 
the function/, which may be assumed at pleasure. 



8 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 4. Geometrical interpretation of the foregoing results, 
and observations on partial differential coefficients. 

The important diflference between the results in the two 
cases mentioned above is rendered more clear by treating 
them geometrically. In so doing we shall for the sake of 
simplicity assume that the function F {x, y) in equation (A) 
is such that it has only a single value for any one point in 
the plane of co-ordinates. We shall also assume that in the 
movement of the point p its original and final positions are 
known, and given by the co-ordinates x^y y^^ and x^, y^ respec- 
tively. Then in the first case we can find an expression for 
the work done by the effective force during the motion, 
without needing to know the actual path traversed. For it 
is clear, that this work will be expressed, according to con- 
dition (A), by the difference F{x^y^ — F^x^y^). Thus, while 
the moving point may pass from one position to the other 
by very different paths, the amount of work done by the force 
is wholly independent of these, and is completely known as 
soon as the original and final positions are given. 

In the second case it is otherwise. In the system of 
equations (B), which belongs to this case, the first equation 
must be treated as the equation to a curve ; and (since the 
form of the second depends upon it) the relation between 
them may be geometrically expressed by saying that the 
work done by the effective force during the motion of the 
point p can only be determined, when the whole of the 
curve, on which the point moves, is known. If the original 
and final positions are given, the first equation must indeed 
be so chosen, that the curve which corresponds to it may pass 
through those two points ; but the number of such possible 
curves is infinite, and accordingly, in spite of their coinci- 
dence at their extremities, they will give an infinite number 
of possible quantities of work done during the motion. 

If we assume that the point p describes a closed curve, so 
that the final and initial positions coincide, and thus the co- 
ordinates x^,y^hB.Ye the same value as x^,y^,then in the 
first case the total work done is equal to zero: in the second 
case, on the other hand, it need not equal zero, but may have 
any value positive or negative. 

The case here examined also illustrates the fact that a 



MATHEMATICAL IKTRODUCTION. 9 

quantity, which cannot be expressed as a function of x and y 
(so long as these are taken as independent variables), may 
yet have partial diflferential coefficients according to x and y, 
which are expressed by determinate functions of those vari- 
ables. For it is manifest that, in the strict sense of the 
words, the components X and Y must be termed the partial 
dififerential coefficients of the work W according to x and y : 
since, when x increases by dx, y remaining constant, the 
work increases by Xdx; and when y increases by dy, x re- 
maining constant, the work increases by Ydy. Now whether 
TT be a quantity generally expressible as a function of x and 
y, or one which can only be determined on knowing the path 
described by the moving point, we may always employ the 
ordinary notation for the partial diflferential coefficients of W, 
and write ' 



"S)'-- 



/dW\ 
\dy) 



Y. 



(8). 



Using this notation we may also write the condition (4), the 
fulfilment or non-fulfilment of which causes the distinction 
between the two modes of treating the diflferential equation, 
in the following form: 

A fiK] = A (^) (Q) 

dy\dxj dx\dy ) ^ 

Thus we may say that the distinction which has to be 
drawn in reference to the quantity W depends on whether 

the difference ;j-(-j-") ""x^ ("j — ) is equal to zero, or has 
a finite value. 

§ 5. Extension of the above to three dimensions. 

If the point p be not restricted in its movement to one 
plane, but left free in space, we then obtain for the element 
of work an expression very similar to that given in equation 
(3). Let a, J, c be the cosines of the angles which the direc- 
tion of the force P, acting on the point, makes with three 



10 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

rectaDgular axes of co-ordinates ; then the three components 
X, Yy Z oi this force will be given by the equations 

X = aP, Y^hP, Z^cP. 

Again, let a, A 7 be the cosines of the angles, which the 
element of space ds makes with the axes ; then the three 
projections dx^ dy^ dz of this element on those axes are given 
by the equations 

dx=ads, dy = fid8, dz^yds. 

Hence we have 

Xdx+ Ydy + Zdz=(aa + hl3+cy)Pds. 

But if <f) be the angle between the direction of P and ds^ 
then 

aa + i^ + C7 = cos ^: 

hence Xdx + Ydy + Zdz = cos ^ x Pds. 

Comparing this with equation (2), we obtain 

dyf^Xdx-^-Yiy-^Zdz (10). 

This is the differential equation for determining the work 
done. The quantities X, F, Z may be any functions what- 
ever of the co-ordinates x^y^ z\ since whatever may be the 
values of these three components at different points in space, 
a resultant force P may always be derived from them. 

In treating this equation, we must first consider the fol- 
lowing three conditions : 

dX^dY dY^dZ dZ^dX 

dy dx' dz dy ^ dx dz ^ ^' 

and must enquire whether or not the functions X, Y, Z 
satisfy them. 

If these three conditions ai*e satisfied, thfen the expression 
on the right-hand side of (11) is the complete differential of 
a function of x, y, z, in which these may all be treated as 
independent variables. The integration may therefore be at 
once effected, and we obtain an equation of the form 

W ^ F {xyz) + cojiat (12), 



/ MATHEMATICAL INTRODUCTION. 11 

If we now conceive the point p to move from a given 
initial position (a?^, y^, z^ to a given final position (a? , y , z^ 
the work done by the force during the motion will be repre- 
sented by 

If then we suppose F{xy y, z) to be such that it has only a 
single value for any one point in space, the work will be 
completely determined by the original and final positions; 
and it follows that the work done by the force is always the 
same, whatever path may have been followed by the point 
•in passing from one position to the other. 

If the three conditions (1) are not satisfied, the integra- 
tion cannot be effected in the same general manner. If, 
towever, the path be known in which the motion takes place, 
the integration becomes thereby possible. If in this case 
two points are given as the original and final positions, and 
various curves are conceived as drawn between these points, 
along any of which the point p may move, then for each of 
these paths we may obtain a determinate value for the work 
done; but the values corresponding to these different paths 
need not be equal, as in the first case, but on the contrary 
are in general different. 

§ 6. OniheErgaL 

In those cases in which equation (12) holds, or the work 
done can be simply expressed as a function of the co-ordinateSj 
this function plays a very important part in our calculations. 
Hamilton gave to it the special name of "force function"; a 
name applicable also to the more general case where, instead 
of a single moving point, any number of such points are 
considered, and where the condition is fulfilled that the work 
done depends only on the positit)h of the points. In the 
later and more extended investigations with regard to the 
quantities which are expressed by this function, it has become 
needful to introduce a special name for the negative value of 
the function, or in other words for that quantity, the suh^ 
iraction of which gives the work performed; and Rankine 
proposed for this the term 'potential energy.* This name 
•sets forth very clearly the character of the quantity ; but it 



12 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

is somewhat long, and the author has ventured to propose 
in its place the term " ErgaL" 

Among the cases in which the force acting on a point has 
an Ergal^ the most prominent is that in which the force 
originates in attractions or repulsioDS, exerted on the moving 
point from fixed points, and the value of which depends only 
on the distance ; in other words the case in which the forqe 
may be classed as a central force. Let us take as centre of 
force a fixed point tt, with co-ordinates f , rj, f, and let p be 
its distance from the moving pointy, so that 

p=V(f-^)"+('/-yr+(r-^r. m. 

Let us express the force which tt exerts on p by 0' (p), in 
which a positive value of the function expresses attraction, 
and a negative value repulsion ; we then have for the com- 
ponents of the force the expressions 

r r r 

But by (13) j^ = - ^-—^: hence X= — 0' (p) -^ , and simi- 
larly for the other two axes. If <f){p) he a function such 
that 

<f>(p)=j<f>'(p)dp (14). 

we may write the last equation thus : 

j^ d4>{p) dp ^ d<l>{p) ,jg. 

dp dx dx ^ '' 

and similarly F = -^. -2^=-^ (15a). 

Hence we have 

. Xdx+Ydy + Zdz = -]^dx+'^dy + ^dX 

But, since in the expression for p given in equation (13) the 
quantities a?, y, z are the only variables, and {p) may there- 
fore be treated as a function of those three quantities, the 



MATHEMATICAL HnHODUCTION. 18 

expression in brackets forms a perfect differential, and we 
may write : 

Xdx+ Ydy-k-Zdz^-^d^ip) (16). 

The element of work is thus given by the negative dififeren- 
tial of ^ (/)) ; whence it follows that ^ (/>) is in this case the 
Ergal. 

Again, instead of a single fixed point, we may have any 
number of fixed points tTj, tt,, tt,, &c., the distances of which 
from p. are pj, p,, p,, &c., and which exert on it forces 
4>{p^f <l>(pj, <I>{P9), &c« Then if, as in equation (14), we as- 
sume 0j(/o), ^,(p), <l>zip)9 &c. to be the integrals of the above 
functions, we obtain, exactly as in equation (15), 

j^ ^<I>M d<t>^(p^ #3(^8) 
dx dx dx 

—d^L^iW + *.(/>,) + *.(/>.) + •••]. 

or X=«^2^(p) (17). 

Similarly r««^2^(p), Z^^^^t<l>{p) (17a), 

whence Xdx+Ydy + Zdz^-dX<l>(j)) (18). 

Thus the sum 2 ^(p) is here the Ergal. 

§ 7. General Extension of the foregoing. 

Hitherto we have only considered a single moving point ; 
we will now extend the method to comprise a system com- 
posed of any number of moving points, which are in part 
acted on by external forces, and in part act mutually on each 
other. 

If this whole system makes an indefinitely small move- 
ment, the forces acting on any one point, which forces we 
may conceive as combined into a single resultant, will per- 
form a quantity of work which may be represented by the 
expression {Xdx + Ydy + Zdz). Hence the sum of all the 



14 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

work done by all the forces acting in the system taay bQ 
represented by an expression of the form 



S(Xda?+ Ydy + Zdz), 



':-\ 



in which the summation extends to all the moving points; 
This complex expression, like the simpler one treated 
above, may have undei* certain circumstances the important 
peculiarity that it is the complete diflferential of some func- 
tion of the co-ordinates of all the moving points ; in which 
case we call this function, taken negatively, the Ergal of the 
whole system. It follows from this that in a finite move- 
ment of the system the total work done is simply equal to 
the diflference between the initial and final values of the 
Ergal ; and therefore (assuming that the function which 
represents the Ergal is such as to have only one value for one 
position of the points) the work done is completely deter- 
mined by the initial and final positions of the points, without 
its being needful to know the paths, by which these have 
moved from one position to the other. • 

This state of things, which, it is obvioUs, simplifies greatly 
the determination of the work done, occurs when all the 
forces acting in the system are Central forces, which either, 
act upon the moving points from fixed points, or are actions 
between the moving points themselves. 

First, as regards central forces acting from fixed points, 
we have already discussed their effect for a single moving 
point ; and this discussion will extend also to the motion of 
the whole system of points, since the quantity of work done 
in the motion of a number of points is simply equal to the 
suni of the quantities of work done in the motion of each 
several point. We can therefore express the part of the 
Ergal relating to the action of the fixed points, as before, by 
2 ^ (p), if we only give such an extension to the summation, 
that it shall comprise not only as many terms as there are 
fixed points, but as many terms as there are combinations of 
one fixed and one moving point. 

Next as regards the forces acting between the moving 
points themselves, we will for the present consider only two 
points p and p\ with co-ordinates a, y, z, and x, y', z\ 



MATHEMATICAL " INTRODUCTION. 1 5 

respectively. If r be the distance between these points, we 
have 

r = V(x-a;)» + (y'-y)« +(/-«)' (19). 

We may denote the force which the points exert on each 
other by/'(^)* ^ positive value being used for attraction, and 
a negative for repulsion. 

Then the components of the force which the point p 
exerts in this mutual action are 

■ /'(r)^. /'(r)2^^. /(f)^-f-^ 

and the components of the opposite force exerted by 'p are 

/'W^', /'(r)^', /'W^'. 

But by (19), diflferentiating 

dr X* ^x dr x — x 



dx r ^ dx 



} 



80 that the components of force in the direction of x may 
also be written . . ' 

and if /(r) be a function such that 

f(r)'=jf'{r)dr (20), 

the foregoing may also be written 

-df{r) , -df(r) ^ 
dx ^ dx * 

Similarly the components in the direction of y may be 
written 

- dfjr) . ::^/(r). 
dy ' dy' > 

and those in the direction of z 

-if{r) . -df{r) 
dz ' dz' ' 



Iff ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

That part of the total work done in the indefinitely small 
motion of the two points, which is due to the two opposite 
forces arising from their mutual action, may therefore be 
expressed as follows : 

But as r depends only qn the six quantities x, y, z, x\ y\ z\ 
and f{f) can therefore be a function of these six quantities 
only, the expression in brackets is a perfect diflferential, and 
the work done, as far as concerns the mutual action between 
the two points, may be simply expressed by the function 

-Af{r). 

In the same way may be expressed the work due to the 
mutual action of everyjother pair of points; and the total 
work done by all the forces which the points exert among 
themselves is expressed by the algebraical sum 

-dS{T)-df{T')-df{:r")-'"\ 

or as it may be otherwise written, 

-d[/Wl-/(O+/(O + ..0 or -d2/(r); 

in which the summation must comprise as many terms as 
there are combinations of moving points, two and two. This 
sum S/(r) is then the part of the Ergal relating to the 
mutual and opposite actions of all the moving points. 

If we now finally add the two kinds of forces together, 
we obtain, for the total work done in the indefinitely small 
motion of the system of points, the equation 

«-J[2<^(p)+2/(r)] (21), 

whence it follows that the quantity 2^ (/o) + 2/ (r) is the 
Ergal of the whole of the forces acting together in the system. 
The assumption lying at the root of the foregoing analy- 
sis, viz. that central forces are the only ones acting, is of 
course only one among all the assumptions mathematically 



MATHEMATICAL INTRODUCTION. 17 

possible as to the forces; but it forms a case of peculiar 
importance, inasmuch as all the forces which occur in nature 
may apparently be classed as central forces. 

§ 8. Relation between Work and Vis Viva. 

Hitherto we have only considered the forces which act on 
the points, and the change in position of the points them- 
selves ; their masses and their velocities have been left out 
of account. We will now take these also into consideration. 

The equations of motion for a freely moving point of 
mass m are well known to be as follows : 

"^^=^' ^dl=^' "^d?"-^- (22). 

If we multiply these equations respectively by 

dx J dy J dz -, 
—r- at* —& at* —r at^ 
dt ' dt ' dt * 

and then add, we obtain 

The left-hand side of this equation may be transformed 
into 

m d 



2dt 



[(S)'-(S)'-(S)> 



or, if V be the velocity of the point, 

and the equation becomes 

If, instead of a single freely moving point, a whole system 
of freely moving points is considered, we shall have for every 

c. 2 



is ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

point a similar equation to the above; and by summation 
we shall obtain the following: 

'«?""-^(^S+^l+4)* <^^)- 

Now the quantity 2 -^w* is* the vis viva of the whole system 

of points. If we take a simple expression for the vis viva, 
and put 

T^t'^v' (26), 

then the equation becomes 

• ■d2'=2(z|-fr| + 4)ci« (27). 

But the right-hand side of this equation is the expression 
for the work done during the time dt Integrate the equa- 
tion from an initial tim^ t^ to a time t, and call T^ the vis 
viva at time t^: then the resulting equation is 

. ^-^-Z- ^(^S-^ ^S+4:)<" (^«'- 

the meaning of which may be expressed as follows: 

The Work done during any time by the forces acting upon 
a system is equal to the increase of the Vis Viva of the system 
during the same tim£. 

In this expression a diminution of Vis Viva is of course 
treated as a negative increase. 

It was assumed at the commencement that all the points 
were moving freely. It may, however, happen that the points 
are subjected to certain constraints in reference to their 
motion. They may be so connected with each other that 
the motion of one point shall in part determine the motion 
of others; or there may be external constraints, as for in- 
stance, if one of the points is compelled to move in a given 
fi^ed plane, or on a given fixed curve, whence it will natur- 

* Translator's Note. The vis viva of a particle is here defined as half 
the mass mnltiplied by the square of the velocity, and not the whole mass, 
as was formerly the custom. 



MATHEMATICAL INTRODUCTION. . 19 

ally follow that all those points, which are in any connection 
with it, will also be to some extent constrained in their 
motion. 

If these conditions of constraint can be expressed by 
equations which contain only the co-ordinates of the points, 
it may be proved, by methods which we will not here con- 
sider more closely, that the reactions, which are implicitly 
comprised in these conditions, perform no work whatever 
during the motion of the points ; and therefore the principle 
given above, as expressing the relation between Vis Viva and 
Work done, is true for constrained, as well as for free motion. 
It is called the Principle of the Equivalence of Work and 
Vis Viva. 

§9. On Energy. 

In equation (28), the work done in the time from L to t 
is expressed by 



/X^S-4-^-)*, 



dt 

in which t is considered as the only independent variable, 
and the co-ordinates of the points and the components of the 
forces are taken as functions of time only. If these functions 
are known (for which it is requisite that we should know the 
whole course of the motion of all the points), then the inte- 
gration is always possible, and the work done can also be 
determined as a function of the time. 

Cases however occur, as we have seen above, in which it 
is not necessary to express all the quantities as functions of 
one variable, but where the integration may still be effected, 
by writing the differential in the form ^{Xdx + Ydy + Zdz), 
and considering the co-ordinates therein as independent vari- 
ables. For this it is necessary that this expression should 
be a perfect differential of some function of the co-ordinates, 
or in other words the forces acting on the system must have 
an Ergal. This Ergal, which is the negative value of the 
above function, we will denote by a single letter. The letter 
U is generally chosen for this purpose in works on Me- 
chanics: but in the Mechanical Theory of Heat that letter 
is needed to express another quantity, which will enter as 

2—2 



/■ 

Jt 



20 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

largely into the discussion; we will therefore denote the 
Ergal by J, Hence we put: 

X{Xdx+Ydy-^Zdz)^''dJ. (29), 

whence if J^ be the value of the Ergal at time t^, we have: 

'Z{Xdx+Ydy{'Zdz)^J^'-J. (30), 

to 

which expresses that the work done in any time is equal to 
the decrease in the Ergal. 

If we substitute Jq — J tor the integral in equation (28), 
we have: 

T^T,^J,^JoT T+J^T, + J, (31); 

whence we have the following principle: The sum of the Vis 
Viva and of the Ergal remains constant during the motion. 
This sum, which we will denote by the letter ZT, so that 

U^T^J. (32), 

is called the Energy oi the system ; so that the above prin- 
ciple may be more shortly expressed by saying: The Energy 
remains constant during the motion. This principle, which in 
recent times has received a much more extended application 
than formerly, and now forms one of the chief foundations of 
the whole structure of physical philosophy, is known by the 
name of The Principle of the Conservation of Energy. 



(21 ) 



CHAPTER L 

FIRST MAIN PRINCIPLE OF THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF 
HEAT, OR PRINCIPLE OF THE EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT 

AND WORK. 

§ 1. Nature of Heat 

Until recently it was the generally accepted view that 
Heat was a special substance, which was present in bodies in 
greater or less quantity, and which produced thereby their 
higher or lower temperature; which was also sent forth 
from bodies, and in that case passed with immense speed 
through empty space and through such cavities as ponder- 
able bodies contain, in the form of what is called radiant 
heat. In later days has arisen the other view that Heat is 
in reality a mode of motion. According to this view, the 
heat found in bodies and determining their temperature is 
treated as being a motion of their ponderable atoms, in 
which motion the ether existing within the bodies may also 
participate ; and radiant heat is looked upon as an undulatory 
motion propagated in that ether. 

It is not proposed here to set forth the facts, experiments, 
and inferences, through which men have been brought to 
this altered view on the subject ; this would entail a refer- 
ence here to much which may be better described in its own 
place during the course of the book. The conformity with 
experience of the results deduced from this new theory will 
probably serve better than anything else to establish the 
foundations of the theory itself. 

We will therefore start with the assumption that Heat 
consists in a motion of the ultimate particles of bodies and 
of ether, and that the quantity of heat is a measure of the 
Vis Viva of this motion. The nature of this motion we 



22 ON THE MECHANlCAli' THEORY OF HEAT* 

shall not attempt to determine, but shall merely apply to 
Heat the principle of the equivalence of Vis Viva and Work, 
which applies to motion of every kind ; and thus establish 
a principle which may be called the first main Principle of 
the Mechanical Theory of Heat. 

§ 2. Positive and negative values of Mechanical Work. 

In § 1 of the Introduction the mechanical work done in 
the movement of a point under the action of a force was 
defined to be The product of the distance moved through and 
of the component of the force resolved in the direction of 
motion. The work is thus positive if the component of 
force in the line of motion lies on the same side of the 
initial point as the element of motion, and negative if it falls 
on the opposite side. From this definition of the positive 
sign of mechanical work follows the principle of the equiva- 
lence of Vis Viva and Work, viz. The increase in the Vis 
Viva is equal to the work doue, or equal to the increase in 
total work. 

The question may also be looked at from another point 
of view. If a material point has once been set in motion, it 
can contiuue this movement, on account of its momentum, 
even if the force acting on it tends in a direction opposite to 
that of the motion ; though its velocity, and therewith its 
Vis Viva, will of course be diminishing all the time. A 
material point acted on by gravity for example, if it has 
received an upward impulse, can continue to move against 
the force of gravity, although the latter is continually 
diminishing the velocity given by the impulse. In such a 
case the work, if considered as work done by the force, is 
negative. Conversely however we may reckon work as 
positive in cases where a force is overcome by the momen- 
tum of a previously acquired motion, as negative in cases 
where the point follows the direction of the force. Applying 
the form of expression introduced in § 1 of the Introduction, 
in which the distinction between the two opposite directions 
of the component of force is indicated by diflerent words, we 
may express the foregoing more simply as follows : we may 
determine that not the work done, but the work destroyed, 
by a force shall be reckoned as positive. 

On this method of denoting work done, the principle of 



EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 23' 

the equivalence of Vis Viva and Work takes the following 
form : The decrease in the Vis Viva is equal to the increase in 
the Work done, or The sum of the Vis Viva and Work done is 
constant This latter form will be found very convenient in 
what follows. 

In the case of such forces as have an Ergal, the meaning 
of that quantity was defined (in § 6 of the Introduction) in 
such a manner that we must say, * The Work done is equal 
to the decrease in the Ergal.' If we use the method of denot- 
ing work just described, we must say on the contrary, 'The 
work done is equal to the increase in the Ergal;' and if the 
constant occurring as one term of the Ergal be determined 
in a particular way, we may then regard the Ergal as simply 
an expression for the work done. 

§ 3. Expression for the first Fundamental Principle. 

Having fixed as above what is to be the positive sign for 
work done, we may now state as follows the first main 
Principle of the Mechanical Theory of Heat. 

In all cases where work is produced by heat, a quantity of 
heat is consumed proportional to the work donis; and inversel//, 
by the expenditure of the same amount of work the same 
quantity of heat may be produced. 

This follows, on the mechanical conception of heat, from 
the equivalence of Vis Viva and Work, and is named The 
Principle of the Equivalence of Heat and Work. 

If heat is consumed, and work thereby produced, we may 
say that heat has transformed itself into work; and con- 
versely, if work is expended and heat thereby produced, we 
may say that work has transformed itself into heat Using 
this mode of expression, the foregoing principle takes the 
following form : Work may transform itself into heat, and heat 
conversely into work, the quantity of tlie one bearing always a 
fixed proportion to that of the other. 

This principle' is established by means of many pheno- 
mena which have been long recognized, and of late years 
has been confirmed by so many experiments of diflferent 
kinds, that we may accept it, apart from the circumstance of 
its forming a special case of the general mechanical principle 
of the Q)nservati6n of Energy, as being a principle directly 
derived from experience and observation. 



24 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 4. Numerical Relation between Heat and Work. 

While the mechanical principle asserts that the changes 
in the Vis Viva and in the corresponding Work done are 
actually eqtuil to each other, the principle which expresses 
the relation between Heat and Work is one of Proportion 
only. The reason is that heat and work are not measured 
on the same scale. Work is measured by the mechanical 
unit of the kilogrammetre, whilst the unit of heat, chosen 
for convenience of measurement, is That amount of heat 
which is required to raise one kilogram of water from 0^ to 
V {Centigrade). Hence the relation existing between heat 
and work can be one of proportion only, and the numerical 
value must be specially determined. 

If this numerical value is so chosen as to give the work 
corresponding to an unit of heat, it is called the Mechanical 
Equivalent of Heat ; if on the contrary it gives the heat 
corresponding to an unit of work, it is called the Thermal 
Equivalent of Work, We shall denote the former by E, and 

the latter by -^^ . 

The determination of this numerical value is effected in 
different ways. It has sometimes been deduced from already 
existing data, as was first done on correct principles by 
Mayer (whose method will be further explained hereafter), 
although, from the imperfection of the then existing data, his 
result must be admitted not to have been very exact. At 
other times it has been sought to determine the number by 
experiments specially made with that view. To the dis- 
tinguished English physicist Joule must be assigned the 
credit of having established this value with the greatest cir- 
cumspection and care. Some of his experiments, as well as 
determinations carried out at a later date by others, will 
more properly find their place after the development of the 
theory ; and we will here confine ourselves to stating those of 
Joule's experiments which are the most readily understood, 
and at the same time the most certain as to their results. 

Joule measured, under various circumstances, the heat 
generated by friction, and compared it with the work con- 
sumed in producing the friction, for which purpose he 
employed descending weights. As accounts of these experi- 



EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 25 

ments are given in many books, they need not here be 
described ; and it will suffice to state the results as given in 
his paper, published in the PhiL Trans, for 1850. 

In the first series of experiments, a very extensive one, 
water was agitated in a vessel by means of a revolving paddle 
wheel, which was so arranged that the whole quantity of 
water could not be brought into an equal state of rotation 
throughout, but the water, after being set in motion, was 
continually checked by striking against fixed blades, which 
occasioned numerous eddies, and so produced a large amount 
of friction. The result, expressed in English measures, is 
that in order to produce an amount of heat which will raise 
1 pound of water through 1 degree Fahrenheit, an amount 
of work equal to 772*695 foot-pounds must be consumed. 
In two other series of experiments quicksilver was agitated 
in the same way, and gave a result of 774*083 foot-pounds. 
Lastly, in two series of experiments pieces of cast iron were 
rubbed against each other under quicksilver, by which the 
heat given out was absorbed. The result was 774*987 foot- 
pounds. 

Of all his results Joule considered those given by water 
as the most accurate; and as he thought that even this 
figure should be slightly reduced, to allow for the sound pro- 
duced by the motion, he finally gave 772 foot-pounds as the 
most probable valiie for the number sought. 

Transforming this to French measures we obtain the 
result that. To produce the quantity of heat required to raise 1 
kilogramme of water through 1 degree Centigrade, work must be 
consumed to the amxmnt q/'423*55 kilogrammetres. This appears 
to be the most trustworthy value among those hitherto 
determined, and accordingly we shall henceforward use it aa 
the mechanical equivalent of heat, and write 

^=423*55 .\.(1). 

In most of our calculations it will be sufficiently accurate 
to use the even number 424. 

§ 5. The Mechanical Unit of Heat 

Having established the principle of the equivalence of 
Heat and Work, in consequence of which these two may be 



20 OS THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

opposed to each other in the same expression, we are often 
in the positioa of having to sum up qnantities, in which 
heat and work enter as terms to be added together. As, 
however, heat and work are measured in different ways, we 
cannot in such a case say simply that the quantity is the 
sum of the work and the heat, but either that it is the sum 
of the heat and of the heat-equivalent of the work, or the sum 
of the work and of the work-equivalent of the heat. On 
account of this inconvenience Rankine proposed to employ a . 
different unit for heat, viz, that amount of heat which is 
equivalent to an unit of work. This unit may be called simply 
the Mechanical Unit of Heat. There is an obstacle to ita 
general introduction in the circumstance that the unit of 
heat hitherto used is a quantity which is closely connected 
with the ordinary calorimetric methods (which mainly 
depend on the heating of water), so that the reductions 
requii'ed are slight, and rest on measurements of the most 
reliable character ; while the mechanical unit, besides need- 
ing the same reductions, also requires the mechanical 
equivalent of heat to be known, a requirement as yet only 
approximately fulfilled. At the same time, in the theoretical 
development of the Mechanical Theory of Heat, in which the 
relation between heat and work often occurs, the method of 
expressing heat in mechanical units effects such important 
simplifications, that the author has felt himself bound to 
drop his former objections to this method, on the occasion of 
the present more connected exposition of that theory. Thus 
in what follows, unless the contrary is expressly stated, it will 
be always understood that heat is expressed in mechanical 
units. 

On this system of meaBureraent the above mentioned 
first main Principle of the Mechanical Theory of Heat takes 
a yet more precise form, since we may say that heat and its 
corresponding work are not merely propuriional, but equal to 
each other. 

If later on it is desired to convert a quantity of heat 
exprestjod in mechanical um^hack again to ordinary heat 
units, all that will ^^JBHIH^^ divide the number 
given in mechaiiical uHJB^^^^TMMamlcal equivalent of 



EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 27 

§ 6. Development of the first main Principle. 

Let any body whatever be given, and let its condition as 
to temperature, volume, &c. be assumed to be known. K an 
indefinitely small quantity of heat dQ is imparted to this body, 
the question arises what becomes of it, and what eflfect it 
produces. It may in part serve to increase the amount of 
heat actually existing in the body ; in part also, if in conse- 
quence of the imparting of this heat the body changes its 
condition, and that change includes the overcoming of some 
force, it may be absorbed in the work done thereby. If we 
denote the total heat existing in the body, or more briefly 
the Quantity of Heat of the body, by H, and the indefinitely 
small increment of this quantity by dH^ and if we put dL 
for the indefinitely small quantity of work done, then we can 

dQ^dH-^dL (I). 

The forces against which the work is done may be 
divided into two classes: (1) those which the molecules of 
the body exert among themselves, and which are therefore 
dependent on the nature of the body itself, and (2) those 
which arise from external influences, to which the body is 
subjected. According to these two classes of forces, which 
have to be overcome, the work done is divided into internal 
and external work. If we denote these two quantities by 
rfe/anddTr,wemayput 

dL^dJ-\-dW (2), 

and then the foregoing equation becomes 

dQ=^dH-\-dJ-\-dW (II). 

§ 7. Different conditions of the Quantities /, TT, and H, 

The internal and external work obey widely diflferent 
laws. As regards the internal work it is easy to see that if 
a body, starting from any initial condition whatever, goes 
through a cycle of changes, and finally returns to its original 
condition again, then the internal work done in the whole 
process must cancel itself exactly. For if any definite 
amount, positive or negative, of internal work remained over 
at the end, there must have been produced thereby either an 



28 OK THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

equivalent quantity of external work or a change in the 
body's quantity of heat ; and as the same process might be 
repeated any number of times it would in the positive case 
be possible to create work or heat out of nothing, and in the 
negative case to get rid of work or heat without obtaining 
any equivalent for it ; both of which results will be at once 
admitted to be impossible. If then at every return of the 
body to its original condition the internal work done becomes 
zero, it follows further that in any alteration whatever of the 
body's condition the internal work done can be determined 
from its initial and final conditions, without needing to know 
the way in which it has passed from one to the other. For 
if we suppose the body to be brought successively from the 
first condition to the second in several different ways, but 
always to be brought back to its first condition in exactly 
the same way, then the various quantities of internal work 
done in different ways in the first set of changes must all be 
equivalent to one and the same quantity of internal work done 
in the second or return set of changes, which cannot be true 
unless they are all equal to each other. 

We must therefore assume that the internal forces have an 
Ergal, which is a quantity fully determined by the existing 
condition of the body at any time, without its being requisite 
for us to know how it arrived at that condition. Thus the 
intiernal work done is ascertained by the increment of the 
Ergal, which we will call /; and for an indefinitely small 
change of the body the differential dJ of the Ergal forms the 
expression for the internal work, which agrees with the nota- 
tion employed in equations 2 and II. 

If we now turn to the external work, we find the state of 
things wholly different. Even when the initial and final 
conditions of the body are given, the external work can take 
very different forms. To show this by an example, let us 
choose for our body a Gas, whose condition is determined by 
its temperature t and volume v, and let us denote the initial 
values of these by t^,v^^ and the final values by t^^V' let us 
also assume that t^>t^f and v^> v^. Now if the change is 
carried out in the following way, viz. that the gas is first ex- 
panded, at the temperature t^, from v^ \x> v^y and then is 
heated, at the volume v^, from t^ to <,, then the external 
work will consist in overcoming the external pressure which 



EQXnVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 29 

corresponds to the temperature f, . On the other hand, if the 
change is carried out in the following way, viz. that the gas 
is first heated, at the volume v^, from t^ to ^,, and is then ex- 
panded, at the temperature t^^ from v^ to v^, then the ex- 
ternal work will consist in overcoming the external pressure 
which corresponds to the temperature t^. Since the latter 
pressure is greater than the former, the external work is 
greater in the second case than in the first. Lastly, if we 
suppose expansion and heating to succeed each other in 
stages of any kind, or to take place together according to any 
law, we continually obtain fresh pressures, and therewith an 
endless variety in the quantities of work done with the same 
initial and final conditions. 

Another simple example is as follows. Let us take a 
given quantity of a liquid at temperature t, and transform it 
into saturated vapour of the higher temperature t^. This 
change can be carried out either by heating the liquid, as a 
liquid, to <,, and then vaporizing it; or by vaporizing it at t, 
and then heating the vapour to t^, compressing it at the 
same time sufficiently to keep it saturated at temperature <,; 
or finally by allowing the vaporization to take place at any 
intermediate temperature. The external work, which again 
shows itself in overcoming the external pressure during the 
alteration of volume, has different values in all these different 
cases. 

The difference in the mode of alteration which, by way 
of example, has been thus described for two special classes 
of bodies, may be generally expressed by saying that the 
body can pass by different paths from one condition to the 
other. 

Another difference, besides this, may come into play. If a 
body in changing its condition overcomes an external resist- 
ance, the latter may either be so great that the full force of 
the body is required to overcome it, or it may be less than this 
amount. Let us again take as example a given quantity of 
a gas, which at a given temperature and volume possesses 
a certain expansive force. If this gas expands, the external 
resistance which it has to overcome in so doing must clearly 
be smaller than the expansive force, or it would not over- 
come it ; but the difference between them may be as small as 
we please, and as a limiting case we may assume them to be 



30 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

equal. These may also however be cases in which this diflTer- 
ence is a finite quantity more or less considerable. If e,g. 
the vessel, in which the gas is at first confined with a given 
force of expansion, is suddenly put in communication with 
some space in which a smaller pressure exists, or with a 
vessel which is entirely empty, then the gas in its expansion 
overcomes a less external resistance than it has the power of 
overcoming, or in the second case no external resistance at 
all ; and it performs in so doing a smaller amount of external 
work than it might perform, or in the second case no external 
work whatsoever. 

In the original case, where pressure and reaction are at 
each instant equal, the gas may be compressed back again by 
exactly the same force which it has overcome in expanding. 
If however the resistance overcome is less than the force of 
expansion, the gas cannot be compressed back again by the 
same amount of force. The distitiction may be expressed by 
saying that the expansion is reversible in the first case, and 
not reversible in the»second. 

This mode of expression may be employed in other cases, 
where changes of condition take place in the overcoming of 
any kind of resistance, and the distinction just mentioned in 
relation to the external work may be generally described as 
follows: with a given change of condition the external work 
may differ in amount, according as the change takes place in 
a reversible or a non-reversible manner^ 

§ 8. Energy of the Body, 

In addition to the two difiFerentials dJ and d W, which 
depend on the work done, we have on the right-hand side of 
equation (II) a third, which is the diflferential of H, the total 
heat actually existing in the body, or its quantity of Heat. 
This quantity jET has clearly the property, also mentioned as 
belonging to J, that it is known as soon as the condition of 
the body is given, without needing to know the way in which 
the body has arrived at that condition. 

Since the heat existing in the body and the internal 
work are on the same footing as regards the above most 
important property, and since further, on account of our 
ignorance as to the internal work, we generally do not know 
the several amounts of these two quantities but only their 



. EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 31 

sum, the author, in his first Paper on Heat, published in 
1850, combined the two under one designation. Following 
the same system, we will put 

U^H+J. (3), 

which changes equation (II) into 

dQ^dU+DW (III). 

The function U, first introduced by the author in the above- 
mentioned paper, has been since adopted by other writers 
on Heat, and as the definition given by him — that starting 
from any given initial condition it expresses the sum of thq 
increment of the heat actually existing and of the heat con^ 
sumed in internal work — is somewhat long, various attempts 
have been made at a shorter designation. Thomson, in his 
paper of 1851*, called it the mechanical energy of a body in 
■a given state: KirchoflF has given it the name 'Function of 
Activity' (Wirkungsfunction)f: lastly Zeuner, in his 'Grund- 
zuge des mechanischen Warmetheorie/ published 1860, has 
called the quantity U, when multiplied by the heat-equi- 
valent of work, the * Interior Heat * of the body. 

This last name (as remarked in the author's former work 
of 1864) does not seem quite to correspond with the meaning 
of U; since only one part of this quantity stands for heat 
actually existing in the body, i.e. for vis viva of its molecular 
motion, while the other part consists of heat which has been 
consumed in doing internal work, and therefore exists as 
heat no longer. In his second edition, published 1866, Zeu- 
ner has made the alteration of calUng U the Internal Work of 
the body. The author however is unable to accept this name 
any more than the other, inasmuch as it appears to be just 
as objectionably limited on the other side. Of the other 
two names, that of Energy, employed by Thomson, appears 
very appropriate, since the quantity under consideration cor- 
responds exactly with that which is denoted by the same 
word in Mechanics. In what follows the quantity U will 
therefore be called the Energy of the body. 

There still remains one special remark to be made with 
reference to the complete determination of the Ergal, and of 

* Trans, Royal Soc. of Edinhurghf Vol. xx., p. 475. 
t Pogg. Ann, Ypl, cm,, p. 177. 



32 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the Energy which comprises the ErgaL Since the Ergal 
expresses the work which the internal forces must have per- 
formed, while the body was passing from any initial condition, 
taken as the starting point, to its condition at the moment 
under consideration, we can only determine completely the 
value of the Ergal for the present condition of the body, 
when we have previously ascertained once for all its initial 
condition. If this has not been done, we must conceive 
the function which expresses the Ergal as still contain- 
ing an indeterminate constant, which depends on the initial 
condition. It will be obvious that it is not always necessary 
actually to write down this constant, but that we may con- 
ceive it as included in the function, so long as this latter is 
designated by a general symbol. Similarly we must conceive 
another such indeterminate constant as included in the other 
symbol which expresses the Energy of the body. 

§ 9. Equations for Finite changes of condition — Cyclical 
processes. 

If we conceive the equation (III), which relates to an 
indefinitely small change of condition, to be integrated for 
any given finite change, or for a series of successive finite 
changes, the integral of one term can be determined at once. 
For the energy CT, as mentioned above, depends only on the 
condition of the body at the moment, and not on the way in 
which it has arrived at that condition. If then we put U^ 
and £7, for the initial and final values of Z7, we may write 



/ 



dU=U,-U,. 



Hence the equation obtained by integrating (III) may be 
written: 

JrfQ= U,^ U,+jdW. (4); 

or if we denote by Q and TFthe two integrals j dQ and jdW 

which occur in this equation, and which represent respect- 
ively the total heat imparted to the body during the change, 
or series of changes, and the external work done, then the 
equation will be 

g= E7,- U,+ W. (4a), 



EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 33 

As a special case, we may assume that the body under- 
goes a series of changes such that it is finally brought round 
to its initial condition. To such a series the author gave the 
name of cyclical processu As in this case the initial and 
final conditions of the body are the same, U^ becomes equal 
to £^, and their difference to zero. Hence for a cyclical pro- 
cess equations (4) and (4a) become : 



\dQ=l 



dW. (5), 



Q=Tr (5a). 

Thus in a cyclical process the total heat imparted to the 
body (i.e. the algebraical sum of all the several quantities of 
heat imparted in the course of the cycle, which quantities 
may be partly positive, partly negative) is simply equal to 
the total amount of external work performed. 

§ 10. Total Heat — Latent and Specific Heat. 

In former times, when heat was considered to be a sub- 
stance, and when it was assumed that this substance might 
exist in two different forms, which were distinguished by the 
terms yree and latent, a conception was introduced which was 
often made use of in calculations, and which was called the 
total heat of the body. By this was understood that quantity 
of heat which a body must have taken up in order to pass 
from a given initial condition into its present condition, and 
which is now contained in it, partly as free, partly as latent 
heat. It was supposed tliat this quantity of heat, if the 
initial condition of the body was known, could be completely 
determined from its present condition, without taking into 
account the way in which that condition had been reached. 

Since, however, we have obtained in equation (4a) an 
expression for the quantity of heat received by the body in 
passing from its initial to its final condition, which expression 
contains the external work W, we must conclude that this 
quantity of heat, like the external work, depends not only on 
the initial and final conditions, but also on the way in which 
the body has passed from the one to the other. The conception 
of the total heat as a quantity depending only on the present 

c, 3 



32 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the Enersry which comprises the Ers^aL Since the Ergsd 
expresses the work which the intem/forces must have plr- 
formed, while the body was passing from any initial condition, 
taken as the starting point, to its condition at the moment 
under consideration, we can only determine completely the 
value of the Ergal for the present condition of the body, 
when we have previously ascertained once for all its initial 
condition. K this has not been done, we must conceive 
the function which expresses the Ergal as still contain- 
ing an indeterminate constant, which depends on the initial 
condition. It will be obvious that it is not always necessary 
actually to write down this constant, but that we may con- 
ceive it as included in the function, so long as this latter is 
designated by a general symboL Similarly we must conceive 
another such indeterminate constant as included in the other 
symbol which expresses the Energy of the body. 

§ 9. Equations for Finite changes of condition — Cyclical 
processes. 

If we conceive the equation (III), which relates to an 
indefinitely small change of condition, to be integrated for 
any given finite change, or for a series of successive finite 
changes, the integral of one term can be determined at once. 
For the energy U, as mentioned above, depends only on the 
condition of the body at the moment, and not on the way in 
which it has arrived at that condition. If then we put U^ 
and Z7j for the initial and final values of U, we may write 



/ 



dU=U^-U^. 



Hence the equation obtained by integrating (III) may be 
written: 

jdQ= U,^ U,+jdW. (4); 

or if we denote by Qand TTthe two integrals j dQ and jdW 

which occur in this equation, and which represent respect- 
ively the total heat imparted to the body during the change, 
or series of changes, and the external work done, then the 
equation will be 

Q= ?7,- U,+ W. (4a). 



EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 33 

As a special case, we may assume that the body under- 
goes a series of changes such that it is finally brought round 
to its initial condition. To such a series the author gave the 
name of cyclical process^ As in this case the initial and 
final conditions of the body are the same, U^ becomes equal 
to C^, and their difference to zero. Hence for a cyclical pro- 
cess equations (4) and (4a) become : 

jdQ=jdW. (5), 

Q=-W (5a). 

Thus in a cyclical process the total heat imparted to the 
body (i.e. the algebraical sum of all the several quantities of 
heat imparted in the course of the cycle, which quantities 
may be partly positive, partly negative) is simply equal to 
the total amount of external work performed. 

§ 10. Total Heat — Latent and Specific Heat. 

In former times, when heat was considered to be a sub- 
stance, and when it was assumed that this substance might 
exist in two different forms, which were distinguished by the 
terms free and latent, a conception was introduced which was 
often made use of in calculations, and which was called the 
total heat of the body. By this was understood that quantity 
of heat which a body must have taken up in order to pass 
from a given initial condition into its present condition, and 
which is now contained in it, partly as free, partly as latent 
heat. It was supposed tliat this quantity of heat, if the 
initial condition of the body was known, could be completely 
determined from its present condition, without taking into 
account the way in which that condition had been reached. 

Since, however, we have obtained in equation (4a) an 
expression for the quantity of heat received by the body in 
passing from its initial to its final condition, which expression 
contains the external work TF", we must conclude that this 
quantity of heat, like the external work, depends not only on 
the initial and final conditions, but also on the way in which 
the body has passed firom the one to the other. The conception 
of the total heat as a quantity depending only on the present 

c, 3 



ft 



34 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

condition of the body is therefore, under the new theory, no 
longer allowable. 

The disappearance of heat during certain special changes 
of condition, e.g. fusion and vaporization, was formerly ex- 
plained, as indicated above, by supposing this heat to pass 
into a special form, in which it was no longer sensible to our 
touch or to the thermometer, and in which it was therefore 
called Latent Heat. This mode of explanation has also been 
opposed by the author,, who has laid down the principle that 
all heat existing in a body is appreciable by the touch and 
by the thermometer; that the heat which disappears under 
the above changes of condition exists no longer as heat, but 
has been converted into work ; and that the heat which 
makes its appearance under the opposite changes (e.g. solidi- 
fication and condensation) does not come from any concealed 
source, but is newly produced by work done on the body. 
Accordingly he has proposed the term Work-heat as a sub- 
stitute for Latent heat in general cases. 

This work, into which the heat is converted, and which 
in the opposite class of changes produces heat, may be of two 
kinds, internal or external. If. e.g. a liquid is vaporized, the 
cohesion of its molecules must be overcome, and, since the 
vapour occupies a larger space than the liquid, the external 
pressure must be overcome also. In accordance with these 
two divisions of the work we also may divide the total work- 
heat, and call the divisions the internal and external work- 
heat respectively. 

That quantity of heat which must be imparted to a body 
in order to heat it simply, without making any change in its 
density, was formerly known under the general name oi free 
heat, or more properly, of heat actually existing in the body ; 
a great part of this, however, falls into the same category as 
that which was formerly called latefat heat, and for which the 
term work-heat has been proposed. For the heating of a body 
involves as a general rule a change in the arrangement of its 
molecules, which change produces in general an externally 
perceptible alteration of volume, but still may take place 
apart from such alteration. This change of arrangement 
requires a certain amount of work, which may be partly 
internal, partly external; and in doing this, work-heat is 
L again consumed. The heat applied to the body thus serves 



EQUIVALENCE OF HEAT AND WORK. 35 

in part only to increase the heat actually existing, the other 
part serving as work-heat. 

On these principles the author attempted to explain (by 
way of example) the unusually great specific heat of water, 
which is much beyond that either of ice or of steam*: the 
assumption being that of the quantity of heat, which each 
receives from without in the process of heating, a larger 
portion is consumed in the case of water in diminishing the 
cohesion of the particles, and thus serves as work-heat. 

From the foregoing it is seen to be necessary that, in 
addition to the various specific heats, which shew how much 
heat must be imparted to one unit-weight of a body in order 
to warm it through one degree under different circumstances 
(e.g. the specific heat of a solid or liquid body under ordinary 
atmospheric pressure, and the specific heat of a gas at con- 
stant volume or at constant pressure), we must also take into 
consideration another quantity which shews hy how much the 
heat actimlly eadsting in one unit-weight of a substance (i.e. 
the via viva of the motion of its ultimate particles) is increased 
when the substa/nce is heated through one degree of temperature. 
This quantity we will name the body's true heat-capacity. 

It would be advantageous to confine this term * heat-capa- 
city ' (even if the word * true ' be not prefixed) strictly to the 
heat actually existing in the body ; whereas for the total heat 
which must be imparted for the purpose of heating it under 
any given circumstances, and of which work-heat forms a 
part, the expression 'specific heat' might be always em- 
ployed. As however the term 'heat-capacity' has hitherto 
been usually taken to have the same signification as * specific 
heat' it is still necessary, in order to affix to it the above 
simplified meaning, to add the epithet ' true.' 

§ 11. Expression for the External Work in a particular 
case. 

In equation (III) the external work is denoted generally by 
dW. No special assumption is thereby made as to the nature 
of the external forces which act on the body, and on which 
the external work depends. It is, however, worth while to 
consider one special case which occurs frequently in practice, 

• Pogg. Ann, Vol. lxxiz., p. 376, and Collection of Memoirs^ Vol. i., p. 23. 

3—2 



36 



ON. THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT. 



and which leads to a very simple determination of the external 
work, viz. the case where the only external force acting on the 
body, or at least the only force which needs to be referred to 
in the determination of the work, is a pressure acting on the 
exterior surface of the body ; and in which this pressure (as 
is always the case with liquid and gaseous bodies, provided 
no other forces are acting, and which may be the case even 
with solid bodies) is the same at all points of the surface^ 
and everywhere normal to it. In this case there is no need,, 
in order to determine the external work, that we should 
consider the body's alterations in form and its expansion in 
particular directions, but only its total alteration in volume. 

As an illustrative case, let tis take a cylinder, as shewn 
in Fig. 1, closed by an easily moving piston P, and containing 
some expansible substance, e.g. a gas, under a 
pressure per unit-area represented by p. The 
section of the cylinder, or the area of the piston, 
we may call a. Then the total pressure which 
acts on the piston, and which must be overcome 
in raising it, is pa. Now if the piston stands 
originally at a height h above the bottom of 
the cylinder, and is then lifted through an 
indefinitely small distance dhy the external work 
performed in the lifting will be expressed by 
the equation 

dW=padh. 

But if V be the volume of the gas we have 

V = aA, and therefore dv = adh ; whence the above equation 

becomes 



Fig. 1. 



dW=pdv (6). 



This same simple form is assumed by the differential of 
external work for any form 
of the body, and any kind 
of expansion whatever, as 
may be easily shewn as fol- 
lows. Let the full line in 
Fig. 2 represent the surface 
of the body in its original 
condition, and the dotted line 
its surface after an indefi- Ffg. 2. 



the 



EQUIVALENCB OF HEAT AND WORE. 37 

nitely small change of form and volame. Let us consider 
any element da> of the original sarface at the point A. 
Let a normal drawn to this element of surface cut the 
second surface at a distance du from the first, where du 
is taken as positive if the position of the second surface 
is outside the space contained within the original surface, 
and negative if it is inside. Now let us suppose an inde- 
finite number of such normals to be di^wn through eveiy 
point in the perimeter of the surface-element dci> to the 
second surfistce; there will then be marked out an indefi- 
nitely smaU prismatic space, which has d« as its base, and 
du as its height, and whose volume is therefore expressed by 
dadiL This indefinitely small volume forms the part of the 
increase of volume of the body corresponding to the element 
of surface c2q>. K then we integrate the expression d&du all 
over the surfSstce of the body, we shall obtain the whole 
increase in volume, dv, of the body, and if we agree to 
express integration over the surface by an integral sign with 
suffix 6>, we may write 

dv= I dudo) (7). 

Now if, as before, we denote the pressure per unit of 
surface by p^ the pressure on the element dm will be pdto. 
Therefore the part of the external work, which corresponds 
to the element dto, and is described by saying that the 
element under the action of the external force pdto is pushed 
outwards at right angles through the distance du, will be 
expressed by the product pdo^du. Integrating this over the 
whole surface, we obtain for the total external work. 



dW 



= I pdudfo. 



As jP is equal over the whole surface, the equation may be 
written : 

dW=^p\ dudw, 

or, by equation (7), 

dW=ipdv, 

which is the same as equation (6) given above. 



38 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Adopting this equation, we may give to equation (III), 
for the case in which the only external force is a uniform 
pressure normal to the surface, the following form : 

dQ^dU+pdv.. (IV). 

This last equation, whidi forms the mathematical expres- 
sion most in use for the first main principle of the Mechanical 
Theory of Heat, we will in the next place apply to a class of 
bodies, which are distinguished for the simplicity of their 
laws, and for which the equation takes accordingly a pecu- 
liarly simple form, so that the required calculations can be 
easily performed. 



(39) 



CHAPTER II. 



ON PERFECT GASES. 



§ !• The Gaseous condition of bodies. 

Among the laws which characterize bodies in the gaseous 
condition the foremost place must be given to those of 
Mariotte and Gay Lussac, which may be expressed together 
in a single equation as follows. Given a unit-weight of a 
gas, which at freezing temperature, and under any standard 
pressure p^ (e,g. that of the atmosphere) has the volume v^; 
then if p and v be its pressure and volume at any tempera- 
ture t (in Centigrade measure) the following equation will 
hold: 

pv-=^p^v^{l + at). (1), 

wherein the quantity a, which is usually termed the coeffi- 
cient of expansion, although it really relates to the change 
of pressure as well as the change of* volume, has one and the 
same value for every kind of gas. 

Begnault has indeed recently proved by careful experi- 
ment that these laws are not strictly accurate; but the 
deviations are for permanent gases very small, and become of 
importance only for gases which are capable of condensation. 
It seems to follow that the laws are the more nearly exact, 
the further a gas is removed, as to pressure and temperature, 
from its point of condensation. Since for permanent gases 
under ordinary conditions the exactness of the law is already 
M greats that for most purposes of research it may be taken 
w perfect, we may imagine for every gas an ultimate condi- 
tion, in which the exactness is really perfect ; and in what 
Allows vre will assume this, ideal condition to be actually 



40 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

reached, calling for brevity's sake all gases, in which this is 
assumed to hold, Perfect Gases. 

As however the quantity a, according to Regnault's deter- 
minations, is not absolutely the same for all the gases which 
have been examined, and has also somewhat different values 
for one and the same gas under different conditions, the 
question arises, what value we are to assign to a in the case 
of perfect gases, in which such differences can no longer 
appear. Here we must refer to the values of a which have 
been found to be correct for various permanent gases. By 
experiments made on the system of increasing the pressure 
while keeping the volume constant, Regnault found the fol- 
lowing numbers to be correct for various permanent gases : 

, Atmospheric Air , 0003665. 

Hydrogen 0003667. 

Nitrogen 0*003668. 

Carbonic Oxide 0003667. 

The differences here are so small, that it is of little im- 
portance what choice we make ; but as it was with atmo- 
spheric air that Regnault made* the greatest number of 
experiments, and as Magnus was led in his researches to a 
precisely similar result, it appears most fitting to select the 
number 0003665. 

' Regnault, however, by experiments made on the other 
system of keeping the pressure constant and increasing the 
volume, has obtained a somewhat different value for a in the 
case of atmospheric air, viz. 0003670. He has further 
observed that rarefied air gives a somewhat smaller, and com- 
pressed air a somewhat larger, coefficient of expansion than 
air of ordinary density. This latter circumstance has led 
some physicists to the conclusion that, as rarefied air is nearer 
to the perfect gaseous condition than air of ordinary density, 
we ought to assume for perfect gases a smaller value than 
0003665. Against this it may be urged, that Regnault 
observed no such dependence of the coefficient of expansion 
on the density in the case of hydrogen, but after increasing 
the density threefold obtained exactly the same value as 
before ; and that he also found that hydrogen, in its devia- 
tion from the laws of Mariotte and Gay Lussac, acts altogether 
differently, and for the most part in exactly the opposite 



ON PEKFECT GASES. 41 

wayi froin atmoflph^ric air. lu these ciJrciiiilstances the 
author considers that additional weight is given to the re- 
sult taken above froip the figure for atmospheric air; 
since it will hardly be questioned that hydrogen is at least 
as near as atmospheric air to the condition of a perfect gas, 
and therefore in drawing conclusions relative to that condi- 
tion the behaviour of the one is as much to be noted as that 
of the other. 

It appears therefore to be the best course (so long as 
fresh observations have not furnished a more satisfactory start- 
ing point for wider conclusions) to adhere to the figure which, 
under the pressure of one atmosphere, has been found to 
agree almost exactly for atmospheric air and for hydrogen ; 
and thus to write : 

a = 0003665 = 3j|^ (2). 

If we denote the reciprocal - by a we may also write the 
equation thus ; 

pv^P^'{a + t) (3). 

And if for brevity we put : 

i?==2o?^> (4) 

T=a + t (5), 

we then obtain the equation in the form 

pv^RT (6). 

R is here a constant which depends on the nature of the gas 
and is inversely proportional to its specific gravity*. T 
represents the temperature, provided this is measured not 
from the freezing point, but from a zero point lying a degrees 
lower. The temperature thus measured from — a we shall 
term the Absolute Temperature, a name which will be more 

* For Jt is proportional to the volnme of a unit of weight of the gas at 
fttandard pressure and temperature ; and is therefore inversely proportional 
to the weight of a unit of volume, i.e. to the specifio gravity. {Translator,) 



\ 



42 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

fully explained further on. Taking the value of a given 
in equation (2) we obtain 



«-^273| (,j 

T=273 + «) 



§ 2. Approximate Principle as to Heat absorbed by Oases, 

In an experiment of Gay Lussac's, a vessel filled with air 
was put in communication with an exhausted receiver of 
equal size, so that half the air from the one passed over into 
the other. On measuring the temperature of each half, and 
comparing it with the original temperature, he found that 
the air which had passed over had become heated, and the 
air which remained behind had become cooled, to exactly the 
same degree ; so that the mean temperature was the same 
after the expansion as before. He thus proved that in this 
kind of expansion, in which no external work was done, no 
loss of heat took place. Joule, and after him Regnault, 
carried out similar experiments with greater care, and both 
were led to the same result. 

The principle here involved may also be deduced, without 
reference to special experiments, from certain properties of 
gases otherwise ascertained, and its accuracy may thus be 
checked. Gases shew so piarked a regularity in their beha- 
viour (especially in the relation between volume, pressure, 
and temperature, expressed by the law of Mariotte and Gay 
Lussac), that we are thereby led to the supposition that 
the mutual action between the molecules, which goes on in 
the interior of solid and liquid bodies, is absent in the case 
of gases ; so that heat, which in the former cases has to over- 
come the internal resistances, as well as the external pressure, 
in order to produce expansion, in the case of gases has to do 
with external pressure alone. If this be so, then, if a gas 
expands at constant temperature, only so much heat can 
thereby be absorbed as is required for doing the external 
work. Again, we cannot suppose that the total amount of 
heiat actually existing in the body is greater after it has 
expanded at constant temperature than before. On these 
assumptions we obtain the following principle : a permanent 
gas, if it eapands at a constant temperature, absorbs only 



ON PERFECT GASES. 43 

80 much heat as is required for the external work which it 
performs in so doing. 

We cannot of course give to this principle any greater 
validity than that of the principles from which it springs, 
but must rather suppose that for any given gas it is true to 
the same extent only in which the law of Mariotte and Gay 
Lussac is true. It is only for perfect gases that its absolute 
accuracy may be assumed. It is on this understanding that 
the author brought this principle into application, combined 
it as an approximate assumption with the two main princi- 
ples of the Mechanical Theory of Heat, and used it for 
establishing more extended conclusions. 

More recently Mr, now Sir William Thomson, who at first 
did not agree with one of the conclusions so deduced, under* 
took in conjunction with Joule to test experimentally the 
accuracy of the principle*; and for this purpose instituted 
with great care a series of skilfully conceived experiments, 
which, on account of their importance, will be more fully and 
exactly discussed further on. These have completely con- 
firmed the truth not only of the general principle, but also of 
the remark added by the author as to its degree of exactness. 
In the permanent gases on which they experimented, viz. 
atmospheric air and hydrogen, the principle was found so 
nearly exact that the deviations might for the purpose of 
most calculations be neglected; while in the non-permanent 
gas selected for experiment (Carbonic Acid) somewhat greater 
deviations were observed, exactly as might have been ex- 
pected firom the behaviour of that gas in other respects. 

After this we may with the less scruple apply the princi- 
ple, as being exact for actually existing gases in the same 
degree as the law- of Mariotte and Gay Lussac, and absolutely 
exact in the case of perfect gases. 

§ 3. On the Form which the Equation expressing the 
first mmn Principle assumes, in the case of perfect gases. 

We now return to equation (IV), viz. : 

dQ = dU -{• pdv, 

in order to apply it to the case of a perfect gas, of which we 
assume as before one unit of weight to be given. 

* Phil. Trans. 1863, 1854, 1862. 



44 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

The condition of the gas is completely determined, when 
its temperature and volume are known ; or it may be deter- 
mined by its temperature and pressure, or by its volume and 
pressure. We will at present choose the first-named quan- 
tities, temperature and volume, to determine the condition, 
and accordingly treat T and v as the independent variables, 
on which all other quantities relating to the condition of the 
gas depend. If then we regard the energy Z7of the gas as 
being also a function of these two variables, we may write 

df dv 

whence equation (IV) becomes 

dU .r^. /dU 



dQ-j^dT+(^^ + pyv (8). 



This equation, which in the above form holds not only 
for a gas, but for any body whose condition is determined 
by its temperature and volume, may be considerably simpli- 
fied for gaseous bodies, on account of their peculiar proper- 
ties. 

The quantity of heat, which a gas must absorb in ex- 
panding at constant temperature through a volume dv, is 

generally denoted by -r^ dv. As by the approximate assump- 
tion of the last Section this heat is equal to the work done 
in the expansion, which is expressed by pdv, we have the 
equation : 

^^dv^pdv, org =2,. 

But from equation (8) 

dQ^dU 
dv dv ^' 

hence from the last two equations we obtain 

f-" (»)• 



. OK PERFECT GASES. 45 

Hence we conclude that in a perfect gas the energy U is 
independent of the volume, and can only be a function of 
the temperature. 

tJTT 
If in equation (8) we put 75- = 0, and substitute for 

ATT 

^rp the symbol (7„ it becomes 

rfG= G.dT^'piv (10). 

From the form of this equation we see that C^ denotes 
the Specific Heat of the Oas at constant volume, since C^dT 
expresses the quantity of heat which must be imparted to 
the gas in order to heat it from T to T+dT, when dv is 

fJTT 
equal to zero. As this Specific Heat = -7^, i.e. is the differ- 
ential coefficient with respect to temperature of a function of 
the temperature only, it can itself also be only a function of 
temperature. 

In equation (10) all the three quantities T, v, and p are 
found; but since by equation (6) pv^Bt, it is easy to 
eliminate one of them ; and by eliminating each in succession 
we obtain three different forms of the equation. 

Eliminating p we obtain, 

dQ^C,dT + ^dv (11). 

Again, to eliminate v we put v = — ; whence we have 

dv = — dT — — ^ dp, 
p p^ ^ 

If we substitute this value of dv in equation (10), and 
then combine the two terms of the equation which contain 
dT^ we obtain 

dq^(C. + R)dT^—dp (12). 

Lastly, to eliminate Ty we obtain from equation (6), by 
differentiation, 

R 



4G ox THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Substituting in equation (10) 

dQ^^vdp + ^^pdv. (13). 

§ 4. Deductions as to the two Specific Heats, and 
transformation of the foregoing equations. 

In the same way as we see from equation (10) that the 
quantity C„ which appears as factor of dT, denotes the 
specific heat at constant temperature, we may see from 
equation (12) that the factor of dT in that equation, viz. 
0, + i?, expresses the Specific Heat at constant pressure. If 
therefore we denote this Specific Heat by Cp we may put 

C,^C, + R (14), 

which equation gives the relation between the two Specific , 
Heats. 

Since jB is a constant, and C^, as shewn above, is a func- 
tion of temperature only, it follows from equation (14) that 
Cp also can only be a function of temperature. 

When the author first drew in this manner from the 
Mechanical Theory of Heat the conclusion that the two 
Specific Heats of a permanent gas must be independent of 
its density, or in other words of the pressure to which it is 
subjected, and coidd depend only on its temperature; and 
when he added the further remark that they were thus in all 
probability constant ; he found himself in opposition to the 
then prevailing views on the subject. At that time it was 
considered to be established from the experiments of Suer- 
mann, and from those of de la Roche and B^rard, that the 
specific heat of a gas depended on the pressure ; and the 
circumstance that the new theory led to an opposite conclu- 
sion produced mistrust of the theory itself, and was used by 
A. von Holtzmann as a weapon of attack against it. 

Some yeai-s later, however, followed the first publication 
of the splendid experiments of Eegnault on tiie specific 
heat of gases*, in which the influence of pressure and tem- 
perature on the specific heat was made a subject of special 

* CompUi Rendus^ ToL xxzn., 1853; also Eelation det exjp^rienees, 
Tol. n. 



ON PERFECT GASES. 47 

investigation. Begnault tested atmospheric air at pressures 
from 1 to 12 atmospheres, and hydrogen at from 1 to 9 at- 
mospheres, but could detect no difference in their specific 
beats. He tested them also at different temperatures, viz. 
between - 30** and + 10°, between 0° and 100^ and between 
0' and 200** ; and here also he found the specific heat always 
the same*. The result of his experiments may thus be ex- 
pressed by saying that, within the limits of pressure and 
temperature to which his observations extended, the specific 
heat of permanent gases was found to be constant. 

It is true that these direct explanatory researches were 
confined to the specific heat at constant pressure; but there 
will be little scruple raised as to assuming the same to be 
correct for the other specific heat, which by equation (14) 
differs from the former only by the constant B, Accordingly 
in what follows we shall treat the two specific heats, at least 
for perfect gases, as being constant quantities. 

By help of equation (14) we may transform the three 
equations (H), (12) and (13), which express the first main 
principle of the Mechanical Theory of Heat as applied to 
gases, in such a way that they may contain, instead of the 
Specific Heat at constant volume, the Specific Heat at con- 
stant density ; which may perhaps appear more suitable, since 
the latter, as being determined by* direct observation, ought 
to be used more frequently than the former. The resulting 
equations are : 

dQ=C,dT-^—dp \ (15). 

Lastly, we may introduce both Specific Heats into the 
equations, and eUminate B, by which means the resulting 

• The numbers obtained for atmospheric air {Rel. dea Exp, Vol. ii., p. 108) 
are as follows in ordiuary heat units :. 

between -SQOand + lO® 0-23771, 
„ 00 „ 100® 0'23741, 

„ 00 „ 20eo 0-23761, 

which may be taken as practically the same. 



48 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

equations become symmetrical as top and v, as follows : 



V 



dQ=^C,dT+{G,r.C,)^dp 

c c 



(16). 



In the above equations the specific heats are expressed 
in mechanical units. If we wish to express them in ordinary 
heat units, we have only to divide these values by the 
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat. Thus if we denote the 
specific heats, as expressed in ordinary heat units, by c, and 
Cp, we may put 

''.^S' «. = § (17)- 

Applying these equations to equation (14), and dividing 
by E, we have 

Cp = c, + ;g. (18). 

§ 5. Eelation between the two Specific Heats, and its 
application to calculate the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat. 

If a system of Sound-waves spreads itself through any gas, 

e.g. atmospheric air, the gas becomes in turn condensed and 

rarefied; and the velocity with which the sound spreads 

depends, as was seen by Newton, on the nature of the changes 

of pressure produced by these changes of density. For very 

small changes of density and pressure the relation between 

the two is expressed by the differential coefficient of the 

pressure with respect to the density, or (if the density, i.e. the 

weight of a unit of volume, is denoted by p) by the differential 

dio 
coeflScient -f^ . Applying this principle we obtain for the 

velocity of sound, which we will call m, the following equa- 
tion 

»V4 ' 7^''^' 

in which g represents the accelerating force of gravity. 



'f ' • . ON PERFECT GASES^ 49 

Now in order to determine the value of the differential 

coefficient -^ Newton used the law of Mariotte*, according to 
dp 

which pressure .and density are proportional to each other. 

He therefore put - = constant, whence by differentiation : 

P 



pdp-pd p _ 



p" 



and therefore 



^ = 2 ^....(20); 

dp p 



whence (19) becomes 



"=v^!' 



(21). 



The velocity calculated by this formula did not however agree 
with experiment, and the reason of this divergence, after it 
had been long sought for in vain, was at last discovered by 
Laplace. 

The law of Mariotte in fact holds only if the change of 
density takes place at constant temperature. But in sound 
vibrations this is not the case, since in every condensation 
a heating of the air takes place, and in every rarefaction a 
cooling. Accordingly at each condensation the pressure is 
increased, and at each rarefaction diminished, to a greater 
extent than accords with Mariotte's law. The question now 

arises how, under these circumstances, can the value of , 

dp 

be determined. 

Since the condensations and rarefactions follow each other 

with great rapidity, the exchange of heat that can take place 

during each short period between the condensed and rarefied 

parts of the gas must be very small. Neglecting this, we 

have to do with a change of density, in which the quantity of 

gas under consideration receives no heat and gives forth none; 

and we may thus, in applying to this case the differential equa- 

* This law is commonly known *n England as * Boyle's law,' as being 
originally due to Boyle. ( Translator. ) 

c, 4 



60 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

tions of the last section, put dQ = 0. Hence, e. g. from the last 
of equations (16), we obtain: 

C C 

C Ic '^^^^ G Iq P^^^^' 

or Cjvdp + Cj,pdv ^ 0. 

Now, since the volume v of one unit of weight is the re- 

1 
ciprocal of the density, we may put v = -, and therefore 

r 

dv = — ^ ; whence the equation becomes 

p p 

f-^^^ (22). 

dp G,p 

This value of the Differential Coefficient -~ differs from that 

dp 

deduced from Mariotte's law, and given in (20), by containing 

as factor the ratio of the two Specific Heats. If for simplicity 

we put 

* = §^ (23), 

the last equation becomes 

1=*? w- 

Sabstituting thia value oi -4- m. equation (19), we get instead 
of (21) 



= /v/*5'f (25). 



u 

■p 



From this equation the velocity of sound u can be calculated 
if A; is known ; or, on the other hand, if the velocity of sound 
is known by experiment, we can apply the equation to calcu- 
late k, changing it firs' into the form 



9 



;t=^ (26). 

9P ^ ^ 



ON PERFECT GASES. 51 

The velocity of sound iu air has been several times deter- 
mined with great care by various physicists, whose results 
agree with each other very closely. According to the experi- 
^nt« of Bravais ^d M^ens* tL velocity a^ freezing ^m- 
perature is 332*4 m. per second (1090*6 feet). We will in- 
sert this value in equation (26). We may also give ff its 
recognized value 9*809 m. (32*2 feet). To determine the 

quotient ^ we may give the pressure p any value we please, 

but we must then assign to the density p the value corre- 
sponding to that pressui:e. We will assume p to be the 
pressure of 1 atmosphere. This must be expressed in the 
formula by the amount of weight supported per unit of 
surface. As this weight is equal to that of a column of 
quicksilver, whose base is 1 sq. m. and height 760 mm., and 
which therefore has a volume of 760 cubic decimetres, and as, 
according to Regnault, the Specific Weight of quicksilver at 
0®, as compared with water at 4°, is 13*596, we obtain 

p = 1 atmosphere = 760 x 13*596 = 10333 kg. per sq. metre. 

Lastly, p is the weight of a cubic metre of air under the 
assumed pressure of 1 atmosphere and at temperature 0®, 
which, according to Regnault, is 1*2932 kg. Substituting 
these values in equation (26) we obtain 

(332*4)^x1*2 932 
9*809x10333 " 

Having thus determined the quantity k for atmospheric 
air, we can now use equation (18) to calculate the quantity E^ 
Le. the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat, as was first done by 
Mayer. For we have from (18) 



Cp-c,* 



• c 
and, if we again denote by k the quotient -^, which is the 

* Ann. de Chim, m,, 13, 5 ; and Togg. Ann, Vol. lxvi., p. 361. 

4—^ 



52 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 
C , C 

same as jf , and accordingly substitute -^ for c,, we have 

^'n w- 

Here we may substitute for k its value 1*410 just found, 
and for c, its value as given by Kegnault, 0*2375. It then 

remains to determine R, or ^-^® . To do this, let us again 

take jpo as the pressure of 1 atmosphere, which, as seen above, 
is equal to 10333, and we then have for v^ the volume in 
cubic metres of 1 kg. of air under the above pressure of 
1 atmosphere and at temperature 0", which according to 
Regnault is 0*7733. Lastly we have already assumed the 
value of a to be 273. The value of R for atmospheric air 
will therefore be given by the equation 

Substituting these values for k, c^, and R in equation (27) 
we obtain 

1-410 X 29-27 _ .,,.^ 
^ ~ 0-410 X 0-2375 ""^'^'^^* 

This figure agrees very closely with that determined by 
Joule from the friction of water, viz. 423*55. In fact it 
must be admitted that the agreement is more close than, 
considering the degree of uncertainty as to the data used in 
the calculation, we could have had any right to expect ; so 
that chance must have assisted in some degree to produce it. 
In any case, however, the agreement forms a striking con- 
firmation of the equations deduced for permanent gases. 

§ 6. Various Formulae relating to the Specific Heats of 
Gases. 

If in equation (18), p. 48, we consider the quantity E as 
known, we may apply that equation to calculate the specific 
heat at constant volume from that at constant pressure, which 
is known from experiment. This application is of special 
importance, because the method of deducing the ratio of the 



ON PERFECT GASES. 53 

two specific heats from the velocity of sound is only prac- 
ticable in the case of the very few gases for which that 
velocity has been experimentally determined. For all others, 
equation (18) ofifers the only means as yet discovered of 
calculating the specific heat at constant volume from that 
at constant pressure. 

It must here be observed that equation (18) is exactly 
true only for perfect gases, although it gives at least approxi- 
mate results for other gases. The circumstance has also to 
be considered, that the determination of the specific heat of 
a gas at constant pressure is the more difficult, and therefore 
the value determined the less reliable, in proportion as the 
gas is less permanent in its character, and thus diverges 
more widely in its behaviour from the laws of a perfect gas ; 
therefore, as there is no need to seek in our calculations a 
greater accuracy than the experimental values themselves 
can possibly possess, we may treat the mode of calculation 
employed as suflSciently complete for our purpose. 

Accordingly we begin by putting equation (18) in the form 

C. = c,-| (28). 

Here for J? we shall use the value 423'55. B is determined 
by equation (4) 

a 

where p^v^ are the pressure and volume at the temperature of 
freezing. Should it be difiicult to make observations on the 
gas at this temperature (as is the case with many vapours) 
we may also, by equation (6), give R the value 

iZ=f (29), 

where p, v, and T are any three corresponding values of 
pressure, volume, and absolute temperature. 

This quantity iJ, as already observed, is only so far depen- 
dent on the nature of the gas, that it is inversely proportional 
to its specific gravity. For if we denote by v' the volume 
of a unit of weight of air at tiemperature T and pressure p^ 



54 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

and by R the corresponding value of B, we have 

-O, — • y . 

Combining this with equation (29), 

V 

But - is the ratio of the volumes of equal weights of the two 

gases, and is therefore the reciprocal of the ratio of the 
weights of equal volumes, which ratio is called the Specific 
Gravity of the gas, as compared with common air. If we 
call this specific gravity rf, the last equation becomes 

ii = f (30). 

Substituting this value of R in (28) we obtain 

"'^'''-m (^^)- 

The quantity here denoted by iJ', i.e. the value of R for 
atmospheric air, has been already determined in § 5 to be 
equal to 29*27. Hence further, 

E ~ 423-55 " ^ ^^^^' 

whence the equation, which serves to determine the Specific 
Heat at constant volume, takes this simple form : 

00691 ,^^, 

^. = Cp ^— (32). 

If in the next place we apply this equation to the case of air, 
for which rf = 1, and for the sake of distinction denote by 
accented letters the two specific heats for air, we get the 
following equation : 

c' =:c;-0-0691 (33), 



ON PERFECT GASES. 65 

and substituting for c^ its value according to Regnault, 
which is 0*2375, we obtain the result 

c; = 0-2375 -00691 = 01684 (34)* 

For the other gases the equation may be given in the 
foUowing form : 

^^^c,c?-00691 (35^^ 

which, as will be seen later, is specially convenient for the 
application of the values given by Regnault for specific 
heats at constant pressure. 

The specific heats denoted by c^ and c, relate to a unit 
of weight of the gas, and have for unit the ordinary unit of 
heat, i.e. the quantity of heat required to raise a unit of 
weight of water from the temperature 0® to 1^ We may 
thus say that the gas, in relation to the heat which it 
requires to raise its temperature either at constant pressure 
or constant volume, is referred as regards weight to the 
standard of water. 

. With gases however it is desirable to refer to the 
standard of air as regards volume ; i.e. so to determine the 
specific heat, as to compare the quantity of heat, which 
the gas requu-es to raise its temperature through l^ with the 
quantity of heat which an equal volume of air, taken at the 
same temperature and pressure, requires to raise its tempe- 
rature to the same extent We may use this kind of 
comparison in the case of both the specific heats, inasmuch 
as we assume in the one case that both the gas under con- 
sideration and the atmospheric air are heated at constant 
pressure, and in the other that they are both heated at 
constant volume. The specific heats thus determined may 
be denoted by 7^ and 7^. 

As we denote by v the volume which a unit weight of gas 
assumes at a given pressure and temperature, the quantity of 
heat, which a unit-volume of the gas absorbs at constant 

pressure in being heated through V, will be expressed by -^ , 

* It win be seen that ej and c/ fulfil the condition fonnd above for 

c 
perfect gases; —=1*410. {Translator,) 



56 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

or in the case of atmospheric air by -f . The specific heat 
7^ is found by dividing the former quantity by the latter, or, 

7,=^x-?- = >x?^ = ^d. (36). 

Similarly %^^d (37). 

In the first of these two equations we may give to c^^ its 
value as found by Regnauli, 0*2375; the equation then 
becomes 

•^' = 04^75 ^^^- 

In the second we may put for c\, according to (34), the 
value 01684, and for c, the expression given in (35); whence 
we have 

_ c,d~ 00691 . 

^- 01684 ^^^^• 

§ 7. Numerical Calculation of the Specific Heat at con- 
stant Volume. 

The formulae developed in the last section have been 
appUed by the author to calculate from the values which 
Regnault has determined by his researches for the Specific 
Heat at constant Pressure of a large number of gases and 
vapours, the corresponding values of the Specific Heat at 
constant Volume. In so doing he has in some sort recal- 
culated one of the two series of numbers given by Regnault 
himself; who has expressed the Specific Heat at constant 
Pressure in two dififerent ways, and has brought together the 
resulting numbers in two series, one of which is superscribed 
* en poids,* and the other ' en volume.' The first series con- 
tains the values which result, if the gases in question are 
compared weight by weight with water, in relation to the 
quantity of heat required to warm them through V; in other 
words, the values of the quantities denoted above by Cp. The 
numbers in the second series are simply obtained from those 



ON PERFECT GASES. 67 

in the first by multiplying them by the corresponding specific 
gravity, i. e. they are the values of the product Cpd, 

These latter numbers were no doubt those most easily 
<^culated from the observed values of c^; but their signi- 
fication is somewhat complicated. Witn them the quan- 
tity of heat has for its unit the ordinary unit of heat, whilst 
the volume to which they refer is that which a unit-weight 
of atmospheric air assumes, when under the same tempera- 
ture and pressure as the gas under consideration. The tedious- 
ness of the verbal description thus required makes the 
numbers troublesome to understand and to apply ; moreover 
this mode of expressing the Specific Heat of gases has been 
used, so far as the autnor knows, by no previous writer. In 
considering gases with reference to volume, it has in all other 
cases been customary to compare the quantity of heat, which 
a given gas requires to raise its temperature through 1®, with 
the quantity of heat which an equal volume of atmospheric 
air requires under the same conditions for the same purpose, 
or, as briefly expressed above, by comparing the gas, volume 
for voltmie, with air. The numbers thus obtained are re- 
markable for their simplicity, and allow the laws which 
hold as to the specific heats of the gas to be treated with 
special clearness. 

It will therefore, the author believes, be found an ad- 
vantage that he has calculated, firom the values given by 
Regnault under the heading 'en volume* for the product 
c/l, the values of the quantity 7^, defined above. All that 
was required for this, by (38), was to divide the values of Cj,d 
by 0-2375. 

He has further calculated the values of c, and 7,; calcula- 
tions which by equations (35) and (39) could be very simply 
performed, by taking from the values of the product c^rf the 
number 0*0691, and dividing the remainder by d, or by 
0*1684, respectively. 

The numerical values thus calculated are brought together 
in the annexed table, in which the different columns have the 
following signification : 

Column I. gives the name of the gas. 

Column 11. gives the Chemical composition, and this 
expressed in such a way that the diminution of volume pro- 



58 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

duced by the combination can be immediately observed. For 
in each case those volumes of the simple gas are given, which 
must combine in order to give Two Volumes of the compound 
gas. Thus we assume for Carbon, as a gas, such an hypothe- 
tical volume as we must asstmie, in order to say that one 
volume of Carbon unites with one volume of Oxygen to make 
Carbonic Oxide, or with two volumes to make Carbonic 
acid. Again, when, e.g. Alcohol is denoted in the Table by 
CjH^O, this means that two volumes of the hypothetical car- 
bon gas, six volumes of Hydrogen, and one volume of Oxygen, 
make up together two volumes of Alcoholic vapour. For 
sulphur-gas the specific gravity used to determine its volume 
is that found by Sainte-Claire Deville and Troost for very 
high temperatures, viz. 2*23. In the five last combinations 
in the Table, which contain Silicon, Phosphorus, Arsenic, 
Titanium) and Tin, these simple elements are denoted by 
their ordinary chemical signs, without reference to their 
volumes in the gaseous condition, because the gaseous 
volumes of these elements are partly stiU unknown, partly 
hampered with certain irregularities not yet thoroughly cleared 
up. 

Column III. gives the Density of the gas, using the values 
given by Regnault. 

Column IV. gives the Specific Heat at constant Pressure 
as compared, weight for weight, with water, or in other words 
referred to a unit-weight of the gas and expressed in ordinary 
units of heat. These are the numbers given by Regnault 
under the heading ' en poids.' 

Column V. gives the Specific Heat at constant Pressure 
compared, volume for volume, with air, calculated by divid- 
ing by 0*2375 the numbers given by Regnault under the 
heading * en volume.* 

Column VI. gives the Specific Heat at constant Volume 
compared, weight for weight, with water, calculated by equa- 
tion (35). 

Column VII. gives the Specific Heat at constant Volume 
compared, volume for volume, with air, calculated by equation 
(39), 



ON FERFECt OASES. 



L 


n. 

ChBini™! 

Compoei- 

lion. 


m. 

Deiwity. 


IV. V. 

SpMifioh«t.t«in- 


VI. I VII. 
SpeciBc heat «t con- 



Wiwr. 


w'thAlr. 


Water. 


(compared 
.oluistor 
roluma 
with Air. 



1 

CO 
HCI 
CO, 
N,0 

E,0 

H B 
G%. 

ceC. 

CHCI, 

c'h,6' 

C,H,„0 
c)h 3 

CjHla 

C,H,Br 
CH O' 

cJh'o, 
stc\ 

PCI. 
Ah CI, 
TiCIj 
SnCl, 


1 

1-1056 

0-B713 

0-0692 

9-1602 

6-4773 

10384 

0-9873 

1-9536 

1-5201 

1-5241 

0-6219 

2-2113 

1-1747 

2-6268 

0-5627 

4-1244 

0-9672 

5894 

2-G942 

4 -6978 

1'1055 

1-5890 

2-5573 

B-lIOl 

2-2269 

3-7058 

3-4174 

2-0036 

3-0400 

5-8833 

4-7461 

6-2667 

G'G403 

8-965* 


0-2375 
0-21751 
0-24380 
a-10900 
0-12099 
0-0S553 
0-2317 
0-2150 
0-1862 
0-2169 
0-2262 
0-480S 
0-1544 
0-2482 
0-1569 
0-5929 
0-1567 
0-4040 
0-6084 
0-3754 
0-5061 
0-4580 
0-4531 
0-4797 
0-4008 
0-2738 
0-1896 
0-2293 
0-4125 
O-40O8 
0-1322 
0-1347 
01122 
0-1290 
00939 


1 

1-013 
0-997 
0-998 
1-248 
1-280 
1-013 
0-998 
0-992 
1-B9 
1-46 
1-26 
114 
1-20 
1-71 
1-38 
2-73 
1-76 
1-26 

4-26 
10-01 
2-13 
3-03 
5-16 
fi-26 
2-57 
2-96 
3-30 
B'43 
e-13 
S-27 
9-69 
2-96 
3-61 
3-64 


0-1684 
0-1501 
0-1737 
2-411 
0-0929 
0-0429 
0-1652 
0-1736 
0-1304 
0-173 
0-181 
0-370 
0-123 
0-181 
0-191 
0-468 
0-140 
0-869 
0-391 
0-350 
0-491 
0-395 
0-410 
0-453 
0-379 
0-243 
0-171 
0-209 
0-378 
0-378 
0-120 
0-120 
0-101 
0-119 
0-086 


1 



0-990 



0-975 



Hydro-Bolpbario Aaid. 
Carbonic di-Hulphide. 
Carbnrettoci Hydrogen 


1-29 

2-04 
1-61 



2-06 



OUotTorpentina 


13-71 



Tri-ohloridoo!SUieoa 
Tri-ohlorideofPhoB-l 


1-21 
3-39 


Tetra-chloride of Ti-I 


3-77 
4-67 


Tetra-chloride rf Tin. 


4-59 



60 ON THE MECHANICAX THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 8. Integration of the Differential Equations which ex- 
press the first main Principle in the case of Gases. 

The diflferential equations deduced in sections 3 and 4, which 
in various forms express the first main principle of the Mechani- 
cal Theory of Heat in the case of gases, are not immediately 
integrable, as can be seen by inspection; and must therefore 
be treated after the method developed in § 3 of the Introduc- 
tion. In other words, the integration becomes possible as 
soon as we subject the variables occurring in the equation to 
some one condition, thus determining the path of the change 
of condition of the body. We shall here give only two very 
simple examples of the process, the results of which are 
important for our f jrther investigations. 

Example 1. The gas changes its volume at Constant 
Pressure, and the quantity of heat required for such change is 
known. 

In this case we select from the above equations one which 
contains jp and v as independent variables, e.g. the last of 
Equations (15), which is 

dQ^^^vdp + ^pdv. 

As the pressure jp is to be constant, we put p^^p^, and 
dp^O; the equation then becomes 

dQ = -^p^dv, 

which gives on integration (if we call v^ the original value 
o{ v) 

Q = ^pAw,) (40). 

Example 2. The gas changes its volume at Constant 
Temperature, and the quantity of heat required for such 
change is known. 

In this case we select an equation which contains T and v 
as independent variables, e.g. Equation (11), which is 

dQ =^ C,dT + — dv. 



ON PERFECT GASES. 61 

As T is to be constant, we put T=^T^, and dr = 0; whence 
we have 



Integrating, 



V 



Q^RT.log^ (41). 



^1 



Hence is derived the Principle that if a Oas dtanges its 
volume without change of temperature, the quantities of heat 
absorbed or given off form an arithmeticdl series, while the 
volumes form a geovnetrical series. 

Again, if we put for R its value ^^ , we have 

Q=p,r.log^ (42). 

If we suppose this equation to refer, not directly to a unit 
weight of the gas, but to a quantity of it such that at pressure 
p it assumes a volume v^, and then suppose that this volume 
changes under constant temperature to v, then the equation 
contains nothing which depends on the special nature of the 
gas. Therefore the quantity of heat absorbed is independent 
of the nature of the gas. Further, it does not depend on the 
temperature, but only on the pressure, being proportional to 
the original pressure. 

Another application of the differential equations deduced 
in sections 3 and 4 consists in making some assumption as 
to the heat to be imparted to the gas during its change 
of condition, and then enquiring what course the change of 
condition will take under such circumstances. The simplest 
and at the same time most important assumption of this kind 
is that no heat whxitever is imparted to or taken from the gas 
during its change of condition. For this purpose we may 
imagine the gas confined in a vessel impermeable to heat, or 
that the change is so rapid that no appreciable heat can pass 
to or from the gas in the time. 



62 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

On this assumption we must put dQ = 0. Let us do 
this for the three Equations (16). Then the first of these 
becomes 

G 
Dividing by T x (7,, and as before denoting ^ by Jc, we have 

f+(A:-l)f-0. 

Integrating, 

log T + (A; - 1) log v = Const. 

or 2V* = Const. 

If Tj, Vj are the original values of T, v, we may eliminate the 
Constant, and obtain 



(43). 



If this equation be applied for example to atmospheric air, 
then, writing A; = 1*410, we can easily calculate the change of 
temperature which corresponds to any given change of 
volume. If e.g. we assume a certain quantity of air to be 
taken at freezing temperature and at any pressure whatever, 
and to be compressed, either in a vessel impermeable to 
heat, or with great rapidity, to half its volume, then T^ = 273 

(absolute temperature) and -^ =» 2 ; hence the equation be- 
comes 

^ = 2?^« - 1-329, 

whence T = 273 x 1*329 = 363, 

or if ^ be the temperature measured in degrees above freezing 
point, 

i=»r-273«90^ 

If a similar calculation is made for the compression of the 
gas to J and -^ of its original volume, results are obtained, 



ON PERFECT GASES. 



63 



which, combined with the former, are presented in the follow- 
ing Table. 



Value of 

V 


1 
2 


1 
3 


1 
10 


T 
273 


1-329 


1-765 


2-570 


T 


363 


482 


702 


t 


90> 


209» 


429« 



Again, if in the second of equations (16) we put dQ = 0, 
we get : 

C,dT+{C,-C,)^dp^O. 

This equation is of the same form as the last, except that 
/? is in the place of v, and that G^ and G^ have their places 
interchanged. Hence in exactly the same way we shall 
obtain, 

U 



whence 



1. _ f^iV* 



y 



(44). 



Finsilly the last of Equations (16), ifdQhe put « 0, passes 
into the form already treated in § 5 : 

^, _^ vdp + ^-^pdv:'0; 
which may be written 

p V 

and gives on integration 



Pi \vJ 



,(45). 



64 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



§ 9. Determination of the External Work done during 
the change of volume of a gas. 

There is one quantity connected vnith the expansion of a 
gas which still requires to be specially considered, viz. the 
External Work done in the process. The element of this 
work, as determined in Equation (6), Ch. I, is 

dW=pdv. 

This work may be very clearly set forth by a graphic 
representation. We will adopt a rectangular system of co-or- 
dinates, in which the abscissa represents the volume v, and the 
ordinate the pressure p. If we now suppose p to be expressed 
as a function of v, say p =/ (v), then this equation is the 
equation to a curve, whose ordinates express the values of p 
corresponding to the different values of v, and which for 
brevity we will call the Pressure-curve. In Fig. 3 let rs be 
this curve, so that, if oe repre- 
sent the volume v existing at 
a certain instant, the ordinate 
ef drawn at e will represent 
the pressure at the same in- 
stant. If further ey represent 
an indefinitely small element 
of volume dv, and the ordinate 
ah is drawn at g, then we shall 
have an indefinitely smiall para- 
lellogram efhg, whose area re- 
presents the external work 
done in an indefinitely small 
expansion of the body; and 
which differs firom the product pdv only by an indefinitely 
small quantity of the second order, which may be neglected. 
The same holds for any other indefinitely small expansion; 
and hence in the case of a finite expansion (say firom the 
volume Vj, represented by the abscissa oa, to that of v., repre- 
sented by the abscissa oc) the external work, for which we 
have the equation 



-a.- 'eg 

Fig. 3. 



W 



:jydv 



(46), 



ON PERFECT GASES. 



65 



is represented by the quadrangular figure abdc, which is 
bounded by the difference of abscissae ac, the ordinates ab 
and cd, and the portion of the pressure-curve bd. 

In order actually to perform the integration in equation 
(46) we must know the function of v which expresses the 
pressure p. On this point we will select as examples the cases 
already treated in § 8. 

First, let us assume that the Pressure p is constant. 
Then the curve of pressure is a straight line parallel to the 
axis of x, and abdc is a rectangle (see Fig. 4) whose area is 



Fig. 4. 



Fig. 6. 



equal to the product of ac and ab. In this case then we 
obtain from (46), denoting the constant pressure by p^, 



'f'^=Pi(^«-^i) 



(47). 



Secondly, let us assume that the Temperature remains 
constant during the expansion of the gas. Then the law of 
Mariotte holds for the relation between pressure and volume, 
and is expressed by the equation 

pv= const. 

From the form of this equation we see that the curve of 
pressure is an equilateral hyperbola (Fig. 5) having the axes 
of co-ordinates as asymptotes. A pressure- curve of this kind, 
which involves the special condition that the temperature is 
constant, is usually called an Isothermal Curve. 

To effect the integration in this case we may write for p 

c. ?> 



66 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the value ^^' , where p^^ is any value obtained for the con- 
stant in the above equation ; we then get from (46) : 



^=?i^,/J':^=2>i^ilog^[ • (^^)' 



We observe that this Value of TT coincides with that given 
in equation (42) for Q ; the reason for this being that the gas, 
while expanding at constant temperature, absorbs only so 
much heat as is required for the external work. 

Joule has employed the equation (48) in one of his deter- 
minations of the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat. For this 
purpose he forced atmospheric air into a strong receiver, up 
to ten or twenty times its normal density. The receiver and 
pump were meantime kept under water, so that all the heat 
which was developed in puniping could be measured in the 
water. The Apparatus is represented in Fig. 6, in which R is 
the receiver, and C the pump. The vessel G, as will be 
easily understood, was used for the drying of the air, and the 
vessel with the spiral tube served to rive to the air, before its 
entrance into the pump, an exactly known temperature. 
From the total quantity of heat given in the calorimeter 
Joule subtracted the part due to the fnction of the pump, 
the amount of which he determined by working the pump 
for exactly the same length of time, and under the same 
mean pressure, but without allowing the entrance of air, and 
then observing the heat produced. The remainder, after this 
was subtracted, he took as being the quantity of heat de- 
veloped by the compression of the air ; and this he compared 
with the work required for the compression as given by equa- 
tion (48). By this means he obtained as the mean of two 
series of experiments the value of 444 kilogrammetres as the 
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat. 

This value, it must be admitted, does not agree very well 
with the value 424 obtained by the friction of water ; the 
reason of which is probably to be found in the far larger 
sources of error attending experiments on air. Nevertheless 
at that time, when the fact that the work required for 
developing a given quantity of heat was equal under all cir- 
umstances was not yet placed on a firm basis, the agreement 



ox PERFECT GASES. 



67 



of the values found by such wholly dififerent methods was 
close enough to aid considerably in the establishment of the 
principle. 

As a third case of determination of work done, we may 
assume that the gas changes its volume within an envelope 



to 

1^ 



impermeable to heat ; or, which comes to the same thing, 
that the change of volume takes place too rapidly to allow of 
the passing of any appreciable quantity of heat to or from the 
body during the time. 



68 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



In this case the relation between pressure and volume is 
given by equation (45), viz.: 



Pi . \v) ' 



The curve of pressure corresponding to this equation 
(Fig. 7) falls more steeply than that delineated in Fig. 5. 
Rankine has given to this 
special class of pressure- 
curves, which correspond to 
the case of expansion within 
an envelope impermeable to 
heat, the name of Adiabatic 
curves (from Scafiaivecv, to 
pass through). On the 
other hand Gibbs {Trans, 
Connecticut Academy, vol. 
II. p. 309) has proposed to 
name them Isentropiccurves, 
because in this kind of ex- 
pansion the Entropy, a quan- 
tity which will be discussed further on, remains constant. This 
latter form of nomenclature is the one which the author pro- 
poses to adopt, since it is both usual and advantageous to 
designate curves of this kind according to that quantity 
which remains constant during the action that takes place. 

To efifect the integration in this case, we may put, accord- 
ing to the above equation, 



Fig. 7. 



— ..-,,» 



JP=JPA 



^v"' 



whence (46) becomes 



or 



^=a['-©1 (*»> 



(69 ) 



CHAPTER III. 



SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE OF THE MECHANICAL THEORY 

OF HEAT. 

§ 1. Description of a special form of Cyclical Process. 

In order to prove and to make intelligible the second 
Principle of the Mechanical Theory of Heat, we shall com- 
mence by following out in all its parts, and graphically repre- 
senting in the manner already described, one special form 
of cycUcal process. For the latter purpose we will assume 
that the condition of the variable body is determined by its 
volume V and its pressure p, and will employ, as* before, a 
rectangular system of co-ordinates, in which the abscissae 
represent volumes, and the ordinates pressures. Any point 
on the plane of co-ordinates will then correspond to a certain 
condition of the body, in which its volume and pressure have 
the same volumes as the abscissa and ordinate of the point. 
Further, every variation of the body's condition will be 
represented by a line, whose extreme points determine the 
initial and final condition of the body, and whose form shews 
the way in which the pressure and volume have simul- 
taneously varied. 

In Fig. 8 let the initial condition of the body, at which 
the cyclical process commences, be given by the point a, so 
that the abscissa oe = v^ and the ordinate ea=^p^ represent 
the initial volume and pressure respectively. By means of 
these two quantities the initial temperature, which we will 
call T^, is also fixed. 



70 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOET OF HEAT. 

Now let the body ia the first place expand, while retain 
ing the same temperature ?*,. If no heat were imparted to i 



during expansion, it would necessarily become cooler: wi 
will therefore assume that it is put in communication with ) 
body K, acting as a reservoir of heat, which body baa thi 
same temperature 7*,, and does not appreciably vary from thi 
during the cyclical process. From this body the variabh 
body IS supposed to draw during the expansion just sufficiem 
heat to keep itself also at the temperature J*,. 

The curve, which during tbis expansion expresses th* 
change of pressure, is part of an iaotkermal curve. In ordei 
that we may give definite forms to the graphic repre- 
sentations of this curve, and of others yet to be described 
we will, without limiting the investigation itself to anj 
particular bodies, draw tbe figure as it would appear in the 
case of a perfect gas. Then the isothermal curve, as ex- 
plained above, will be an equilateral hyperbola ; and, if tb« 
expansion take place from the volume oe = r, to the volumt 
of= V^, we shall obtain the part ab of such an equilateral 
hyperbola. 

When the volume F, has been reached, let us suppose the 
body ^ to be withdrawn, and let the variable body be left 
to continue its expansion by itself, without any heat being 
imparted to it. The temperature must then fall, and we 
obtain as curve of pressure an isentropic curve, which descends 
more steeply than the isothermal curve. Let tbis expansion 
continue till the volume K, is reached, giving us the portion 
of an isentropic curve 6c. The lower temperature thus 
attained we may call T,. 



SECOSD MAIN PRrSCIPLK. 71 

■ From henceforward let the body be compressed, so as to 
bring it back to its original volume. Let the compression 
first take place at the constant temperature T^, ior which 
purpose we may suppose that the body is connected with a 
body K^ at temperature T,, acting as a reservoir of heat, and 
that it gives up to K^ just so much heat as suffices to keep 
itself also at temperature T,. The pressure-curve correspond- 
ing to this compression is again an isothermal curve, and in 
the special case of a perfect gas is another equilateral hyper- 
bola, of which we obtain the p.>rtion cd during the reduction 
of volume to oh = v . 

Finally, let the last compression, wbich brings the varia- 
ble body back to its initial volume, take place without 
the presence of the body JC , so that the temperature rises, 
and the pressure follows the hue of an isentropic curve. 
We will assume that the volume oS = v,, up to which the 
compression went on according to the first mode, is so chosen, 
that the compression which begins from this volume and 
continues to volume oe = v^ is just sufficient to raise the 
temperature again from T^ to T^. If then the initial tem- 
l>erature is thus regained at the same time as the initial 
volume, the pressure must also return to its initial value, and' 
the last curve of pressure must therefore exactly hit the 
point a. When the body is thus brought back again to the 
original condition, expressed by the point a, the cyclical pro- 
cess is complete, 

§ 2, Result of tiie Cyclical Process. 

During the two expansions which take place in the course 
of the cyclical process the ex- 
ternal pressure must he over- 
come, and therefore external 
work must be performed; 
whereas conversely during the 
compressions external work 
is absorbed t-o perform them. 
These quantities of work are 
given directly by the figure, 
which is here reproduced. 
'^' ■ Tlie work performed during 

the expansion ah is rej'resented by the quadrangle eabf, and 



72 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

that performed during the expansion be by the quadrangle 
fbcg. Again, the work absorbed for the compression cd is 
represented by the quadrangle gcdh, and that absorbed for 
the compression da by the quadrangle hdae. The two latter 
quantities, on account of the lower temperature which obtains 
during the compression, are smaller than the two former; 
and, if we subtract them from these, there remains an over- 
plus of external work performed, which is represented by the 
quadrangle abed, and which we will call W. 

To the external work thus gained must correspond, ac- 
cording to equation (5a) of Chapter I., a quantity Q, equal to 
it in value, which is required for its production. Now the 
variable body, during the first expansion, expressed by ab, 
which took place in connection with the body K^, received 
from this latter a certain quantity of heat, which we may call 
Qj ; and again during the first compression, expressed by cd, 
which took place in connection with the body K^, it im- 
parted to this latter a certain quantity of heat, which may be 
called Q^. During the second expansion be and the second 
compression da the body neither imparted nor received heat. 
Now, since in the course of the whole cyclical process a certain 
quantity of heat Q is absorbed in work, it follows that the 
quantity of heat Q^, received by the variable body, is larger 
than the quantity of heat Q^ which it gives out, so that the 
difference Q^ — Q, is equal to Q. 

We may accordingly put 

Q. = Q,+<2 (1). 

and can then distinguish in the quantity of heat Q,, which 
the variable body has drawn from the body K^, two parts, of 
which one Q is converted into work, whilst the other Q^ is 
given back as heat into the body K^. Since in all the other 
relations of the body the original condition is restored at the 
end of the cyclical process, and accordingly every variation 
which takes place at one part of the process is counter- 
balanced by an equal and opposite variation which takes 
place at some other part of the process, we may finally de- 
scribe the result of the cyclical process in the following terms : 
The one quantity oflieat Q, derived from the body K, is trans- 
formed into work, and the other quantity Q^ has passed over 
from the hotter body K^ into the colder K^, 



SECOND MAIN PBINCIPLK 73 

The whole of the cyclical process just described may also 
be supposed to take place in t$e reverse order. If we again 
begin with the conditions represented by the point a, in 
which the variable body has the volume v^ and the tempera- 
ture Tj, we may suppose that it first expands, without any 
heat being imparted to it, to the volume v,, thus describing 
the curve ad, in which its temperature sinks from T^ to T^; 
that it is then connected with the body K^, and expands at 
constant temperature T^ from v^ to F,,, describing the curve 
dc, during which it draws heat from the body K^; that it 
then, without parting with its heat, is compressed from F, to 
Fj, describing the curve cb, during which its temperature nses 
from T^ to T^ ; finally that it is connected with the body K^, 
at the constant temperature T^, and whilst imparting its heat 
to K. is again compressed from Fj to the initial volume v^, 
descnbing the curve ba. 

In this reversed process the quantities of work represented 
by the quadrangles eadh and hdcg are work performed or 
positive, those represented by gcbf and fbae are work absorbed 
or negative. The latter amount is larger than the former, and 
the x^mainder, a. represented by thi quadrangle <d,cd, is in 
this case work absorbed. 

In addition the variable body has drawn the quantity of 
heat Qg from the body K^, and has given out to the body K^ 
the quantity of heat ^^ = Q^ + Q. Of the two parts of which 
Qj^ consists, the one Q corresponds to the work absorbed, and 
is generated from it, whilst the other Q^ has passed over as 
heat from the body K^ to the body K^, Hence the result of 
the cyclical process may here be described as follows: the 
quantity of heat Q is generated out of work, and is given off 
to the body K^, and the quantity of heat Q^ has passed over 
from the colder body K^ to the hotter body K^, 

§ 3. Cj/clical process in the case of a body composed 
partly of liquid, partly of vapour. 

In the foregoing sections, although in describing the 
cyclical process we made no assumptions limiting the nature 
of the variable body, yet the graphic representation of the 
process was made to correspond to the case of a perfect gas. 
it is perhaps as well therefore to examine the cyclical process 



74 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



over again in the case of a body of a diflferent kind, in order to 
see how its appearance may vary with the nature of the body 
operated on. We will select for this examination a body 
which has not all its molecules in one and the same state in 
all its parts, but consists partly of liquid, partly of vapour at 
the maximum density. 

Let us suppose a liquid contained in an expansible en- 
velope, but only filling a part of it, and leaving the remainder 
free for vapour having the maximum density corresponding 
to the existing temperature T^. The combined volumes of 
liquid and vapour are represented in Fig. 10 by the abscissa 
oe, and the pressure of the 
vapour by the ordinate ea. 
Now suppose the envelope to 
yield to the pressure and en- 
large, while at the same time 
the liquid and vapour are 
connected with a body K^ of 
constant temperature T^. As 
the volume increases, more 
liquid becomes vaporised, but 
the heat consumed in the 



e 



f S 



Fig. 10. 



vaporisation is continually replaced from the body K^, so that 
the temperature, and with it the pressure of the vapour, 
remains unaltered. The isothermal curve corresponding to 
this expansion is therefore a straight line parallel to the 
abscissa. When the combined volume has increased in this 
way from oe to of, a quantity of external work has been 
thereby performed, which is represented by the rectangle 
eabf. Now withdraw the body K^, and let the envelope 
enlarge still farther, without any passage of heat inwards or 
outwards. Then there will be partly an expansion of the 
vapour already existing, partly a generation of new vapour ; 
in consequence the temperature will fall, and the pressure 
with it. Let this go on until the temperature has changed 
from T^ to T^, at which time the volume og has been 
attained. The fall of pressure, which has taken place during 
this expansion, will be represented by the isentropic curve 
be, and the external work performed by fbcg. 

Now let the envelope be compressed, so as to bring the 
liquid and vapour back again to their original combined 



SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE. 75 

volume oe ; and let this compression take place, partly in con- 
nection with the body K^, of constant temperature T^, to which 
all the heat produced by condensation of vapour passes over, 
80 that the temperature T^ remains unaltered : partly apart 
from this body, so that the temperature rises. Let it also be 
arranged, that the first compression shall extend only so far 
(to oh) as that the decrease of volume he then remaining may 
be just sufficient to raise the temperature again from T to T . 
During this first compression the pressure remains unaltered, 
at the value gc ; the external work thus absorbed is therefore 
represented by the rectangle gcdh. During the last compres- 
sion the press;ure increases, and is represented by the 
isentropic curve da, which must end exactly at the point a, 
since with the original temperature T^ we must also have the 
original pressure ea. The external work absorbed in this 
last operation is represented by hdae. 

At the end of the operation the liquid and vapour are 
again in their original condition, and the cyclical process is 
complete. The surplus of the positive above the negative 
external work, or the external work W which has been gained 
on the whole in the course of the process, is represented as 
before by the quadrangle abed. To this work must correspond 
the absorption of an equivalent quantity of heat Q ; and if we 
denote by Q^ the heat imparted during the expansion, and by 
Q, the heat given out during the contraction, we may put 
Qi = Q+ Q^, and the final result of the cyclical process is 
again expressed by saying, that the quantity of heat Q is 
converted into work, and the quantity Q^ has passed over from 
the hotter body K^ to the colder K^. 

This cyclical process may also be carried out in the reverse 
direction, and then the quantity of heat Q will be generated out 
of work, and given off to the body JT,, while the quantity Q, 
will pass over from the colder body K^ to the hotter K^. 

In a similar manner cyclical processes of this kind may 
be carried out with other variable bodies, and graphically 
represented by two isothermal and two isentropic lines ; in 
which cases, while the form of the curves depends on the 
nature of the body, the result of the process is always of the 
same kind, viz. that one quantity of heat is converted into 
work, or generated out of work, and that another quantity 
passes over from a hotter to a colder body, or vice versa. 



76 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

The question now arises, Whether the quantity of heat 
converted into work, or generated out of work, stands in a 
generally constant proportion to the quantity which passes over 
from the hotter to the colder body, or vice versd; or whether 
the proportion existing between them varies according to the 
nature of the variable body, which is the medium of the 
transfer, 

§ 4. Camot's view as to the work performed during a 
Cyclical Process, 

Camot, who was the first to remark that in the produc- 
tion of mechanical work heat passes from a hotter into a 
colder body, and that conversely in the consumption of 
mechanical work heat can be brought from a colder into a 
hotter body, and who also conceived the simple cyclical process 
above described (which was first represented graphically by 
Clapeyron), took a special view of his own as to the funda- 
mental connection of these processes*. 

In his time the doctrine was still generally prevalent that 
heat was a special kind of matter, which might exist within 
a body in greater or lesser quantity, and thereby occasion 
differences of temperature. In accordance with this doctrine 
it was supposed that heat might change the character of its 
distribution, in passing from one body into another, and 
further that it could exist in different conditions, which were 
denominated respectively 'free' and 'latent'; but that the 
whole quantity of heat existing in the universe could neither 
be increased nor diminished, inasmuch as matter can neither 
be created nor destroyed. 

Camot shared these views, and accordingly treated it as 
self-evident that the quantities of heat, which the variable 
body in the course of the cyclical process receives from and 
gives out to the surrounding space, are equal to each other, 
and consequently cancel each other. He lays this down very 
distinctly in § 27 of his work, where he says : " we shall 
assume that the quantities of heat absorbed and emitted in 
these different transformations compensate each other exactly. 
This fact has never been held in doubt ; admitted at first with- 
out reflection, it has since been verified in many instances by 

* Reflexions 8ur la puissance motrice dufeu. "Paris, 1824. 



SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE. 77 

experiments with the calorimeter. To deny it would be to sub- 
vert the whole theory of heat, which rests on it as its basis." 

Now since on this assumption the quantity of heat exist- 
ing in the body was the same after the cyclical process as 
before it, and yet a certain amount of work had been achieved, 
Camot sought to explain this latter fact from the circum- 
stance of the heat falling from a higher to a lower tempera- 
ture. He drew a comparison between this descending passage 
of heat (which is especially striking in the steam-engine, 
where the fire gives off heat to the boiler, and conversely the 
cold water of the condenser absorbs heat) and the falling of 
water from a higher to a lower level, by means of which a 
machine can be set in motion, and work done. Accordingly 
in § 28, after making use of the expression ' fall of water/ he 
applies the corresponding expression ' fall of caloric' to the 
siiJcing of heat from a higher to a lower temperature. 

Starting from these premises, he laid down the principle 
that the quantity of work done must bear a certain constant 
relation to the 'passage of heat,* i.e. the quantity of heat 
passing over at the time, and to the temperature of the bodies 
between which it passes ; and that this relation is indepen- 
dent of the nature of the substance which serves as a 
medium for the performance of work and passage of heat. 
His proof of the necessary existence of this constant relation 
rests on the principle " That it is impossible to create moving 
force out of nothing," or in other words, " That perpetual 
motion is an impossibility." 

This mode of dealing with the question does not accord 
with our present views, inasmuch as we rather assume that 
in the production of work a corresponding quantity of heat 
is consumed, and that in consequence the quantity of heat 
given out to the surrounding space during the cyclical process 
is less than that received from it. Now if for the production 
of work heat is consumed, then, whether at the same time 
with this consumption of heat there takes place the passage 
of another quantity of heat from a hotter to a colder body, 
or not, at least there is no ground whatever for saying that 
the work is created out of nothing. Accordingly not only 
must the principle enunciated by Camot receive some modifi- 
cation, but a different basis of proof from that used by him 
must be discovered. 



78 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 5. Kew Fundamental Principle concerning Heat 

Various considerations as to the conditions and nature of 
heat had led the author to the conviction that the tendency 
of heat to pass from a warmer to a colder body, and thereby 
equalize existing differences of temperature (as prominently 
shewn in the phenomena of conduction and ordinary radia- 
tion), was so intimately bound up with its whole constitution 
that it must have a predominant influence under all conceiv- 
able circumstances. He thereupon propounded the following 
as a fundamental principle : " Heat cannot, of itself, pass from 
a colder to a hotter body." 

The words ' of itself,* here used for the sake of brevity, 
require, in order to be completely understood, a further ex- 
planation, as given in various parts of the author s papers. 
In the first place they express the fact that heat can never, 
through conduction or radiation, accumulate itself in the 
warmer body at the cost of the colder. This, which was 
akeady known as respects direct radiation, must thus be 
further extended to cases in which by refraction or reflection 
the course of the ray is diverted and a concentration of rays 
thereby produced. In the second place the principle must 
be applicable to processes which are a combination of several 
different steps, such as e.g. cycUcal processes of the kind 
described above. It is true that by such a process (as we 
have seen by going through the original cycle in the reverse 
direction) heat may be carried over from a colder into a 
hotter body: our principle however declares that simul- 
taneously with this passage of heat from a colder to a hotter 
body there must either take place an opposite passage of heat 
from a hotter to a colder body, or else some change or other 
which has the special property that it is not reversible, except 
under the condition that it occasions, whether directly or 
indirectly, such an opposite passage of heat. This simul- 
taneous passage of heat in the opposite direction, or this 
special change entailing an opposite passage of heat, is then 
to be treated as a compensation for the passage of heat from 
the colder to the warmer body ; and if we apply this concep- 
tion we may replace the words " of itself" by " without com- 
pensation," and then enunciate the principle as follows : 

" A passage of heat from a colder to a hotter body cannot 
take place without compensation." 



SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE. 79 

This proposition, laid down as a Fundamental Principle 
by the author, has met with much opposition ; but, having 
repeatedly had occasion to defend it, he has always been able 
to shew that the objections raised were due to the fact that 
the phenomena, in which it was believed that an uncompen- 
sated passage of heat from a colder to a hotter body was to 
be found, had not been correctly understood. To state these 
objections and their answers at this place would interrupt too 
seriously the course of the present treatise. In the discus- 
sions which follow, the principle, which, as the author believes, 
is acknowledged at present by most physicists as being correct, 
will be simply used as a fundamental principle ; but the 
author proposes to return to it further on, and then to consider 
more closely the points of discussion which have been raised 
upon it. 

§ 6. Proof that the relation between the quantity of heat 
carried over, and that converted into work, is independent of 
the nature of the matter which foi^ms the medium of the 
change. 

Assuming the foregoing principle to be correct, it may be 
proved that between the quantity of heat Q, which in a cyclical 
process of the kind described above is transformed into work 
(or, where the process is in the reverse order, generated by 
work), and the quantity of heat Q , which is transferred at the 
same time from a hotter to a colder body (or vice versa), there 
exists a relation independent of the nature of the variable 
body which acts as the medium of the transformation and 
transfer ; and thus that, if several cyclical processes are per- 
formed, with the same reservoirs of heat K^ and K^, but with 

different variable bodies, the ratio — will be the same for 

all. If we suppose the processes so arranged, according to 
their magnitude, that the quantity of heat Q, which is trans- 
formed into work, has in all of them a constant value, then 
we have only to consider the magnitude of the quantity of 
heat Qj which is transferred, and the principle which is to be 
proved takes the following form : " If where two different 
variable bodies are used, the quantity of heat Q transformed 
into work is the same, then the quantity of heat ^2* which 
is transferred, will also be the same." 



80 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Let there, if possible, be two bodies C and C (e.g. the 
perfect gas and the combined mass of liquid and vapour, 
described above) for which the values of Q are equal, but 
those of the transferred quantities of heat are different, and 
let these different values be called Q, and Q\ respectively : 
Q^ being the greater of the two. Now let us in the first 
place subject the body to a cyclical process, such that the 
quantity of heat Q is transformed into work, and the quantity 
Qj is transferred from K^ to jBT,. Next let us subject C to a 
cyclical process of the reverse description, so that the quantity 
of heat Q is generated out of work, and the quantity Q\ is 
transferred from K^\^ K^, Then the above two changes, 
from heat into work, and work into heat, will cancel each 
other ; since we may suppose that when in the first process 
the heat Q has been taken from the body K^ and transformed 
into work, this same work is expended in the second process in 
producing the heat Q, which is then returned to the same body 
K^. In all other respects also the bodies will have returned, 
at the end of the two operations, to their original condition, 
with one exception only. The quantity of heat Q\, trans- 
ferred from K^ to K^, has been assumed to be greater than 
the quantity Q^ transferred from K^ to K^, Hence these two 
do not cancel each other, but there remains at the end a 
quantity of heat, represented by the difference Q^ — Q,, which 
has passed over from K^ to K^, Hence a passage of heat will 
have taken place from a colder to a warmer body without any 
other compensating change. But this contradicts the funda- 
mental principle. Hence the assumption that Q\ is greater 
than Q2 niust be false. 

Again, if we make the opposite assumption, that Q"^ is 
less than Q^, we may suppose the body C to undergo the 
cyclical process in the first, and G in the reverse direction. 
We then arrive similarly at the result that a quantity of heat 
Q2 "" Q\ ^^ passed from the colder body K^ to the hotter K^, 
which is again contrary to the principle. 

Since then Q\ can be neither greater nor less than Q^ it 
must be equal to Q^; which was to be proved. 

We will now give to the result thus obtained the mathe- 
matical form most convenient for our subsequent reasoning. 

Since the quotient -^ is independent of the nature of the 



SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE. 



81 



variable body, it can only depend on the temperature of the 
two bodies K^ and K^, which act as heat reservoirs. The 
same will of course be true of the sum 

This last ratio, which is that between the whole heat received 
and the heat transferred, we shall select for further considera- 
tion ; and shall express the result obtained in this section as 

follows : " the ratio ^ can only depend on the temperatures 

Tj and T^'* This leads to the equation : 

|=.^(2;2;).. ..(2). 

in which <f>{T^ T^ is some function of the two temperatures, 
which is independent of the nature of the variable body. 

§ 7; Determination of the Function <f> (T^T^). 

The circumstance that the function given in equation (2) 
is independent of the nature of the variable body, ofifers a 
ready means of determining this function, since as soon as we 
have found its form for any single body it is known for all 
bodies whatsoever. 

Of all classes of bodies the perfect gases are best adapted 
for such a deteimination, since their laws are the most accu- 
rately known. We will therefore consider the case of a per- 
fect gas subjected to a cyclical process, similar to that graphi- 
cally expressed in Fig. 8, § 1 ; which figure may be here repro- 
duced (Fig. 11), inasmuch as a perfect gas was there taken as 

an example of the variable 
body. In this process the 
gas takes up a quantity of 
heat Q during its expansion 
ab, and gives out a quantity 
of heat Qjj during its com- 
pression cd. These quanti- 
ties* we shall calculate, and 
then compare with each 
other. 

For this purpose we must 
first turn our attention to the volumes represented Vj XJc^a 

c. fe 



Fig. 11. 



82 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

tibscisssB oe, oh, of, off, and denoted by v^, v^, V^, F,, in ol-der 
that we may ascertain the relation between them. Now the 
volumes v^v^ (represented by oe, oh) form the limits of that 
change of volnme to which the isentropic curve ad refers, 
and which may be considered at pleasure as an expansion or 
a compression. Such a change of volume, during which the 
gas neither takes in nor gives out any heat, has been treated 
of in § 8 of the last chapter, in which we arrived at the fol- 
lowing equation (43), p. 62 : 



T, \v) 



where T and v are the temperature and volume at any point 
in the curve. Substituting for these in the present case the 
£nal values T^ and t?,, we have : 



f:=r «■ 



In exactly the same way we obtain for the change of volume 
represented by the isentropic curve be (of which the initial 
and final temperatures are also T^T^ : 



(4)- 



Combining these two equations we obtain : 

XT =-, or — » = — ? (.^). 

"We must now turn to the change of volume represented 
by the isothermal curve ab, which takes place at the constant 
temperature T^, and between the limits of volume v^ and Fj. 
The quantity of heat received or given ofif during such a 
change of volume has been determined in § 8 of the last 
chapter, and by the equation (41) there given, p. 61, we 
may put in the present case : 

(?.=i2r.logJ (6). 



SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE. 83 

, Similarly for the change of volume represented by the iso- 
thermal curve dc, which takes place at temperature T, between 
the limits of volume v^ and V^, we have : 

Q,^BT,log^' (7). 

From these two equations we obtain by division : 

t-l - («'■ 

V V 
since by 15) _i -- _j . 

The function occurring in equation (2) is now determined, 
since to bring this equation into unison with the last equation 
(8) we must have : 

^(r.rj--!; (9). 

We can now use in place of equation (2) the more deter- 
minate equation (8), which may also be written as follows : 

&-Sr' = (10). 

The form of this equation may be yet further changed, by 
affixing positive and negative signs to Q^, Q^. Hitherto these 
have been treated as absolute quantities, and the distinction 
that the one represents heat taken in, the other heat given 
out, has been always expressed in words. Let us now for 
convenience agree to speak of heat taken in only, and to 
treat heat given out as a negative quantity of heat taken in. 
If accordingly we say that the variable body has taken in 
during the cyclical process the quantities of heat Q^ and Q,, 
we must here conceive Q, as a negative quantity, i.e. the same 
quantity which has hitherto been expressed by — Qg. On 
this supposition equation (10) becomes : 

& + ^' = (11). 

6—2 



84 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



§ 8. Cyclical processes of a more complicated character. 

Hitherto we have confined ourselves to cyclical processes 
in which the taking in of quantities of heat, positive or 
negative, takes place at two temperatures only. Such pro- 
cesses we shall in future call for brevity's sake Simple 
Cyclical Processes. But it is now time to treat of cyclical 
processes, in which the taking in of positive and negative 
quantities of heat takes place at more than two tempera- 
tures. 

We may first consider a cyclical process with heat taken 
in at three temperatures. This is represented graphically by 
the figure ahcdefa (Fig. 12), which, as in the former cases, 
consists of isentropic and isothermal curves only. These 
curves are again drawn, by way of example, in the form 
which they would take in the case of a perfect gas, but this 



Fig. 12. 

is not essential. The curve ah represents an expansion at 
constant temperature 2\; he an expansion without taking in 
heat, during which the temperature falls from T^ to T^; cd 
an expansion at constant temperature T^ ; de an expansion 
without taking in heat, during which the temperature falls 
from Tj to Tg ; e/'a compression at constant temperature T^\ 
and lastly fa a compression without taking in heat, during 
wtich the temperature rises from T^io T^, and which brings 
back the variable body to its exact original volume. In the 



SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE. 85 

expansions ah and cd the variable body takes in positive 
quantities of heat Q^ and Q^, and in the compression ef the 
negative quantity of heat Qg. It now remains to find a rela- 
tion between these three quantities. 

For this purpose let us suppose the isentropic curve ho 

S reduced in the dotted line eg. The whole process is thereby 
ivided into two Simple Processes ahgfa and cdegc. In the 
first the body starts from the condition a and returns to the 
same again. In the second we may suppose a body of the 
same nature to start from the condition e, and to return to 
the same again. The negative quantity of heat Qg, which is 
taken in during the compression ef, we may suppose divided 
into two parts q^ and q^y of which the first is taken in during 
the compression gf, and the second during the compression 
eg. We can now form the two equations, corresponding to 
equation (11), which will hold for the two simple processes. 
These equations are, for the process ahgfa^ 

fp ^ fp * 

and for the process cdego 

Adding these equations we obtain 

rp I rp y m "> 

or, since ff. + J.'^Q,. 

■?- + |* + S* = (12). 

■^l -^2 -^S 

In exactly the same way we may treat a process in which 
heat is taken in at four temperatures, as represented by the 
annexed figure abcdefgha, Fig. 13, which again consists solely 
of isentropic and isothermal lines. The expansions ab and cd, 
and the compressions ef and gh, take place at temperatures 
2\, T^, Tg, T^, and during these times the quantities of heat 
Qif Qtf Qs> O4 ^® taken in respectively ; the two foxtcifit \>ra\% 



86 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT. 



positive, and the two latter negative. Produce the isentropic 
curves be and fg in the dotted lines d and gk respectively. 
Then the whole process is subdivided into three Simple Pro- 
cesses akgha, khifk, and cdeic, which may be supposed to be 



Fig. 18. 

carried out with three exactly similar bodies. We may sup- 
pose the quantity of heat Q^^ taken in during the expansion oft, 
to be divided into two parts q^ and q^^ corresponding to ex- 
pansions ak and kh ; and the negative quantity Q , taken in 
during the compression e/^ to be likewise divided into q^ and 
q^y corresponding to compressions if and ci. Then we can 
form the following equations for the three simple processes : 
First, for akgha 



0. 



Secondly, for kfnfk 



Thirdly, for cdeic 



?'- + 2» = 



m • rn ^« 



SECOND MAIN PBINCIPLE. 



87 



Adding, we obtain 

•^t -'j -^s -^4 



or 



m * fp ^ m *^ rp "^ ^* 



(13). 



In exactly the same way any other cyclical process, which 
can be represented by a figure consisting solely of isentropic 
and isothermal lines, and which has any given number of 
temperatures at which heat is taken in, may be made to yiell 
an equation of the same form, viz. 



or generally 



-^1 ■'■% •'■9 -^4 



4=0. 



(14). 



§ 9. Cyclical Processes, in which taking in of Heat and 
change of Temperature take place simultaneously. 

We have lastly to consider such cyclical processes as are 
represented by figures not consisting solely of isentropic and 
isothermal lines, but altogether general in form. 

The mode of treatment is as follows. Let point a in 



Fig. 14. 



Fig. 14 represent any given condition of the variable body ; 
let p9 be an arc of the isothermal curve which passes t\itou<^ 



88 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT, 



a, rs an arc of the isentropic curve which passes through the 
same point. Now let the body undergo a variation which is 
expressed by a pressure-curve not coinciding with either of 
the above, but taking some other course such as be or de. 
Then we may consider such a variation as made up of a very 
great number of very small variations, in which we have 
alternately change of temperature without taking in of heat, 
and taking in of heat without change of temperature. This 
series of successive variations will be represented by a dis- 
continuous line, made up of alternate elements of isothermal 
and isentropic curves, as drawn in Fig. 15, along the course of 



Fig. 16. 

be and de. The smaller the elements of which the dis- 
continuous curve is made up, the more closely will it coincide 
with the continuous line, and if these are indefinitely small 
the coincidence will be indefinitely close. In this case it can 
only make an indefinitely small difference, in relation to the 
quantities of heat taken in and their temperatures, if we 
substitute for the variation represented by the continuous line 
the indefinitely large number of alternating variations, which 
are represented by the discontinuous line. 

We are now in a position to consider a complete cyclical 
process, in which the taking in of heat is simultaneous with 
changes of temperature, and which may be represented 
graphically by curves of any form whatever, or merely by a 
single continuous and closed curve, such as is drawn in 
Fig. 16. The area of this closed curve represents the ex- 



SECOND MAIS PRINCIPLE. 



temal work consumed. Let it be divided into indefinitely 
thin strips by means of adjacent isentropical curves, as shewn 
b^ the dotted lines in Fig. 16. Let us suppose these curves 
joined at the top and bottom by indefinitely small elements 



Fig. 16. 

of isothermal Imea, which cut the given curve, so that 
throughout its length we have a broken line, which ia every- 
where in indefinitely close coincidence with it. By the above 
reasoning we may substitute for the process represented by 
the continuous fins the other process represented by the 
broken line, without producing any perceptible alteration in 
the quantities of heat taken in, or in their temperatures. Fur- 
ther, we may again substitute for the process represented by 
ihe broken fine an indefinitely great number of Simple Pro- 
cesses, which will be represented by the indefinitely small 
quadrangular strips, made up each of two adjacent isentropic 
curves, and two indefinitely small elements of isothermal 
curves. If then for each one of these last processes we form 
an equation similar to (11), in which the two quantities 
of heat axe indefinitely small, and can therefore be denoted by 
differentials of Q ; and if all these equations be finally added 
t<^ther ; we shall then obtain an equation of the same form 
as (14), but in which the sign of summation is replaced by the 
sign of Integration, thus : 

ff-O (15). 



90 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY Ot HEAT. 

This equation, which waa first published by the author in 
1854 (Fogg. Ann. vol. 93, p. 500),. forms a very convenient 
expression for the second main Principle of the Mechanical 
Theory of Heat, as far as it relates to reversible processes. 
This Principle may be expressed in words as follows : If in a 
reversible Cyclical Process every element of heat taken in 
{positive or negative) be divided by the absolute temperature 
at which it is taken in, and the differential so formed be inte- 
grated for the whole course of the process, the integral so ob- 
tained is equal to zero. 

If the integral I -^, corresponding to any given succession 

of variations of a body, be always equal to zero provided the 
body returns finally to its original condition, whatever the 
intervening conditions may be, then it follows that the ex- 
pression under the integral sign, viz. -^ , must be the perfect 

differential of a quantity, which depends only on the present 
condition of the body, and is altogether independent of the 
way in which it has been brought into that condition. If we 
denote this quantity by S, we may put 

or dQ^TdS (VI), 

an equation which forms another expression, very convenient 
in the case of certain investigations, for the second main 
principle of the Mechanical Theory of Heat. 



(91) 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE SECOND MAIN PRINCIPLE UNDER ANOTHER FORM, OR 
PRINCIPLE OF THE EQUIVALENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 

§ 1. On the two different kinds of Transformations. 

In the last chapter it was shewn that in a Simple Cyclical 
Process two variations in respect to heat take place, viz. that 
a certain quantity of heat is converted into work (or generated 
out of work), and another quantity of heat passes from a 
hotter into a colder body (or vice vers4). It was found fur- 
ther that between the quantity of heat transformed into 
work (or generated out of work) and the quantity of heat 
transferred, there must be a definite relation, which is 
independent of the nature of the variable body, and therefore 
can only depend on the temperatures of the two bodies which 
serve as reservoirs of heat. 

For the former of these two variations we have already 
employed the word "transformation," inasmuch as we said, 
when work was expended and heat thereby produced, or 
conversely when heat was expended and work thereby pro- 
duced, that the one had been " transformed " into the other. 
We may use the word " transformation " to express the second 
variation also (which consists in the passage of heat from one 
body into another, which may be colder or hotter than 
the first), inasmuch as we may. say that heat of one tem- 
perature " transforms *' itself into heat of another tempera- 
ture. 

On this principle we may describe the result of a simple 
cyclical process in the following terms : Two transformations 
are produced, a transformation from heat into work (or vice 
veri^) and a transformation from heat of a bigliet ^fcXK^^x^- 



92 ON THE MECHANICAI, THEORY OP HEAT. 

ture to heat of a lower (or vice vers&). The relation between 
these two transformations is therefore that which is to be ex- 
pressed by the second Main Principle. 

Now, in the first place, as concerns the transformation of 
heat at one temperature to heat at another, it is evident at 
once that the two temperatures, between which the trans- 
formation takes place, must come under consideration. But 
the further question now arises, whether in the trans- 
formation from work into heat, or from heat into work, the 
temperature of the particular quantity of heat concerned 
plays an essential part, or whether in this transformation the 
particular temperature is matter of indifference. 

If we seek to deduce the answer to this question from the 
consideration of a Simple Cyclical Process, as described above, 
we find that it is too limit^ for our purpose. For since in 
this process there are only two bodies which act as heat 
reservoirs, it is tacitly assumed that the heat which is trans- 
formed into work is derived from (or conversely the heat 
generated out of work is taken in by) one or other of these 
same two bodies, between which the transference of heat also 
takes place. Hence a definite assumption is made from the 
beginning as to the temperature of the heat transformed into 
work (or conversely generated out of work), viz. that it 
coincides with one of the two temperatures at which the 
transference of heat takes place ; and this limitation prevents 
us from learning what influence it would have on the relation 
between the two transformations if the first-mentioned tem- 
perature were to alter, while the two latter remained un- 
altered. 

To ascertain this influence, we may revert to those 
more complicated cyclical processes, which have also been 
described in the last chapter, § 8, and to the equations 
derived firom them. But in order to give a clearer and simpler 
view of the question it is better to consider a single process 
specially chosen for this investigation, and by its help to 
bring out the second Main Principle anew in an altered 
form. 

§ 2. On a Cyclical Process of special farm. 

Let us again take a variable body, whose condition is 
completely determined by its volume and pressure, so that 



THE EQUIVALENCE OF T&ANSFORMATIONS. 93 

we can represent its variations graphically in the manner 
already described. We will once more by way of example 
construct the figure in the form it assumes for a perfect gas, 
but without making in the investigation itself any limiting 
assumption whatever as to the nature of the body. 

Let the body be first taken in the condition defined by 
the point a in Fig, 17, its volume being given by the abscissa 



T 


\ 


\ 



" 



ID 



k 1 



Fig. 17. 

oh, and its pressure by the ordinate ka. Let T be the tem- 
perature corresponding to these two quantities, and deter- 
mined by them. We will now subject the body to the follow- 
ing successive variations : 

(1) The temperature T of the gas is changed to ?*, , 
which we will suppose less than T. This may be done by 
enclosing the gas within a non-conducting envelope, so that 
it can neither take in nor give out heat, and then allowing it 
to expand. The decrease of pressure caused by the simul- 
laneous increase of volume and fall of temperature will be 
represented by the isentropic curve ab; so that, when the 
temperature of the gas has reached T., its volume and 
pressure have become oi and ib respectively. 

(2) The variable body is placed in communication with 
a body^, of temperature T,, and then allowed to expand still 
further, but so that all the heat lost in expansion is restored by 
ffj. With respect to the latter it is assumed that, on account of 
ila magnitude or from some other cause, ita temperature is not 



92 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

ture to heat of a lower (or vice vers^). The relation between 
these two transformations is therefore that which is to be ex- 
pressed by the second Main Principle. 

Now, in the first place, as concerns the transformation of 
heat at one temperature to heat at another, it is evident at 
once that the two temperatures, between which the trans- 
formation takes place, must come under consideration. But 
the further question now arises, whether in the trans- 
formation from work into heat, or from heat into work, the 
temperature of the particular quantity of heat concerned 
plays an essential part, or whether in this transformation the 
particular temperature is matter of indifiference. 

If we seek to deduce the answer to this question from the 
consideration of a Simple Cyclical Process, as described above, 
we find that it is too limited for our purpose. For since in 
this process there are only two bodies which act as heat 
reservoirs, it is tacitly assumed that the heat which is trans- 
formed into work is derived from (or conversely the heat 
generated out of work is taken in by) one or other of these 
same two bodies, between which the transference of heat also 
takes place. Hence a definite assumption is made from the 
beginning as to the temperature of the heat transformed into 
work (or conversely generated out of work), viz. that it 
coincides with one of the two temperatures at which the 
transference of heat takes place ; and this limitation prevents 
us irom learning what influence it would have on the relation 
between the two transformations if the first-mentioned tem- 
perature were to alter, while the two latter remained un- 
altered. 

To ascertain this influence, we may revert to those 
more complicated cyclical processes, which have also been 
described in the last chapter, § 8, and to the equations 
derived from them. But in order to give a clearer and simpler 
view of the question it is better to consider a single process 
specially chosen for this investigation, and by its help to 
bring out the second Main Principle anew in an altered 
form. 

§ 2. On a Cyclical Process of special form. 

Let us again take a variable body, whose condition is 
completely determined by its volume and pressure, so that 



THE EQUIVALENCE OF TRANSFOEMATIONS. 

■KB can represent its variations graphically in the i 
already described. We will once more by way of esample 
construct the figure in the form it assumes for a perfect gas, 
but without making in the investigation itself any limiting 
assumption whatever as to the nature of the body. 

Let the body he first taken in the condition defined by 
the point a in Fig. 17, its volume being given by the abscissa 



f^ 


\j. 



\ 


m k 



oh, and its pressure by the ordinate ha. Let T be the tem- 
perature corresponding to these two quantities, and deter- 
mined by them. We will now subject the body to the foUow- 
ing successive variations : 

(1) The temperature T of the gas is changed to T, , 
which we will suppose less than T. This may be done by 
enclosing the gas within a non-conducting envelope, so that 
it can neither take in nor give out heat, and then allowing it 
to expand. The decrease of pressure caused by the simul- 
taneous increase of volume and fall of temperature will be 
represented by the isentropic curve ab; so that, when the 
temperature of the gas has reached T , its volume and 
pressure have become oi and ib respectively, 

(2) The variable body is placed in communication with 
a body K^ of temperature T,, and then allowed to expand still 
further, but so that all the heat lost in expansion is restored by 
ff", . With respect to the latter it is assumed that, on account of 
its magnitude or from some other cause, its temperature is not 



'Ot ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

perceptibly altered by this giving out of heat, and may there- 
fore be taken as constant. Hence the variable body will also 
preserve during its expansion the same constant temperature 
jPj, and its diminution of pressure will be represented by an 
isothermal curve be. Let the quantity of heat thus given off 
by K^ be called Q^. 

(3) The variable body is disconnected from K^ and 
allowed to expand still further, without being able either to 
take in or give out heat, until its temperature has fallen from 
jTj to T^. Let this diminution of pressure be represented by 
the isentropic curve cd. 

(4) The variable body is placed in communication with 
a body K^, of constant temperature T,, and is then com- 
pressed, parting with all the heat generated by the com- 
pression to K^, This compression goes on until K^ has 
received the same quantity of heat Q^, as was formerly 
abstracted from jffl. In this case the pressure increases ac- 
cording to th^ isotnermal curve de, 

(5) The variable body is disconnected from K^, and 
compressed, without being able to take in or give out heat, 
until its temperature has risen from T^ to its original value 
T, the pressure increasing ia<;cording to the isentropic curve 
ef. The volume on, to which the body is brought by this 
4)rocess,is less than the original volume oh, since the pressure 
to be overcome, and consequently the external work to be 
transformed into heat, is less during the compression cfo 
than during the expansion be; so that, in order to restore 
the same quantity of heat Q, , the compression must be con- 
tinued further than would have been necessary merely to 
annul the expansion. 

(6) The variable body is placed in communication with a 
body Ko{ constant temperature T, and allowed to expand to its 
original volume oh, the heat lost in expansion being restored 
from K. Let Q be the quantity of heat thus required. If 
the body attains the original volume oh at the original tem- 
perature T, then the pressure must also revert to its original 
value, and the isothermal curve, which represents this last 
expansion, will therefore terminate exactly in the point a. 

The above six variations make up together a Cyclical Pro- 
cess, since the variable body is finally restored exactly to its 



THE EQUIVALENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. OS 

oTiginal condition. Of the three bodies, K, K^, K^, which in 
the whole process only come under consideration in so far as 
they serve as sources or reservoirs of heat, the two first have 
at the end lost the quantities of heat Q, Q^ respectively, 
whilst the last has gained the quantity of heat Q^ ; this may 
be expressed by saying that Q^ has passed from K^ to K^, 
whUe Q has disappeared altogether. This last quantity of 
heat must, by the first fundamental principle, have been 
transformed into external work. This gain of external work 
is due to the fact that in this cyclical process the pressure 
during expansion is greater than during compression, and 
therefore the positive work greater than the negative ; its 
amount is represented, as is easily seen, by the area of the 
jclosed curve ahodefa. If we call this work W, we have 
by equation (5a) of Chapter I. 

It is easily seen that the above Cyclical Process embraces 
as a special case the process treated of at the commencement 
of Chapter III., and represented in Fig. 8. For if we make 
Ihe special assumption that the temperature T of the body K 
is equal to the temperature T^ of the body jBT^, we may then 
do away with K altogether, and use K^ instead. The result 
of the process will then be that one part of the heat given 
out by the body K^ has been transformed into work, and the 
other part has been transferred to the body K^, just as was the 
case in the process above mentioned. 

The whole of this cyclical process may also be carried 
out in the reverse order. The first step will then be to 
connect the variable body with K, and to produce, instead 
of the final expansion fa of the former case, an initial 
compression af: and similarly the expansions fe and ed, 
and the compressions dc, ch, and ha will be produced one 
after another, under exactly the same circumstances as the 
converse variations in the former case. It is obvious that 
the quantities of heat Q and Q^ will now be taken in 
by the bodies K and K^ respectively, and the quantity 
of heat Qi will be given out by the body if,. At the same 
time the negative work is now greater than the positive, so 
that the area of the closed figure now represents a loss of 
work. The result of the reversed process is therefore that 



96 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT* 

the quantity of heat Q^ has been transferred from K to K^, 
and that the quantity of heat Q has been generated out of 
work and given to the body K. 

§ 3. On Equivalent Transformations. 

In order to learn the mutual dependence of the two 
simultaneous transformations above described, viz. the trans- 
ference of Qi, and the conversion into work of Q, we shall 
first assume that the temperatures of the three reservoirs of 
heat remain the same, but that the cyclical processes, through 
which the transformations are eflfected, are diflferent. This 
may be either because different variable bodies are subjected 
to similar variations, or because the same body is subjected to 
any other cyclical process whatever, subject only to the con- 
dition that the three bodies K, K^ and K^ are the only bodies 
which receive or give out heat, and also that of the two 
latter the one receives just as much as the other gives out* 
These different processes may either be reversible, as in the 
case considered, or non-reversible ; and the law which governs 
the transformations will vary accordingly. However the 
modification which the law undergoes for non-reversible pro- 
cesses can be easily applied at a later period, and hence for 
the present we will confine ourselves to the consideration of 
reversible processes. 

For all such it follows from the Principle laid down in the 
last chapter (p. 78) that the quantity of heat Q^, transferred 
from ifj to jffj, must stand in a constant relation to the 
quantity Q transformed into work. For let us suppose that 
there were two such processes, in which, while Q was the 
same in both, Q was different : then we might successively 
execute that in wnich Q^ was the smaller in the direct order, 
and the other in the reverse. In this case the quantity of 
heat Q, which in the first process would have been trans- 
formed into work, would in the second process be transformed 
again into heat and given back to the body K\ and in other 
respects also everything would at the conclusion be restored 
to its original condition, with this single exception that the 
quantity of heat transferred from K^ to K^ in the second pro- 
cess, would be greater than the quantity transferred from K^ 
to K^ in the first process. Thus on the whole we have a 
transfer of heat from the colder body K^ to the hotter K^, 



THE EQUIVALJSNCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 97 

with nothing to compensate for it* As this contradicts the 
fundamental principle, it follows that the above supposition 
cannot b& true ; in other words Q m^ust always stand in the 
same ratio to Q^, 

Of the two transformations in a reversible process such 
as the above, either can replace the other, provided this latter 
be taken in the reverse direction : in other words, if a trans- 
formation of the one kind hag taken place, this can be again 
reversed, and a transformation of the other kind substituted in 
its place, without the occurrence of any other permanent 
change. For example, let a quantity of heat Q be in any way 
generated out of work, and taken in by the body K; then by 
the cyclical process above described it can be again withdrawn 
from the body K, and transformed back into work, but in so 
doing a quantity of heat Q^ will be transferred from the body 
K^ to the body K^. Again, if the quantity of heat Q^ has 
previously passed from if^ to jKj, it can by performing the 
above process in the reverse order be transferred back again, 
to -Kj, whilst at the same time the quantity of heat Q, at the 
temperature of the body K, will be generated out of work. 

It is thus seen that these two kinds of transformation 
may be treated as processes of the same nature; and two 
such transformations, which may mutually replace each other 
in the way indicated, will be henceforth called *' Equivalent 
IVansformations." 

§ 4. Equivcdence-Values of the Transformations. 

We have now to find the law according to which the 
above transformations must be expressed mathematically, so 
that the equivalence of the two may appear from the equaUty 
of their values. The mathematical value of a transformation 
may be termed, thus determined, its " Equivalence- Value." 

We must firat settle the order in which each transforma- 
tion is to be taken as positive : this may be chosen arbi- 
trarily for one of the two classes, but it will then be fixed 
for the other, since clearly we must regard a transformation 
in the latter class as positive, if it is equivalent to a positive 
transformation in the former. In all that follows we shall 
consider the transformation of Work into Heat, and therefore 
the passage of heat from a higher to a lower temperature, as 
being positive quantities. It wiU be seen later why this 

C. 4 



98 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

choice as to the positive and negative sign is preferable to 
the opposite. 

With regard to the magnitude of the equivalence-value, 
it is at once seen that the value of a change from work into 
heat must be proportional to the quantity of heat generated, 
and that beyond this it can only depend on its temperature. 
We may therefore express generally the equivalence-value of 
the generation out of work of the quantity of heat Q, of 
temperature T, by the formula Q xf(T), where f(T) is a 
function of temperature which is the same for all cases. If Q 
is negative in this formula, what is expressed is that the 
quantity of heat Q has been transformed, not out of work 
into heat, but out of heat into work. 

Similarly the value of the passage of a quantity of heat Q 
from the temperature T^ to the temperature T, must be propor- 
tional to the quantity of heat which passes, and beyond this 
can only depend on the two temperatures. We may therefore 
exj^ress it generally by the formula Q x F(T^, T^), in which 
F{T., T^) is a function of the two temperatures, also constant 
for all cases, and which we cannot at present determine more 
closely; but of which it is clear from the commencement 
that, if the two temperatures are interchanged, it must change 
its sign, without changing its numerical value. We may 
therefore write, 

FiT„T;) = -F{T,.T,) (1). 

In order to compare these two expressions with each other, 
we have the condition that in every reversible process of the 
kind given above the two transformations that take place 
must be equal in magnitude but of opposite sign, so that 
their algebraical sum is zero. Thus if we choose for a mo- 
ment the particular process fully described above (§ 2), the 
quantity of heat Q, at temperature T, is then transformed 
into work, giving as its equivalence-value — Q xf(T)\ and 
the quantity of heat Q^ passes from temperature T^ to T^, 
thus giving as its equivalence-value Q^ x F(T^, T^, There- 
fore the following equation must hold : 

-<2x/(T) + Q,xi?'(r„r,)=o (2). 

Let us now suppose a similar process performed in the 
teverse order, and under the conditions that the bodies K^ 



THE EQUIVALENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 99 

and K^y and the quantity of heat Q which passes between 
them, remain the same, but that for tne body K of tempera- 
ture T is substituted another body K' of temperature T'l 
and let us call the heat generated out of work in this case Q\ 
Then, corresponding to the former equation, we have the 
following : 

Qfx/{T') + Q,xF(T„T,) = (3). 

Adding (2) and (3) and substituting from (1) we obtain, 

- Q xf{T) + q xfiT)^Q (4). 

Now let us consider, as is clearly allowable, that these two 
successive processes make up together a single process ; then 
in this latter the two transferences of heat between K^ and 
K^ will cancel each other and disappear from the result ; we 
have therefore only left the transformation into work of the 
quantity of heat Q, given off by K, and the generation out 
of work of the quantity of heat Q taken in by K\ These 
two transformations, which are of the same kind, can however 
be so broken up and re-arranged as to appear in the light 
of transformations of different kinds. For if we simply hold 
fast to the main fact, that the one body K has lost the 
quantity of heat Q, and the other K' gained the quantity Qf, 
then the heat equivalent to the smaller of these two quanti- 
ties may be considered as having been transferred directly 
from K to K'y and it is only the difference between the two 
which remains to be considered as a transformation of work 
into heat or vice vers4. For example, let the temperature T 
be higher than T) then the transference of heat on the 
above view is from a hotter to a colder body, and is therefore 
positive. Accordingly the other transformation must be 
negative, i.e, a transformation from heat into work : whence it 
follows that the quantity of heat Q given off by K is greater 
than the quantity Q' taken in by K\ Thus if we divide Q 
into its two component parts Q and Q— Q, then the first of 
these will have passed over from K to K\ and the second is 
the quantity of heat transformed into work. 

On this view the two processes appear as combined into a 
single process of the same kind ; for the circumstance that 
the heat transformed into work is not derived from a third 
body, but from one or other of the same two bodies, between 

7—2 



100 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

which the transference of heat takes place, makes no 
essential difference in the result. The temperature of the 
heat transformed into work is optional, and can therefore have 
the same value as the temperature of one of the two bodies ; 
in which case the third body is no longer required. Accord- 
ingly for the two quantities of heat Q' and Q-- Q there must 
be an equation of the same form as (2), namely ; 



Eliminating Q by means of equation (4) and then striking 
out Q\ we obtain 

F(TT')=f{T)-f{T) (5). 

As the temperatures T and 2" are any whatever, the function 
of two temperatures F{TT), which, holds for the second kind 
of transformation, is thus shewn to agree with the function of 
one temperature /(jT), which holds for the first kind. 

For the latter function we will for brevity use a simpler 
symbol. For this it is convenient, for a reason which will be 
apparent later on, to express by the new symbol not the 
function itself, but its reciprocal. We will therefore put 

T=j^or/(T) = i ^^^' 

SO that T is now the unknown function of temperature which 
enters into the Equivalence-value. If special values of this 
function have to be written down, corresponding to tempera- 
tures Tj, Tj, etc., or T\ T\ etc., then this can be done by 
simply using the indices or accents for t itself. Thus equa- 
tion (5) will become 

F{T,T') = \-\. 

T T 

Hence the second Main Principle of the Mechanical 
Thepry of Heat, which in this form may perhaps be called 
the principle of the Equivalence of Transformations, can be 
expressed in the following terms : 

**K we call two transformations which may cancel each other 
without requiring any other permanent change to take place, 
Eguivalent Transformations, then the generation out of work 



THE EQUIVALENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 101 

r 

of the quantity of heat Q of temperature t has the equivalence- 
value — ; and the transference of the quantity of heat Q from 
temperature T^ to temperature T^ has the Equivalence-value 



<-^> 



in which t is a function of temperature independent of the 
kind of process by which the transformation is accomplished/' 

§ 5. Combined value of all the transformations which 
take place in a single Cyclical Process. 

If we write the last expression of the foregoing section 

in the form — — — , we see that the passage of the quantity 

of heat Q from temperature T. to T^ has the same equiva- 
lence-value as a double transformation of the first kind, 
viz. the transformation of the quantity Q from heat of tem- 
perature T^ into work, and again out of work into heat of 
temperature T^, The examination of the question how far 
this external agreement has its actual foundation in the 
nature of the process would here be out of place ; but in any 
case we may, in the mathematical determination of the 
Equivalence- Value, treat every transference of heat, in what- 
ever way it may have taken place, as a combination of two 
opposite transformations of the first kind. 

By this rule it is easy for any Cyclical Process however 
complicated, in which any number of transformations of both 
kinds take place, to deduce the mathematical expression 
which represents the combined value of all these trans- 
formations. For this purpose, when a quantity of heat is 
given oflF by a heat reservoir, we have no need first to 
enquire what portion of it is transformed into work, and 
what becomes of the remainder; but may instead reckon 
every quantity of heat given off by the heat reservoirs which 
occur in the cyclical process as being wholly transformed into 
work, and every quantity of heat taken in as being generated 
out of work. Thus if we assume that the bodies K^, K^, K^, 
etc. of temperatures 2\, T^, T^, etc. occur as heat reservoirs, and 
if Q^, Q^, Q^, etc. are the quantities of heat given off dwxvcL^ 



102 . ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the Cyclical Process (in which we will now consider quanti- 
ties of heat taken in as negative quantities of heat given 
out*), then the combined value of all the transformations, 
which we may call N, will be represented as follows : 

n T, T3 

or using the sign of summation, 

JV^--2^ (7). 

T 

It is here supposed that the temperatures of the bodies 
K^, K^, K^, etc. are constant, or at least so nearly so that 
their variations may be neglected. If however the tempera- 
ture of any one of the bodies varies so much, either through 
the taking in of the quantity of heat Q itself, or through any 
other cause, that this variation must be taken into account, 
then we must, for every element of heat dQ which is taken 
in, use the temperature which the body has at the moment 
of its being taken in. This naturally leads to an integration. 
If for the sake of generality we assume this to hold for all 
the bodies, then the foregoing equation takes the following 
form : 

"^ (8). 



N=-j^ 



in which the integral is to be taken for all the quantities of 
heat given off by the different bodies. 

§ 6. Proof that in a reversible Cyclical Process the total 
value of all the transfonfrvations must he equal to nothing. 

If the Cyclical Process under consideration is reversible, 
then, however complicated it may be, it can be proved 
that the transformations which occur in it must cancel each 
other, so that their algebraical sum is equal to nothing. 

* This ehoice of positive and negative signs for the quantities of heat 
agrees with that which we made in the last chapter, where we considered a 
quantity of heat taken in hy the variable body as positive, and a quantity 
given out by it as negative ; for a quantity given out by a heat reservoir is 
taken in by the variable body, and vice versa. 



TH£ EQUIVALENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 108 

For let us suppose that tliis is not the case, i.e. that this 
algebraical sum has some other value ; then let us imagine 
the following process applied. Let all the transformations 
which take place be divided into two parts, of which the first 
has its algebraical sum equal to nothing, and the second is 
made up of transformations all having the same sign. Let 
the transformations of the first division be separated out into 
pairs, each composed of two transformations of equal magnitude 
but opposite signs. If all the heat reservoirs are of constant 
temperature, so that in the Cyclical Process there is only a 
finite number of definite temperatures, then the number of 
pairs which have to be formed will be also finite ; but should the 
temperatures of the heat reservoirs vary continuously, so that 
the number of temperatures is indefinitely great, and therefore 
the quantities of heat given off and taken in must be dis- 
tributed in indefinitely small elements, then the number of 
pairs which have to be formed will be indefinitely lareje. 
C however, by our principle, makes no difference. The 
two transformations of each pair are now capable of being done 
backwards by one or two Cyclical Processes of the form 
described in § 2. 

Thus in the first place let the two given transformations 
be of different kinds, e.g. let the quantity of heat Q of tem- 
perature T be transformed into work, and the quantity of 
heat Qi be transferred from a body K^ of temperature 2\ to 
a body K^ of temperature T^, The symbols Q and Qj^ are 
here supposed to represent the absolute values of the quanti- 
ties. Let it be also assumed that the magnitudes of the two 
quantities stand in such relation to each other that the follow- 
ing equation, corresponding to equation (2), will hold, viz. 



• .e+«/i_i).o. 



Then let us suppose the Cyclical Process to be performed in 
the reverse order, whereby the quantity of heat Q, of tem- 
perature jP, is generated out of work, and another quantity 
of heat is transferred from the body K^ to the body K^. This 
latter quantity must then be exactly equal to the quantity Q^ , 
given in the above equation, and the given transformations 
have thug been performed backwards. 

Again let there be one transformation frota \Ncvtt yqX» 



i 



104 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAt. 

heat and one from heat into work, e.g. let the quantity of 
heat Q of temperature T be generated out of work, and 
the quantity of heat ^ of temperature J" be transformed 
into work, and let these two stand in such relation to each 
other that we may put 

T T 

Then let us suppose in the first place that the same process as 
last described has been performed, whereby the quantity of 
heat Q of temperature T has been transformed into work, and 
another quantity Qj^ has been transferred from a body K^^ to 
another body K^, Next let us suppose a second process per- 
formed in the reverse direction, in which the last-named 
quantity Q^ is transferred back again from K^ to K^, and a 
quantity of heat of temperature T is at the same time gene- 
rated but of work. This transformation from work into heat 
must, independently of sign, be equivalent to the former 
transformation from heat into work, since they are both equi- 
valent to one and the same transference of heat. The quantity 
of heat of temperature T\ generated out of work, must there- 
fore be exactly as great as the quantity Q^ found in the above 
equation, and the given transformations have thus been made 
backwards. 

Finally, let there be two transferences of heat, e.g. the 
quantity of heat Q transferred from a body K^ of tempera- 
ture Ti to a body K^ of temperature T^, and the quantity 
Q\, from a body K\ of temperature T\ to a body K\ of tem- 
perature T\, and let these be so related that we may put 

e.(i-i).«'.(^Aj=o.. 

Then let us suppose two Cyclical Processes performed, in one 
of which the quantity Q^ is transferred from K^ to K^, and 
the quantity Q of temperature T thereby generated out of 
work, whilst in the second the same quantity Q is again 
transformed into work, and thereby another quantity of heat 
transferred from K\ to K\. This second quantity must then 
be exactly equal to the given quantity Q\, and the two 
given transferences of heat have thus been done backwards. 



THE EQUIVALENCE OP TRANSFORMATIONS. 105 

When by operations of this kind all the transformations 
of the first division have been done backwards, there then 
remain the transformations, all of the like sign, of the second 
division, and no others whatever. Now first, if these trans- 
formations are negative then they can only be transformations 
from heat into wort and transferences from a lower to a higher 
temperature; and of these the transformations of the first 
kind may b^ replaced by transformations of the second kind. 
For if a quantity of heat Q of temperature Tis transformed 
into work, then we have only to perform in reverse order the 
cyclical process described in § 2, in which the quantity of 
heat Q of temperature T is generated out of work, and at the 
same time another quantity Q^^ is transferred from a body K^ 
of temperature T^ to another body Kj^ of the higher tempera- 
ture 2\. Thereby the given transformation from heat into 
work is done backwards, and replaced by the transference of 
heat from K^ to K^. By the application of this method, we 
shall at last have nothing left except transferences of heat 
from a lower to a higher temperature which are not com- 
pensated in any way. As this contradicts our fundamental 
principle, the supposition that the transformations of the 
second division are negative must be incorrect. 

Secondly, if these transformations were positive, then 
since the cyclical process under consideration is reversible, 
the whole process might be performed in reverse order; 
in which case all the transformations which occur in it 
would take the opposite sign, and every transformation of 
the second division would become negative. We are thus 
brought back to the case already considered, which has been 
found to contradict the fundamental principle. 

As then the transformations of the second division can 
neither be positive nor negative they cannot exist 8(,t all ; and 
the first division, whose algebraical sum is zero, must em- 
brace all the transformations which occur in the cyclical 
process. We may therefore write iV= in equation (8), and 
thereby we obtain as the analyticpl expression of the Second 
Main rrinciple of the Mechanical Theory of Heat for reversi- 
ble processes the equation 



jdQ^ 



(VII). 



106 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 7. On the Temperatures of the various quantities of 
Heat, and the Entropy of the Body. 

In the development of Equation VII. the temperatures of 
the quantities of heat treated of were determined by those of 
the heat reservoirs from which they came, or into which they 
passed. But let us now consider a cyclical process, which is 
such that a body passes through a series of changes of 
condition and at last returns to its original state. This 
variable body, if placed in connection with the heat reservoir 
to receive or give oflf heat, must have the same temperature 
as the reservoir ; for it is only in this case that the heat can 
pass as readily from the reservoir to the body as in the reverse 
direction, and if the process is reversible it is requisite that 
this should be the case. This condition cannot indeed be 
exactly fulfilled, since between equal temperatures there can in 
general be no passage of heat whatever ; but we may at least 
assume it to be so nearly fulfilled that the small remaining 
differences of temperature may be neglected. 

In this case it is obviously the same thing whether we 
consider the temperature of a quantity of heat which is being 
transferred as being equal to that of the reservoir or of the 
variable body, since these are practically the same. If how- 
ever we choose the latter and suppose that in forming Equa- 
tion VII. every element of heat Q is taken of that tem- 
perature which the variable body possesses at the moment it 
IS taken in, then we can now ascribe to the heat reservoirs 
any other temperatures we please, without thereby making 

any alteration in the expression I — . With this assumption 

as to the temperatures we may consider Equation VII. as 
holding, without troubling ourselves as to whence the heat 
comes which the variable body takes in, or where that goes 
which it gives off, provided the process is on the whole a re- 
versible one. 

The expression — , if it be understood in the sense just 

given, is the differential of a quantity which depends on the 
condition of the body, and at the same time is fully deter- 
mined as soon as the condition of the body at the moment 
is known, without our needing .to know the path by which 



THE EQUIViXENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 107 

the body has arrived at that condition ; for it is only in this case 
that the integral will always become equal to zero as often as 
the body after any given variations returns to its original con- 
dition. In another paper*, after introducing a further de- 
velopment of the equivalence of transformations, the author 
proposed to call this quantity, after the Greek word t/oottj), 
Transformation, the Entropy of the body. The complete 
explanation of this name and the proof that it correctly 
expresses the conditions of the quantity under consideration 
can indeed only be given at a later period, after the develop- 
ment just mentioned has been treated of; but for the sake 
of convenience we shall use the name henceforward. 

If we denote the Entropy of the body by S we may put 

dQ = TdS. (VIII). 

§ 8. On the Temperature Fwnction t. 

To determine the temperature function t we will apply the 
same naethod as in Chapter III. § 7, p. 81, to determine the 
function ^ (Tj, T^. For, as the function r is independent of 
the nature of the variable body used in the cyclical process, we 
may, in order to determine its form, choose any body we 
please to be subjected to the process. We will therefore 
again choose a perfect gas, and, as in the above-mentioned 
section, suppose a simple process performed, in which the gas 
takes in heat only at one temperature T, and gives it out 
only at another I\, The two quantities of heat which are 
taken in and given out in this case, and whose absolute 
values we may call Q and Q^, stand by equation (8) of the 
last chapter, p. 83, in the following relation to each other : 

On the other hand, if we apply Equation VII. to this 
simple cyclical process, whilst at the same time we treat the 

* Pogg. iliiii. YoL czxT. p. 390. 



108 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

giving out of the quantity of heat Q as equivalent to the 
taking in of the negative quantity — Q, we have the follow- 
ing equation : 

From equations (9) and (10) we obtain 



T 



T 



T T' 



or 7 = T^ <^")' 

If we now take T as being any temperature whatever and T^ 
as some given temperature, we may write the last equation 
thus: 

T=rx Const (12), 

and the temperature function t is thus reduced to a constant 
fiactor. 

What value we ascribe to the constant factor is indiffe- 
rent, since it may be struck out of Equation VII. and thus 
has no influence on any calculations performed by means of 
the equation. We will therefore choose the simplest value, 
viz. unity, and write the foregoing equation 

T=ir , (13). 

The temperature function is now nothing more than the 
absolute temperature itsel£ 

Since the foregoing determination of the function t rests 
on the equations deduced for the case of gases, one of the 
foundations on which this determination rests will be the 
approximate assumption made in the treatment of gases, 
viz. that a perfect gas, if it expand at constant temperature, 
absorbs only just so much heat as is required for the 
external work thereby performed. Should anyone on this 
account have any hesitation in regarding this determination 
as perfectly satisfactory, he may in Equations VII. and VIII. 
regard r as the symbol for the temperature funotiou as yet 



THE EQXnVALENCE OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 109 

undetermined, and use the equations in that form. Any such 
hesitation would not, in the author s opinion, be justifiable, 
and in what follows T will always be used in the place of t. 
Equations VII. and VIII. will then be written in the following 
forms, which have already been given under Equations V. 
and VI. of the last chapter, viz. 



/ 



^-0 



CHAPTER V. 



FOBMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 

§ 1. Discussion of the Variables which determine the 
Condition of the Body, 

In the general treatment of the subject hitherto adopted 
we have succeeded in expressing the two main principles of 
the Mechanical Theory of Heat by two very simple equations 
numbered III. and VI. (pp. 31 and 90), 

dQ=^dU+dW (Ill), 

dQ^TdS (VI). 

We will now throw these equations into altered forms 
which make them more convenient for our further calcula- 
tions. 

Both equations relate to an indefinitely small alteration 
of condition in the body, and in the latter it is further 
assumed that this alteration is aifected in such a way as to 
be reversible. For the truth of the first equation this assump- 
tion is not necessary : we will however make it, and in. the 
following calculation will assume, as hitherto, that we have 
only to do with reversible variations. 

We suppose the condition of the body under considera- 
tion to be determined by the values of certain magnitudes, 
and for the present we will assume that two such magnitudes 
are sufficient. The cases which occur most frequently are 
those in which the condition of the body is determined by its 
temperature and volume, or by its temperature and pressure, 
or lastly by its volume and pressure. We will not however 
tie ourselves to any particular magnitudes, but will at first 



FORMATION OP THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. Ill 

assume that the condition of the body is determined by any 
two magnitudes which may be called x and y ; and these mag- 
nitudes we shall treat as the independent variables of our 
calculations. In special cases we are of course always free to 
take one or both of these variables as representing either one 
or two of the above-named magnitudes. Temperature, Volume 
and Pressure. 

If the magnitudes x and y determine the condition of 
the body, we can in the above equations treat the Energy U 
and the Entropy S as being functions of the variables. In 
the same way the temperature T, whenever it does not itself 
form one of these variables, may be considered as a function 
of the two variables. The magnitudes W and Q on the con- 
trary, as remarked above, cannot be determined so simply, 
but must be treated in another fashion. 

The differential coefficients of these magnitudes we shall 
denote as follows : 

dW dW 

d^^'"'^^" W' 

^ = M; ^-^^N (2). 

dx ay ^ ^ 

These differential coefficients are definite functions of x 
and y. For suppose the variable x is changed into X'\'dx 
while y remains constant, and that this alteration of condi- 
tion in the body is such as to be reversible, then we are 
dealing with a completely determinate process, and the 
external work done in that process must therefore be also 

dW 
determinate, whence it follows that the quotient -r— must 

equally have a determinate value. The same will hold if we 
suppose y to change to y + dy while x remains constant. If 
then the differential coefficients of the external work W are 
determinate functions of x and y it follows from Equation III. 
that the differential coefficients of the quantity of heat Q 
taken in by the body are also determinate functions of x 
and y. 

Let us now write, for dW and dQ their expressions as 
functions of dx and dy, neglecting those terms which are of a 



112 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

higher order than dx and (2y. We then have, 

dW ^ mdx 'h ndt/ (3), 

dQ^Mdx-vNdy ...(4), 

and we thus obtain two complete differential equations, which 
cannot be integrated so long as the variables x and y are 
independent of each other, since the magnitudes m, n and 
M, N do not fulfil the conditions of integrability, viz. 

dm dm, , dM dN 

The magnitudes W and Q thus belong to that class which 
was described in the mathematical introduction, of which the 
peculiarity is that, although their diflferential coefficients are 
determinate functions of the two independent variables, yet 
they themselves cannot be expressed as such functions, and 
can only be determined when a further relation between the 
variables is given, and thereby the way in which the varia- 
tions took place is known. 

§ 2. Elimination of the quantities U and 8 from the 
two Fundamental Equations. 

Let us now return to Equation III., and substitute in it 
for dW and dQ expressions (3) and (4) ; then, collecting to- 
gether the terms in dx and dy^ the equation becomes, 

Mdx-^Ndy= i— + wJdaj + (;7— + wj dy. 

As these equations must hold for all values of dx and dy, 
we must have, 

N^f^n. 
dy 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 113 

Differentiating the first equation according to y, and the 
second according to cr, we obtain, 

dM^^ dm 
dy dxdy dy ' 

. dN ^ drU dn 
dx dydx dx 

We may apply to TJ the principle which holds for every 
function of two independent variables, viz. that if they are 
differentiated according to both variables, the order of dif- 
ferentiation is a matter of indifference. Hence we have 

d?TJ_ ^ d^U 
dxdy dydx ' 

Subtracting one of the two above equations from the 
other we obtain, 

dM *7iV__ dm dn 

dy llx dy dx ^ '* 

We may now treat Equation VII. 'in the same manner. 
Putting for dQ and dS their complete expressions, it be- 
comes, 

Mdx + Kdy ^T(y^^'^^^I/)> 

M. N. dS. dS, 
or Y '^T ^^d^ "^dy^^' 

This equation divides itself, like the last, into two, viz. 

M_dS 
T dx' 

N_dS 
T'dy' 

Differentiating the first of these according to y, and the 
second according to x, we obtain, 

C. ^ 



114 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

d}i_ dT 

5" ^ dxd^' 

ri,dN_jfdT 



dx dx (PS 



But as before, 



r dydx' 



d^S d^S 



dxdy dydx ' 



hence subtracting one of the above equations from the other 
we obtain : 

dy dy dx <^ _ a 

dM dN 1 f,,dT ^r dT' 
or 



<'y 



dN l[,,dT T.rdT\ ,„. 

-d^=fr^-^d^j ^^^- 



The two equations (5) and (6) may be also written in a 
somewliat difiFerent form. To avoid the use of so many 
letters in the formula, we will replace M and i\r, which were 

introduced as abbreviations for -f^ and -r^,by those dififeren- 

dx dy 

tial coefficients themselves. Similarly for m and ti we will 

dW dW 
write -^— and -7—. Then the right hand side of equation 

(5) may be written 

d_ fdW\ _ d^ /dW\ 
dy\dx) dx\dy J* 

Thus the magnitude represented by this expression is a func- 
tion of X and y, which may generally be considered as kno^vn, 
inasmuch as the external forces acting on the body are open 
to direct observation, and from these the external work can 
be determined. The above difference, which will occur very 
frequently from henceforward, we shall call "ITie Work 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 113 

Difference referred to x and y" and shall use for it a special 
symbol, putting 



A. r^\ « A (^\ IT) 

dy\dx) dx\dy) ^ '' 



Through these changes equations (5) and (6) are trans- 
formed into the following : 

i(s)-i(f)-"-. («>• 

d_(dQ\_d_ /dQ\ ^1 (dT^dQ_dT^dQ\ 
dy\dx) dx\dy) T\dy dx dx dyj"^ ^' 

These two equations form the analytical expressions of 
the two fundamental principles for reversible variations, in 
the case in which the condition of the body is determined by 
two given variables. From these equations follows a third, 
which is so far simpler as it contains only differential coeffi- 
cients of Q of the first degree, viz. 

dT dQ_dT dQ^ 

dy^ dx dx^dy ^^^ ^^^> 

§ 3, Case in which the Temperature is taken as one of the 
Independent Variables. 

The above three equations are very much simplified if the 
temperature of the body is selected as one of the independent 
variables. Let us for this purpose put y = T, so that the two 
independent variables are the temperature jT, and the still 
undetermined quantity x. Then we have first, 

^=1 
dy 

Again, referring to the differential coefficient -j- , it is 

assumed in its formation that, while x is changed into x + dx, 
the other variable, hitherto called y, remains constant. But 
as T is now itself the other variable, it follows that T must 
remain constant in the above differential coefficient, or in 
other words 

da; 

8—2 



116 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORV OF HEAT. 

Again, if we form the Work-difference referred to x and 
T, this will run as follows : 

^" dT\dx) dccUTj ^ '• 

Hence equations (8), (9), (10) take the following form : 



dT\dxJ dx\dTj 



(12), 



■ ■ ^ fdQ\_£/dQ\_ldQ . 

dT\d^) dx\dTj T dx ^ ': 

^=^^- (I*)- 

If the product TD^f, given in equation (14), be substi- 
tuted for -,— in equation (12), and then differentiated accord- 
ing to T, the following very simple equation will be the 
result : 

dxKdT)'-^ dT ^^'^^• 

§ 4. Particular Assumptions as to the External Forces, 

We have hitherto made no particular assumptions as to 
the external forces to which the body is subjected, and to 
which the external work done during its alterations of condi- 
tion is related. We will now fionsider more closely a special 
case, which occurs frequently in practice, namely that in 
which the only external force which exists, or at least the 
only one which is of suflBcient importance to be taken into 
consideration, is a pressure acting on the surface of the body, 
everywhere normal to that surface, and of uniform intensity. 
In this case external work can only be done during changes 
in the volume of the body. Let p be the pressure per unit 
of surface, v the volume ; then the external work done, 
where this volume is increased to v + dv, is given by the 
equation 

dW=pdv (16). 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 1 17 

Let us now suppose the condition of the body to be given 
by the values of two given variables x and y. Then the 
pressure p and volume v must be considered as functions of 
X and y. We may thus write the last equation as follows : 



whence it follows that 



dW ^ dv 
dx ^ doc 

dW^^ d^ 
dy ^^ dy . 



(17). 



dW dW 
Putting these values for -7— and -7- in equation (7), and 

performing the differentiations indicated, taking note also of 

the fact that -^ — ^ = -^ — r- » we obtain 

dxay dydx 

J) ==^?x— -^+— , as) 

^ dy dx dx dy ' ^ ^' • 

This value of D^ we have now to apply to equations (9) 
and (10). Let x and T be the two independent variables ; 
then equation (18) becomes 

__dp d^ dp dv 
^''"dT^dx^dx^dT ^^^^' 

which value we have to apply to equations (12), (14) and 
(15). The expression given in (18) takes its simplest form, 
if we choose for one of the independent variables either the 
volume or the pressure, or if we choose both for the two 
independent variables. For these cases equation (18) takes, 
as is easily seen, the following forms, 



118 



OM THE MECHANICAL THEOBT OF HEAT. 



J) ^ 



fP 



(21), 
(22). 



Lastly in the cases in which either the volume or pressure 
is taken as one of the independent variables, we may choose 
the temperature for the other. We must then put T for y 
in equations (20) and (21), which then become 



D =^P 
" dT 



D ^ 

" dT 



(23), 



(24). 



§ 5. Frequently occurring Forms of the Differential 
Equaiicns. 

In the circumstances described above, where the only 
external force is a uniform pressure normal to the surface, 
it is usual to choose as the independent variables, which 
are to determine the condition of the body, the quantities 
last mentioned in the foregoing section, viz. volume and 
temperature, pressure and temperature, or lastly, volume 
and pressure. The systems of differential equations which 
hold for these three cases may be easily deduced from the 
more general systems given above ; but on account of their 
frequent use it may be well to collect them together in this 
place. The first system is the one which the author has 
usually employed in the treatment of special cases. 

If V and T are taken as the independent variables, 



d^(dg\ 
dT\dv) 
±(dQ\ 
dT\dv) 

dQ 

dv 
d (dQ\ _ 
dv \df) 



_d/dQ\ 
dv [dTj 
£(dQ\ 
dv [dTj 

rpdp 
dT' 



_dp 



dT' 
1 dQ 
T dv 



* ' •••■•• ••( 20 ]• 



dr 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 119 



If p and T are taken : 

dT\dp) dpKdT)" dT 

d dQ _± /^\ 1 dQ 
dT dp dp \dTj T dp ' 



dQ__ ^dv 
^ "" dT 



> 



dp 

dp [dTj dr 

If V and p are taken : 

dp \dt;/ dv \dp) ' 

^(^\^^ (^\ ==,}.(' 
dp[dv) dv[dp)'~'T\dp 



.(26). 



dT dQ 
dv 



dv dp J ' 



dT dQ 

X 



dT^d^^^ 



(27), 



dp dv dv dp 

§ 6. Equations in the case of a body which undergoes 
a Partial Change in its Condition of Aggregation. 

A case which permits a still further simplification peculiar 
to itself, and which is of special interest from its frequent 
occurrence, is that in which the changes of condition in the 
body are connected with a partial change in its Condition of 
Aggregation. 

Suppose a body to be given, of which one part is in 
one particular state of aggregation, and the remainder in 
another. As an example we may conceive one part of the 
body to be in the condition of liquid and the remainder 
in the condition of vapour, and vapour of the particular 
density which it assumes when in contact with liquid : the 
equations deduced will however hold equally if one part 
of the body is in the solid condition and the other in the 
liquid, or one part in the solid and the other in the vaporous 
condition. We shall, for the sake of generality, not attempt 
to define more nearly the two conditions of aggregation 
which we are treating of, but merely call them the first and 
the second conditions. 



120 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Let a certain quantity of this- substance be inclosed in 
a vessel of given volume, and let one part have the first, 
and the other the second condition of aggregation. If the 
specific volumes (or volumes per unit of weight), which the 
substance assumes at a given temperature in the two dif- 
ferent conditions of aggregation, are difiereiit, then in a 
given space the two parts which are in the different con- 
ditions of aggregation cannot be any we please, but can 
only have determinate values. For if the part which 
exists in the condition of greater specific volume increases 
in size, then the pressure is thereby increased which the 
inclosed substance exerts on the inclosing walls, and con- 
sequently the reaction which those walls exert upon it, 
and finally a point will be reached, where this pressure is 
so great that it prevents any further passage of the substance 
into this condition of aggregation. When this point is 
reached, then, so long as the temperature of the mass and 
its volume, i.e. the content of the vessel, remain constant, 
the magnitude of the parts which are in the two conditions 
of aggregation can undergo no further change. If, however, 
whilst the temperature remains constant, the content of 
the vessel increases, then the part which is in the condition 
of aggregation of greater specific volume can again increase 
at the cost of the other, but only until the same pressure as 
before is attained and any further passage from one condition 
to the other thereby prevented. 

Hence arises the peculiarity, which distinguishes this 
case from all others. For suppose we choose the temperature 
and the volume of the mass as the two independent variables 
which are to determine its condition; then the pressure 
is not a function of both these variables, but of the tempera- 
ture alone. The same holds, if instead of the volume we 
take as the second independent variable some other quantity 
which can vary independently of the temperature, and which 
in conjunction with the temperature determines fully the 
condition of the body. The pressure must then be inde- 
pendent of this latter variable. The two quantities, tem- 
perature and pressure, cannot in this case be chosen as 
the two variables which are to serve for the determination 
of the body's condition. 

We will now take, in addition to the temperature jT, any 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 121 

other magnitude a?, as yet left undetermined, for the second 
independent variable which is to determine the body's 
condition. Let lis then consider the expression given in 
equation (19) for the work-difference referred to xT, viz. 

T\ _dp civ dp dv 

dt) 
In this we must, by what has been said, put -f = 0, 

and we thus obtain 

^-^44" (^»)- 

The three equations (12), (13), (14) are thereby changed 
into the following: 



dT\dxl dx\dT)~df dx ^ '' 



dT\dx) dx\dT)~T dx ^ '' 

'i-^%^% (^')- 

§ 7. Clapeyroris Equation and Camot's Function, 

To conclude the developments of the Fundamental Equa- 
tions which have formed the subject of the present chapter, 
we may consider the equation which Clapeyron* deduced as 
a fundamental equation from the theory of Camot, in order 
to see in what relation it stands to the equations we have 
here developed. As however Clapeyron*s equation contains 
an unknown function of temperature, usually designated as 
Camot's function, it will be advisable beforehand to throw 
our equations, so far as they will come under considera- 
tion, into the form which they take, if the temperature 
function r, introduced in the last chapter, is treated as still 
indeterminate, and is not, in accordance with the value 

* Journal de VEcole Poly technique ^ Vol. xiv. (18E4V 



% 



122 OK THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

there determined, put equal to the absolute temperature T. 
We shall thereby obtain the advantage of fixing the relation 
between our temperature-function t and Carnot's Function. 
If instead of equation 

dQ=TdS, 

we use the less determinate Equation VIII. of the last chapter, 

dQ = Td8, 

and eliminate 8 from this equation, in the same manner 
as in § 2, we obtain instead of equation (9) the following : 

dy\dx) dx\dy) r\dy dx dx dyj" ^' 

Combining this with (8) we obtain instead of equa- 
tion (16), 

dy dx dx dy *^ ^ ^' 

If we now assume that the only external force is a 
uniform and normal pressure on the surface, we may use 
for Dayy the expression given in equation (18), and the above 
equation becomes 

dr^^dlQ _dT ^dQ^^/dp ^dv _dp ^ dv\ 

dy dx dx dy \dy dx dx dy) ^ ^' 

If further we choose as independent variables v and p, 
putting x = Vy and y = p, we obtain 

^x^- — x^ = T (35) 

dp dv dv dp ^' 

But as T is only a function of T, we may put 

dr^dr dT ^ dr ^dr dT 
dv^dT^ dv 'dp^dT^dp' 

dT C?T 

Introducing these values of -r- and -r- in the above equation. 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 123 

dr 
and dividing by -7^, we obtain, instead of the last of equa- 
tions (27), the following: 

dp dv dv dp dr ^ ^' 

dT 

' It is here assumed that the heat is measured in mechani- 
cal units. To introduce the ordinary measure of heat, we 
must divide the expression on the right-hand side by the 
mechanical equivalent of heat, which gives : 

dTdQ dT^^dQ r ^^. 

dp dv dv dp „ dr ^ ^' 

dT 

Clapeyron's equation agrees in form with this, since it is 
written* 

dp dv dv dp ^ 

where C is an undetermined function of temperature, and is 
the same as Camot's Function already mentioned. 

If we equate the right-hand expressions of (37) and (38), 
we obtain the relation between G and r, as follows : 

^^T^^T^Hil ^^^^' 

dT dT 

If, adhering to the determination of r given by the author, 
we assume it to be nothing more than the absolute tempera- 
ture T, then C takes the simpler form, 

C=| (40). 

As equation (33) is formed by the combination of two equa- 
tions, which express the first and second Main Principles, it 



« 



Pogg. Ann, Vol. ux. p. 574. 



124« ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT*. 

follows that Clapeyron's equation must be considered not as an 
expression of the second Main Principle in the form assumed 
by the author, but as the expression of a principle, which 
may be deduced from the combination of the first and second 
principles. As concerns the manner in which Clapeyron has 
treated his differential equation, this differs widely from the 
method adopted by the author. Like Carnot, he started from 
the assumption that the quantity of heat which must .be 
imparted to a body during its passage from one condition to 
another, may be fully ascertained from its initial and final 
conditions, without its being necessary to know in what way 
and by what path the passage has taken place. Accordingly 
he considered (? as a function of p and v, and deduced by 
integrating his differential equation the following expression 
for Q: 

Q^F{T)^G4>{p,v) (41), 

in which F {T) is any function whatever of the temperature; 
and <^ ( p, v) is a function of p and v which satisfies the follow- 
ing more simple differential equation : 



x^«^+# = l (42). 



dT 

dv '^ dp dp * dv 



To integrate this last equation we must be able to express the 
temperature T for the body in question as a function of p 
and V, If we assume that the body in question is a perfect 
gas, we have 



whence 



T-^ (43), 

— = P nd ^=- 
dv " JR dp M' 



Hence equation (42) becomes 



'>l-"S=« <">■ 



Integrating, we have 

<f> (p, v) = Blogp + <^ ipv). 



FORMATION OF THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL EQUATIONS. 125 

where ^(pv) is any function whatever of the product pv. For 
this we may by equation (43) substitute any function what- 
ever of the temperature, so that the equation becomes, 

<f>{pv) = It\ogp + yjr{T) (45). 

If we introduce this expression for ^ (p, v) in (41), and put 

i^(r)-(7t(!r)=jK5, 

where B again expresses any function whatever of the tem- 
perature, we obtain, 

Q=B{B--Clogp) (46). 

This is the equation which Clapeyron has deduced for the 
case of gases, 



CHAPTER VI. 

APPLICATION OF THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT TO 

SATURATED VAPOUR, 

§ 1. Fundamental equations for saturated vapour. 

Among the equations of the last chapter, those deduced 
in § 6, which refer to a partial change in the body's state of 
aggregation, may conveniently be treated first; inasmuch as 
the circumstance there mentioned, viz. that the pressure is 
only a function of the temperature, greatly facilitates the 
treatment of the subject. We will in the first place consider 
the passage fix)m the liquid to the vaporous condition. 

Let a weight M of any given substance be inclosed in an 
expansible envelope: of this let the part m be in the condition 
of vapour, and that vapour (as necessarily follows from its 
contact with the liquid) at its maximum density; and let the 
remainder J/— m be liquid. If the temperature T of the 
mass is given, the condition of the vaporous part, and at the 
same time that of the liquid part, is thereby determined. If 
m be also given and thereby the magnitudes of both parts 
known, then we know the condition of the whole mass. We 
will accordingly choose T and m as the independent variables, 
and will substitute m for a; in equations (29), (30), (31) of 
the last chapter. Then these equations become 



A 
dl 

A 
dl 



I fdQ\ d_fdQ\ ^dp^^dv^ ... 

T\dm) dm\dT) dT dm ^^^' 

ifdQK^ d (dQ\^l^dQ 

T\dm) dm\dTj T dm ^"^^ 

dQ __rpdp dv^ . 

drn'^^dT'^dm ^'^^^ 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 127 

We may now denote the specific volume (i.e. the volume 
of a unit of weight) of the saturated vapour by s, and the 
specific volume of the liquid by <r. Both these magnitudes 
bear some relation to the temperature T and its correspond- 
ing pressure, and are therefore, like the pressure, functions of 
the temperature alone. If we further denote by v the total 
volume of the mass, we may then put 

v = 7ns+ {M—m) a, 
= m (5 — <r) + Ma. 

We will substitute for the difference {s — <r), a simpler ex- 
pression, by putting 

U = 8 — (r (4), 

whence it follows that 

V = mu + M(r (5); 

whence 

^^ /^. 

-i-^u 6. 

am ^ ' 

The quantity of heat which must be applied to the mass, if 
a unit of weight of the substance, at temperature T and 
under the corresponding pressure, is to pass from the liquid 
into the vaporous condition, and which may be shortly called 
the vaporizing heat, may be denoted by p \ then we have 

dm-P (^)- 

We will further introduce into the equations the specific heat 
of the substance in the liquid and vaporous condition. The 
specific heat here treated of is not however that at constant 
volume, nor yet that at constant pressure, but belongs to the 
case in which the pressure increases with the temperature in 
the same manner as the maximum expansive power of the 
saturated vapour. This increase of pressure has very little 
influence on the specific heat of the liquid, since liquids are 
but slightly compressible by such pressures as are herein con- 
sidered. We shall hereafter explain how this influence may 
be calculated, in our researches on the different kinds of 
specific heat, and a single example will suflSce here. For 
water at boiling-point the difference u between the a^ecifia 



128 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

heat here considered and the specific heat at constant 

pressure, is only of the latter, a diflference which may be 

neglected. Accordingly, we may for the purposes of calcula- 
tion take the specific heat of the liquid here considered as 
being equal to the specific heat at constant pressure, although 
their meaning is different. We will call this specific 
heat C. 

With vapour it is otherwise. The specific heat here con- 
sidered refers, as shewn above, to that quantity of heat which 
saturated vapour requires to heat it through V, if it is at the 
same time so powerfiilly compressed that even at the higher 
temperature it again returns to the saturated condition. As 
this compression is very considerable, this kind of specific 
heat is very different from all which we have hitherto treated 
of. We shall call it the Specific Hfeat of Saturated Steam, 
and shall denote it by H. 

Bringing in the two symbols G and H, we may now at once 
write down the quantity of heat which is necessary to give 
the increase of temperature dT to the quantity of vapour 
m, and the quantity of liquid Jf — m. The result will be as 
follows : 

mHdT-\-{M^m)CdT, 

whence 

^ = mir+(Jlf-m)(7, 
or otherwise 

^^=^m{H-C)+MG (8). 

From equations (7) and (8) we have 

dT\dm) ~ dT ^ ^' 



L®-"-'' w 



dm 

Substituting in equations (1, 2, 3) the values given in equa- 
tions (7, 9, 10) we have 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 129 

%^C-H = u% (11), 

J + €r-5'=| (12). 

P = Tuf^ (13). 

These are the fundamental equations of the Mechanical 
Theory of Heat as relates to the generation of vapour* Equa- 
tion (11) is a deduction from the first fundamental principle, 
(12) from the second, and (13) from both together. 

K it is desired to use the ordinary and not the mechanical 
measures for the quantities of heat, we need only divide all 
the members of the foregoing equations by the mechanical 
equivalent of heat. In this case we will denote the two 
specific heats and the heat of vaporization by new symbols, 
putting 

"^E' ^''W ''^E <^*)- 

The equations then become 

S+''-^=J(df) ^^'^> 

— + c~h = ^ (16), 

§ 2. Specific Heat of Saturated Steam. 

As the foregoing equations (15), (16) and (17), of which 
however only two are independent, have thus been obtained by 
means of the Mechanical Theory of Heat, we may make use of 
them in order to determine more closely two magnitudes, of 
which one was previously quite unknown and the other only 
known imperfectly; viz. the magnitude h and the magnitude 
s contained in u. 

K we first apply ourselves to the magnitude h, or the 
Specific Heat of Saturated Steam, it may be worth. >nVv\\% ycl 



130 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOJRY OF HEAT. 

the first place to give some account of the views formerly 
promulgated concerning this magnitude. 

The magnitude h is of special importance in the theory 
of the steam engine, and in fact the first who published any 
distinct views upon it was the celebrated improver of the 
steam engine, James Watt. In his treatment of the subject 
he naturally started from those views which were based on the 
older theory of heat. To this class belongs especially the idea 
mentioned in Chapter I., viz. that the so-called total heat, i.e. 
the total quantity of heat taken in by a body during its passage 
.from a given initial condition to its present condition, depends 
only on the present condition and not on the way in which 
the body has been brought into it ; and that it accordingly 
may be expressed as a function of those variables on which 
the condition of the body depends. According to this view 
we must in our case, in which the condition of the body com- 
posed of liquid and vapour is determined by the quantities 
T and m, consider this quantity of heat (? as a function of T 
and m ; accordingly we have the equation 

A. (^\ -A (^\ = 
dT \dmj dm [dTj ^' 

If we here substitute for the two second differentials their 
values given in equations (9) and (10), we have 



or dividing by E 



% + C-H=0, 



^+c-h = 0. 



whence we have, to determine h, the equation, 

h = ^ + o (18). 

This was in fact the equation which was formerly used "to 
determine A, though not quite in the same form. To calculate 
h from this equation we must know the differential co- 

dt* 
efficient ^, or the change of the vaporizing heat for a given 

johsLUge of temperature. 



SATURATE^) VAPOUR. 131 

Watt had made experiments on the vaporizing heat of 
water at different temperatures, and was thereby led to a 
result, which may be expressed by a very simple law, com- 
monly called Watt's law. This in its shortest form is as 
follows: "The sum of the free and latent heat is always 
constant." By this is meant that the sum of the two quan- 
tities of heat, which must be imparted to a unit of weight of 
water, in order to raise it from freezing point to temperature 
T, and then at that temperature convert it into steam, is in- 
dependent of the temperature T itself. The quantity of 
heat required for heating the water is expressed by the 
integral 



•' a 



in which a is the absolute temperature of freezing point. 
The heat of vaporization is represented by r. Watt's law 
therefore leads to the equation 

r + rcdr= Constant (19). 

Differentiating, 

^+c = (20), 

combining this with, equation (18) we have 

A = (21). 

This result was long considered as correct, and was expressed 
by the following principle : If steam of maximum density 
changes its volume within a vessel impermeable to heat, it 
always preserves its maximum density. 

More recently Regnault made very careful experiments on 
the changes in the heat of vaporization with changes in the 
temperature* ; and thereby discovered that Watt's law, accord- 
ing to which the sum of the free and latent heat is always 
constant, does not agree with the facts, but that this sum has 
an increasing value as the temperature rises. The result of 
his experiments is expressed in the following equation, in 



• 



Relations de Experiences, t. i. ; Mem, de VAcad*^ t. xsi., l^^l. 



132 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

which instead of the absolute temperature T we introduce 
the temperature t reckoned from the freezing point : 



+ [ cd* = 606-5 + 0-305 * (22). 

J A 



Differentiating this equation with regard to t, and then sub- 

dif* dv 
stituting -J for -r- , both having the same value, we have 

Jy 4.0 = 0-305 (23), 

CombinlDg this equation with (18) we have 

A = -305 (24). 

This was the value of A, which it was supposed, after the 
publication of Regnault's experiments, must be substituted 
for the value zero and applied to the theory of the steam 
engine. Hence arose the idea that if saturated steam be 
compressed, and thereby heated, in such a way that it always 
has exactly the temperature for which the density is a maxi- 
mum, it must take in heat from without; and conversely in 
expanding, in order to cool itself in a manner corresponding 
to the expansion, it must give out heat from itself. Hence 
we must further conclude that if saturated steam be com- 
pressed in a vessel impermeable to heat, a fall of temperature 
must take place ; whilst in expanding the steam will not re- 
main at its maximum density, inasmuch as its temperature 
cannot fall so low as this will necessitate. 

Having thus explained the conclusions previously drawn 
in relation to A, we will now see what may be concluded 
from the equations here developed. 

The quantity h occurs in the two equations (15) and (16); 
but the first of these also contains the quantity u, which cannot 
at present be considered as accurately known ; it is therefore 
less convenient for determining h than the latter, which in 
addition to h contains only such quantities as the experi- 
ments of Kegnault have determined with great accuracy in 
the case of water, and of many other fluids. This equation 

may be written 

dv 7* 
* = 5y + c-2f (25). 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 133 

We have thus obtained by the Mechanical Theory of Heat a 
new equation for determining A, which differs from the equa- 
tion (18), previously assumed to be correct, by the negative 

.7* 

quantity—^, the value of which quantity is thus of great 
importance. 

§ 3. Nvmerical Value of h. for Steam. 

If we apply equation (25) to the case of water, we must first, 
following Kegnault, give to the sum of the first two symbols 
on the right-hand side the value 0*305. To determine the 
last symbol we must know the value of r, as a function of the 
temperature. Equation (22) gives us 

r = 606-5 + 0-305* - { cdt 



-( cdt (26). 

JO 



The specific heat of water c is determined according to 
Regnault by the following formulae : 

= 1 + 0'00004« +00000009*' (27). 

Applying this, equation (26) becomes 

r=* 606-5 - 0-695*- 0-0000** -0-0000003**... (28). 

Substituting this value for r in (25), and replacing T by 
273 + *, we obtain for steam the following equation : 

r A OA- 606-5 - 0-695* - 0-00002*' - 0-0000008** ,„^, 
A = 0-30o 2,^3-^^^ ...(29). 

The expression for r given in (28) is inconvenient from its 
length, and the experiments on the heat of vaporization at 
different temperatures, valuable as they are, can scarcely 
possess such a degree of accuracy as to make so long a 
formula necessary to represent them. Accordingly in his 
paper on the theory of the steam engine the author pre- 
ferred to use the following formula : 

r = 607-0-708* (30). 

The manner in which the two constants in the formula 
are determined "v^ill be more closely examined further on, 



134 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



in describing the steam engine. Here we will only give a 
comparison of some values determined by both formulsB, in 
order to shew that the difference between them is so small, 
that one may be substituted for the other without danger : 



t 


00 


500 


1000 


1500 


2000 


r by equation (28) ... 
r by equation (30) . . . 


606-5 
607-0 


571-6 
571-6 


536-5 
536-2 


500-7 
500-8 


464-3 
465-4 



Substituting in equation (25) the expression for r in (30) 
we have instead of equation (29) the following : 



h = 0-305 - 



607 - 0708« 



273 + t 



or in still simpler form, 



h = 1013 - 



800-3 
275 + t 



(31). 



A glance at equations (29) and (31) shews that for mode- 
rate temperatures A is a negative quantity. Equation (29) 
gives for certain fixed temperatures the following values, 
which agree very closely with those calculated by equation 
(31): 



t 


00 


500 


1000 


1500 


2000 


h 


-1-916 


-1-465 


- 1-133 


- 0-879 


- 0-676 



The circumstance that the specific heat of saturated steam 
has a negative value, and that of so large an amount, gives 
it a special character of its own. We may explain in the 
following manner the cause of this singular condition. If 
steam is compressed, heat is generated by the work thereby 
expended, and this heat is more than sufficient to raise the 
temperature of the steam to the point at which the new 
density is the maximum density. Accordingly if the steam 
is to be treated in such a way that it remains saturated, it 
must be deprived of a part of the heat thus generated. In 
like manner in the expansion of steam more heat is con- 
verted into work than is necessary to cool the steam so far' 



SATUBATED TAPOUB. 135 

only that it remains exactly in the condition of saturated 
steam. AccordiDgly if this last condition is to hold heat must 
be imparted during the expansion. 

Should the original saturated steam be contained in a 
vessel impermeable to heat, it will be superheated during 
compression and wiU be in part condensed during expan- 
sion. 

The conclusion that the specific heat of saturated steam 
is n^ative was drawn by Rankine and by the author inde- 
pendently, and about the same time*. Bankine however 
developed only the first of the two equations (15) and (16), 
which contain A, and this in a somewhat difTerent form. 
The second it was impossible for him to develope, since he was 
without the second fimdamental principle, which was neces- 
sary thereto. Since in the first equation there occurs together 
with h the specific volume of the saturated steam, which is 
contained in ti, Rankine in order to determine this applied 
to saturated steam the law of Mariotte and Gray-Lussac, 
which, as we shall see further on, is inaccurate. More exact 
determinations of h could only be accomplished by means of 
equation (16), which was first established by the author. 

§ 4. Nvmfsrioal Value of h for other Vapours. 

When equation (25) was first published, Regnault's deter- 
minations of the specific heat and heat of vaporization as func- 
tions of temperature had been performed only for the case 
of waterf; and therefore the numerical value of h could be 
given for water only. Regnault has since extended his 
measurements to other fluids j, and it is now possible to apply 
the equation, to obtain the numerical value of h for these 
fluids. We thus obtain the following results. 

Bisulphide of Carbon: CS,. According to Regnault we 
have 

f cdt = 0-23523* + 0-0000815<', 
Jo 

* BaiiMne*8 paper was read before the Boyal Society of Edinburgh in 
February, 1850, and printed in the Transactions^ Vol. xx. p. 147. The anthor^s 
paper was read before the academy of Berlin in Febmary, 1850, and printed 
in Poggendorf s Annalen, VoL lxxix. pp. 368 and 500. 

f Relations des Experiences, Vol. i., Paris, 1847. 

X Relations des Experiences^ Vol. ii., Paris, 1862. 



186 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



r+l cclt = 90 + O'UGOlt - 00004123f : 
Jo 

whence we have 

c = 0-23523 + 0-0001630^, 
r = 90-00 - 0-08922^ - 00004938^. 
Substituting these values, equation (25) becomes 

A = 014601 - 0-0008246^ - ^^-^"-Q-Q^^^y-^-^^^^^^^ 
hence we obtain for h the following values amongst others: 



t 


00 


1000 


k 


-0-1837 


-0-1406 



The specific heat of the saturated vapour of Bi-sulphide 
of Carbon is thus negative like that of steam, but its values 
are smaller. 

Ether : Gfi^fi. According to Kegnault we have 

odt = 0-52900^ + 0-00029587^, 



Ja 

I cdt^ 94- 

Jo 



00 + 0-45000* - 0-00055556^', 

whence we have 

c = 0-529 + 0-00059174*, 

r= 94-00 - 0-07900* - 0-0008514*'. 

Equation (25) thus becomes 

h = 0-45000 - 0-0011111 1 - 9400-007y-00008514<' 

273 + 1 

and from this the following values are deduced : 



t 


00 


1000 


h 


-0-1057 


-0-1309 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 



137 



in the case of Ether therefore the specific heat of 
saturated steam has, at least at ordinary temperatures, a posi- 
tive value. «• 

Chloroform : CHClg. According to Regnault we have 

[ cdt = 0-23235^ + 000005072«*, 
Jo 

r+j cdt^67^0'U75t; 
Jo 

whence we have 

c = 0-23235 + 0-00010144^, 
r = 67 - 0-09485^ - 000005072^. 
Equation (25) thus becomes 

2. A 1 o^rrr 67 - 0-09485* - 0-00005072^ 

^^=^'1^^^ -mn ' 

and from this the following values are deduced : 



t 


00 


1000 


h 


- 0-1079 


-00-153 



Bi- Chloride of Carbon : CCl^. According to Regnault we 
have : 



[ cd*=:0-19798<+ 0-0000906*', 
f erf* = 52 + 0-14625* - 0000172^' ; 

^0 



r + 

whence we have 

c = 0-19798 + 0-0001812*, 
r = 52 - 0-05173* - 0-0002626**. 
Equation (25) thus becomes 

52-00 - 0-05173 - 0-0002626** 



A « 0-14625 - 0-000344* 



273 + t 



138 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEOUt OF HEAT. 



and from this the following values are deduced i 



t 


QO lOQO 


k 


- 0-0442 - 0*0066 



Aceton : C3H3O. According to Regnault we have 
[ cdt = 0-50643e + 0-0003965«*, 

r+( cdt^ 140-5 + 0-36644^ - 0'000516«* ; 
Jo 

whence we have 

c = 0-50643 + 0-0007930^, 

r = 140-5 - 0-13999^ - 0-0009125^. 

Equation (25) thus becomes 

140-5 - 0-13999^ - 00009125f 



M' «9 



A = 0-36644 -0-001032^ - 



273 +« 



and from this the following values are deduced ; 



00 



0-1482 



1000 



-0-0515 



In addition to the above Regnault has investigated 
Alcohol, Benzine, and Oil of Turpentine, so far as to deter- 
mine the values of r + I cdt For Alcohol and Turpentine 

he gives no empirical formulae for ascertaining their values, 
on account of the irregularities in the experiments ; and for 

Benzine he has not expressed I cdt as a function of tempera- 

ture, but has only investigated a mean value of the Specific 
Heat for a narrow interval of temperature. The numerical 
value of h is thus much more uncertain for these fluids than 
for those given above, and accordingly we shall not treat of 
them further. 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 139 

In all the formulae for h given above we see that its value 
increases as the temperature rises. In the only case, that of 
ether, in which it is positive at ordinary temperatures, its 
absolute value increases as the temperature rises. In the 
other cases, in which it is negative, its absolute value 
diminishes; it thus approaches to zero, and it would appear that 
at some higher temperature it would attain the value zero, 
and at still higher temperatures would become positive. To 
determine the temperature at which A = 0, we have by equa- 
tion (25) 

j5,+ c-5,= (32). 

In this equation we must, as above, express c and r as 
functions of t, and then solve it with regard to t 

The empirical formul® of Regnault, by means of which 
we have expressed c and r as functions of ty should not of 
course be applied much beyond the limits of temperature 
within which Regnault carried out his experiments. Hence 
the determination of the temperature for which A = 
is in many cases impossible, as for instance with water, 
where the equations obtaioed by putting A = in (29) 
and (31) would lead to a value for t of about 500^ where- 
as the equations are only applicable up to somewhat over 
200^ But with other fluids the temperature for which 
A = 0, and above which A is positive, lies within the limits of 
application of the formulae. Thus Cazin* calculates this 
temperature for Chloroform at 123*48^ and for Bi-chloride of 
Carbon at 128-9^ 

§ 5. Specify) Heat of Saturated Steam, cw proved by 
Eaperiment 

The result arrived at by theory, that the Specific Heat of 
saturated steam is negative, and that therefore saturated 
steam, if expanded in a non-conducting envelope, must 
partially condense, has since been experimentally proved by 
Him"f-. A cylindrical vessel of metal was fitted at the two 
ends with parallel plates of glass, so that it could be seen 
through. This, when filled with steam at high pressure was 

* AnnaZes de Chimie et de Physique, Series rv. Vol. xiv. 

t Bulletin 133 de la SodUi Industrielle de Mulhousey p. lET. 



140 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

perfectly clear; but when a cock was suddenly opened, so 
that part of the steam escaped, and the remainder expanded, 
a thick cloud appeared in the interior of the cylinder, proving 
a partial condensation of the steam. Subsequently, when 
Volume II. of Regnault's Relation des Experiences had ap- 
peared, containing the data, given above, to determine h for 
other fluids, and shewing that for ether h must be positive. Him 
proceeded to experiment with that vapour also. Bfis description 
is as follows * : " To the neck of a strong crystal flask I 
connected a pump, the capacity of which was nearly equal to 
that of the flask, and which was provided with a cock at the 
bottom. Some ether was poured into the flask, and it was 
immersed to the neck in water at about 50®. The cock was 
then kept open, until all the air was assumed to be expelled. 
Then the cock was closed, and the pump plunged into the hot 
water with the flask : whereupon the ether vapour raised 
the piston to the top. The apparatus was now suddenly 
taken from the water, and the piston forced rapidly down. 
At this moment, but for a moment only, the flask became 
filled with a distinct cloud." It was thus shewn that ether 
vapour behaves conversely to steam, partially condensing, not 
during expansion, but during compression; a fact which 
is in accordance with the opposite sign of h in the two 
cases. 

To check this conclusion Him made an exactly similar 
experiment with Bi-sulphide of Carbon. The result was 
that on forcing down the piston the flask remained per- 
fectly transparent. This is again in accordance with the 
theory, since with Bi-sulphide of Carbon, as with water, 
h is negative, and compression of the vapour produces a rise 
of temperature, and not a fall. Some years later Cazin"f-, 
aided by the Association scientifique, made with great care 
and skill a similar series of experiments, in some respects 
more extended. He used as before a cylinder of metal, fitted 
with glass at the ends. This was placed in a bath of oil, so 
as to give it the exact temperature proper for the experi- 
ment. The first series of experiments embraced only the 
expansion of steam; the arrangement was such that, when 
the cylinder was filled with vapour, a cock could be opened, 

♦ Cosmos, 10 April, 1863, 

t Annales de Chimie et de PhysiqiMf Series iv. Vol. xiv. 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 141 

through which a part of the vapour escaped either into the 
atmosphere or into an air vessel, the pressure in which 
could be kept at any given point below the pressure of the 
vapour. In a second series of experiments a pump was 
connected with the cylinder; this was placed in the same 
bath of oil, and the piston could be moved rapidly back- 
wards or forwards by special mechanism, so as to increase or 
diminish the volume of the vapour. 

By these experiments the results obtained by Hirn for 
steam and ether were confirmed, and with the second ap- 
paratus a double proof was given in each case, viz. both by 
rarefaction and condensation. Steam formed a cloud during 
rarefaction, whilst it remained quite clear during condensa- 
tion. Ether, on the contrary, formed a cloud during con- 
densation, and remained clear during rarefaction. Some 
special experiments were further made with vapour of chloro- 
form. As mentioned above, in the case of chloroform A, 
which is negative at lower temperatures, becomes zero at a 
temperature which Cazin has calculated at 123 '48^, and at 
still higher temperatures is positive. This vapour must thus 
partially condense during expansion at lower temperatures, 
and must partially condense during compression at higher 
temperatures beyond the point of transition. With the first 
apparatus, which only allowed of expansion, clouds were 
observed during expansion at temperatures up to 128°. At 
temperatures above 145® there was no formation of cloud. 
Between 123® and 145® the conditions were somewhat different 
according to the degree of expansion. With a small degree 
of expansion there was no cloud ; with a higher degree some 
formation of a cloud appeared towards the end of the pro- 
cess. The explanation of this is simple. The high expansion 
had produced a considerable fall of temperature, and the 
vapour had thereby been reduced to the temperature at 
which expansion is accompanied by a fall of tempera- 
ture. The result is thus completely in accordance with the' 
theory. With the second apparatus the vapour of chloroform 
formed a cloud during expansion up to 130®, whilst it re- 
mained perfectly transparent during compression. Above 
136® a cloud was formed during compression, whilst it re- 
mained clear during expansion. The theory is hereby more 
fully established than by the first apparatus. The circumsta.\\a^ 



142 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

that the temperature at which the law of the vapour changes 
appeared in these experiments to lie between 130° and 136**, 
whilst theory gives it at 12348°, is not a matter of great im- 
portance. On the one hand these experiments are not adapted 
for an accurate determination of this temperature, because 
they always involve finite changes of volume of considerable 
magnitude, whereas the theory embraces indefinitely small 
changes only. On the other hand, Cazin himself mentions 
that his chloroform was not chemically pure, and required for 
a given vapour-pressure a higher tempers^ture than that 
found by Regnault. Having regard to these circumstances, 
the theory must be considered as being fully confirmed by 
experiment. 

§ 6. Specific Volume of Saturated Vapour. 

We will now consider the second of the two quantities 
mentioned at the beginning of § 2, viz. 8, or the specific volume 
of the saturated vapour. 

It was formerly the custom to use the law of Mariotte and 
Gay-Lussac, in order to calculate the volume which a gas as- 
sumes under diflferent conditions of temperature and pressure, 
and to take no account of whether the vapour was in the satu- 
rated or superheated condition. It is true that from many 
quarters doubts were expressed, whether vapours really fol- 
lowed this law up to the saturation point: but, as the experi- 
mental determination of the volumes offered great difficulties, 
and a theoretical determination was impossible from the want 
of well-established principles, it remained, the custom to 
apply the above law in this case, so as at least to arrive 
at some sort of determination of the volume of saturated 
vapour. But the equations obtained by the author, and 
given at the end of § 1, now off^er us a means of arriving at 
a strict theoretical calculation for the volume of saturated 
vapour, which, when the data are given, may be worked out 
in practice. For in these equations occurs the quantity u, 
which =8—0-, where a is the specific volume of the fluid. 
This, as a rule, is very small in comparison with 5, and 
may be neglected in many calculations; but it is still a 
known quantity, and may be taken account of without diffi- 
culty. 



SATUEATED VAPOUR. 143 

Substituting («— c) for u in the last of these equations, (17), 
we obtain 

T{8^o) dp 
^- E^^dT ^'^^^' 

or, solving the equation for s, 

B^J^ + o- (34). 

dT 

By this equation the specific volume of the saturated va- 
pour may be calculated for all substances, whose pressure p 
and heat of vaporization r are known as functions of the 
temperature. 

§ 7. Departwre from the law ofMarioUe and Oay-Lussac 
in Ihe case of Saturaied Steam. 

We will first apply the foregoing equations to ascertain 
whether saturated steam follows the law of Mariotte and Gay- 
Lussac, or how far or in what way it departs from it. 

K it follows the law the following equation must hold : 



~ = const., 



a 



or, substituting a + ^ for T, and multiplying by ^, 

but from equation (33), substituting a + < for T, we obtain 

-^pis^oi) — --= ^ J (35). 

^ « + * {a + tf^-i 

^ p at 

As the difference {s — a) differs little from 5, the left-hand 
side of these two equations is very nearly the same, and, t9 



144 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

ascertain how saturated steam is related to the law of Mari- 
otte and Gay-Lussac, we have only to enquire whether the 
right-hand side of the last equation is constant, or varies 
with the temperature. To ascertain whether the successive 
values of an expression are equal to each other, or in what 
way they depart from each other, is a very simple matter ; 
and the form of equation (35) is very well adapted for this pur- 
pose. The author has calculated the values of this expression 
for a series of temperatures from 0" to 200^ applying the 
numbers given by Regnault to r and p. For r, the heat of 
vaporization, the equation (28) was used, viz. : 

r = 606-5 - 0-695^ - 0-00002«? - 00000003e». 

The more simple formula (30) might have been used without 
any great diflference in the results. To obtain p, the author 
first applied the numbers which Regnault has published in 
his weU-known large Tables, in which the pressure of steam 
fgr every degree from — 32® to + 230® is given. He found how- 
ever some pecuUar variations from the regular course of the 
numbers, which in certain ranges of temperature had quite 
a diflferent character from what they had in others ; and he 
soon discovered that the source of these variations lay in the 
fact that Regnault had calculated his numbers by empirical 
formulae, and that for diflferent ranges of temperature he 
had employed diflferent formulae. It then appeared desirable 
to the author to emancipate himself entirely from the in- 
fluence of empirical formulae, and to confine himself to those 
numbers which express simply the results of the observa- 
tions, because these are specially adapted for comparison with 
theoretical results. Regnault, in order to obtain from his 
numerous observations the most probable values, used the 
aid of graphical methods. He constructed curves of which 
the abscissae represent the temperature, and the ordinates 
the pressure p, and which run from — 33® to + 230®. From 
100® to 230® he also constructed a curve in which the ordi- 
nates represented not jp itself, but the logarithm of jp. From 
this have been obtained the following values, which may be 
considered the most direct results of his observations, and 
from which were also taken the values which served for the 
calculation of his empirical formulae. 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 



145 



t in Centi- 
grade Degrees 

of the Air- 
thermometer. 


p in 
Millimetres. 


t in Centi- 
grade Degrees 

of the Air- 
thermometer. 


p in Millimetres 1 


according to 

the Curve of 

Numbers. 


. ... . -- _^ 
according to 
the Curve of 
Logarithms *. 


-200 


0-91 


1100 


1073-7 


1073-3 


-10 


2-08 


120 


14890 


1490-7 



4-60 


130 


2029-0 


2030-5 


10 


916 


140 


2713-0 


2711-5 


20 


17*39 


150 


35720 


3578-5 


30 


31-55 


160 


4647-0 


4651-6 


40 


54-91 


170 


5960-0 


5956-7 


50 


91-98 


180 


7545-0 


7537-0 


60 


148-79 


190 


9428-0 


9425-4 


70 


233-09 


200 


11660-0 


11679-0 


80 


354-64 


210 


14308-0 


14325-0 


90 


525-45 


220 


17390-0 


17390-0 


100 


760-00 


230 


20915-0 


20927-0 



In order to make the required calculation with these data, 

the values of — ^ were determined from the above table for 

p (it 

the temperatures 5^ 15*^, 25^ etc., in the following manner. 

As - -^ diminishes but slowly as the temperature increases, 

the decrease was taken as uniform for every interval of 10^ 
i.e. from 0® to 10^ from 10° to 20°, and so on ; e.g. the value 
for 25® was taken as the mean of the two values for 20° and 
:30^ Then since 

1 dp _d (logp) 

p'di dt ' 

the followins: formulse could be used : 



\p dtJiBP 10 



or otherwise 



( 



1 ^\ ^ Log p ^- Log p, 

P d^/25a lOM 



(36), 



.where Log signifies the common system of logarithms, and M 

* In this column are given, instead of the Logarithms given directly by 
the curve and used by Begnault, the numbers which correspond with them, 
in order to compare them with the numbers in the previous column. 

C. \^ 



146 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



the modulus of that system. By the help of these values of 

- -J~ and of the values of r given by the equation stated 

above, and lastly of the value 273 for a, the values were 
calculated which the expression on the right-hand side of 
equation (35) and therefore likewise the expression 

1 . .a 

assumes for the temperatures 5^ 15^, 25", etc. These values are 
given in the second column of the table below. For tempe- 
ratures over 100° the two series of numbers found above for p 
were both made use of, and the two results thus obtained are 
placed side by side. The meaning of the third and fourth 
columns will be more fnlly explained below. 



1. 


1 / ^ 


a 

• 



t in Degrees 
Centigrade of 


E^^ ^ a + t 


4. 
Differences. 


2. 


3. 


the Air- 
thermometer. 


According to 
Experiment. 


According to 
Equation (38). 



50 


30-93 


30-46 


-0-47 


15 


30-60 


30-38 


-0-22 


25 


30-40 


30-30 


-0-10 


35 


30-23 


30-20 


-0-03 


45 


30-10 


30-10 


0-00 


55 


29-98 


30-00 


+ 0-02 


65 


29-88 


29-88 


0-00 


75 


29-76 


29-76 


0-00 


85 


29-65 


29-63 


-0-02 


95 


29-49 


29-48 


-001 


105 


29-47 29-50 


29-33 


-0-14 -0-17 


115 


29-16 29-02 


29-17 


+ 001 +015 


125 


28-89 28-93 


28-99 


+ 0-10 +0-06 


135 


28-88 29-01 


28-80 


-0-08 -0-21 


145 


28-65 28-40 


28-60 


- 005 + 0-20 


155 


28-16 28-25 


28-38 


+ 0-22 +0-13 


165 


28-02 28-19 


28-14 


+ 0-12 -0-05 


175 


27-84 27-90 


27-89 


+ 005 - 0-01 


185 


27-76 27-67 


27-62 


- 0-14 - 0-05 


195 


27-45 27-20 


27-33 


-0-12 +0-13 


205 


26-89 26-94 


27-02 


+ 013 +0-08 


215 


26-56 26-79 


26-68 


+ 0-12 -0-11 


225 


26-64 26-50 


26-32 


-0-32 -0-18 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 147 

This table at once shews that -rrPis — a) is not constant, 

as it must be if the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac holds, 
but decreases decidedly as the temperature rises. Between 
35* and 95" this decrease appears very regular. Below 35® 
the decrease is less regular, the simple explanation being that 

here the pressure p and its diflferential coefficient -~ are very 

small, and therefore small errors in their determination, which 
are quite within the limits of errors of observation, maj^ yet 
become relatively important. Above 100® the values of the 
expression are not so regular as between 25® and 95®, but 
shew on the whole a similar rate of decrease : and if we 
make a graphic representation of these values, it is foimd 
that the curve, which below 100® passes exactly through the 
points determined by the' numbers contained in the table, 
can be readily continued up to 230® in such a way that these 
points are distributed equally on both sides of it. 

The course of this curve can be expressed with sufficient 
accuracy for the whole extent of the table by an equation of 
the form 

eP (*" "^^ ^t^'^'^''^ (^'')' 

where e is the base of Napierian logarithms, and m, n, h are 
constants. If we determine the latter from the values which 
the curve gives for 45®, 125®, and 205®, we obtain 

m = 31-549; n = f0486; ifc = 0-007138 (37a), 

and if for convenience we use common logarithms, we finally 
obtain 

Logr31-549-^.p(5-o-) ^1 = 0-0206 + 0003100^.. (38). 

The numbers contained in the third column of the table 
are calculated from this equation, and in the fourth column 
are given the differences between these and the numbers in 
the second column. 



148 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



§ 8. Differential Coefficients of — . 

PSo 

The foregoing analysis leads easily to a formula, from 
which we can ascertain more exactly the mode in which 
steam departs from the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac. 
Assuming this law to hold, we shall be able to put 

ps ^a + t 

where ps^ represents the value of ps at 0^ The differential 

coefficient -^- ( — ) would then have a constant value, viz. the 
at KpsJ 

well-known coefficient of expansion - = 0*003665. Instead 

of this, equation (37) gives, if we use a in place of (s — a), 
the equation 



ps m— ne^*' a + t 

-— = X 

ps^ m—n a 



(39). 



whence 



d fps\__l m — nll + k(a + f)]e 



dt 



\pSo/ a 



M 



m — n 



(40). 



Thus the differential coefficient is not a constant, but a 
function which decreases as the temperature increases. This 
function, if we substitute for m, n, and k the numbers given 
in (37a), has amongst others the following values, for different 
temperatures. 



t. 

00 


d /p8\ 
dt ypsj' 


t. 

700 


d /p8\ 

dt \psj ' 


t, 
1400 


d rp8\ 
dt \p8j • 


0-00342 


0-00307 


0-00244 


10 


0-00338 


80 


0-00300 


150 


000231 


20 


0-00334 


90 


. 0-00293 


160 


0-00217 


30 


0-00329 


100 


0-00285 


170 


000203 


40 


0-00326 


110 


0-00276 


180 


0-00187 


50 


000319 


120 


0-00266 


190 


0-00168 


60 


000314 


130 


0-00256 


200 


0-00149 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 149 

From the above table we see that it is only at low tem- 
peratures that the variations from the law of Mariotte and 
Gay-Lussac are small, and that at higher temperatures, e.g. 
above 100^ they can by no means be neglected. 

A glance at the table is sufficient to shew that the values 

found for -7- ( ^ 1 are smaller than 0'003665 ; whereas it is 
dt\psj 

known that for the gases which vary considerably from the law 

of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac, such as carbonic acid and sulphuric 

acid, the coefficient of expansion is not smaller, but greater 

than the above number. Hence this diflferential coefficient 

cannot be taken to correspond with the coefficient of expansion 

which relates to increase of volume by heating at constant 

pressure, nor yet with the figure obtained if we leave the 

volume constant during the heating, and then observe the 

increase of the expansive force. Thus we have here a third 

special case of the general diflferential coefficient ji ( ) » viz. 



>^V 



that in which the pressure increases during the heating 
under the same conditions as in the case of steam, when this 
retains its maximum density; and this case must be con- 
sidered for carbonic acid likewise, if we are to establish a com- 
parison. 

Steam has at about 108® an expansive force equal to 1 metre 
of mercury, and at 129^° equal to 2 metres. We will examine 
what takes place with carbonic acid, if this is also heated by 
21^®, and thereby the pressure increased from 1 to 2 metres. 
Regnault* gives as the coefficient of expansion of carbonic 
acid at constant pressure 000371 if the pressure is 760 mm., 
and 0*003846 if the pressure is 2520 mm. For a pressure of 
1500 mm., the mean between 1 and 2 metres, the coefficient 
of expansion, if assumed to increase in proportion to the 
pressure, will have the value 003767. If carbonic acid 
under this mean pressure is heated from 0' to 21^°, the 

quantity ^-— will increase from 1 to 

1 + 0-003767 X 21-5 = 1-08099. 

Again other experiments of Regnault's'f have shewn that, if 

* Relation d^s ExpSnences, t. i. Mem. 1. 
t Relation des Exp4rience8f 1. 1. Mem. 6. 



loO ON THE M^HANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

carbonic acid, which had a pressure of about 1 m. at a tem- 
perature of about 0^ is loaded with a pressure of 1*98292 m., 
the quantity pv decreases in the ratio of 1 : 0*99146 ; or for an 
increase of pressure from 1 to 2 ms., it will decrease in the 
ratio of 1 : 0*99131. Now if both of these take place 
together, viz. a rise of temperature from 0*^ to 21^^, and 

pv 
a rise of pressure from 1 to 2 ms., then the quantity *— 

must increase from 1 to 108099 x 0*99131 = 1071596 very 
nearly, whence we obtain as the mean value of the differen- 
tial coeflScient -n ( - ) , 

dt \pvj 

Q-Ojlf^ = 0003:33. 
21*5 

We thus see that for the case here considered we have a 
value for carbonic acid which is less than 0*003665, and 
there is therefore less ground for surprise at obtaining the 
same result for steam at its maximum density. 

If we seek to determine on the other hand the actual 
coeflScient of expansion for steam, or the number which 
shews how far a quantity of steam expands, if it is taken at 
a given temperature and at its maximum density and then 
heated, apart from water, at constant pressure, we shall cer- 
tainly obtain a value which is larger, and probably much 
larger, than 0*003665. 

§ 9. Formula to determine the Specific Volume of Satu- 
rated Steam, and its comparison with experiment. 

From equation! (37), and equally from equation (34), the 
relative values of « — a-, and therefore to a close approxima- 
tion those of 5, may be calculated for different temperatures, 
without needing to know the Mechanical Equivalent E, If 
however we wish to calculate from the equations the absolute 
value of 8, we must either know E, or must attempt to 
eliminate it by the help of some other known quantity. At 
the time when the author first began these researches, several 
values of E had been given by Joule, taken from various 
methods of experiment: these differed widely from each 
other, and Joule had not announced which he considered the 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 151 

most probable. In this uncertainty the author determined 
to attempt the determination of the absolute value of s from 
another starting point, and he believes that his method still 
possesses interest enough to merit description. 

The specific weight of gases and vapours is generally ex- 
pressed by comparing the weight of a unit of volume of the 
gas or vapour with the weight of a unit of volume of at- 
mospheric air at the same pressure and temperature. Simi- 
larly the specific volume may be expressed by comparing 
the volume of a unit of weight of the gas or vapour with the 
volume of a unit of weight of atmospheric air at the same 
pressure and temperature. If we apply this latter method to 
saturated steam, for which we have denoted the volume of 
a unit of weight by s, and if we designate by v' the volume 
of a unit of weight of atmospheric air at the same pressure 
and temperature, then the quantity under consideration is 

given by the fraction - . 

For s we have the following equation, obtained from (37) 
by neglecting a : 

s = ^^^^x{m^n^) (41). 

For t?' we have by the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac 
the equation 

, -n^a + t 
P 

These two equations give 

J = ia("^-"^'^ (*2). 

If we form the same equations for any given temperature 
f^, and denote the corresponding value of - by {-'], we 
obtain 



(-7) = 7^7-(m-we*'«). 
\v Jo lia^ ' 



152 ON THE MECHAlNICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

If by the help of this equation we eliminate the constant 

E 
factor ^v- from (42), we obtain 

s fs\m-r^ m. 

V \v Jo m — ner^^ 

The question is now whether, for any given temperature 

t^, the quantity ( - j or its reciprocal (- ) > which expresses 

the specific weight of the steam at temperature t^, can be 
determined with sufficient certainty. 

The ordinary values given for the specific weight of steam 
refer not to saturated but to highly superheated steam. 
They agree very well, as is known, with the theoretical 
values which may be deduced from the well-known law as 
to the relation between the volume of a compound gas, and 
those of the gases which compose it. Thus e.g. Gay-Lussac 
found for the specific weight of steam the experimental value 
0*6235; whilst the theoretical value obtained by assuming 
two units of hydrogen and one unit of oxygen to form, by 
combining, 2 units of steam, is 

2 X 006926 X 1-10563 ^ ^„^ 
^ = 0*622. 

This value of the specific weight we cannot in general 
apply to saturated steam, since the table in the last section, 

which gives the values of -7-1 — ), indicates too large a 

dtKpsJ 

divergence from the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac. On 
the other hand the table shews that the divergences are 
smaller as the temperature is lower; hence, the error will' 
be insignificant if we assume that at freezing temperature 
saturated steam follows exactly the law of Mariotte and Gay- 
Lussac, and accordingly take 0*622 as the specific heat at 
that temperature. In strict accuracy we must go yet further 
and put the temperature, at which the specific weight of 
saturated steam has its theoretical value, still lower than 
freezing point. But, as it would be somewhat questionable 
to use equation (37), which is only empirical, at such low 
temperatures, we shall content ourselves with the above 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 



153 



assumption. Thus giving to t^ the value 0, and at the same 
time putting ( - ) = 0*622 and therefore ( - ) = nTfioo » ^^ ^^" 
tain from equation (43) 

s ^ m^n^ .... 

V 0-622 (m-ri) ^ ^* 

From this equation, using the values for m, n, and k 

s 
given in (37a), the quantity -7, and therefore the quantity s, 

may be calculated for each temperature. The foregoing 
equation may be thrown into a more convenient form by 
putting 

-, = ilf-JW (45), 

V 

and by giving to the constants M, i\r, and a the following 
values, calculated from those of m, n, and k : 

Jf= 1-663; JV^ = 005527; a = 1007164... (45a). 
To give some idea of the working of this formula, we give 
in the following table certain values of ~, and of its re- 



V 



V 



ciprocal - , which for the sake of brevity we shall denote by 



8 



the letter d, already used to designate specific weight. 



t 


00 


500 


1000 


1500 


20()0 


8 


1-608 


1*585 


1-550 


1-502 


1-433 


d 


0-622 


0-631 . 


0-645 


0-666 


0-698 



The result that saturated steam diverges, so widely as the 
above formulae and tables indicate, from the law of Mariotte 
and Gay-Lussac, which had been previously applied to it 
without reserve, met at first, as mentioned in another place, 
with the strongest opposition, even from very GomijetOiTAi 



154 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



judges. The author believes however that it is now generally 
accepted as correct. 

It has also received an experimental verification by the 
experiments of Fairbaim and Tate*, published in 1860. The 
results of their experiments are compared in the follow- 
ing table, on the one hand with the results previously ob- 
tained by assuming the specific weight to be 0*622 at all 
temperatures, and on the other hand with the values cal- 
culated by equation (45). 



Volume of a 


, Eilogramme of Saturated 


Temperature 
in Degrees 
Centigrade. 


Steam in Cubic metres. 


Values 

previously 

obtained. 


By Equation 
(45). 


By Experi- 
ment. 


58-210 


8-38 


8-23 


8-27 


68-52 


5-41 


5-29 


5-33 


70-76 


4-94 


4-83 


4-91 


77-18 


3-84 


3-74 


3-72 


77-49 


3-79 


3-69 


3-71 


79-40 


3-52 


3-43 


3-43 


83-50 


3-02 


2-94 


3-05 


86-83 


2-68 


2-60 


2-62 


92-66 


2-18 


2-11 


2-15 


117-17 


0-991 


0-947 


0-941 


118-23 


0-961 


0-917 


0-906 


118-46 


0-954 


0-911 


0-891 


124-17 


0-809 


0-769 


0-758 


128-41 


0-718 


0-681 


0-648 


130-67 


0-674 


0-639 


0-634 


131-78 


0-654 


0-619 


0-604 


134-87 


0-602 


0-569 


0-583 


137-46 


0-562 


0-530 


0-514 


139-21 


0-537 


0-505 


0-496 


141-81 


0-502 


0-472 


0-457 


142-36 


0-495 


0-465 


0-448 


144-74 


0-466 


0-437 


0-432 



This table shews that the values given by experiment agree 
much better with those calculated by the author's equation 
than with the values previously obtained ; and that the ex- 



* Proc. Jtoyal Soc, 18S0, and Phil, Mag,, Series iv. Vol. xxi. 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 155 

perimental values are in general yet further removed from 
those previously obtained than are the values derived from 
the author's formula 

§ 10. Determination of the Mechanical Equivalent of 
Heat from the behaviour of Saturated Steam. 

Since we have determined the absolute values of s, with- 
out assumiug the mechanical equivalent of heat to be known, 
we may now apply these values, by means of equation (17), 
to determine the mechanical equivalent itself. For this 
purpose we may give that equation the following form : 

E 7^(»-'') («)• 

The coeflScient of 5 — <7 in this equation may be calculated 
for diflferent temperatures by means of Kegnault's tables. For 
example, to calculate its values for 100**, we have given for 

dj} 

-^ the value 27*20, the pressure being reckoned in milli- 
metres of mercury. To reduce this to the measure here em- 
ployed, viz. kilogrammes per square metre, we must multiply 
by the weight of a column of mercury at temperature 0", 
1 square metre in area and 1 millimetre in height, that is by 
the weight of 1 cubic decimetre of mercury at ff^. As Regnault 
gives this weight at 13*596 kilogrammes, the multiplication 
gives us the number 369*8. The values of (a + t) and of r 
at 100^ are 373 and 536*5 respectively. Hence we have 

^^"^ ^d^ 373 X 369*8 _^,^ 
; " 536*5 ^"^^^^ 

and equation (46) becomes 

^=257(5-0-) ;.(47). 

We have now to determine the quantity (s — a-), or, since o- is 
known, the quantity s for steam at 100®. The method formerly 
pursued, i.e. to use for saturated steam the same specific 
weight, which for superheated steam had been found by 
experiment or deduced theoretically from the condensation of 



156 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

water, led to the result, that a kilogram of steam at 100® 
should have a volume of 1*696 cubic metres. From the fore- 
going, however it appears that this value must be consider- 
ably too large, and must therefore give too large a. value for 
the mechanical equivalent of heat. Taking the specific heat 
as calculated by equation (45), which for 100® is 0*645, we 
obtain for s the value 1*638. Applying this value of s we 
get from equation (47) 

^ = 421 (48). 

This method therefore gives for the mechanical equivalent 
of heat a value which agrees in a very satisfactory manner 
with the value found' by Joule from the friction of water, and 
with that deduced in Chapter II. from the behaviour of 
gases ; both of which are about equal to 424. This agree- 
ment may serve as a verification of the author's theory as to 
the density of saturated steam. 

§ 11. Gjmplete Differential Equation for Q in the case of 
a body composed both of liquid and vapour. 

In § 1 of this chapter we expressed the two first diflFer- 
ential coefficients of Q, for a body consisting both of liquid 
and vapour, by equations (7) and (8), as follows: 

dm ^' 

Hence we may form the complete difierential equation of the 
first order for Q, as follows : 

dQ = pdm+ Im (ff- (7) + Jlfol dT, (49). 

By equation (12) we may put 

TT_p_dp _^p_ 

whence equation (49) becomes 

dQ=^pdra+\m(^--^-^MG\dT (50). 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 157 

Since /> is a function of T only, and therefore 

we have dQ^d{mp) + U^-^MC\ dT (51), 

or dQ = Td(^rf)-^MGdT...., (52). 

These equations are not integrable if the two quantities, whose 
differentials are on the right-hand side, are independent of 
each other, and the mode of the variations thus left undeter- 
mined. They become integrable as soon as this mode is deter- 
mined in any way. We can then perform with them calcu- 
lations exactly similar to those given for gases in Chapter II. 
We will for the sake of example take a case which on 
the one hand has an importance of its own, and on the other 
derives an interest from the fact that it plays a prominent 
part in the theory of the steam-engine. The assumption is 
that the mass consisting both of liquid and vapour changes 
its volume, without any heat being imparted to it or taken 
from it. In this case the temperature and magnitude of the 
gaseous portion also sutfers a change, and some external 
work, positive or negative, must at the same time be per- 
formed. The magnitude m of the gaseous portion, its volume 
v, and the external work TF, must now be determined as 
functions of the temperature. 

§ 12. Change of the Gaseous Portion of the Mass. 

As the mass within the vessel can neither receive nor 
give off any heat, we may put dQ = 0. Equation (52) then 
becomes: 



Td(^^^+MGdT=^0 (53). 



If we divide this equation by E, the quantities p and (7, which 
relate to the mechanical measure of heat, change into r and 
c, which relate to the ordinary measure of heat. If we also 
divide the equation by T, it becomes: 



d(^f^+Mc^^O (53a). 



158 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

The first member of this equation is a simple differential, 
and may at once be integrated : the integration of the second 
is also always possible, since c varies only with the tempera- 
ture T, If we merely indicate this integration, and denote 
the initial values of the various magnitudes by annexing 
the figure 1, we obtain the following equation: 



or 



^.-"^-MJV^ (54). 



Actually to perform the integration thus indicated, we 
may employ the empirical formula for c given by Regnault. 
For water this formula, already given in (27), is as follows : 

c = 1 + 000004 + 00000009^. 

Since c is thus seen to vary very slightly with the tempera- 
ture, we will in our calculations for water assume c to be 
constant, which will not seriously affect the accuracy of the 
results. Hence (54) becomes: 



mr m.r. ,, . T .^^. 

-Y'^-^-Mclog-^ {oo), 



whence 



m 



= f(^-if«log|) (56). 



If we here substitute for r the expression given in (28), or in 
a simpler form in (30), then m will be determined as a func- 
tion of temperature. 

To give a general idea of the values of this function, 
some values have been calculated for a special case, and col- 
lected in the following table. The assumption is that the 
vessel contains at first no water in a liquid condition, but 
is filled with steam at its maximum density, so that in 
equation (56) we may put m, = if. Let there now be an 
expansion of the vessel. A compression would not be ad- 
missible, because on the assumption of the absence of water 
at the commencement, the steam would not remain at its 



SATURATED VAPOUR. 



159 



maximum density, but would be superheated by the heat 
developed in the compression. In expansion on the other 
hand the steam not only remains at its maximum density, 
but a part of it is precipitated as water ; and the diminution 
of m thus produced is exhibited in the table. The initial 



m 



temperature is taken at 150" C, and the values of ^ are 

given for the moments when the temperature has sunk 
through expansion to 125**, 100^ etc. As before, the tem- 
perature is reckoned from freezing point, and is denoted by 
ti to distinguish it from the absolute temperature T. 



t 


1500 


1250 


lOQO 


750 


500 


250 


m 
M 


1 


0-956 


0-911 


0-866 


0-821 


0-776 



§ 13. Relation between Volume and Temperature. 

To express the relation which exists between the volume 
V and the temperature, we may first apply equation (5) : 

V = mu + Ma-. 

The quantity c, which expresses the volume of a unit of 
weight of the liquid, is a known function of temperature, and 
the same is therefore true of M<t. It remains to determine 
mu. For this purpose we need only substitute in equation 
(55) the expression for r given in equation (17). Thus we 
obtain 



whence 



rrm dp Tn^ T^ 



(57). 



miA = 



dp 



'"^^> - Jfc log -J) (58). 



dp 



The diflferential coeflScient -—p may be considered as known, 

since |) is a known function of the temperature ; and there- 
fore this equation determines the product mu, and thence, by 
the addition of Jfa, the required quantity v. 



160 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



The following table gives a series of values of the quotient 

— , calculated by this equation for the same case as was treated 

in the last table. Under these are placed for the sake of 

comparison the values of -- , which would hold if the two 

ordinary assumptions in the theory of the steam-engine were 
correct : viz. (1) that steam in expansion remains at its maxi- 
mum density without any part of it condensing; (2) that 
steam follows the law of Mariutte and Gay-Lussac. On these 
assumptions we shall have 

V p^ T 



v^ p 



t: 



t 


1500 


1250 


1000 


750 


500 


250 


V 

P T, 


1 
1 


1-88 
1-93 


3-90 
4-16 


9-23 
10-21 


257 

29-7 


88-7 
107-1 



§ 14. Determination of the Work as a fwnction of Tem- 
perature. 

It remains to determine the work done during the change 
of volume. For this we have the equation 



W 



= I pdv 

J Vi 



(59). 



But by equation (5), taking the magnitude a- (which is 
generally small and very slightly variable) as constant, we 
have : 

dv = d (mu), 
whence 

pdv=pd{mu), 

which may be also written thus 



pdv = d {mup) — mu -&j dT 



(60). 



SATURATED VAPOUR. IGl 

In this equation we may substitute for rnu -~ the expres- 
sion given in equation (57), and may then perform the inte- 
gration. The result however is obtained in a more convenient 
form as follows. By (13) we have: 

and from (53) we obtain 

'^dT^d(mp) + MCdT; 

hence 

mu ^dT^d(mp) + MCdT. 

Equation (60) now becomes 

pdv = d {mup) — d (mp) — MCdT 

=^-d[m(p-up)]--MCdT (61). 

Integrating this equation we obtain 

W = m,(p,^uj>;)-'m{p^up) + MG{T,''T)...(Q2), 

If in this equation we substitute for p and C, according to 
equation (14), the values Mr and Ec, and collect together the 
terms which contain J? as a factor, we have : 

F = wt^p - m,t*j2?, 4- ^ [m/j - wr + if c (T^ - T)] ... (63) . 

From this equation we may calculate TT, since mr and 
Witt are already known from the equations (56) and (58). This 
calculation has been made for the same case as before, and 

the values of -tt, i.e. of the work done by a unit of weight 

during expansion, are given in the following table ; the unit 
of weight is here a kilogram and the unit of work a kilo- 
pwnmetre. The value used for E is 423*55, as found by 
Joule. 

As a comparison with the numbers of this table it may be 

c. W 



162 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



again mentioned that the valae obtained for the work done 
during the actual formation of steam, as this overcomes the 
external pressure, is 18700 kilogrammetres per kilogram of 
water, evaporated at temperature 150^ and at the correspond- 
ing pressure. 



t 150» 


125« 


\(Xfi 


75« 


50° 25® 


IT 
M 



iidoo 


23200 


35900 


49300 


63700 



■•'s 



1^ 



CHAPTER Vir. 



i*USIOK AND VAPORIZATION OP SOLID BODIES; 

1. Fundamental Eqvjations for the process of Fusion. 

Tiilst in the case of vaporization the influence of the ex^ 
I pressure was early observed, and was everywhere taken' 
iccount, it had hitherto been left out of account in the* 
)f fusion, where it is much less easily noticed. A little- 
leration however shews that, if the volume of a body 
:es during fusion, the external pressure must have 
iuence on the process. For, if the volume increases, an* 
we of pressure will make the fusion more difficult, 
ce it may be concluded that a higher temperature is 
sary for fusion at a high than at a low pressure. If on 
bher hand the volume decreases, an increase of pressure 
acilitate the fusion, and the temperature required will 
IS, as the pressure is greater. 

3 examine more exactly the connection between pressure 
nsion-point, and the peculiar changes which are some- 
connected with a change of pressure, we must form the 
ions which are supplied for the process of fusion by the 
fundamental principles of the Mechanical Theory of 
For this purpose we pursue the same course as for 
ization. We conceive an expansible vessel containing 
iain quantity M oi b, substance, which is partly in the 
and partly in the liquid condition. . Let the liquid part 
the magnitude m, and therefore the solid part the mag- 
e JIf — w. The two together are supposed to fill the 
I completely, so that the content of the vessel is equal 
the volume of the body. 

? this volume v and the temperature T are given, the 
litude m is thereby determined. To prove this, let ua 

W— ^L 



164 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

first suppose that the body expands during fusion. Let it be 
also in such a condition that the temperature T is exactly the 
melting temperature at that particular pressure. Now if in 
this condition the magnitude of the liquid part were to 
increase at the expense of the solid, the expansion which 
must then result would produce an increase of pressure 
against the walls of the vessel, and therefore an increased 
reaction of the walls against the body. This increased pres- 
sure would produce a rise in the fusion-point, and since the 
existing temperature would then be too low for fusion, a 
solidification of the liquid part must begin. If on the con- 
trary the solid part were to increase at the expense of the 
liquid, the point of fusion would thereupon sink, and since 
the existing temperature would then be higher than the 
fusion-point, a fusion of the solid part must begin. Next, if 
we make the opposite assumption, viz. that the volume 
decreases during fusion, then if the solid part increase there 
must be a rise of pressure and in consequence a partial 
melting, and if the liquid part increase there must be a fall 
in pressure and in consequence a partial solidification. Thus 
on either assumption we have the same result, viz. that only 
the original proportions of the liquid and solid parts (which 
proportions correspond to the pressure which gives a tem- 
perature of fusion equal to the given temperature) can be 
permanently maintained. Since then the magnitude m is. 
determined by the temperature and volume, this volume will 
conversely be determined by the temperature and the mag- 
nitude m; and we may choose T and m as the variables 
which serve to determine the condition of the body. It now 
remains to express jp as a function of T, Here we may 
again apply equations (1), (2), (3) of the last chapter, viz.: 

dTKdrn) dm [dTj ''dT^din' 

dT\dm) dm\dT) T^ dm' 

dm dT dm * 

If we denote by <7, as before, the specific volume (or volume 
of a unit of weight) for the liquid condition of the body, 



FUSION AND VAPORIZATION OF SOLID BODIES. 165 

and the specific volume for the solid condition by t, we have 
for the total volume v of the body, 

V = ma + ( Jf — w) T, 
or V— m{a- ''t) + Mr (1), 

whence dM^'^^'^ (^^• 

If further we denote the heat effusion for a unit of weight by 
p\ we may put 

diil-P (^)- 

To express -^, the other diflferential coefficient of Q, we 

must employ symbols for the specific heat of the body in the 
liquid and in the solid condition. Here, however, we must 
make the same remark as in the case of vaporization, viz. 
that it is not the specific heat at constant pressure which is 
treated of, but the specific heat for the particular case in 
which the pressure alters with the temperature in such a way 
that the temperature shall always be the temperature of 
fusion for that particular pressure. In the case of vaporiza- 
tion, where the changes of pressure are generally small, it 
was possible to neglect the influence of the change of pressure 
on the specific heat of the liquid body, and to consider the 
specific heat of a liquid body, as found in the formula, to be 
equivalent to the specific heat at constant pressure. In the 
present case small changes of temperature produce such 
great changes of pressure, that the influence of these on the 
specific heat must not be neglected. We will, therefore, under 
the present circumstances, denote by C the specific heat of 
the liquid, which in the formula for vaporization we denoted 
by C. The specific heat of the solid body may be de- 
noted in this case by IC. Applying these symbols we may 
write 

^^mC' + {M-m)K', 
or ^9^=m{C'-K')+MK' (4). 



166 OS THE MECHANICAL THEOBT OF HEAT. 

Pxom equations (3) and (4) we have 



±fdQ\_dl 

dT\dm)~dT ^ '' 



dm ^ 

Inserting these values, jand the value for -^ given in (3), in 
the above differential equations, we obtain 

^^ + K'-C'^i.-r)'^ .7). 

%+^'-(^'='t («>• 

p' = T{<r-T)^ (9). 

In these equations the heat is supposed to be measured by 
mechanical units. If the heat is to be measured in ordinary 
units, we may use the following symbols : 

, G J, K ' P /I A\ 



The equations then become 

dT 



*''-'''-¥{%) <"). 



<7r' r' 

^+k'-c' = '^ (12). 



T(a-T)/dp 



© (^«)- 



These are the equations required, of which the first corre- 
sponds to the first Fundamental Principle, and the secbnd to 
the second, whilst the third is a combination of the other 
two. 



FUSION AND VAPORIZATION OF SOLID BODIES. 167 

§ 2. Relation between Pressure and Temperature of 
Fusion. 

The foregoing equations, only two of which are inde- 
pendent, may be applied to determine two quantities hitherto 
unknown. 

We will first use the last equation to determine the way 
in which the temperature of fusion depends on the pressure. 
The equation may be written 

f-^^ <")• 

This equation in the first place justifies the remark already 
made, that if a body expand during fusion the point of fusion 
rises as the pressure increases ; whereas if the body contracts 
the point of fusion falls. For according as a is greater or 
less than t so is the difference <r — t, and therefore also the 

differential coefficient -j- , positive or negative. Again, by 

this equation we may calculate the numerical value of —j- . 

We will calculate this value for the case of water. The vo- 
lume in cubic metres, or the value of <r, for a kilogramme of 
water at 4®C. is 0001. At freezing point it is a little greater, 
but the difference is so small that it may be neglected. The 
volume in cubic metres, or the value of r, for a kilogram 
of ice is 0001087. The heat of fusion for water, or the 
value of /, is according to Person 79. At freezing point T 
equals 773, and for^ we will take the value 424. Hence 
we obtain 

dT ^ 273x0-000087 

dp "" 424 X 79 • 

If the pressure is given not in mechanical units (kilograms 
per square metre), but in atmospheres, we must multiply the 

above value of -p- by 10333. This gives us 

^=-.000733, 
dp 

i.e. an increase of pressure of one atmosphere will lower the 
point of fusion by 000733 of a degree Cent, 



168 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



§ 3. Experimental Verification of the Foregoing Result. 

The conclusion that the melting point of ice is lowered 
by an increase of pressure, and the first calculation of the 
amount, are due to James Thomson, who derived from 
Camot's theory an equation which differs from our equation 

T . 

(14) only in this, that in the place of p it contains an un- 
known function of temperature, whose particular value for 
the freezing point was determined from Regnault's data on 
the heat of vaporization and pressure of steam. Sir William 
Thomson afterwards applied to this theoretical result a very 
accurate test by experiment*. 

In order to measure small differences of temperature, he 
prepared a thermometer filled with ether-sulphide, the bulb 
of which was 3J in. long and the tube 6 J in. Of this 6^ in. 
were divided in 220 equal parts, and 212 of these parts com- 
prised an interval of temperature of 3' Fahr., so that each 
part was about equal to 7^ of a degree Fahr. This thermo- 
meter was hermetically enclosed in a larger glass tube, to 
protect it from the external pressure, and so enclosed was 
placed in an Oersted press, filled with water and lumps of 
clear ice, and containing an ordinary air gauge to measure 
the pressure. When the thermometer had become stationary 
at a point corresponding to the melting point of ice at atmos- 
pheric pressure, the pressure was increased by screwing down 
the press. The thermometer was at once seen to fall, as the 
mass of water and ice assumed the lower melting tempera- 
ture corresponding to the higher pressure. On taking off 
this pressure the thermometer returned to its original position. 
The table below gives the fall of temperature observed for two 



Pressure. 


Fall of Temperature. 


Observed. 


Calculated. 


8-1 Atm. 
16-8 „ 


0-0590 C. 

0-129 „ 


0-0590 C. 

0-123 „ 



different pressures, and also the fall of temperature, as cal- 
culated for those same pressures by applying to temperatures 

* Phil. Mag.f Series iii. Vol. xxxvii. p. 123. 



FUSION AND VAPORIZATION OF SOLID BODIES. 169. 

dT 

as high as 16*8 atm. the value of j-, which was found in the 

last section, and which primarily relates to the ordinary at- 
mospheric pressure. 

We see that the observed and calculated numbers agree 
very closely together, and thus another result of theory 
has been verified by experiment. 

More recently a very striking experiment was performed 
by Mousson*, who by the applicatiorof enormous pressures 
melted ice which was kept during the experiment at a 
temperature of — 18** to — 20^. The pressure employed he 
calculates approximately at about 13000 atmospheres; on 
which it may be remarked that it may be possible to pro- 
duce the melting with a much smaller pressure, since with 
his arrangement all that could be known was that the ice 
had somehow melted during the experiment, and not the 
exact time at which the melting took place. 

§ 4. Eirperimerds on Substances which expand durinff 
Fusion. 

Bunsent was the first to institute experiments on sub- 
stances which expand during fusion, and of which the 
fusion point must therefore rise as the temperature in- 
creases. The substances he chose were spermaceti and 
paraffin. By an ingenious arrangement he obtained in an 
extremely simple manner a very high and at the same time 
measurable increase of pressure, and was able to observe 
portions of the same substance side by side under ordinary 
atmospheric, and under the increased pressure. He took a 
tube of thick glass about the size of a straw and 1 foot in 
length, and drew it at one end into a capillary tube 15 to 
20 inches long, and at the other end into a somewhat larger 
one only 1 J inches long. The latter, which was placed lowest 
in the apparatus, was bent round until it stood up parallel 
to the lower part of the glass tube. This short curved part 
was filled with the substance to be tested, and the larger 
glass tube with quicksilver, whilst the long capillary tube 
remained filled with air. Both capillary tubes were sealed 

* Pogg. Ann., Vol. cv. p. 161. 
t Pogg. Ann. J Vol. lxzxi. p. 562. 



170 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 



at the ends. On heating the apparatus the quicksilver 
expanded, rose in the longer capillary tube, and compressed 
the air within it. The reaction of this air compressed first 
the quicksilver and then the substance in the shorter tube, 
and the magnitude of the pressure, which was capable of 
rising to above 100 atmospheres, could be measured by the 
volume of air left in the upper tube. 

This apparatus was fixed on a board close to another 
arranged in the same way except that the upper air-tube 
was not sealed ; so that no compression of the air, and con- 
sequent rise of pressure, could take place. The two tubes 
were now plunged in water, the temperature of which was 
somewhat higher than the melting point of the substance 
to be tested. Thus when the lower tube filled with the 
substance was once completely under water, it was only 
needed to sink it still deeper in order to heat a larger part 
of the quicksilver, and so to obtain a higher pressure 
in the closed upper tube. Under these conditions Bunsen 
repeatedly melted the substance in both tubes, and then by 
cooling the water allowed it again to solidify, observing the 
temperature at which this took place. The result was that 
this solidification always took place at a higher temperature 
in the tube in which the pressure was increased than in 
the other. The following were the numerical results. 



Spermaceti. 


Pressure. 


Point of 

Solidification. 

1 


lAtm. 

29 „ 

96 „ 
141 „ 
156 „ 


47-70 C. 
48-3 „ 
49-7 „ 
50-5 „ 
50-9 „ 



Paraffin, 


Pressure. 


Point of 
Solidification. 


lAtm. 
85 „ 
100 „ 


46-3» C. 
48-9 „ 
49-9 „ 



FUSION AND VAPORIZATION OF SOLID BODIES. 171 

More recently Hopkins* experimented with spermaceti, 
wax, sulphur, and stearine, producing pressures by means of 
a weighted lever to 800 atmospheres and upwards. With all 
the above substances a rise of the meltiug point under an 
increase of pressure was observed. The particular tempera- 
tures observed with different pressures shewed however 
considerable irregularities. In the case of wax, with which 
the rise of temperature was most regular, an increase of 
pressure of 808 atmospheres produced a rise in the melting 
point of 15|* Cent. 

The calculation of the rise in the melting point from 
the theoretical formula cannot well be performed for the 
substances tested by Bunsen and Hopkins, since the data 
required are not known with sufficient accuracy. 

§ 5. Relation between the heat consumed in Fusion and 
the temperature of Fusion. 

Having applied equation (13), in § 2, to determine the 
relation between the temperature of fusion and the pressure, 
we wUl now turn to equation (12), which may be written as 
follows : 

g=C'-fc'+^y (15). 

This equation shews that, if the temperature of fusion is 
changed by a change of pressure, the quantity of heat r 
required for fusion also changes. The amount of this change 
can be determined from the equation. In this the symbols 
c and h' denote the specific heat of the substance in the 
liquid and in the solid condition, not however, as already 
observed, the specific heat at constant pressure, but the 
specific heat in the case in which the pressure changes with 
the temperature in the manner indicated by equation (13). 

The mode of determining this kind of specific heat will 
be described in the next chapter. Here we will merely 
by way of example give the numerical values in the case 
of water. The specific heat at constant pressure, i.e. that 
specific heat which is simply measured at atmospheric 
pressiure, has in the neighbourhood of 0® the value 1 for 
water, and, according to Personf, the value 0*48 for ice. 

* Report^ Brit, Assoc.^ 1854, p, 57. 
t Comptes BendtUf Vol. zxz. p. 526, 



172 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

The specific heat for the case here considered has on the 
contrary for water and ice the values c'=* 0*945 and fc'=0'631. 
For r' we may take Person's value 79. We thus obtain 

g.= 0-946 -0-631 + ^3 

= 0-314 + 0-289 
= 0-603. 

It is known that the freezing point of water can also 
be lowered by protecting it from every sort of disturbance. 
This lowering of temperature however only refers to the 
commencement of freezing. As soon as this has begun, a 
portion of the water freezes immediately such that the whole 
mass of water is thereby warmed again up to 0^ and the re- 
mainder of the freezing takes place at that temperature. 
There is therefore no need to examine more closely the change 
in the magnitude r which corresponds to a lowering of the 
temperature of this kind, and which is simply determined by 
the diflference of the specific heat of water and ice at constant 
pressure. 

§ 6. Passage from the solid to the gaseous condition. 

Hitherto we have considered the passage from the liquid 
to the gaseous and from the solid to the liquid condition. 
It may however happen that a substance passes direct from 
the solid to the gaseous condition. In this case three equa- 
tions will hold of the same form as equations (15), (16) 
and (17) of the last chapter, or (11), (12), (13) of this : we 
must only remember to choose the specific heats and specific 
volumes relating to the different states of aggregation, and 
the quantities of heat consumed in the passage from one con- 
dition to the other, in the manner corresponding to the pre- 
sent case. 

The circumstance that the heat expended is greater in 
the passage from the solid condition to the gaseous than 
from the liquid, leads to a conclusion which has already been 
drawn by Kirchhoff *. For if we consider a substance when 
just at its melting point, vapour may be developed at this 
temperature both from the liquid and from the solid. At 

• Pog0, Ann., Vol. cm. p. 206. 



FUSION AND VAPORIZATION OF SOLID BODIES. 173 

temperatures above the melting point we have only to do 
with vapour developed from a liquid, and at temperatures below 
with vapour developed from a solid, leaving out of account 
the special case mentioned in the last section, in which a 
liquid kept perfectly still remains fluid in spite of having 
reached a lower temperature. 

If for these two cases, i. e. for temperatures above and below 
the melting point, we express the pressure of vapour ^ as a 
function of temperature, and construct for each case the curve 
which has the temperatures for abscissae and the pressures 
for ordinates, the question arises how the curves correspond- 
ing to the two cases are related to each other at the common 
limit, viz. the temperature of fusion. In the first place, so 
far as concerns the value of p itsdf, we may consider it as 
known by experience to be equal in the two cases ; and 
thus the two curves will meet in one point at the tempera- 
ture of fusion. But with regard to the differential coeflScient 

~-i^ , the last of the above-named three equations shews that it 

has different values in the two cases ; and thus the tangents 
to the two curves at their point of intersection have different 
directions. 

Equation (17) of Chapter VI. which relates to the passage 
from the liquid to the gaseous condition, may be written as 
follows : 

dp __ Er 

dT^ T{8-<t) ^^^^• 

To form the corresponding equation for the passage from 
the solid to the gaseous condition, we should set on the left 
hand the pressure of the vapour given off by the solid body, 
which for distinction we may call P. On the right hand we 
must put, instead of a, which is the specific volume of the 
liquid, the specific volume of the solid which we may call t ; 
the difference thus indicated is however very small, since 
these two specific volumes differ very slightly from each 
other, and in addition are small in comparison with s, the 
specific volume of the substance as a gas. It is of more 
importance to substitute for r, which is the heat required to 
cause the passage from the liquid to the gaseous condition, 
the quantity of heat required for the passage from the solid 



174 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

to the gaseous condition. This latter equals r + r\ where r' 
is the heat required for melting. Thus in the present case 
the equation is : 

dP_ E{r^T') 

dT^ T{8-t) ^ '^• 

Combining this equation with (16), and neglecting the small 
diflference between <r and t, we have 

dT dT''T{8^a) ^ ^* 

If we apply this equation to water, we must put T= 273, 
r'= 79, 8 =» 205, o- = 0*001, and giving E the known value 424 
we have 

dP dp _ 424x79 _ 

dT ""dr" 273x205 ■""^^^• 

If we wish to express the pressure in millimetres of mer- 
cury, instead of kilogrammes per square metre, we must, as 
remarked in Chapter VI. § 10, divide the above result by 
13*596; then putting for p and P the Greek letters tt ana 
n, we have 

dn dTT __ ^ ^^, 

dT d?"""'"^- 

It may be added for the sake of comparison that the diflfe- 

dir 
rential coeflScient -™ has for 0** the value 0*33, according to 

the pressures which Regnault has observed at temperatures 
just over 0^ 



CHAPTER VIII. 



ON HOMOGENEOUS BODIES. 



§ 1. Changes of Condition without Change in the Con- 
dition of Aggregation. 

We will now return to the general equations of Chapter 
V. and will apply them to cases, in which a body undergoes 
changes which do not extend so far as to alter its condition 
of aggregation, but in which all parts of the body are always 
in the same condition. We will suppose these changes to be 
produced by changes in the temperature and in the external 
pressure. In consequence of these, changes take place in the 
arrangement of the molecules of the body, which are indi- 
cated by changes in form and volume. 

With regard to the external force, the simplest case 
is that in wlich an uniform normal pressure alone acts on 
tie body ; in this case no account need be taken of changes 
^ the body's form, in determining the external work, but only 
of its alteration in volume. Here we may take the condition 
of the body as known, if of the three magnitudes, tempera- 
^^^>J^e, pressure and volume, which we will denote as before 
"y 3^, p and v, any two are given. According as we choose 
for this purpose v and T, or p and T, or v and p, so 
■^^ obtain one of the three systems of equations, which in 
^apter V. are numbered (25), (26) and (27) : these equa- 
tions -^e will now use to determine the different specific heats 
®^d other quantities, related to changes in temperature, 
pressure, and volume. 



176 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 2. Improved Denotation for the Differential Coeffi- 
cients, 

If the above-named equations of Chapter V. are referred 
to a unit of weight of the substance, the differential coeffi- 

cient -7^ will denote in equations (25) the specific heat at 
constant volume, and in equations (26) the specific heat at con- 
stant pressure. Similarly -~ has different values in (25) 

and (27) and -p has different values in (26) and (27). Such 

indeterminate cases always occur where the nature of the 
question occasions the magnitudes chosen as independent 
variables to be sometimes interchanged. If we have chosen 
any two magnitudes as independent variables, it follows 
that in differentiating according to one we must take the 
other as constant. But if, whilst keeping the first of these 
ists one independent variable throughout, we then choose for 
the other different magnitudes in succession, we naturally 
arrive at a corresponding number of different significations 
for the differential coefficients taken according to the first 
variable. 

This fact induced the author, in his paper " On various 
convenient forms of the fundamental equations of the Me- 
chanical Theory of Heat,"* to propose a system of denotation 
which so far as he knows had not been in use before. This 
was to subjoin to the differential coefficient as an index the 
magnitude which was taken as constant in differentiating. 
For this purpose the differential coefficient was inclosed in 
brackets and the index written close to it, a line being drawn 
above the latter, to distinguish it from other indices, which 
might appear at the same place. The two differential co- 
efficients named above, which represent the specific heat 
at constant volume and at constant pressure, would thus be 

written respectively f-T^j_and ( Tm)_. This method was 

soon adopted by various writers, but the line was generally 

♦ Repcyrt of the Naturalists* Society of Zurich, 1865, and Pogg. Ann.i Vol 
cxxY. p. 353. 



ON HOMOGENEaUS BODIES. 177 

left out for the sake of convenience. More recently* the 
author introduced a simpler form of writing, which yet 
retained the essential advantage of the method. This con- 
sisted in placing the index next to d, the sign of differentia- 
tion. The brackets were thus rendered needless and also the 
horizontal line, because no other index is in general placed 
in this position. The two above-named differential coeffi- 

cients would thus be written -j^ and -j^ : and this method 

al al 

will be adopted in what follows. 

§ 3. Relations between the Differential Coefficients of 
Pressurey Volume, and Temperature, 

If the condition of the body is determined by any two of 
the magnitudes. Temperature, Volume, and Pressure, we 
may consider each of these as a function of the two others, 
and thus form the following six differential coefficients : 

djpi dj£ d£ djV dpT dJI 
dT' dv' dT dp* dv ' dp' 

In these the suffixes, which shew which magnitude is 

to be taken as constant, may be omitted, provided we agree 

once for all that in any differential coefficient that one of the 

"three magnitudes, T,^, v, which does not appear, is to be con- 

Jsidered as constant for that occasion. We shall however 

^^etain them for the sake of clearness, and because we shall 

^^oieet with other differential coefficients between the same 

^x:>iagnitudes, for which the constant magnitude is not the 

^ame as here. 

The investigations to be made by help of these six dif- 

^^f^rential coefficients will be facilitated, if the relations which 

xist between them are laid down beforehand. In the first 

lace it is clear that amongst the six there are three pairs 

^^vhich are the reciprocals of each other. If we take v as 

^cnstant, T and p will then be so connected that each may 

*^€ treated as a simple function of the other. The same holds 

"^ith T and v where p is constant, and with v and p when T 

* "On the principle of the Mean Ergal and its application to the mole- 
^tdar motions of Gases." Proceedings of the Niederrhein, Ges, fiir Natur- 
^nd Heilkunde, 1874, p. 183. 



1 e% 



178 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBY OP HEAT. 

is constant. Hence we may put 

dj dT' d^^dT' djp" dp ^ ^' 

dp dv dv 

To examine further the relation between these three 
pairs, we will by way of example treat ^ as a function of 
T and v. Then the complete diflferential equation for p is 

If p is constant, we must put in this equation, 

whence it becomes 
whence 

W'^dT'^^ — • ^'^^• 

By means of this equation combined with equations (1), 
we may express each of the six diflferential coeflScients by the 
product or the quotient of two other diflferential coeflScients. 

§ 4 Complete Differential Equations for Q. 

We will now return to the consideration of the heat taken 
in and given out by the body. If we denote the specific 
heat at constant volume by 0,, and at constant pressure by 
(7^, and take the weight of the body as unity, we have 

dT '' dT'' ^' 

We have also the equations (25) and (26) of Chapter V., 
which with our present notation will be written as follows ; 

dv dT' dp " ■ dT' 



ON HOMOGENEOUS BODIES. 179 

Hence we can write down the following complete diflferen- 
tial equations : 

dQ^C,dT+T^dv (3), 

dQ = C,dT-T^£^dp (4). 

From these two we easily obtain a third differential equa- 
tion for Qy which relates to v and p as independent variables. 
For multiplying the first equation by C^ and the second by 
(7,, subtracting, and dividing the result by G^ — (7„ we have 

These three equations correspond exactly to those obtained 
in Chapter II. for perfect gases, except that the latter are 
simplified by applying the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac. 
The equation expressing this law is 

pv = jRr, 
whence we have 

dT v' dT" p\ 
Substituting these values in the above equations, and in the 
last putting ^ for T, we get 

dQ = G,dT+^dv, 
dQ = C^dT- — dp. 

Jr 
C C 



P ^9 P V 



These equations are the same as (11), (15) and (16) of 
Chapter II. 

The equations (3), (4) and (5) are not immediately inte- 
grajble, as has been alreiady shewn with respect to the special 
equations holding for gases. For equations (3) aivd (V^ XJci^ 



180 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

follows from equations already given. If in the last equa- 
tions of the systems (25) and (26) of Chapter V. we use the 
symbols (7, and C^, and also the method above explained of 
writing the diflferential coefficients, we have 

dv " dT^' dp dr ^^^' 

Whereas the conditions which must be fulfilled, if (3) and 
(4) are to be integrable, are as follows : 

drC^^rpdlp d^, dj\ ^_m(Vv dv 
dv dr'^dT' dp dr dT' 

By a similar but longer process we may shew that equa- 
tion (5) is not integrable; as may ^.t once be concluded from 
the fact that it is derived from equations (3) and (4). 

These three equations thus belong to that class of com- 
plete dififerential equations which are described in the Intro- 
duction, and which can only be integrated if a further relation 
between the variables is given, and the path of the variation 
thereby fixed. 

§ 5. Specific Heat at Constant Volume and at Constant 
Pressure. 

If in equation (4) we substitute for the indeterminate 

d Y) 
dififerential dp the expression -^ dT, we introduce the special 

case in which the body changes its temperature by dT, the 
volume remaining constant. If we divide by dT we have on 

the left-hand side the diflferential coefficient -4jpf , which is 

dl 

the specific heat at constant volume and has been denoted 

by 0,. Hence we obtain the following relation between 

C, and C^ : 

^- ^- ^ ^ X ^ (7). 

Substituting in equation (5) the value of C^ — C, given 
by this equation, we obtain the following simpler form : 

dQ = C^^-£dv + C,^-^dp (8). 



ON HOMOGENEOUS BODIES. 181 

If by means of equation (7) we proceed to determine thQ 
specific heat at constant volume from that at constant pres- 
sure, it is requisite first to make a slight change in the 

equation. The differential coefficient -p^ contained therein 

expresses the expansion of the body upon a rise of tempera- 
ture, and may generally be taken as known, but the other 

differential coefficient -^ cannot in general be determined 

for solid and liquid bodies by direct experiment. However 
from equation (2) we have 

d^ 

dT dy 

dp 

In this fraction the numerator is the differential coeffi- 
cient already discussed, and the denominator expresses, if 
taken with a negative sign, the diminution of volume by an 
increase of pressure, or the compressibility of the body ; and 
this for a large number of liquids has be^n directly measured, 
whilst for solids it may be approximately calculated from the 
coefficients of elasticity. Equation (7) now becomes 

dp 

If the specific heats are expressed not in mechanical but 
in ordinary units, we may denote them by c, and c^ ; the equa- 
tion then takes the form : 

'' = '"+-£-1^ (7^> 

dp 

In applying this equation to a numerical calculation we 
inust remember, that in the differential coefficients the unit 
of volume must be the cube of the unit of length which has 



182 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

^been used for determining E : and that the unit of pressure 
must be the pressure which a unit of weight exerts on a unit 
of surface. If, as is usually the case, the coeflBcients of ex- 
pansion and compression refer to other units, they must be 
reduced to those above mentioned. 

Since the differential coeflScient -j- is always negative, the 

specific heat at constant volume must always be less than 
that at constant pressure. The other diflferential coefficient 

jrh is generally positive. In the case of water it is zero at 

the temperature of maximum density, and accordingly the 

two specific heats are equal at that temperature. At all 

other temperatures, both above and below, the specific heat 

at constant volume is less than that at constant pressure; for 

d V 
although the differential coefficient -^ is negative below the 

temperature of maximum density, yet, as it is the square of this 
which occurs in the formula, it has no influence on its value. 
As an example of the application of equation (7), we will 
calculate the difference between the two specific heats in 
the case of water at certain known temperatures. According 
to the observations of Kopp (see his tables in Lehrhuch 
der Phys. u. theor, CMmie, p. 204), we have the following 
coefficients of expansion in the case of water, its volume at 
4** being taken as unity : 

at 0' -0-000061, 
„ 25" +0-00025, 
„ 50" +0-00045. 

According to the observations of Grassi*, we have for the 
compressibility of water the following numbers, which express 
the diminution of volume upon an increase of pressure of one 
atmosphere, in the form of a decimal of the volume at the 
original pressure : 

at 0" 0-000050, 

25" 0-000046, 



» 



99 



50" 0-000044. 



* Ann, de Chim. et de Phys, 3rd ser. Vol. xxxi. p. 437, and Kronig's 
Joum, filr Physik des Auslandes, Vol. n. p. 129. 



ON HOMOGENEOUS BODIES. 183 

We will now, as an example, perform the calculation for 
the temperature of 25^ The unit of length may be the 
metre, the unit of weight the kilogram. We must then 
take the cubic metre as the unit of volume ; and, since a 
kilogram of water at 4* contains O'OOl cubic metres, we 

d V- 
must, in order to obtain -^, multiply the coefficient of ex- 
pansion given above by 0001. Thus we have 

^ = 0-00000025 = 25 X lO"'. 
dT 

For compression we must, by what has been said, take as 
unit the volume which the water contained at the tem- 
perature in question and at the original pressure (which latter 
we may assume to be the ordinary pressure of one atmosphere). 
This volume at 25® = 0001003 cubic metres. Further we 
have taken one atmosphere as unit of pressure, whereas we 
must take the pressure of 1 kilogramme on 1 square metre ; 
in which case a pressure of one atmosphere is expressed by 
10,333. Accordingly, we must put 

dj.v _ 0-000046 X 0-001003 _ ,. „ 

^"": 10:333 -^oxw . 

Further, we have at 25", T = 273 + 25 = 298 ; and for E 
vre will take Joule's value 424. Substituting these numbers 
in equation (76), we get 

298 25^ 10-^« ^..^^ 
'-"'^=^42i^45^l0^' = ^'^^^^- 

In the same way we obtain from the values given above 
for the coefficients of expansion and compression at 0® and 
50° the following numbers : 

at 0", Cp - c^ = 0-0005, 
„ 50^ c^-c„ = 0-0358. 

If we now give to Cp, or the specific heat at constant pres- 
sure, the experimental values found by Regnault, we obtain 
for the two specific heats the following pairs of values: 



184 ON THE MECHAXICAI. THEORY Ot* HEAT. 



at 0' 



., 26' 



« 50' 



ir' 



\c^ = 0-9095, 

(c, = 1-0016 
(c« = 0-9918, 

jc,= 1-0042 
Ic. = 9684. 



§ 6. Specific Heats under other circumstances. 

In the same way as we have determined the specific heat 
at constant volume in the last section, we may determine also 
the specific heat corresponding to various other circumstances, 
since we may by equation (4) fix its relation to the specific 
heat at constant pressure. 

Thus, if the circumstances are given under which the 
heating takes place, the two difierentials dT and dp are no 
longer independent, but the one is determined by the other. 

We can therefore write for dp the product -~ dT, in which 

-j^ is a known function of the variables on which the con- 
dl 

dition of the body depends. Substituting this product for 

dp in equation (4), dividing by dT, and denoting by G the 

quotient -^, which stands on the left-hand side of the equa- 
tion, and which, expresses the specific heat under the given 
circumstances, we obtain 

^^^^^^dT'^dT (^)- 

If the specific heat is to be expressed in ordinary units, 
we may use the sjrmbol c instead of G ; and the equation 
becomes 

^■"^ KdT'dT ^ ^^' 

We will employ this equation, by way of example, to de- 
termine the specific heats which came under consideration in 
the two last chapters, viz. (1) the specific heat of water, when 
in contact with steam at maximum pressure ; (2) the specific 



ON HOMOQENBOUS BODIES. ISS 

heat of water and ice, when the pressure changes with the 
temperature in such a way that the temperature of melting 
corresponding to the pressure at any moment is always equal 
to the temperature which exists at that moment. 

In the first case we have simply to give to -^ the value 

corresponding to the intensity of pressure of the steam. For 
the temperature 100° this value is 370, taking as unit of 
pressure a kilogram per square metre. With regard to 

jj^, the researches of Kopp give 0*00080 as the coefficient of 

expansion of water at 100°, taking the volume of water at 4* 

as unity. This number must be multiplied by 0*001, in order to 

d V 
obtain the value of -^ in the case when a cubic metre is 

dl 

taken as the unit of volume and a kilogram as the unit of 

weight: we thus obtain the number 0*0000008. Lastly we 

vmte for T the absolute temperature for 100°, or 373, and 

for E, as usual, 424. Then equation (9a) becomes 



373 
424 



c = C«- T^ X 0*0000008 X 370 = c^ - 0*00026. 



If we take for the specific heat of water at constant pres 
sure, aiid at 100°, the values derived from the empirical 
formula of Regnault, we obtain for the two specific heats 
which we wish to compare, the following simultaneous values : 

c^ = 1-013, 
c = 1-01274. 

It thus appears that these two quantities are so nearly 
equal, that it would have been useless to take account of the 
diflFerence betweeji them in the calculations as to saturated 
steam. 

The consideration of the influence of pressure on the 
freezing point of liquids shews that a great change in the 
pressure ojijy produces a very slight alteration in the freezing 

point; bejice in this case -i^ must be very large. If we 

assiunei according to the calculations in Chapter YIL, that au 



186 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT. 

increase of pressure of one atmosphere lowers the freezing 
point by 0*00733' C, we have 

dp ^ 10 333 ^ 
dT 0-00733 ^ 

hence equation (9a) becomes, giving to T the value at the 
freezing point, viz.. 273, and to E the value 424, 

c-c +273 10333^ ^_ . go^ooo^ 
^ - ''^ + 424 "" 000733 "" dT '''^ ^"**""" dT 

Applying this equation first to water, we will take Kopp*s 
value for the coeflScient of expansion of water at 0®, viz. 
— 0000061 ; then, using the kilogram as unit of weight, and 
the cubic metre as unit of volume, we have 

^== - 0-000000061 ; 

whence, from the equation above, 

c^c^- 0-055. 

As c^ is here = 1, being the ordinary heat unit, we have finally 

c = 0-945. 

Next, to apply the equation to ice, we will take the linear 
coefficient of expansion of ice at 0-000051, following the 
experiments of Schumacher, Pohrt, and Moritz ; whence the 
cubic coefficient will be 0*000153. In order to reduce this 
number to the required units, we must multiply it by 
0001087, the volume of a kilogram of ice in cubic metres: 
whence we obtain 

!^= 0-000000166. 
dl 

Substituting this value, the equation becomes 

I 

c = c^ -4- 0-151. 
According to Person* Cp = 0*48 : hence we have finally 

c = 0-631. 

* Comptes Benduit Vol. xzx. p. 526. 



ON HOMOGENEOUS BODIES. 187 

These values, 0*945 and 0'631, were those employed in Chap- 
ter VII. for the calculation by which the relation between 
the heat expended in fusion and the temperature of fusion 
was determined. 

§ 7. Isentropic Variations of a Body. 

Instead of determining the kind of variation of condition, 
which a body is to undergo, by means of an equation con- 
taining one or more of the quantities T, p, v, we will now 
lay down as a condition, that no heat is imparted to or with- 
drawn from the body during its variation. This is expressed 
mathematically by the equation 

dQ = 0. 

If this equation holds, we have further 

that is, the entropy S of the body remains constant. We 
will therefore give to this kind of variation the designation 
isentropic, already applied to the curves of pressure which 
correspond to it: and will characterize the diflferential co- 
efficients formed in discussing it by the index 8, 
If in equation (3) we put d^ = 0, we have 

K we divide this equation by dv, the differential coeflS- 

dT 
cient -T-, thus obtained, refers to the case of an isentropic 

Variation, and hence we must write : 

dv " c/dT ^^^''• 

Similarly we obtain from equation (4), 

d^_T^ d£ .... 

dp " g/ dT ^ ^• 

Applying either equation (5) or equation (7), we have 



188 ON THfi MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

, d.v G, df 

whence -,- =■ — tt rr^ • 

dp Gp d^ 

dT 
Applying equations (1) (2), this equation becomes 

^ = ^x^ (12). 

dp G, dp 

If here we give to (7, its value from (7a), we obtain 

d^ _d^ T fd^v\* 

H^-l^^-c.KdT) ^^^^' 

If we take the reciprocal of (12), we obtain the equation 

'dv-C^'^dv ^^^^• 

This equation, if transfonued in the same way as (12), 
gives 

'dv^'d^''~c\dT) ^^^^' 

These differential coefficients between volume and pres- 
sure, for the case of the entropy being constant, have been 
applied to calculate the velocity of propagation of sound in 
gases and liquids, as has been already described in Chap- 
ter II. for the case of perfect gases. 

§ 8. Special Forms of the Fundam&ntal Equations for 
an Expanded Bod. 

Hitherto we have always considered the external force to 
be a uniform surface pressure. We will now give an ex- 
ample of a different kind of force, and will take the case of 
an elastic rod or bar, which is extended lengthwise by a 
tensional strain, e.g. a hanging weight, whilst no forces act 
upon it in a transverse direction. Instead of a tensional we 
may take a compressive strain, so long as the rod is not thereby 
benti This we should simply treat in the formulae as a 
negative tension. The condition that no transverse force 
acts on the rod would be exactly fulfilled only if the rod were 



ON HOMOaENEOUS BODIES. 189 

placed in vacuo and thus freed from the atmospheric pres- 
sure. But, since the longitudinal strain, which acts on the 
cross section, is very large in comparison with the atmos- 
pheric pressure upon an equal area, the latter may be 
neglected. 

Let P be the force, and I the length of the rod, when 
acted on by the force and at temperature T. The length, 
and in general the whole condition, of the rod is under these 
conditions determined by the quantities P and T; and we may 
therefore choose these as independent variables. 

Let us now suppose that by an indefinitely small change 
in the force or temperature or both, the length I is increased 
by dl. The work Pdl will then have been done by the 
force P. Since however in our formulae we have taken as 
positive not the work done but the work destroyed by a 
force, the equation for determining the external work must 
be written 

dW^-Pdl (16). 

Taking Z as a function of P and Ty we may write this equa- 
tion as follows : 



dW^-^p[^^dP^§dT), 



, dW_ p dl dW_ dl 
Whence -^ r-^) dT""^ dT' 

Differentiating the first of these equations according to T 

and the second according to P, and observing that, since 

dP 
J^ and T are independent variables, -r^ = 0, we have 

dTKdP)" dPdT 
d (dW\_ dl p dH 
dPKdT)" dT dTdP' 

If we subtract the second of these from the first, and 
substitute for the difference on the left-hand side of the 
resulting equation the symbol already employed for the 
same purpose, viz. i?^^, we have 

A, = ^ (17). 



190 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

This value of D^j, we will apply to equations (12), (13), 
(14), (15) of Chapter V., substituting P for x in this parti- 
cular case throughout. We then obtain the fundamental 
equations, in the following form : 

d_ /dQ\ _ d_ (dQ\ _ d^ . 

dT\dP) dP\dfJ'"dT ^ ^' 

±(dQ\_d_(dQ\ l^dQ. 

dT\dP) dP\dT)" T dT ^^^^' 

g-^.7 w 



©--.^ m- 



d fdO\ ^ d^l 
dP 



§ 9. Alteration of Temperature during the extension q 
the Rod. 

"the form of equation (20) indicates a special relation 
between two processes, viz. the alteration in temperature 
produced by an alteration in lengthy and the alteration 
in length produced by an alteration in temperature. Thus 
if, as is usually the case, the rod lengthens when heated 

under a constant strain, and -^ is therefore positive, the 

equation shews that -^ is also positive ; whence it follows 

that, if the rod is lengthened by an increase in the external 
force, it must take in heat from without if it is to keep its 
temperature constant, or in other words, if no heat is im- 
parted to it, it will cool during extension. On the other 
hand if, as may happen in exceptional cases, the rod shortens 

when heated at constant pressure, and therefore -^ is nega- 

dO 

tive, then the equation shews that -^ is also negative. In 

this case the rod must give out heat, when lengthened by 
an increase of strain, if it is to preserve a constant tempera- 
ture ; and if no giving out of heat takes place it must grow 
warmer in lengthening. 



ON HOMOGENEOUS BODIES. 191 

The magnitude of the alteration of temperature which 
takes place if the force is varied, without any heat being 
imparted to or taken from the rod, is easily determined if 
we form the complete differential equation of the first order 
for Qf in the same way as we have already done- in the case 
of bodies under a uniform surface pressure. The differen- 

tial coefficient -Tp is determined by equation (20), in which 
we will write for ^ the fuller form ^. In order to ex- 

press the other differential coefficient -^ in a convenient 

form, we may denote the specific heat of the rod under 
constant strain by C>, and the weight of the rod by M. Then 
'we have 

dT ^' 
and the complete differential equation is as follows : 

dQ^MG^T+T^ (22). 

If we now assume that no heat is imparted to or taken 
firom the rod, we must put dQ = 0, which gives 

dpi 
dT 



0=^MGpdT+T'^dP. 



If we divide this equation by dP, the quotient -Tp ex- 
presses that differential coefficient of T according to P, in 
the formation of which the entropy is taken as constant; 

J rp 

it should therefore be written more fully •-^. We thus 

obtain the following equation : 

d^ T dpi .^ . 

'dJP^^MCp^dT ^'^•^''• 

This equation was first developed, though in a slightly 
different form, by Sir William Thomson, and its correctness 
was experimentally verified by Joule*. The agreement of 

♦ Phil, Trans,, 1859. 



192 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

observation and theory was specially brought out by a phe- 
nomenon occurring with India rubber, which had already 
been noticed by Gough, but was then observed also by Joule 
and verified by accurate measurements. So long as India 
rubber is not extended at all, or only by a very small force, 
it behaves, with regard to alterations in length produced by 
alterations in temperature, in the same way as other bodies ; 
i.e. it lengthens when heated and shortens when cooled. When 
however it is extended by a greater force its behaviour is 
the opposite; i.e, it shortens when heated and lengthens 

J 7 

when cooled. The differential coefficient -^ is thus positive 

in the first case and negative in the second. In accordance 
with this it exhibits the peculiarity that it is cooled by an 
increase of the strain, so long as the strain remains small, 
but is heated by an increase of the strain when the strain 
is large. This agrees with equation (23), according to which 

—p must always have the opposite sign to -^,. 

§ 10. Further Dedvx^tions from the Equations. 

The complete diflFerential equation (22) may also be so 
formed as to present T and I, or I and P, as the independent 
variables. For this purpose we must first state the relation 
which holds between the differential coefficients of the 
quantities T, I, and P. This relation will be expressed by 
an equation of the same form as (2), viz. : 

djF dpi diT __^ - rc%A\ 

W^dT'^'dP ^ '^'^'^^• 

First, to form the complete differential equation which 
contains T and I as independent variables, we must consider 
P as a function of T and Z, and accordingly write (22) in the 
form 



ON HOMOGENIEOUS BODIES, 193 

Transforming the last term by means of equation (24), 
we have 

dQ=.(MC, + T^x'^^)dT-T^dl (25). 

If we denote by (7, the specific heat at constant length, 
the coefficient of dT in this equation must be equal to MC^ ; 
whence 

^• = ^'+14^^ (26). 

Transforming this by means of (24), we have 

dP 

Equation (25) assumes then the following simplified 
form; 

dQ = MG,dT--T^dl (28). 

Secondly, to form the complete differential equation which 
contains I and P as independent variables, we must consider 
^ as a function of I and P. Equation (22) then becomes 



Transforming the coefficient of dP, we have 
dQ^M0/-^dl+(MC,+ T'^.'^y^dF. 

9 

f y equation (26) MO^ can be substituted/or the expression 
1^ brackets. The equation then becomes " 

dQ = MG,^dl + MC,^dP (29). 

We will again apply equations (28) and (29) to the case 
c. \3» 



194 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

of the rod when it neither receives nor gives out any heat, 
and therefore dQ^O. The first equation then becomes 



d,T_ T ^^d,P 



and the second 



dl MG, dT 

d,T 

dj a dP 



Xt^.-.. (30); 



_l G, 

dP^ (7p^^- 

dl 

But by equation (24) we may write the latter thus : 

dl_C^ dj . 

dP^G^^dP ^"^ ^• 

GiviDg to Ci its vialue according to (27), we have 

dl^dl T_ (dA^ . . 

dP^dP mgMt) ^ ^' 

The relation between length and stretching force which 
is expressed by the differential coefficient —p^ as here de- 
termined, is that which has to be applied to calculate the 
velocity of sound in an elastic rod, in place of the relation 

expressed by the diflferential coefficient — , which is commonly 

used, and which is determined by the coefficient of elasticity. 
In the same way, to calculate the velocity of sound in 
gaseous and liquid bodies, we must use the relation between- 

volume and pressure expressed by -|- in place of that ex— 

pressed by -^ . We may however remark that in treatin 

of the propagation of sound, in cases where the force P i 
not large, we may in equation (32), which serves to deter- 
mine ~ , substitute for the specific heat at constant tension. > 

denoted by C>, the specific heat at constant pressure, as 
measured in the ordinary way under the pressure of the 
atmosphere. 



CHAPTER IX. 

DETERMINATION OF ENERGY AND ENTROPY. 

§ 1^ General Equations. 

In former chapters we have repeatedly spoken of the 
Energy and Entropy of a body as being two magnitudes of 
great importance in the Science of Heat, which are determined 
by the condition of the body at the moment, without its 
being necessary to know the way in which the body has 
come into this condition. Knowing these magnitudes, we 
can easily make by their aid various calculations relating 
to the body's changes in condition, and the quantity of heat 
thereby brought into action. One of these, the Energy, has 
aheady been made the subject of many valuable researches, 
especially by Kirchhoff*, and the method of determining it is. 
therefore more accurately known. We will here treat of 
Energy and Entropy simultaneously, and set forth side by 
side the equations which serve to determine them. 

In Chapters I. and III. the two following fundamental 
equations, denoted by (III.) and (VI.) were developed : 

dQ^dU-vdW. (Ill), 

dQ^TdS, (VI). 

Here U and 8 denote the Energy and Entropy of the 
Wly, and dU and dS the changes produced in them by an 
indefinitely small change in the body's condition : dQ is the 
quantity of heat taken in by the body during its change ; 

* Pogg. Ann,^ Vol. cm. p. 177. 



196 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

dW th(3 external work performed; and T the absolute tem- 
perature at which the change takes place. The first equa- 
tion is applicable to any indefinitely small change of con- 
dition, in whatever way it takes place, but the latter can 
be applied only to such changes as are in their nature 
reversible. These two equations we will now write in 
the form : 

dJJ^dQ^dW (1), 

AS^^ (2). 

Their integration will then determine TJ and B. 

Here we must first notice a point which has already been 
mentioned with regard to energy in Chapter I., § 8. It is 
not possible to determine the whole energy of a body, but 
only the increase which the energy has received, whilst the 
body was passing into its present condition from some other 
which we choose as its initial condition ; and the same is also 
true of the Entropy. 

Now to apply equation (1). Let us suppose that the body 
has been brought into its present condition from the given 
initial condition, the energy of which we will denote by TJ^y 
by any convenient path, and in any way reversible or not 
reversible ; and let us suppose d?7 to be integrated through 
the range of this change in condition. The value of this 
integral will be simply IT"— TJ^, The integrals oi dQ and 
dW represent the whole quantity of heat which the body 
has taken in, and the whole external work which it has per- 
formed, during the change in condition. These we will de- 
note by Q and TT, Then we have the equation 

TJ^TJ.^Q-W. (3). 

Hence it follows that if for any mode of passing from 
a given initial condition to the present condition of the body, 
we can determine the heat taken in and the work performed, 
we thereby know also the energy of the body, except as 
regards one constant depending on the initial condition. 

Next to apply equation (2). Let us suppose that the body 
has been brought into its present condition from the given 
initial condition, the entropy of which we denote by /S^, by 
any path whatever, but by a process which is reversible; 



DETERMINATION OF ENERGY AND ENTROPY. 197 

and let us suppose the equation integrated for this change in 
condition. The integral of dS will have the value 8 — 8^: 
whence we have 



S=8,+f^ (4). 



Hence it follows that if for any passage of the body, by 
a reversible method but by any path whatever, from a given 

initial condition to its present condition, we can determine 

//JO 
-jp-f we shall thereby know the value of the entropy, ex- 
cept as regards one constant depending on the initial con- 
dition. 

§ 2. Differential Equations for the Case in which only 
Reversible Changes take place, and in which the condition of 
the Body is determined by two Independent Variables. 

If we apply both the equations (III.) and (VI.) to one 
and the same indefinitely small and reversible change in the 
body's condition, the element dQ will be the same in both 
equations, and may therefore be eliminated. Hence we 
have 

TdS--dU+dW (5). 

We will now assume that the condition of the body is 
determined by two variables, which, as in Chapter VI., we 
will generally denote by w and y, signifying by these certain 
magnitudes to be fixed later on, such as temperature, 
volume, pressure. If the condition is determined by os and y, 
then all magnitudes, the values of which are fixed by the con- 
dition of the body at the moment, without its being neces- 
sary to know the way in which the body has come into that 
condition, are capable of being represented by functions of 
these variables; in which functions the variables must be 
considered as independent of each other. Accordingly the 
entropy 8 and the energy U must be looked upon as 
functions of x and y. On the other hand, the external work 
W, as we have repeatedly observed, holds a completely dif- 
ferent .position in this relation. It is true that the differ- 
ential coefficients of W, so far as concerns reversible changes, 
may be considered as known functions of x and y : W itself 
however cannot be represented by such a function, and can 



198 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT. 

only be determined, if we liave given not only the initial 
and final conditions of the body, but also the path by which 
it has passed from one to the other. 
If in equation (6) we put 

dS = ^r dx + -j- dy, 
ax dy ^ 

dW=^dx + -^dy, 
tbat equation becomes 

As this equation must hold for any values whatever of dx 
and dy, it must hold for the cases amongst others in which 
one or other of these differentials is equal to zero. Hence 
it divides into the two following equations : 



(6). 



dx dx dx 

dy dy dy 

From these equations either S or U may be eliminated by 

a second differentiation. We will first take U, as this gives 

rise to the simplest equation. For this purpose we must 

differentiate the first of equations (6) according to y, and the 

second according to x. We shall write the second differential 

coefficients of Sand U in the ordinary manner : but the differ- 

dW dW 
ential coefficients of -^— and -7— we will write as follows : 

dx dy 

"j- ( -^- I and J- ( -7— ). This is with the same object as in 
dy \dx/ dx \dy I '^ 

Chapter V., viz. to shew that they are not second differential 

coefficients of a function of x and y. Finally we may observe 

that r, the absolute temperature of the body, which in this 



DKTEEMINATION OF ENERGY AND ENTROPF. 199 

itivestigation we assume to be uniform throughout the body, 
may also be considered as a function otx and y. We thus obtain 

dT^dS ^ ^cPS ^cPU ^ d /dW\ 
dy dx dxdy dxdy dy\dx)* 

dx dy dydx dydx dx\dy)' 

Subtracting the second of these equations from the first, 
and remembering that 

d^S d^S , d^U d^U 

, and 



dxdy dydx* dxdy dydx* 

we have 

dT^dS dT ^dS_d. fdW\ d fdW\ 
dy dx dx dy dy\dxj dx\dy )' 

. The right-hand side of this equation we have named in 
Chapter V., "the work difference referred to a?y," and 
have denoted it by D^] hence we may put 

T) - d (dW\ d (dW\ .^ 

'» dy\dx) dxVd^J ""^^^* 

and the previous equation becomes 

^x— - — X— = Z> (S) 

dy dx dx dy *^ ^ ^' 

This is the differential equation, derived from equation (5), 
'which serves to determine {8). 

Secondly, to eliminate 8 from equations (6), we write them 
in the following form : 

d8^1 dU IdW 
dx T dx "^ T dx' 

dS^ldU 1 dW 
dy T dy'^T dy' 



' "^ dy^ ldy[T dxj dx\T dyjy 



200 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT, 

Differentiating the first of these equations according to y, 
and the second according to x, we have 

d^S _1 d^U 1 dT dU d (1 dW\ 
dxdy^T^ dxdy T^ dy^ dx^ dy\T dxJ' 

d'S _1 d^U 1 dT dU dndW\ 
dydx T^ dydx t'^ dx^'^'^ dx\T dy)' 

Subtracting the second of these equations from the first, 
putting all the terms containing TJ in the resulting equation 
on the left-hand side, and multiplying the whole equation by 
y, we have 

dT dU_dT 
dy dx dx 

We will adopt a special symbol for the right-hand side of 
this equation, viz., 

'~ \dy\T dx) dx\T dy)\ ^^' ' 

and we may point out that between D^ and A^ there is the 
following relation: 

.* _,„ dTdW dTdW ,,„, 

Using this symbol, the above equation assumes the form 

dTdU^dTdU^ 

dy dx dx dy **' ^ '* 

This is the difierential equation, derived from equation 
(5), which serves to determine U. 

§ 3. Introduction of the Temperature as one of the 
Independent Variables. 

The above equations take a specially simple form, if the 
temperature T is chosen as one of the independent variables. 
If we put T=y,yfe have 

— = 1 — = 
dy * dx 



DETERMINATION OF ENEHGt AND ENTROPY. 



201 



We thus obtain from (10) the following expression of the 



relation between A^« and D 



Xjf 



«y • 



A =2!D -^ 
" " dx 



(12). 



Equations (8) and (11) also become 



das "■ 



dx 



^at 



(13). 



The differential coeflBcients of the two functions S and U 
with regard to x are thus known. For their differential 
coefficients with respect to T we will take the expressions 
which follow directly from (2) and (1) on the assumption 
that the condition of the body is determined by T and a?, viz. : 



dS^ldQ 



dS 

dT~ TdT' 

dU_dQ dW 
dT ~ dT dT 



" t 



(14). 



From equations (13) and (14) we can form the following 
complete differential equations : 



dS 



T dT "^ ' 



^^'i§'-w)'^^-^^''^ 



(15). 



Since 8 and U must be capable of being expressed as 
functions of T and x, in which functions these two variables 
inay be taken as independent of each other, the well-known 
condition of integrability must hold for the case of the two 
equations just given. For the first equation this condi- 
tion is 



or 



d (1 dQ\__dD,^ 
dxATdT) dT 

d fdQ\ _ rp dP,, 
dx\dT)'"^ dT 



(16), 



202 ON THE MKCHANICAI/ THEORY OF HEAT. 

which is equation (15) of Chapter V. For the second equa- 
tion the condition is 



ix\dT) dxKdT)" dT ^ '^' 



dx 

This equation can be easily shewn to depend on the last. 
For by (12) 



^xT -^ -*^«r 



dx ' 



Diflferentiating this equation according to 3^, we have 

dA^,__ dp^ _d,(iE\ 

dT ^^ dT ^ '' dT\dx)' 

Now, remembering that 

_ d^ (dW\ _ d^ (dW\ 
^''^dT\dx) dxVdTJ' 

we may write this equation as follows :■ 

dKr_^dD„ ±(dW\ 
dT ~ dT dxKdTj' 

On substituting this value of — ^ in equation (17), we 

brought back to the form of equation (16). 

We have now to determine 8 and U theAiselves, L^^'J 
integrating equations (15). Let us suppose that the ixx^^^^J 
has been brought into its present condition, by any pafr^tn 
we please, from an initial condition for which the quantiti — ^es 
T, S, X, U have the values T^, S^, x^, TJ^ respectively : SiW^^d 
let this particular change of condition give the range of t -ie 
integration. As an example^ let us suppose that the lK>-^r 
is first heated from the temperature T^ to tie temperatc^-?^ 
T, while the other variable keeps its initial value x^, 9i^^d 
then that this other variable changes its value from x^ to ^, 
while the temperature remains constant. . Then we have 



^ = ^n + 



(18). 



DETERMINATION OF ENERGY AND ENTROPY. 203 

In both these equations the first integral on the right-hand 
side is a simple function of T, whilst the second is a function 
of T and x. 

Let us now make the opposite assumption, viz. that the 
change of x first takes place at the initial value of T, and 
then the change of T at the final value of x. Then we 
obtain 

In both these equations the first integral on the right-hand 
side is a simple function of x, and the second of T and x. 

By what has been said above, we may choose any other 
path whatever, instead of that which we have taken as our 
example, in which path the changes of T and x may be 
transposed in any way, or may both take place at once 
according to any law. We should naturally in each special 
case choose that path, for which the data requisite to perform 
the calculation are most accurately known. 

§4. Special case of the Differential equations on the 
assumption that the only external force is a Uniform Surface 
Pressure, 

If we assume as the only. Es:temal Force a Uniform 
EVessure normal to the surface, we must put 

dW^-pdv. 

^ dW dv , dW dv 

aence -r^=P"7- and -7- =©-7-. 

dx ^ dx dy ^ dy 

rhe expressions for D^ and A^ then assume peculiar forms. 
rhose for D^ have been already considered in Chapter V. 
^e have first 



n —A. f ^\ ^ ( ^'^\ 
^^"dyy^dxj d^[Pd^)' 



idy \T dx) dx \T dy) \ 



204 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



In the last of these equations we will put for the sake of 
brevity : 



(20). 



whereby it becomes 

[jay \ ax J ax \ dyjj 

Performing the differentiation in these equations, and 
remembering that -jzir. = j..j„ , we have 



dxdy dydx 



j^ _dp dv dp dv 
**' dy dx dx dy 



\dy dx dx dy) 



(21). 



■«y 



(22). 



If the temperature T be selected as one independent 
variable, whilst the other remains x as before, the expressions 
become 



j^ _dp dv dp dv 



(2.3), 



^«-^^(Sx|-SxS) (^*)^ 



or, restoring to ir its value ■=, , 



^xr- J- (^^y X ^ dx^dT) / dx ^''*"'- 

The equations (15) then assume the following forms : 



i^'{§-^%y^ ^ (S4:-S4r)^ •■•«' 



DETERMINATION OF EjNERGY AND ENTROPY. 

or written in another form, 



205 



.{26a). 



If we further choose for the second variable, as yet unde- 
termined, the volume v, and thus put x = v,we have 

^»laiid^ = 0. 

Hence the preceding equations become 



_ldQ 
TdT 



dS=~^dT+^dv, 



dT 



_dQ 



(27). 



dU=2}dT+(T%~p)d 

If the pressure p be chosen as the second independent 
variable, so that x=p, we have 



and the equations become 



dS = ^ ^dT ~ ^^dp, 



^^-&T-fS)''-{^rT-4)" 



I 

I 



(28). 



§ 5. Application of the foregoing Equations to Homo- 
geneous Bodies, and in particular to Perfect Gases. 

For Homogeneous Bodies, where the only external force 
is a uniform pressure normal to the surface, it is usual, as 
at the end of the last section, to choose for independent 

Tariables two of the quantities T,v,p; and -^ then takes 

the simple significations which we have several times alluded 
to. Thus if T and v are the independent variables, and if 



206 ON THE MBCBLiNICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

the weight of the body be a unit of weight, --^ signifies the 

specific heat at constant volume : or, if T and p are the 
independent variables, the specific heat at constant pressure. 
Equations (27) and (28) become in these cases 

d8^%dT+%dv. 

^ '^^ • (29), 



dU^C^T+{Tfj,-p)dv 



d8 = ^dT-^dp. 



. (30). 



If we wish to apply these equations to a perfect gas, we 
may use the following well known equation : 

pv^RT. 

Hence, if T and v be selected as independent variables, 

dp _R 
dT" v' 

and equations (29) then become 

'^-<^.f-4') (31, 

dU=:C,dT J 

As in this case (7, must be regarded as a constant, these 
equations can at once be integrated, and give 

^-^.^OM^^RH'A (3,,. 

If we choose T and p as independent variables, we may 
put 

dT'-'p'''''^Tp'"y^ 



DKTIStMINATION OF BNEBGY AND ENTROPY. 207 

accordingly ^quatioixs (30) become 

'^=<'.f-*fl (38). 

dU=iC,-B)dT ] 

Whence we obtain by integration 

^ = ^, + (7,log|-51og£] ^3,^ 

The integration of the general equations (29) and (30) can 
of course only be accomplished if, in (29), p and C7, are 
known functions of T and t;, or if, in (30), v and C^ are 
known functions of T and jp. 

§ 6. Application of the Equations to a Body composed 
of matter in two Different States of Aggregation, 

As another special case we may select the state of things 
treated of in Chapters VI. and VII., viz. the case in which 
the body under consideration is partly in one state of aggre- 
gation and partly in another, and when the change, which 
the body may undergo at constant temperature, is such that 
the magnitudes of the parts in the two different states of 
aggregation are altered, with a corresponding change in the 
volume, but no change in the pressure. In this case the 
pressure p depends only on the temperature ; and we may 

therefore put -^ = 0, by which equations (25) and (26) are 

transformed as follows : 



dS = ^xfj,dT + %x^dx. 



I (35). 



As m Chapters VI. and VII., let us denote by if the weight 
of the whole mass, and by m the weight of the part in the: 
second state of aggregation ; and let us take m in place of x 



208 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORT OF HEAT. 

for the second independent variable; then equation (6), 
Chapter VI., becomes 

dv __ 

dm * 

for which, by equation (12), Chapter VI., we may substitute 

dv __ p 

dm rp <^P * 
dT 

Then the above equations become 



,c.= (§-,*)...,A--|J 



dm, 



(36). 



To integrate these equations we may take as a starting 
point the condition that the whole mass M is in the first 
state of aggregation, that its temperature is T^, and that its 

?ressure is the pressure corresponding to that temperature, 
'he passage from this to its present condition (m which 
the temperature is T, and in which the part m of the whole 
mass is in the second, and the part ilf — m in the first state of 
aggregation) may be supposed to take place in the following 
way : — First let the mass, still remaining entirely in the first 
state of aggregation, be heated from T^ to T, and let the 
pressure change at the same time, in such a way that it 
is always the pressure corresponding to the temperature at 
the moment : then let the part m pass at temperature T from 
the first to the second state of aggregation. The integration 
has to be performed according to these two successive stages. 
During the first stage dm = 0, and thus it is only the first 
term on the right-hand side which has to be integrated. 

Here -jL has the value MG^ where C signifies the specific 

heat of the body in its first state of aggregation, and for the 
case in which the pressure changes during the heating in the 
way described above. This kind of specific heat has been 
already discussed several times, and the conclusions drawn 
in Chap. VIII., § 6, shew that where the first state of aggre* 



DETERMINATION OF ENERGY AND ENTROPY. 209 

gation is the solid or liquid, and the second the gaseous, 
it may safely be taken, for purposes of numerical calculation, 
as equal to the specific heat at constant pressure. It is only 
at very high temperatures, for which the vapour tension 
increases very rapidly with the temperature, that the difiference 
between the specific heat C and the specific heat at constant 
pressures is important enough to be taken into account. 
[Further, during the first change the volume v has the value 
Ma-y where a is the specific volume of the substance in the 
first state of aggregation. During the second stage dT= 0, 
and therefore it is only the second term on the right-hand 
side of equation (3a) which has to be integrated. This inte- 
gration can be at once performed for both equations, since 
the coefficient of dm is a constant with regard to m. The 
resulting equations therefore are 



1- 



...(37). 



If in these equations we put m = or m = 3/, we obtain 
the entropy and energy for the two cases in which the mass 
is either entirely in the first or entirely in the second state of 
aggregation, under the temperature T, and under the pressure 
corresponding to that temperature. For example, if the first 
state is the liquid and the second the gaseous, then if we put 
^ = 0, the expressions relate to the case of liquid under tem- 
perature T, and under a pressure equal to the maximum 
Vapour tension at that temperature ; or if we put m = My they 
''elate to saturated vapour at temperature T. 

§ 7. Belations of the Expressions D<^ and A^^ 

In concluding this chapter it is worth whUe to refer aorain 

^ the expressions D^ and A^ which by (7) and (9) have the 

^•^llowing meanings : 

'''~dy\dx) dx\dyj* 

'^"" \dy\Tdx) dxKTdjjy 
C. \A^ 



210 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



These are both functions of x and y : but if to determine 
the condition of the body we choose instead of x and y any 
two other variables which we may call f and 77, we may form 
corresponding expressions D^y^ and A^, as follows : 



_ d (dW\ d (dW\ 



d^ ) di \T dv )_ 



(38). 



These are of course functions of f and 77, as the former 
were of x and y. But if we compare one of them, e.g. that 
for D^r,i with the corresponding expresssion for D^, we find 
that these are not simply two expressions for one and the 
same magnitude referred to different variables, but are 
actually two different magnitudes. For this reason D^^ has 
not been called simply the work difference, but the work 
difference referred to xy, so that it may be distinguished 
from D^, the work difference referred to ^rj. The same holds 
true of A^y and A^^. 

The relation which exists between D^^ and D^, may be 
found as follows. The differential coefficients which occur in 
the expression for D^r, in (38), may be derived by first forming 
the differential coefficients according to x and y, and then 
treating each of these as a function of f and rj. Thus we 
have 

dW_dW dx dW dy 

dS " dx ^ d^'^ dy ^ d^' 

dW^dW dx dW dy 
drj dx dt] dy dij' 

Differentiating the first of these equations according to rj 
and the second according to |, and again applying the same 
artifice, we have 

d_ /dW\ dxdx d (dW\ dx dy 

dx\dx ) d^drj dy\dx J d^ drj 



d fdW\ ^ 



dW d^ d^ /d_W\ dx dy 
dx d^drj dx\dy)drjd^ 
d fdW\dydy dW cPy 
dy\dy) df dr) dy d^drj * 



DETERMINATION OF ENERGY AND ENTROPY. 



211 



d (dW 

d^UvJ 



d (dW\ dxdx d^ fd'W\ dx dy 
dx\dx J d^dif] dy\dx J dr) d^ 
dW d^x _^/^F\d^dy 

dx d^drj dx\dy)d^drj 

d^ /dW\ dydy dW d^y 
dy\dy) d^ drj dy d^drj ' 



+ 



If we subtract the second of these equations from the first, 
all the terms on the right-hand side disappear except four, 
which may be expressed as the product of two binomial terms 
in the following equation : 

dv\d^) d^\dri)' 



/dx dy_^dx dy\ V d^ (^^\ 
\d^ drj drj d^J {dy \dx ) 

_d_(dW\ 
dx\dy J_ 



Here the expression on the left side is J?^,, and the expres- 
sion in the square bracket is D^.^. Hence we have finally 



-, /dx dy dx dy\ r^ 



Xlf 



(39). 



Similarly we may obtain 

'dx 



dy 



(39a). 



If we substitute one new variable only, e.g. if we keep the 

Variable x, but replace y by rj, we must put iz? = f in the two 

1 (i^ dx 

last equations, whence ;t^ = 1 and -7- = 0. The equations 

t'hen become 



-0^ = 1^., and A«, = |a., 



(40). 



If we retain the original variables, but chauge their order 
?f sequence, the expressions simply take the opposite sign, as 
^ seen at once on inspection of (7) and (9). Hence 

(41). 



D^ = - D^, and A,^ = - A^. 



\\— ^ 



CHAPTER X. 



ON NON-EEVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 



§ 1. Completion of the Mathematical Expression for ih^ 
second main Principle. 

In the proof of the second main principle, and in tt*-^ 
investigations connected therewith, it was throughout assume "^ 
that all the varijations are such as to be reversible. We mu^^^ 
now consider how far the results are altered, when tt^® 
investigations embrace non-reversible processes. 

Such processes occur in very different forms, although ^-^ 
their substance they are nearly related to each other. O rr^g ^ 
case of this kind has already been mentioned in Chapter I^B--) 
viz., that in which the force under which a body changes i ^*^ 
condition, e.g. the force of expansion of a gas, does n^^^ 
meet with a resistance equal to itself, and therefore do^^^ 
not perform the whole amount of work which it migfc*^ 
perform during the change in condition. Other cases of tfc»-^ 
kind are the generation of heat by friction and by tfc*-^ 
resistance of the air, and also the generation of heat by ^ 
galvanic current in overcoming the resistance of the wir"^- 
Lastly the direct passage of heat from a hot to a cold body, t>J 
conduction or radiation, falls into this class. 

We will now return to the investigation by which it was 
proved in Chapter IV. that in a reversible process the sum of 
all the transformations must be equal to zero. For one kind of 
transformation, viz. the passage of heat between bodies of 
different temperatures, it was taken as a fundamental principle |ii 
depending on the nature of heat, that the passage from a 
lower to a higher temperature, which represents negative 
transformation, cannot take place without compensation. On 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 213 

this rested the proof that the sum of all the transformations 
in a cyclical process could not be negative, because, if any- 
negative transformation remained over at the end, it could 
always be reduced to the case of a passage from a lower to a 
higher temperature. It was finally shewn that the sum of 
the transformations could not be positive, because it would 
then only be necessary to perform the process in a reverse 
order, in order to make the sum a negative quantity. 

Of this proof the first part, that which shews that the sum 
of the transformations cannot be negative, still holds without 
alteration in cases where non-reversible transformations occur 
in the process under consideration. But the argument which 
shews that the sum cannot be positive is obviously inappli- 
cable if the process is a non-reversible one. In fact a direct 
consideration of the question shews that there may very 
well be a balance left over of positive transformations ; since in 
many processes, e.g. the generation of heat by friction, and the 
passage of heat by conduction from a hot to a cold body, 
a positive transformation alone takes place, unaccompanied by 
any other change. 

Thus, instead of the former principle, that the sum of all 
the transformations must be zero, we must lay down our prin- 
ciple as follows, in order to include non-reversible variations : — 
The algebraic sum of all the transformations which occur 
in a cyclical process must always he positive, or in the limit 
equal to zero. 

We may give the name of uncompensated transformations 
to such as at. the end of a cyclical process remain over without 
anything to balance them ; and we may then express our 
principle more briefly as follows : — 

Uncompensated transformations must always he positive. 

In order to obtain the mathematical expression for this 
extended principle we need only remember that the sum 
of all the transformations in a cyclical process is given 

by— \-m-* Thus to express the general principle, we must 

write in place of equation V. in Chapter III., 



/' 



■f-<0 (IX). 



214 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Equation (VI.)> Chapter IIL, then becomes 

dQ<TdS (X.) 

§ 2. Magnitude of the Uncompensated Transformation. 

In many cases the magnitude of the Uncompensated 
Transformation is obtained directly from the equivalence 
value of the transformations, as determined by the method 
of Chapter IV. If for example a quantity of heat Q is 
generated by any process such as friction, and this is finally 
imparted to a body of temperature T, the uncompensated 

transformation thus produced has the value ^'. Again, if a 

quantity of heat Q has passed by conduction from a body 
of temperature 1\ to another of temperature T,, then the 

uncompensated transformation is^fyf— yr)« If a body 

has passed through a non-reversible cyclical process, and we 
wish to determine the resulting uncompensated transforma- 
tion, which we may call N, we have, by the principles 
explained in Chapter IV., the equation 



N 



-n «■ 



As however a cyclical process may be made up of several 
individual changes of condition in a given body, some of 
which may be reversible, others non-reversible, it is in many 
cases interesting to know how much any particular one of 
the latter has contributed towards making up the whole 
sum of uncompensated transformations. For this purpose 
we may suppose that after the change of condition which 
we wish to enquire into, the variable body is brought by any 
reversible process into its former condition. By this means 
we form a smaller cyclical process, in which equation (1) 
may be applied just as well as in the whole process. Thus 
if we know the quantities of heat which the body has taken 
in during this process, and the temperatures which appertain 

to them, the negative integral — / ~ gives the uncom- 
pensated transformations which have taken place. But as 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 215 

the return to the original condition, which has taken place 
in a reversible manner, can have contributed nothing to 
increase this sum, the expression above gives the uncom- 
pensated transformation which was sought, and which was 
caused by the given change in condition. 

If we examine in this way all the parts of the whole 
process which are non-reversible, and thereby find the values 
of N^, N^ etc., which must all be individually positive, then 
the sum of these gives the magnitude N relating to the 
whole cyclical process, without requiring us to bring under 
review those parts of it which are known to be reversible. 

§ 3. Expansion of a Gas unaccompanied hy External 
Work. 

It may be worth while to examine more closely those 
changes of condition, mentioned in § 1, which take place 
in a non-reversible manner because the resistances to 
be overcome are less than the forces at work ; our ob- 
ject being to^ determiue the amount of heat taken in 
during the process. As however there are a great number 
of different changes of this kind, which are produced in a 
great number of ways, we must confine ourselves to a few 
cases, which are either especially noteworthy on account of 
their simplicity, or have some special interest on other 
grounds. 

The general equation f5r determining the quantity of 
heat which a, body takes in, whilst it undergoes any given 
change of condition, reversible or non-reversible, is as 
follows : 

Q=U,-U,+ W (2); 

in which U^ and U^ are the energy in the initial and final 
conditions, and W is the external work done during the 
variation. 

To determine the energy we can employ the equations of 
Chapter IX. If the only external force is a uniform pres- 
sure, and if the condition of the body is determined by its 
temperature and volume, then we may use equation (29), viz. 



dU=C,dT+(T^P-p^dv (3). 



216 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

This must be integrated for a passage in some reversible 
manner from the initial to the final condition. If the 
temperature is equal in the two conditions, as we shall 
assume in the examples which follow, then the integration 
may be performed at constant temperature, and the result 
will be, if we denote the initial and final volumes by 
v^ and Vg, 

whence equation (2) beconfes 



«=£;(4M''^+^- (5)- 



As the first and simplest case we may take that in which a 
gas expands without doing any external work. We may sup- 
pose a quantity of the gas to be contained in a vessel and that 
this vessel is put in connection with another in which is a va- 
cuum, so that part of the gas can pass from one to the other 
wdthout meeting any external resistance. The quantity of 
heat which the gas must in this case take in, in order to keep 
its temperature unaltered, is determined by putting Tr=0 in 
the last equation ; thus we have 



^=i^(^5'-^)^" (^)- 



If we make the special assumption that the gas is a 
perfect one, and therefore that^?; =i2r, we have 

dp _R 

dT" v' 
whence 

whence (6) becomes 

<? = (7). 

As already mentioned, Gay-Lussac, Joule, and Regnault 
have experimented on expansion apart from external work. 
Joule annexed to his experiments, described in Chapter II., by 
which he determined the heat generated in the compression 



rig. 18. 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 

r, other experiments upon 
expansion of air. The re- 
r R, shewn in Fig. 6, was 

with air condensed to 22 
spheres, and was then con- 
d, in the manner shewn in 
18, with an empty receiver 
3 that the communication 
sen the two was only closed 
.e cock. The two receivers 
placed together in a water 
meter, and the cock was then opened, whereupon the 
assing over to the receiver R expanded to about twice 
rmer volume. The calorimeter shewed no loss of heat, 
thus, so far as could be measured by this apparatus, 
laf seemed to be required for the expansion of the air. 
he above result however holds only for the process as a 
1, and not for its individual parts. In the first receiver, 
[ich the expansion takes place and the motion originates, 
is required; in the second, on the contrary, in which the 
in ceases, and the air which rushes in first is compressed 
at which follows, heat ia generated ; and so also in the 
) where friction has to be overcome during the passi^. 

however the beat generated and the heat required are 
, they cancel each other; and we may say, so far as the 
al result of the whole process is concerned, that no 
iditure of heat takes place. 



) observe specially the different parts of the process, 
varied his experiment by placing the two receivers and 



218 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the pipe carrying the cock in three different calorimeters, as 
shewn in Fig. 19. Then the calorimeter in which was the 
receiver containing the air shewed a loss of heat, and the two 
other calorimeters again. The whole gain and the whole loss 
were so nearly equal that Joule considers the difference to be 
within the limits of error of the observation. 

§ 4. Expansion of a Gas doing Partial Work, 

If a gas in expanding has a resistance to overcome, but one 
which is less than its expansive force, then an amount of work 
will be performed less than the amount which the gas could 
perform during the expansion. An example of this is the 
case of a gas rushing into the atmosphere out of a vessel 
in which it has a pressure higher than atmospheric pressure. 

In this case also the process is a complicated one. We 
have not only to deal with the work necessary for the 
expansion and the corresponding consumption of heat, but in 
addition heat is consumed in producing the velocity with 
which the gas escapes ; and heat is again generated when this 
velocity is subsequently checked. Similarly, heat is con- 
sumed in overcoming the resistance of friction, and is 
generated by the friction itself. To investigate accurately 
all these individual parts of the process would involve us in 
great diflSculties. 

If however we only wish to determine the quantity of 
heat, which on the whole must be taken in from without in 
order to keep the temperature of the gas constant, the case is 
simple. We can then leave out of account those parts of the 
process which balance each other, and need only consider the 
initial and final volume of the gas, and so much of the work 
done as is not transformed back again into heat. Then the 
internal work is the same as in any other case of the gas 
expanding at the same temperature and between the same 
initial and final volumes ; while the external work is simply 
represented by the product of the increase of volume and the 
atmospheric pressure. 

To determine the required quantity of heat, we start 
again from equation (5), and there substitute for W the 
expression for the external work performed in the present 
case, viz. p^ (r, — v^), where p^ is the atmospheric pressure. 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 



219 



The equation thus becomes 



(8). 



If the gas is a perfect one, the integral on the right-hand 
side, as shewn in the last section, will = 0, and the equation 
takes the simpler form 



Q =P2 (^2 - ^i)- 



(9), 



which expresses that in this case the heat 
that corresponding to the work required for 
external pressure of the air. 

If the heat is to be measured according 
not the mechanical unit, we must divide the 
of (8) and (9) by the mechanical equivalent 
we have 



taken in is only 
overcoming the 

to the ordinary, 
right-hand side 
of heat, whence 



«=i£;(^l^-^)^^-^S^^»"^^) («^)' 



Q=^^(v.-v,) 



E 



(9a). 



This kind of expansion has also been experimented on by 
Joule. Having as before compressed air to a high pressure 
in a receiver, he allowed it to escape under atmospheric 
pressure. In order to bring the escaping air back to the 
original temperature, he caused 
it, after leaving the receiver, to 
pass through a long coil of pipe, 
as shewn in Fig. 20, which was 
placed together with the receiver 
in a water calorimeter. There 
then remained in the air only a 
small reduction of temperature, 
which it shared in common 
with the whole mass of the calo- 
rimeter. The cooling of the 
calorimeter gave the quantity of 
heat given off to the air during Fig. 20. 



220 ox THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

its expansion. Applying equation (9a) to this quantity of 
heat, Joule was able to use this experiment as a means of 
calculating the mechanical equivalent of heat. The numbers 
obtained from three series of experiments gave a mean value 
of 438 (in English measures 798) ; a value which agrees closely 
with the value 444 found by the compression of air, and does 
not dififer from the value 424, found by the friction of water, 
more widely than can be explained by the causes of error 
inherent in these experiments. 

§ 5. Method of Experiment used hy Thomson and Joule. 

The above-mentioned experiments of Joule, in which air 
contained in a receiver was expanded either by escaping into 
another receiver or into the atmosphere, shewed that the 
conclusions drawn under the assumption that air is a perfect 
gas are in close accordance with experience. If however we 
wished to know to what degree of approximation air or any 
other gas obeys the laws of perfect gases, and what are the laws 
of any variations that may occur from the conditions of a per- 
fect gas, then the above mode of experiment is not sufficiently 
accurate ; since the mass of the gas is too small compared 
with that of the vessels and other bodies which take part in 
the variation of heat, and therefore the sources of error 
derived from these have too great an influence on the result. 
A very ingenious method of making more accurate experi- 
ments was devised by W. Thomson, and the experiments were 
carried out by him and Joule with great care and skill. 

Let us imagine a pipe, through which is forced a 
continuous current of gas. At one place in this let a porous 
plug be inserted, which so impedes the passage of the gas, 
that even when there is a considerable difference between the 
pressure before and behind the plug, it is only a moderate 
amount of gas, suitable for the experiment, which can pass 
through in a unit of time. Thomson and Joule used as plug 
a quantity of cotton wool or waste silk, which, as shewn 
in Fig. 21, was compressed between two pierced plates, AB 
and CD, 

Let us now take two sections, JFFand GH, one before and 
one behind the plug, but at such a distance that the unequal 
motions which may occur in the neighbourhood of the plug 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 



221 



Gf 



£ 



a 



D 



B 



Fig. 21. 

the process; 
difference of 
noticed and 



are not discernible, and there is only a uniform 
current of gas to deal with. Then the whole 
process of expansion, corresponding to the dififer- 
ence of pressure before and behind the plug, takes 
place in the small space between these two sec- 
tions. If then the current of gas is kept uniform 
for a considerable time, a state of steady motion 
is produced, in which all the fixed parts of the 
apparatus keep their temperature unaltered, 
and neither take in nor give off heat. Then if, 
as was done by Thomson and Joule, we surround 
this space with a non-conducting substance, so 
that no heat can either pass into it from without 
or vice versa, the gas can only give out or take 
in the quantity of heat expended or generated in 
and thus, even where this quantity is very small, a 
temperature may exist suflScient to be easily 
accurately measured, 

§ 6. Development of the Equations relating to the above 
method. 

In order to determine theoretically the difference of 
temperature in the above case, we will first form the general 
equations determining the quantity of heat which the gas 
must have taken in, if the temperature at the second section 
is to have any required value. From this we can readily 
find the temperature at which the heat imparted will be 
nothing. 

The separate parts of the process in the present case are 
connected partly with consumption, partly with generation of 
heat. Heat will be consumed in overcoming the frictional 
resistance due to the passage through the porous plug ; whilst 
by the friction itself the same amount of heat will be 
generated. At certain points in the passage heat is consumed 
in increasing the velocity; whilst at other points heat is 
generated as the velocity decreases. To determine the quantity 
of heat which on the whole must be imparted to the gas, we may 
leave out of account the parts of the process which balance 
each other ; since it is suflScient for our purpose to know what 
is the work which remains over as external work done or con- 
suqied, and at the same time the actual permanent change in 



222 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the vis viva of the current. For this we need only consider the 
work done at the entrance of the gas into the space between 
the sections, i.e. at section EF, and also at the exit from that 
space, i.e. at section GH; and similarly the velocities of the 
current at those two sections. 

With regard to the velocities, the difference between their 
vis viva can readily be calculated. If however they are at 
each section so small as they were in Thomson and Joule's 
experiments, their vis viva may be altogether neglected. It 
then remains only to determine the work done at the two 
sections. The absolute values of these quantities of work may 
be obtained as follows. Let us denote the pressure at section 
EF by p^, and suppose the densi«ty of the gas at this section to 
be such that a unit-weight at this density has the volume v^. 
Then the work done during the passage through the section of 
a unit- weight of the gas equals p^v^. Similarly the work done 
at section GH will be p^v,^, where p^ is the pressure and v, 
the specific volume at that section. These two quantities 
must however be affected with opposite signs. At section 
GH, where the gas is escaping from the given space, the 
external pressure has to be overcome, in which case the work 
done must be taken as positive ; while in section EF, where 
the gas is entering the space and thus moving in the same 
direction as the external pressure, the work must be con- 
sidered as negative. Thus the net external work per- 
formed on the whole will be represented by the difference 

We have now further to determine the quantity of heat, 
which a unit-weight of the gas must take in while it passes 
through the distance between the two sections; suppos- 
ing the gas to have at the first section, where the pressure is 
p^y the temperature T^, and at the second section, where the 
pressure is p^, the temperature T^. For this purpose we 
must use the equation which applies to the case in which a 
unit-weight of the gas passes from a condition determined by 
the magnitudes p^ and T^ into that determined by the 
magnitudes p and T^, and performs in so doing the work 
PJU^^Pi^v ^® therefore recur to equation (2), in which the 
symbol w, denoting the external work, must be replaced by 
p^v^ —PjVj^ ; hence we have 

Q=U,- U,+p,v,-p^v, ...(10). 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 223 

Here we need only to determine TJ^—JJ^, for which 
purpose we can again use one of the differential equations for 
U set forth in the last chapter. In this case it is convenient 
to choose the differential equation in which T and jo are the 
independent variables, i.e. equation (30) of Chapter IX. : 

In this equation we may put 

l'^«^2'+ P ^ dp =pd» = d (^) - vd'p. 
It thus takes the following form : 

dJJ^G.dT-i^^-^dp-A^fv) (11). 

This equation must be integrated from the initial values 
^i» Vv ^ ^^ ^Vi^Hi values T^, p^. The integration of the last 
term can be performed at once, and we may write : 



-p,v,+i?,v, ....(12). 



Substituting this value of t/^— U^ in equation (10), we 
obtain 

Q=^\G^dT-(T^^-v)dp^ (13). 

Here the expression under the integral sign is the differ- 
ential of a function of T and p, since C^ satisfies equation (6) 
of Chapter VIII. : 

dp" dr • 

And thus the quantity of heat Q is completely determined 
by the initial and final values of T and p. 

If we now introduce the condition corresponding to 
Thomson and Joule's experiments, viz. that Q = 0, then the 
difference between the initial and final temperatures is no 
longer independent of the difference between the initial and 
finjJ pressures, but on the contrary the one can be found 



224 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

from the other. If we suppose both these differences indefi- 
nitely small, we may use instead of (13) the following 
differential equation : 

If we here put dQ = 0, we obtain the equation which 
expresses the relation between dT and dp, and which may be 
thus written : 

%'hX'rT-') -a*'- 

If the gas were a perfect gas, and therefore p; = jBT, we 
should have 

dv __R __v 

dT'"p'^T' 
hence the above -equation would become 

dT 



dp 



= 0. 



Thus in this case an indefinitely small difference of 
pressure produces no difference of temperature; and the 
same must of course hold if the difference of pressure is 
finite. Hence one and the same temperature must exist 
before and behind the porous plug. If on the contrary some 
difference of temperature is observed, it follows that the gas 
does not satisfy the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac, and by 
observing the values of these differences of temperature 
under various circumstances, definite conclusions may be 
formed as to the mode in which the gas departs from that 
law. 

§ 7. Results of the Eocperiments, and Equations of 
Elasticity for the gases y as deduced therefrom. 

The experiments made by Thomson and Joule in 1854* 
shewed that the temperatures before and behind the plug 
were never exactly equal, but exhibited a small difference, 
which was proportional to the difference of pressure in each 

♦ Fhih Tram., 1854, p. 321. 



. ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 225 

case. With air at an initial temperature of about 15^, losses 
of temperature were observed, which, if the pressure were 
measured in atmospheres, could be expressed by the equation 

With carbonic acid the losses of heat were somewhat 
greater ; with an initial temperature of about 19° they satis- 
fied the equation 

T,-T,= 1-15»(|,.-|,J. 

The differential equations corresponding to these two equa- 
tions are as follows : 

^ = 0-26 and 5^ = 115 (15.) 

dp dp ^ ' 

In a later series of experiments, published in 1862*, 
Thomson and Joule took special pains to ascertain how the 
cooling effect varies when different initial temperatures are 
chosen. For this purpose they caused the gas, before reach- 
ing the porous plug, to pass through a long pipe surrounded 
by water, the temperature of which could be kept at will to 
anything up to boiling point. The result showed that the 
cooling was less at high than at low temperatures, and in the 
inverse ratio of the squares of the absolute temperatures. 
For atmospheric air and carbonic acid they arrived at the 
following complete formulae, in which a is the absolute 
temperature of freezing point, and the unit of pressure is the 
weight of a column of quicksilver 100 EngHsh inches high: 

If one atmosphere is taken as unit of pressure, these 
formulae become 

f.«.8(£)-»df=m(J)- (la, 

With hydrogen Thomson and Joule observed in their 
later researches that a slight heating effect took place instead 
of cooling. They have however deduced no exact formula 

♦ FML Tram., 1862, p. 679. 



226 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

for this gas, because the observations were not sufficiently 
accurate. 

J rn 

If in the two formulae for -i- , given in (16), we substi- 
tute for the numerical factor a general symbol -4, they 
combine into one general formula, viz. 

. f -^(t)' a^- 

Substituting in equation (14), we obtain 

T^-v = AC,{^ (18). 

According to Thomson and Joule, this equation should 
be employed for gases as actually existing, in place of the 
Equation referring to perfect gases, 

if we wish to express the relation which exists between 
the change of volume and temperature when the pressure is 
kept constant. 

If G^ is taken as constant, equation (18) can be integrated 
immediately. Now it is only for perfect gases that it has 
really been proved that the specific heat C^ is independent 
of the pressure; and similarly it is only for perfect gases 
that the conclusion derived from Regnault's experiments 
is strictly true, viz. that C^ is also independent of the 
temperature. If however a gas differs very slightly from 
the condition of a perfect gas, C^ will have values differing 
very slightly from a constant, ana these differences may be 
taken as quantities of the same order. Since in addition 
the whole term containing C^ is only another small quantity 
of the same order, the differences produced in the equa- 
tion by the differences of C will be small quantities of 
a higher order, and such may m what follows be neglected ; 
thus we may take C^ as constant. Then multiplying the 

dT 
equation by ^ , and integrating, we have 



or 



^ ON ' NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES, 227 

v = FT-iAC,(^^J (19), 

where P is the constant of integration, which in the present 
case may be considered as a function of the pressure p. 

According to the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussao 
w^ should have 

V = jT. (20); 

r 

and it is therefore advantageous to give the function P 
the form 

P 
where ir represents another function of p which however 
can only be very small. Equation (19) then becomes 

t> = ie|+,rr-i4C7,(|,y (21). 

This equation Thomson and Joule further simplified 
as follows. The mode in which the pressure and volume of 
a gas depend on each other varies less from the law of 
Mariotte accordiug as the temperature is higher. Those 
terms of the foregoing equation which express this varia- 
tion must thus become smaller as the temperature rises. 
The last term is the only one which actually fulfils this con- 
dition ; the last but one, ttT, does not fulfil it. Accordingly 
this term should not appear in the equation, and putting 
TT = 0, we obtain 



t,=ij|-Ma,(|,y (22). 



This is the equation which according to Thomson and 
Joule must be used for gases actually existing, in place of 
equation (20) which holds for perfect gases. 

An exactly similar equation was previously deduced 
by Rankine*, in order to represent the variations from 
the law of Mariotte and Qay-Lussac, found by Regnault 

•. PMl. Trani., 1864, p. 836. 



228 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

in the case of carbonic acid. This equation in its simplest 

form may be written y^^n ^ /oo\ 

^ pv^RT^Yy (23), 

in which a like R is constant. 

If we divide this equation by p, and in the last term, which 
is very small, replace the product po by the very nearly equal 

product RT, and finally write /8 for the constant ^ , we obtain 

which is an equation of the same form as (22). 

§ 8. On the Behaviour of Vapour during Expansion under 
Various Circumstances, 

As a further example of the different results which 
may be produced by expansion, we will consider the behaviour 
of saturated vapour. We will assume two conditions : (1) that 
the vapour expanding has to overcome a resistance equal to 
its whole force of expansion ; (2) that it escapes into the 
atmosphere, and thus has only to overcome the atmospheric 
pressure. Under the last condition we may make a distinc- 
tion according as the vapour is separate from liquid in the 
vessel from which it escapes, or is in contact with liquid, 
which continually replaces by fresh evaporation the vapour 
which is lost. In all three cases we will determine the 
quantity of heat, which must be given to or taken from 
the vapour during expansion, in order that it may continue 
throughout at maximum density. 

First then let us suppose a vessel to contain a unit- 
weight of saturated vapour, and let this vapour expand, e.g. 
by pushing a piston before it. In so doing let it exert upon 
the piston the whole expansive force which it possesses at 
each stage of its expansion. For this it is requisite only that 
the piston should move so slowly that the vapour which 
follows should always be able to equalize its expansive force 
to that of the vapour which remains behind in the vessel 
The quantity of heat Q, which must be imparted to this 
vapour, if it expands so far as that its temperature falls from, 
a given initial value 2\ to a value T,, is simply found by the 

^ equation Q^j'^MT.... (24). 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 229 

Here h is the magnitude introduced in Chapter VI., and 

named the Specific Heat of Saturated Vapour. If, as is the 

case with most vapours, h has a negative value, the foregoing 

integral, in which the upper limit is less than the lower^ 

represents a positive quantity. 

In the case of water, h is given by formula (31) of 

Chapter VL, viz., 8003 

A = 1-013 jp-. 

Applying this formula it is easy to calculate the value of Q for 
any two temperatures 2\ and T^, For example let us assume 
that the steam has an initial pressure of 5 or of 10 atmospheres, 
and that it expands until its pressure has fallen to one atmo- 
sphere; then by Regnault's tables we must put 2^= a4-152*2, 
or = a + 180*3 respectively, and T^ = a + 100; we thus obtain 
the values Q = 52*1 or = 74*9 units of heat respectively. 

In the second case we suppose that a vessel contains a 
unit-weight of saturated vapour apart from liquid, and at a 
temperature T^ which is above the boiling point of the 
liquid; and that an opening is made in the vessel, so that 
the vapour escapes into the atmosphere. Let us proceed to 
a distance beyond the opening such that the pressure of 
the vapour is there only equal to the atmospheric pressure. 
To insure that the current of vapour shall expand in the 
proper manner, let the vessel be fitted at the opening with a 
trumpet-shaped mouth KPQM (Fig. 22.) This mouth is not 
actually needed in order that the 
equations which follow may hold, 
but merely serves to facilitate the 
conception. Let KLM be a surface 
within this mouth, such that the 
pressure of the vapour is there only 
equal to atmospheric pressure, and 
its. velocity so small that its vis 
viva may be neglected. We will 
further assume that the heat gene- 
rated by the friction of the vapour 
against the edge of the opening 
and the surface of the mouth is 
not dissipated, but again imparted 
to the vapour. 

Now to determine the quantity Fig. 22. 



S30 



ON Tfll! KECHANICAL THEOBY OF BEAT. 



of heat wWcli must be imparted to the vapour during ex- 
pansion^ if it is to remain throughout in the saturated con- 
dition, we will again apply the general equation (2) ; which 
gives, if in this case we denote the heat by ^, 

Q^^U.-U.+ W. (25); 

here U^ is the energy of the vapour in its initial condition 
within the vessel, JT, the energy of the vapour in its final 
condition at the surface KLM, and W the external work done 
in overcoming the pressure of the atmosphere. 

The energy of a unit-weight of saturated vapour at 
temperature T is given by the value of U in equation (37) 
of Chapter IX., if we there put m = J/= 1. It is 

dT 

First give to T the initial value T^, and let p„ f -ry, J , and p^ 
be the values of ^, -rv^ , and p corresponding to this tempera- 
ture. Again let T have the final value T^y and let^,, f— ^,] , 

and pj be the corresponding values. Then subtracting these 
two equations from each other we have 



^'-^^-f^i^-^mj^^^f^^ 



1- 



Pi 



-Py 



h 



^.©. 



(26). 



The external work which results from the overcoming of 
the atmospheric pressure je?,, during an expansion from 
volume «j to volume «,, is given by the equation 



ON NON-EEVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 231 

We wiU give another form to this expression. If, as in 
Chapter VL, we put 8 = u + a, where a is the specific volume 
of the liquid, the equation becomes 

Substituting for u the expression given in equation (13), 
Chapter VI., we have 



F=y, 



r.(*)_ ^.*^ 



dTj, 



+PA<^.-<^d (27). 



Now substituting in (25) the value of Z7, — U^ from (26), 
and of Wirom. (27), we arrive at the equation 

+ i>,(<^2-0 (28). 

Here the heat is expressed in mechanical units. To 
express it in ordinary heat units the right-hand side must 

G o 

be divided by E. As before we will put r* = ^ > ^^ = ^' -^t 

the same time, since a- is a small quantity and varies very 

slightly, we will neglect the quantities -pp and (<r, — crj. 

Thus we obtain 

«'=£>^2^ + ^.-^i + -f^(^^--^») (29)- 

'[dTj, 

This equation is well adapted for the numerical calcula- 
tion of Q, since the quantities which it contains have all 
been determined experimentally for a considerable number 
of liquids. 

For water we have according to Regnault 

c+|j,= 0-305; 
whence 

r*cdr+r,-r, = -0-305(7;-7;). 



232 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEOEY OP HEAT. 



The quantities in the last term of equation (29) are also 
sufficiently known, so that the whole calculation is easy. 
For example if we take the initial temperature at five or 
ten atmospheres, we have Qf = 19'5 or = 17*0 units of heat 
respectively. 

Since Qf is positive, it follows that in this case also heat 
must be imparted to the vapour, not taken from it, if no 
part of it is to be allowed to condense ; which condensation 
might take place not only at the opening, but equally well 
inside the vessel. The quantity of vapour so condensed 
would however be less than in the first case, because Q^ is 
less than Q. 

It may easily happen that the above equations give a 
larger quantity of heat for an initial pressure of five than 
of ten atmospheres. The reason is that at five atmospheres 
the volume of the vapour is already very small ; and the 
diminution of volume, when the pressure is raised to ten 
atmospheres, is so small that the corresponding increase of 
work during the escape of the vapour is more than balanced 
by the excess of the free heat in the vapour at 180'3** over 
that in the vapour at 152*2^ 

L Lastly let us take the third case, 

in which the vessel contains liquid 
as well as vapour. Let the vessel 
ABCp (Fig. 23) be filled to the level 
^^with liquid, and above this with 
vapour. Let PQ be the opening 
of escape, fitted, as in the last case, 
with the trumpet -shaped mouth 
KPQMy to regulate the spreading 
out of the current of vapour. Let 
there be some source of heat which 
keeps the liquid at a constant tem- 
perature Tj, so that it continually 
gives off new vapour to replace that 
which escapes, and thus the condi- 
_. tions of the escape remain always 

^^' ' the same. 

This last circumstance makes an important distinction 
between this case and the foregoing. The pressure, which 
the vapour newly given off exerts on that ialre^dy existing. 



ON NON-REVERSIBLE PROCESSES. 233 

performs work during the escape of the vapour, which must 
be brought into the calculation as negative external work. 

Let GHJ be a surface at which the vapour which passes 
through has still the same expansive force p^, temperature T^, 
and specific volume 8^ which exist within the vessel, and at 
which the new vapour is given off. Again let KLM be a 
surface at which the vapour passing through has simply the 
expansive force equal to the atmospheric pressure /?,. At both 
surfaces we shall assume the velocity to be so small that 
its vis. viva ma.j be neglected. In its passage from one 
surface to the other, the vapour must continually have just 
that measure of heat given to it or taken from it, which is 
necessary in order to keep it wholly in the gaseous condition, 
^nd completely saturated, and also in order that at the 
surface KLM it may have the temperature T^ corresponding 
to the pressure p^ (i,e, the boiling temperature of the liquid), 
and the specific volume s^ belonging to that temperature. 
We have now to enquire how large this quantity of heat Q" 
must be for each unit-weight of the escaping vapour. 

To determine this we may proceed as in the last case, 
remembering that we have now a different value for the 
external work. This value is the difference between the 
work done at the surface OHJ, through which passes a 
volume of vapour 8^ at pressure Pj, and that done at the 
surface KLM, through which passes a volume s^ at pressure 
p^. It is thus given by the equation 

Putting once more 



8=:u + a 



dT 



we have 



W=--^--^^P.<r,-p.<r. (30). 

If we now form for Q" an equation of the same form as 
(25), and in it substitute for U^ — U^ the expression given in 
(26), and for W the expression given above, the main terms in 



234 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

these two expressions cancel each other, and there re- 
mains 

If we transform this equation so that it refers not to 
mechanical but to ordinary units of heat, and neglect the 
terms containing a, we arrive at the simple equation 

Q'^TcdT + r^-r, (32). 

J Ti 

For water the equation takes the form 

(2" = -0-305(2;-?;); 

and if we calculate the numerical values of Q" for an initial 
pressure of five or of ten atmospheres, we obtain 

Q" = — 15*9 or = — 24*5 units of heat respectively. 

Since the values of Q are negative, it follows that in this 
case heat must be taken out of the vapour, not imparted to 
it. If this withdrawal of heat does not take place to a 
suflScient extent at any place under consideration, then the 
steam is there hotter than 100** and therefore superheated. 
Here it is of course assumed that nothing but steam passes 
through the first surface OHJ, and thus that there are no 
particles of liquid mechanically carried ofif by the steam, as 
may happen during violent ebullition. 



CHAPTER XL 



Application of the Mechanical Theory of Heat to 

THE StEAM-EnGINE. 



§ 1. Necessity of a new Investigation into the Theory of 
the Steam-Engine. 

Since the altered views as to the nature and action of 
Heat, which are comprised under the name of the Mechanical 
Theory of Heat, had their first origin in the known fact 
that heat can be applied to produce mechanical work, it 
'might have been at once expected that the theory so formed 
would conversely serve to place this application of heat 
in a clearer light. In particular the more general point 
of view thus obtained would make it possible to pass a more 
certain judgment upon the particular machines used for 
this application, as to whether they already completely 
fulfilled their purpose, or whether. and how far they failed 
to do so. 

To these reasons, which apply to all thermo-dynamic 
machines, are joined in the case of the most important 
of them, the steam-engine, certain special grounds, which 
make it desirable to undertake a new investigation into 
its working, derived from the mechanical theory of heat. 
This theory in fact, in the case of steam of maximum density, 
has brought to light certain important departures from the 
laws previously assumed as correct, or at least generally used 
for purposes of calculation. . ^ 



236 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

On this head we need only refer to two results given in 
Chapter VI. In most of the recent writings on the steam- 
engine, amongst others the excellent work of de Pambour, 
the foundation of the theory has been taken to be the 
law of Watt, viz. that saturated steam when contained in a 
non-conducting vessel remains during all changes of volume 
steam of maximum density. In some later writings, after the 
publication of Regnault's researches on the heat required to 
evaporate water at different temperatures, the assumption is 
made that steam partly condenses during compression, and 
during expansion cools in a less degree than corresponds 
to the reduction of density, and therefore passes into the 
superheated condition. On the other hand it is proved 
in Chapter VI. that steam must behave in a way which 
is different from the first assumption and the exact oppo- 
site of the second assumption, viz. that it is superheated 
during compression, and is partly condensed during expan- 
sion. 

Further it is assumed in the above writings, in default of 
more accurate means of determining the volume of a unit- 
weight of steam at different temperatures, that steam even at 
its maximum density still follows the law of Mariotte and 
Gay-Lussac. On the other hand it is shewn in Chapter VI. 
that it departs widely from that law. 

These two points have naturally an important influence 
on the quantity of steam which passes from the boiler into the 
cylinder at each stroke, and on the behaviour of this steam 
during expansion. It is thus obvious that they are them- 
selves sufificient to make it necessary that we should calculate 
in a different way from that hitherto adopted the amount 
of work which a given quantity of steam performs in the 
steam-engine. 

§ 2. On the Action of the Steam-Engine, 

In order to illustrate more clearly the series of processes 
which make up the action of a condensing steam-engine, 
and to bring out clearly the fact that they form a cyclical 
process, continually repeating itself in the same manner, 
the imaginary diagram (Fig. 24) may be employed, A is 
the boiler, the contents of which are kept unifonnly at 



APPUCATION TO THE STKAM-ENGINE. 

a constant temperature 
T, by means of a source of 
heat. From this boiler a 
part of the steam passes 
into the cylinder ti, and 
drives the piston a cer- 
tain distance upwards. 
Then the cylinder is shut 
off from the boiler, and 
the enclosed steam drives 
the piston still higher by 
expansion. The cylinder , 
is now put in connection j 
■with the vessel C, which I 
represents the condenser. 
It will be. supposed that 
this condenser iskeptcold, Pig. 24. 

not by injected water, but by cooling from without : thia makes 
no great difference in the results, but simplifies the treatment. 
The constant temperature of the condenser we may call T^ 
During the connection of the cylinder with the condenser, the 
piston returns through the whole distance it has previously 
traversed ; and thereby all the steam which has not of itself 
passed into the condenser is driven into it, and there con- 
denses into water. It remains, in order to complete the 
cycle of operations, that this condensed water should be 
brought back s^va. into the boiler. This is effected by the 
small pump D, the working of which is so regulated, that 
during the upward stroke of its piston it draws out of the 
condenser exactly as much water as has been brought into it 
by the condensation during the last stroke ; and this water is 
then, by the downwaid stroke of its piston, forced back into 
the boiler. When it has here been heated once more to the 
temperature T,, all is again restored to its initial condition, 
and the same series of proce8.se3 may begin anew. Thus we 
have here to deal with a complete cyclical process. 

In the common steam-engine the steam passes into the 
^Under not at one end only, but at both ends alternately. 
The only difference thereby produced is, however, that during 
one up and down stroke of the piston two cyclical processes 
take pace instead of one, and it is sufficient in this case to 



238 ON THE MECHANICAL TflEORY OF HEAT. 

determine the work done during one process, in order to be 
able to deduce the whole work done during any given time. 
In the case of an engine without a condenser, we have only 
to assume that it is fed with water at 100**, and we may 
then suppose it replaced by an engine with a condenser, the 
temperature of the condenser being 100^ 

§ 3. Assumptions for the purpose of Simplification. 

For the purpose of this investigation we will assume, as 
has usually been done, that the cylinder is a non-conducting 
vessel, and so neglect the exchange of heat which takes place 
during each stroke between the walls of the cylinder and the 
steam. 

The vapour within the cylinder can never be anything but 
steam of maximum density with a certain admixture of 
water. For it is evident from the conclusions of Chapter VI., 
that during the expansion which takes place in the cylinder 
after it is shut off from the boiler the steam cannot pass into the 
superheated condition, because no heat is imparted to it from 
without ; but must rather partially condense. It is true that 
there are certain other processes, to be mentioned later, which 
tend to produce a slight super-heating ; but this is prevented 
from taking place by the fact, that the steam always carries 
with it into the cylinder a certain amount of water in the 
form of spray, with which it remains in contact. The exact 
amount of this water is of no importance ; and since for the 
most part it is diffused through the steam in fine drops, and 
therefore readily participates in the changes of temperature 
which the steam undergoes during expansion, no important 
error will be introduced if at each moment under consideration 
we assume that the temperature of the whole mass of vapour 
in the cylinder is the same. 

Further, to avoid too great complexity in the formulae, we 
will first determine th^ whole work done by the steam pressure, 
without examining how much of this is actually useful work, 
and how much is expended on the engine itself in overcoming 
friction, and in actuating the pumps required, besides the one 
shewn in the figure, for the proper working of the machinCi 
This latter part of the work may be subsequently determined 
and deducted from the whole, in thd manner shown fater on. 
It may further be remarked with reg^d to the friction between 



•APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 239 

the piston and cyKnder, that the work expended upon this is 
not to be regarded as wholly lost. For since heat is generated 
by this friction, the inside of the cylinder is thereby kept 
hotter than it otherwise would be, and the power of the steam 
increased accordingly. 

Lastly, since it is desirable to understand the working of 
the most perfect machine possible, before enquiring intct 
the influence of th^ various imperfections which occur in 
practice, we will in this preliminary investigation make two 
further assumptions, which may afterwards be withdrawn. 
The first is that the inlet pipe from the boiler to the cylinder, 
and the outlet pipe to the condenser or to the atmosphere, 
are so large, or else the speed of the engine so slow, that 
the pressure within the end of the cylinder connected with 
the boiler is always equal to the pressure in the boiler itself; 
and similarly that the pressure within the other end is always 
equal to that in the condenser, or to the atmospheric pressure 
as the case may be. The second is that there are no clear* 
^nce or waste spaces sufficient to affect the result. 

§ 4. Determination of the Work done during a single 
stroke. 

Under the conditions just enumerated the amount of 
work done during the cyclical process corresponding to a 
single stroke may be written down by help of the results 
obtained in Chapter VI. without further calculation, and 
their sum comprised in a simple expressioh. 

Let M be the whole quantity of vapour which passes from 
the boiler to the cylinder during one stroke ; of this let the 
part m. be in the form of steam and the remainder M — m. 
in the form of water. The space which this mass occupies will 
be (by Ch. VL, § 1) ln^u^ + M(r, where u^ represents the value 
of u corresponding to 2\, while <r is taken as constant and 
therefore has no suffix. The piston has therefore been raised 
Bo far that this amount of space is left under it; and since this 
takes place at the pressure p^ corresponding to 2\, the work 
done during the first prdcess, which we may call TT^, is given 
by the following equation : 

W^^m,u,p^+Map^ -(1). 



240 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

Let the expansion which succeeds to this continue so feir 
that the temperature of the vapour enclosed in the cylinder 
falls from the value 2^ to a value T^ The work done during 
this expansion, which we may call TT,, is given directly by 
equation (62) of Chapter VL, if we there take T^ for the 
final temperature, and corresponding values for the other 
quantities involved. Thus 

^. = "I, (Pi - «.P.) - *». (p. - «t2>J + ^OiT, - rj (2). 

On the return stroke of the piston, which now begins, 
the vapour, which at the end of the expansion occupied 
the space m, t/, + Ma, is driven out of the cylinder into 
the condenser, overcoming the constant resistance p^ The 
negative work thus performed is therefore given by the 
equation 

W^^-m^u^p^-Afap^ (3). 

Kow let the piston of the small pump rise until it leaves 
under it the space Ma; the pressure then continues to be 
the pressure p^ of the condenser, and the work done is 

W, = Map, (4). 

Finally, during the descent of this piston, the pressure pj 
of the boiler has to be overcome, and we have therefore the 
negative work 

W,= ^Map, (5). 

Adding these five equations we have for the whole work 
done during the cyclical process by the steam pressure, or in 
other words by tne heat, which work we may call W, the 
foUovmig expression : 

F' = «i.p. - m./,. + JlfC (T. - rj + «.«. Cp. -i,0...(6). 

From this equation we must eliminate m^. If for u^ w6 
substitute the vsdue given by equation (13) Chapter VL, vi& 



1*-.= 



then m, only oocuia in the product m,p,; for which equation 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 241 

(55) Chapter VI. gives, if we substitute therein p and G for r 
and c, the expression 

T T 

Substituting this expression we obtain an equation in which 
all the quantities on the right-hand side are known, since 
the masses JIf and m^, and the temperatures 2\, T^, and T^ are 
supposed to be known directly, and the quantities p, p, and 

-— are assumed to be known as functions of temperature. 

§ 5. Special Forms of the Expression found in the last 
section. 

If in equation (6) we put T^ = T^, we obtain the work 
done in the case where the machine works without expan- 
sion, viz. 

W = m,u,(p,-p,) (7). 

If on the other hand we assume that the expansion con- 
tinues until the steam has cooled by expanding from the 
temperature of the boiler down to that of the condenser (an 
assumption which cannot be realized in practice, but forms 
the limiting case to which we may approach as near as 
is practicable) we have only to put 2',= To; whence we 
have 

W = m,p,-7n,p, + MG(T-T,) (8). 

Ehminating m„p^, from this equation by means of the 
same equation (55) Chapter VI., in which we must also put 
2; =r^ we have 

W'^m,p,^^^+MC(T,--T,+ T,l0g^^ (9). 

§ 6. Imperfections in the Construction of the Steam- 
Engine, 

With all steam-engines as actually constructed the 
expansion falls much below the maximum value given at the 
end of the last section. If for example we take the tempera- 
ture of the boiler at 150°, and that of the condenser at 50°, 
then if the temperature of the steam in the cylinder is to be 
lowered by expansion to the temperature of the condenser, 

C. \^ 



242 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the steam must be expanded (by the table given in § 13 
of Chapter VI.) to twenty-six times its original volume. In 
practice, on account of the many evils attending too high an 
expansion, steam is not expanded beyond three or four times 
its volume in general, or ten times at the very utmost. Such 
an expansion, with an initial temperature of 151", is shewn 
by the same tables to lower the temperature to 100**, or 75® 
at the utmost, instead of to 50**. 

Besides this imperfection, which has already been taken 
account of in the above investigation and included in equation 
(6), the steam-engine is subject to several others, two of 
which have been already expressly excluded from considera- 
tion. These are, first the fact that the pressure in one end 
of the cylinder is less than that in the boiler, and in the 
other greater than that in the condenser, and secondly the 
presence of waste spaces. We must now extend our previous 
investigations so as to include these further imperfections. 

The influence upon the work done of the difference 
between the boiler and cylinder pressures has been investi- 
gated most fully by Pambour in his work Th4orie des 
Machines d Vapeur, The author may therefore be allowed, 
before himself entering on the subject, to reproduce the most 
important of these investigations, only making some changes 
in the notation and omitting the quantities which refer to 
friction. It will thus be easier to shew how far Pambour's 
results are no longer in accordance with our present know- 
ledge on the subject of heat, and at the same time to connect 
with it the new method of investigation, which in the 
author's opinion must take its place. 

§ 7. Pamihours Formulae for the relation between 
Volume and Pressure. 

Pambour's theory has its foundation in the two laws 
already mentioned, which at that time were generally applied 
to the case of steam. The first is the law of Watt, viz. that 
the sum of free and latent heat is always constant. From 
this law, as already mentioned, was drawn the conclusion that 
if a certain quantity, of steam at maximum density were 
inclosed in a non-conducting vessel, and the contents of this 
vessel then increased or diminished, the steam would neither 
be superheated nor partially condensed, but would remain 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 243 

precisely at maximum density; and that this would take 
place without any reference to the way in which the change 
of volume was produced, or to whether the steam had to 
overcome a resistance corresponding to its expansive force, 
or not. This was the condition of things which Pambour 
supposed to exist in the steam cylinder; and he also assumed 
that no change of importance would be occasioned by the 
presence of the particles of water which are always mixed 
with the steam. 

Next, to determine more closely the connection between 
volume and temperature, or between volume and pressure, 
ia the case of steam at maximum density. Pambour applied 
further the law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac. If we take the 
volume of a kilogram of steam at 100° and at maximum 
density to be 1696 cm,, as given by Gay-Lussac, and if we 
remember that the corresponding pressure of one atmo- 
sphere represents a weight of 10333 kilograms to the square 
metre; and if for any other temperature T we call v the 
volume and p the pressure; then the law of Mariotte and 
Gay-Lussac leads to the following equation: 

i^o^ 10333 273 + 7 ,.^. 

t; = 1-696 x-^x 2-73^:^0 (10). 

Here we have only to substitute for p the value given by 
the table of pressures, and we can then determine the volume 
corresponding to any temperature, provided the foregoing 
assumptions are correct. 

Since in the formulae for the work done by the steam- 

engine /p.f« plays a principal part, it wa3 necessary for the 

convenient treatment of this integral, that the simplest 
possible relation between p and v should be used. The 
equations which would have been obtained, if it had been 
sought to eliminate the temperature T from the foregoing 
equation by means of one of the ordinary empirical formulae 
for p, would have been too complicated : Pambour accordingly 
preferred to form a special empirical formula for the purpose, 
and following the example of Navier he gave it the following 
general form : 

"-ii?- <"'• 



244 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBT OF HEAT. 

where B and b axe constants. These constants he endeavoured 
to fix so that the volumes calculated by this formula might 
agree as nearly as possible with those calculated by the 
formula given above. As however sufficient accuracy cannot 
thus be arrived at in the case of all the pressures which are 
met with in the steam-engine, he made use of two different 
formulae in the cases of engines with and without condensers. 
The first, for condensing engines, is as follows ; 

20000 . -, . 

^ = 1200 + ^ : ("«)' 

This agrees best with the formula (10) for pressures between 
^ and 3^ atmospheres, but may be applied within somewhat 
wider limits, say ^ and 5 atmospheres. The second, for non- 
condensing engines, is as follows : 

21232 ,^^,, 

^ = 3020+^ <^^*>- 

This is most accurate between 2 and 5 atmospheres, and may 
be applied anywhere between IJ and 10 atmospherea 

§ 8. Pambour's Determination of the Work done during 
a single stroke. 

The quantities needed for determining the work done, and 
depending on the dimensions of the engine, will be here 
denoted in a manner somewhat difiering from that of Pambour. 
The whole space within the cylinder, including the waste 
space, which is left open for steam during a single stroke, 
we shall call v. The waste space we shall call ev' and the 
space swept through by the piston (1 — e) v. That part of 
the whole space, which is left open for the steam up to the 
moment when the cylinder is shut off from the boiler, again 
inclusive of the waste space, we shall call ev\ Then the 
space swept through by the piston during the entrance of 
steam will be denoted by (e — e) v , and that swept through 
during expansion by (1 — e) v. 

First to determine the work done during the entrance of 
the steam. For this purpose we must know the actual 
pressure in the cylinder at this time, which must be less than 
that in the boiler, otherwise there would be no flow from one 
into the other. The amount of this difference cannot how- 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 245 

ever be fixed in general terms, because it depends not only on 
the construction of the engine, but also on how widely the 
valve in the steam pipe has been opened by the engineer, 
and on the speed with which the engine is moving. By a 
change in these circumstances the difference may be made to 
vary within wide limits. Again the pressure in the cylinder 
may not remain constant during the whole time the steam 
is entering, because the speed of the piston, and also the 
opening left by the valve, may be made to vary during this 
time. 

With reference to this latter point Pambour assumes that 
the mean pressure, to be used for determining the work done, 
may with sufiBcient accuracy be taken to be the same as the 
final pressure which exists in the cylinder at the moment 
when it is shut oflf from the boiler. The author does not 
think it desirable to introduce into the general formulae an 
assumption of this kind, although in the absence of more 
exact data it may fairly be resorted to for the purpose of actual 
calculations ; but he is bound to follow Pambour 's method, in 
order to complete the exposition of his theory. 

The actual pressure at the moment when the steam is 
shut oflf, Pambour determines by means of his equation, 
as given above, between volume and pressure ; assuming that 
special observations have been made to determine the quantity 
of steam which passes from the boiler to the cylinder during 
an unit of time, and therefore during each stroke. We 
will, as before, denote by M the whole quantity which passes 
into the cylinder during one stroke, and by m the portion 
which is in the condition of steam. As this quantity M, of 
which Pambour only recognizes the part which is in the 
condition of steam, fills at the moment when the cylinder is 
closed the space ev\ we have by equation (11), 

^=6T7. ^^^^* 

where p^ is the pressure in the cylinder at that moment. 
Hence 

^.=^-6 (X^-)' 

If we multiply this equation by {e — e) v\ which is the 



246 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

space swept through by the piston up to this moment, we 
have the following equation for the first part of the work 
done: 

Tf^=^5x^^^-t/(e-6)& (13). 

The law of variation of the pressure during the expansion 
is also given by equation (11). If v is the volume and p the 
pressure at any moment, then 

mB J 

This expression we must substitute in fpdv, and then 
integrate this from v = ev' to v = v. Thence we obtain for 
the second part of the work done 

Fj, = m51og--v (l-e)J (14). 

Next, to determine the negative work done by the resis- 
tance during the return stroke, we must know the value of 
that resistance. Without entering at present into the ques- 
tion how this resistance is related to the pressure in the 
condenser, we will denote the mean pressure by p^; then the 
work done will be given by 

F. = -«'(!-€) p. (15). 

Finally there remains the work which must be expended 
in forcing back into the boiler the quantity of liquid M, 
Pambour has taken no special account of this work, but 
included it with the friction of the engine. Since, however, 
for the sake of completing the cycle of operations, it has been 
included in the author's formulae, it will be investigated here 
in order to facilitate the comparison. If p^ be the pressure 
in the boiler, and PqUi the condenser, then equations (4) and 
(5) show, as in the example already considered, that this 
work is on the whole given by 

W, = -M<t(p,-p,) (16). 

For the present case, where p^ is not the pressure in the 
condenser itself, but in the end of the cylinder which is open 
to the condenser, this equation is not quite exact ; but since 
on account of the smallness of a the value of the whole 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 247 

expression is almost too small to be taken into account, 
d fortiori we may neglect an error which is small even in 
comparison with that value; and we shall therefore retain 
the expression in the form given above. 

Adding these four several quantities of work together, we 
obtain the following expression for the whole work done 
during the cyclical process : 

F = m5(i:^%logl)-i;'(l-€)(i+2>,)--if<r(p,--;>J 

(17). 

§ 9. Pambour*8 Value for the Work done per Unit-weight 
of Steam. 

If instead of the work done in one stroke, during which 
the quantity of steam used is m, we prefer to find the work 
done per unit-weight of steam, all that is needed is to divide 
the foregoing value by m. Let us denote by I the fraction 

M ... 

— , which gives the ratio of the whole mass which passes into 

the cylinder to that part of it which is' in the form of steam, 
and is therefore somewhat greater than 1 ; by F the frac- 

tion — , i.e. the space which on the whole is occupied by the 

unit-weight of steam in the cylinder ; and by W the fraction 

W 

— , i.e. the work done per unit- weight of steam. Then wo 
m IT o 

have 

Tr=£(^%logi)-F(l-e)(6+2>.)-?<r(p.-^J 

(18). 

In this equation there is only one term which involves 
the volume F, and this contains F as a factor. Since this 
term is negative, it follows that the work, which can be 
obtained from one unit- weight of steam, is the greatest, other 
things being equal, when the volume which that steam occu- 
pies in the cylinder is the least possible. The least value of 
this volume, to which we may continually approximate, but can 
never exactly obtain, is that which is given by the assumption 
that either the engine goes so slowly, or the steam-pipe is so 



248 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

large, that the pressure in the cylinder is as great as that in 
the boiler. This then gives the maximum quantity of work. 
If with an equal admission of steam the speed of the eugine 
is greater, or if with equal speed the admission of steam is 
less, then in each case a less quantity of work is obtained 
from the same quantity of steam. 

§ 1 0. Changes in the Steam during its passage from the 
Boiler into the Cylinder. 

Before we pass on to treat the same connected series of 
processes on the principles of the Mechanical Theory of Heat, 
it will be advantageous to consider one of them, which 
requires a special investigatioti of its own, in order to fix 
beforehand the results which refer to it. This process is the 
flow of the steam into the clearance or waste space and into 
the cylinder, in the case when it has a smaller pressure 
to overcome than that which forces it out of the boiler. 

The steam as it comes from the boiler passes first into 
the waste space ; there it compresses the steam of less density 
which remains over from the last stroke, fills up the space 
thus obtained, and then acts upon the piston ; this, according 
to the assumption, on account of its comparatively lighter 
load recedes so fast, that the steam cannot follow it quickly 
enough to keep the density in the cylinder the same as in the 
boiler. Under such circumstances, if nothing but saturated 
steam escaped from the boiler, this would become superheated 
in the cylinder, inasmuch as the vis viva of the flow would 
be transformed into heat'; but since the steam always carries 
with it small particles of water, the superabundant heat 
goes to vaporize a part of these, and the steam thus remains 
in the saturated condition. 

We must now consider the following problem : Given the 
initial condition of the whole mass under consideration, as 
well that already found in the waste space as that which is 
newly received from the boiler; given also the amount of 
work which is done during the entrance of the steam by the 
pressure which acts on the piston ; lastly given the pressure 
which exists at the moment when the boiler is shut off from 
the cylinder ; then to determine what proportion of the mass 
within the cylinder is at that moment in the condition of steam. 

Let ft be the mass which exists in the waste space 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE, 249 

before the entrance of the steam ; for the sake of generality we 
will assume this to be partly in the liquid, partly in the 
gaseous condition, and will call the latter part fi^. The 
pressure of this steam may for the moment be denoted by p^, 
and the corresponding absolute temperature by Tp, without 
implying thereby that these are exactly the same values as 
hold for the same quantities within the condenser. Let py^ 
and T^ be, as before, the pressure and temperature in the 
boiler, M the mass which flows from the boiler into the 
cylinder, and m^ the part of M which is in the condition of 
steam. The pressure exerted on the piston during the 
entrance of the steam need not, as already explained, be 
constant. We will call p^ the mean pressure, by which the 
space swept through by the piston during the entrance of the 
steam must be multiplied, in order to obtain the same 
amount of work as is actually done by the varying pressure. 
Let p^ be the actual pressure in the cylinder at the moment 
when the steam is cut off, T^ the corresponding temperature^ 
Lastly let m^ be the magnitude we have to determine, viz. 
the part of the whole mass M+ /i within the cylinder, which 
is in the condition of steam. 

To determine this quantity, let us suppose the mass M+fi 
to be brought back to its initial condition in any way 
whatever, e.g. the following. Let the gaseous part m^ be 
condensed in the cylinder by the fall of the piston, it being 
assumed that the piston can force itself even into the waste 
space; at the same time let the mass have such a quantity of, 
heat continuously imparted to it, that its temperature T^ re- 
mains constant. Then let the part ilf of the whole liquid mass 
be forced back into the boiler, where it again takes up its 
original temperature T^, We have now within the boiler 
the same condition of things as before the flow of the steam, 
since every part of the boiler has its original temperature; 
and therefore the proportions of liquid and steam must be 
the same as at the commencement. Whether the individual 
molecules, which are in the gaseous and in the liquid 
condition, are exactly the same as at the commencement does 
not concern ois ; we make no distinction between these, and 
never enquire what molecules, but simply how many mole- 
cules, are in each of the two conditions.* 

* If it be wished that exactly the same molecules should be in the 



250 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Let the mass fi, which is not forced back into the boiler, 
be first cooled in the liquid condition from T^ to T^, and then 
at this temperature let the part fi^ be transformed into steam ; 
the piston receding so far, that this steam can again occupy 
its original space. 

Thus the mass M+ fi will have passed through a complete 
cyclical process, to which we may now apply the principle 
that the sum of all the quantities of heat taken in during 
a cycUcal process must be equal to the total external 
work done. In this case the following quantities of heat 
have been taken in : 

(1) In the boiler, where the mass M has been heated 
from T^ to T^, and at the latter temperature the part m^ 
transformed into steam, we have the quantity of heat 

(2) During the condensation of m^ at temperature T^, we 



have 



have 



(3) During the cooling of the part /x from T^ to T^, we 



-^C{T,-T,). 



(4) During the vaporization of the part ^^ at temperature 
Tq, we have 

The whole quantity of heat taken in, which we may 
call Q, is thus given by 

Q = m^,'-mj), + MG{T,^T,)+fi^,''fLC{T,'-T;)... {19). 

The quantities of work are obtained as follows : 

(1) To determine the space swept through by the 
piston during the entrance of the steam, we must remember 

gaseous condition at the end as at the beginning, we need only assume that 
the water forced back into the boiler is not only in quantity, but also in 
its actual molecules, the same as that which left the boiler previously; and 
that when this water takes up the temperature Tj, the quantity rrir. which waB 
formerly vapour, is again vaporized, whilst an equal quantity of tne existing 
steam is condensed. For this purpose there is no need that the whole mass 
in the boiler should take in or give out any heat, because that required for 
the vaporization, and that generated by the condensation, exactly balance 
each other. 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 251 

that the whole space taken up by if H-/-6 at the end of this 
time is given by 

From this we must subtract the waste space. Since this 
is filled at the commencement by a mass yb at temperature T^, 
of which the part fi^ is in the condition of steam, it may 
be represented by 

If we subtract this expression from the former, and multiply 
the remainder by the mean pressure p\, we obtain for 
the first part of the work done 

(2) The work done in the condensation of the mass 
Wgis 

(3) The work done in forcing the mass M back into the 
boiler is 

— Map^. 

(4) The work done in vaporizing the part u, is 

Adding these four quantities together we obtain the 
following expression for the whole work done : 

w--m,u, {p; -p,) -Ma (p, -p;) - fi^u, {p;-p,) (20). 

Since Q = TT, we may equate the expressions in (19) and 
(20) ; and bringing to one side of the equation the terms 
containing m,, we obtain 

By means of this etiuation the quantity m^ is given 
in terms of quantities assumed to be already known. 

§11. Divergence of the above Results from Fambour's 
Assumption. 

In cases where the mean pressure p/ is much larger 
than the final pressure p^, — e.g. if we suppose that during 
the greater part of the time of admission of the steam, 



2o2 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

the pressure in the cylinder is nearly the same as in 
the boiler, and that it is only by the expansion that the 
pressure is finally brought down to the value p^, — it may 
happen that the value found for m^ is less than m^ + fi^, 
and accordingly that a part of the original steam must 
have condensed. On the other hand if jp/ is only a little 
greater or even a little smaller than p^, then the value 
of m^ will be greater than m^ + fiQ. This latter is in general 
true of the steam-engine, and in particular holds for the 
case assumed by Pambour, in which p^' = p^. 

Here as in Chapter VI. we have arrived at a result 
widely diverging from the views of Pambour. Whereas 
he assumed for the two different kinds of expansion, which 
succeed each other in the steam-engine, one and the same 
law, according to which the original quantity of steam 
can neither grow less nor greater, but must always remain 
exactly at maximum density, we have been led to two 
separate equations, which indicate an opposite condition 
of things. In the first expansion, during the admission of 
steam, there must by equation (21), be a continual genera- 
tion of fresh steam ; in the further expansion, after the 
steam is cut off, and while it is doing the full work 
corresponding to its force of expansion, there must by 
equation (56) of Chapter VI. be a condensation of some part 
of the existing steam. 

Since these two opposite processes of increase and 
diminution of steam, which must also exert an opposite 
influence on the amount of work done by the engine, 
partly go to cancel each other, the final result may in 
certain circumstances be nearly the same as under the 
simpler assumption of Pambour. We must not however 
on this account cease to take into consideration the difference 
we have discovered, especially if our object is to determine 
what effect a change in the arrangement or speed of the 
engine will have on the amount of work done. 

§ 12. Determination of the Work done during one stroke^ 
taking into consideration the Imperfections already noticed. 

We may now return to the complete cyclical process 
performed by the steam-engine, and tFeat its several parts 
one after another in the same way as before. 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 253 

The mass M flows from the boiler, in which the pressure 
is Pj, into the cylinder. Of this mass the part m^ is in 
the condition of steam, the remainder of water. The mean 
pressure in the cylinder during this time we will as before 
call jPj, and the final pressure jp,. The steam now expands, 
until its pressure has fallen from p, to pg, and its temperature 
from Tg to T^, Then the cylinder is opened to the condenser, 
the pressure in which is p^^, and the piston moves back 
again through the whole length of the stroke. The back 
pressure which it has to overcome is on account of its 
comparatively rapid motion somewhat larger than p^, and the 
mean value of this back pressure we will for the sake of dis- 
tinction call jOq'. The steam which remains in the waste space 
at the end of the return stroke, and must be taken into ac- 
count for the next stroke, has a pressure which may not be 
equal either to p^ or 'to p/, and therefore must be denoted 
by p/. It may be greater or less than p^', according as the 
steam is shut off from the condenser a little before or after 
the end of the return stroke ; for in the foimer case the steam 
ivill be compressed still further, while in the latter it will 
have time to escape partially into the condenser and so to 
expand again. Finally the mass M must be returned from 
the condenser into the boiler, during which as before the 
pressure po assists the operation, and the pressure p^ has to 
be overcome. 

The quantities of work done during these processes will 
be represented by expressions very similar to those in the 
simpler case already considered : a few obvious changes must 
be made in the suffixes to the letters, and the quantities 
added which refer to the waste space. We thus obtain the 
following equations : 

During the admission of steam we have, as in § 10, 
only writing <' instead of u,, 

^i=K^2+^^-^o02'i' (22). 

During the expansion from pressure p^ to pg, we have as 
in equation (62) of Chapter VI., writing M-\- ii instead of My 

• •••.....l^^Oy. 



254 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT. 



During the return stroke of the piston, where the whole 
space swept through by the piston equals the whole space 
occupied by Jf + /* at pressure p^, less the waste space which 
is represented by fi^u^^' + fia, we have 



^8 = - K^ + ^<^ - /^oO Po- 



.(24). 



During the forcing back of the mass M into the boiler we 
have 

W, = -M<r(p,-p;) (25). 

Hence for the total work done we have 

-jifc7(p,-;);+;?;-Po)-;*o<'(p/-i>oO -(26). 

In this equation the masses m^ and m^ are given by 
equation (21) and by equation (55) of Chapter VI. respectively; 
substituting in the former p^' for p^y and changing T^, r^, u^ 
in the same way, while in the latter J/ + )L6 is to be sub- 
stituted for Jf, p for r, and C for c. The eliniination of m^ 
and m^ is thus rendered possible: here however we shall only 
make the substitution in the case of one of them, m^, as it is 
more convenient for purposes of calculation to combine the 
equation so obtained with the two named above. Thus the 
system of equations serving to determine the work done 
by the steam-engine will, in its most general form, be as 
follows : 



+ m,u:' {p' - p,") - Ma (p; -p,) 



-^8 -^a -'a 



...(27). 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENQINE. 255 

§ 13. Pressure of Steam in the Cylinder during the dif- 
ferent Stages of the Process, and corresponding Simplifications 
of the Equations, 

To obtain numerical values from equations (27), we 
must first determine more accurately the quantities j?/, 

No general law can be laid down as to the mode in which 
the pressure within the cylinder varies during the admission 
of steam, because the opening and closing of the steam pipe 
is performed with different engines in different ways. For 
the same reason no fixed general value can be laid down for 
the relation between the mean pressure p^ and the final 
pressure p^, taking the latter in its strictest meaning. This 
is however possible if we make a slight change in the signifi- 
cation of JOg. 

The shutting off of the cylinder from the boiler cannot 
of course be instantaneous: the necessary motion of the 
valve or cock must consume a certain time, less or greater 
according to the arrangement of the gear. During this time 
the steam in the cylinder expands somewhat, because as the 
opening narrows the quantity of fresh steam which enters is 
less than corresponds to the speed of the piston. We may 
therefore assume in general that at the end of this time the 
pressure is already somewhat less than p^. 

Again, if we do not limit ourselves to taking the end of 
the time required to close the valve as the moment of cut-off, 
but allow ourselves some freedom in fixing this moment, 
other values may be obtained for p^. The moment may be 
so chosen that, if at this moment the whole mass M had 
already been admitted, a pressure would then exist exactly 
equal to the mean pressure calculated for all the time up to 
this instant. If we substitute for the actual cut-off the 
instantaneous cut-off as thus determined, the resulting error 
in the calculation of the work will be quite insignificant. 
With this modification therefore we can fall in with Pam- 
bours assumption, that^/=jt} , but we must then for each 
particular case make a special investigation of the circum- 
stances, in order to determine accurately the moment to be 
fixed for the cut-off. 

As regards the back-pressure p^, which exists during the 
return stroke, the difference p^—p^ is obviously smaller, 



256 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

other things being equal, as p^ is smaller. It is therefore 
smaller for a condensing engine than for a high-pressure 
engine, where p^ equals one atmosphere. In the case of the 
most important high-pressure engine, the locomotive, there 
is generally a special circumstance which tends to increase 
this difference, viz. that the steam is not usually led into the 
air by the shortest and widest channel possible, but is led 
into the chimney, and there allowed to escape through a 
somewhat contracted blast-pipe, in order to increase the 
draught. In this case an accurate determination of this 
difference is of importance to obtain a trustworthy result. 
It must also be remembered that this difference is not con- 
stant even with the same engine, but depends upon the 
speed, and the law of this dependence must therefore be 
investigated. This subject, with the researches made upon 
it, will not however be entered on here, since it has nothing 
to do with the present application of the Mechanical Theory 
of Heat. 

In the case of engines where the exhaust steam is not 
thus employed, and especially with condensing engines, ^/ 
differs so little from p^, and therefore varies so slightly with 
the speed, that it is usually suflScient to assume a mean 
value for Pq\ Moreover, since p^ enters into equations (27) 
only in terms which are multiplied by a; and therefore have 
but small influence on the value of the work done, we may 
also substitute for p^ the most probable value for Pq, 

The pressure p^', which exists in the waste space, depends, 
as already mentioned, on whether the shutting off from the 
condenser takes place before or after the end of the stroke, 
and may therefore have very different values. But this 
pressure, and the quantities depending on it, occur in equa- 
tions (27) only in terms containing the small factors /j, and 
fiQy SO that an approximate value is sufficient for our purpose. 
In cases where there are no special circumstances which 
cause Pq^ to vary widely from Pq, we may neglect this differ- 
ence, as we did that between Pq and p^, and may thus assume 
as a general value for all three quantities the most probable 
mean value for the back-pressure within the cylinder. This 
value we may call p^. 

These simplifications change equations (27) into the 
following : 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 257 

+ At(.w« (p. - JPo) + ^<r {Pi -p^ 



\ (28). 



§ 14. Suhstitution of the Volume for the corresponding 
Temperature in vertain cases. 

In the above equations it is assumed that, besides the 
masses M, m^, fi, and fi^, of which the two first must be found 
by direct oDservation, and the two latter can be approxi- 
mately determined from the size of the waste space, we have 
also given the four pressures p^, p^y Ps* and p^, or, which is 
the same thing, the four temperatures T^, T^, 2\, and Tq. 
In practice however this condition is only partially fulfilled, 
and we must therefore bring in other data to assist us. 

Of the four pressures here mentioned, two only, p^ and p^^ 
may be taken as known : of these the first is given directly 
by the gauge on the boiler, and the latter can be at least 
approximately fixed by the gauge on the condenser. The 
two others, ^j and Pg, are not given directly; but we know 
the dimensions of the cylinder and the point of cut-oflf, and 
can thence deduce the volume of the steam at the moment 
of cut-off and at the end of the stroke. We may then take 
these volumes as our data in place of the pressures p^ and p^. 
For this purpose we must throw the equations into a form, 
which will enable us to use the above data for calculation. 

Let us now, as before in the explanation of Pambour's 
theory, denot-e by v the whole space within the cylinder 
which is open to the steam during one stroke, including the 
waste space; by ev' the space opened to the steam up to the 
moment of cut-off; and by ev' the waste space. Then in the 
same way as before we have the following equations : 

m, u^ + {M+ fi)a- = ev\ 
m^u^ + {M + fi)(T = v\ 



258 



OK THE MECHANICAL THEOBT OF HEAT. 



(29). 



The quantities /i and a are both so small that .their pro- 
duct may be at once neglected ; whence we have 

m^u^—eo— Ma 
m^u^ = v' ^ Ma 

Further, we have by equation (13) of Chapter VI. 

P = Tug, 

writing the single letter g for -^, which will occur very 

frequently in what follows. We can therefore replace p^ and 
P3 m equations (28) by w^ and u^. Then the masses m and 
m^ occur only in the products m^u^ and m^u^, for which we 
may substitute the values given in the two first of equa- 
tions (29). Again, by the last of these equations we may 
eliminate the mass fi^; and as regards the other mass ft, 
though this may be somewhat larger than /i^, yet, since the 
terms which contain fju are generally insignificant, we can 
without serious error use the value found for fi^: in other 
words we may drop for the purposes of calculation the as- 
sumption made for the sake of generality, that the original 
mass in the waste space is partly liquid and partly gaseous, 
and consider the whole of it to be in the gaseous form. 

The above substitutions may be effected in the more 
general equations (27), as well as in the simplified equations 
(2S). This substitution presents no difficulty, and we will 
here confine ourselves to the latter set, in order to have the 
equations in a form adapted for calculation. With these 
changes they read as follows : 

{ev' - Ma) T^, = m,p, + MC{T,- T^) 



u. 



. (30). 



(31). 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 259 

§ 15. Work per Unit-Weight of Steam. 

To adapt the above equations, which give the work per 
stroke or per quantity of steam wt^, to determine the work 
per unit-weight of steam, we must apply the same method 
as before in transforming equation (17) into (18) : viz. to 
divide the three equations by m^, and then put 

^ = ^. ^=r.and]^=Tr; 
then the equations become 

(r-Msr. = (eF.-Z<r)5r.+ (z+i?) Glog| J 

§ 16. Treatment of the Equations. 

, The application of the above equations to calculate the 
work done may be effected as follows. Assuming the pres- 
sure of steam to be known, and also the speed at which the 
^engine works, we can thence determine the volume V of one 
unit-weight of steam. By help of this value we first calcu- 
late the temperature T^ from the second equation, then T^ 
from the third, and finally apply these to determine the work 
done from the first equation. 

Here however we are met by another difficulty. In order 
to calculate T^ and T^ from the two latter equations, these 
must be solved for those temperatures. But they contain 
those temperatures not only explicitly but also implicitly, 
since p and g are functions of temperature. If to eliminate 
these quantities we use for p one of the ordinary empirical 
expressions for the pressure as a function of tempera- 
ture, and for g th6 differential coefficient of the same ex- 
pression, then the equations beconie too complicated l^t 



260 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

further treatment. It would probably be possible to adopt 
the same method as Pambour, and to form new empirical 
formulae, more convenient for the present purpose, and suflS- 
ciently accurate, if not for all temperatures at least within 
certain limits. This however will not here be attempted, but 
another method will be adopted instead, which makes the 
calculation somewhat extended, but easily performed in its 
individual parts. 

§ 17. Determination of-^ or g, and of ike Product Tg. 

If the range of pressure of the vapour at different tempera- 
tures is known with suflScient accuracy for any liquid, then 
the values of g and Tg can also be calculated for the same 
temperatures, and collected in tables, as usually done with 
the values of p. For steam, which has hitherto been the 
only vapour used for the steam-engine, the author has per- 
formed such a calculation, by help of Regnault's tables, for 
temperatures from 0® to 200^ For this purpose he differen- 
tiated according to t the formula used by Eegnault to calcu- 
late the values of p under and above 100° ; and then calcu- 
lated g by means of the new formulae thus obtained. But 
since these formulae did not seem to answer the purpose so 
well as to repay the great labour involved, and since the 
forming and calculating of other more suitable formulas 
proved still more tedious, the author was contented to use 
the numbers already calculated for the pressure to determine 
approximately the differential coeflScient of that pressure: 
e.g., if the pressure for the temperatures 146® and 148* were 

denoted by p^^ and p^^, it was assumed that ^^*^ ^'^ would 

represent with sufficient accuracy the value of the differen- 
tial coefficient for the mean temperature ] 47^ 

Above 100° the same numbers were employed as were 
used by Regnault*. With regard to values under 100° it has 
been recently pointed out by Moritz f that the formula used 
by Regnault is somewhat inaccurate, especially in the neigh- 

* 3f^m. de VAcad. des Sciences, VoL xxi. p. 626. 

t Bulletin de la CUuse physico-maMmatique de VAcad, de St Pitertbourg* 
VoL XIII, p. 41* 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 261 

bourhood of 100^ owing to his having employed for the 
calculation of the constants logarithms to seven places of 
decimals only. Moritz has therefore recalculated these con- 
stants from the same observed values, but using ten places 
of logarithms, and has published the values of jp derived from 
this improved formula, so far as they differ from Regnault's 
values, which first takes place at 40 . These are the-values 
used by the author*. 

When g has been calculated for the various temperatures, 
the product Tg can be calculated without further difficulty, 
since Tis given by the simple equation 

The values of g and Tg thus found are given in a table 
at the end of this Chapter. To complete this the corre- 
sponding values oip are added, those from 0° to 40® and above 
100* being Eegnault's numbers, and those from 40® to 100° 
being Moritz*s. By the side of each of these three columns are 
given the differences between each two successive numbers, 
so that this table enables the values of these three quantities 
to be found for any given temperature, and conversely the 
temperature corresponding to any given value of one of these 
three quantities. 

§ 18. Introduction of other Measures of Pressure and 
Heat 

One other remark is to be made as to the mode of using 
this table. In equations (31) it is assumed that the pressure p 
and its differential coefficient g are expressed in kilograms 
per square metre, whereas in the table the same unit of 
pressure is employed as in Eegnault*s tables, viz. a milli- 
metre of mercury. Hence, if in the formulse which follow 
we are to consider p and g as expressed in these latter units, 
we must alter equations (31) by multiplying p and g by the 
number 13*596 which expresses the specific weight of mercury ; 
inasmuch as this, by Chapter VI., § 10, is the ratio between 
the imits. If we denote this number by fc, we must sub- 
stitute hp and kg for p and g^ whenever these occur in the 
above equations. Similarly for the quantities G and /), which 
express the specific heat and the heat of vaporization in 

* See note at end of chapter. 



^62 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



mechanical units, w6 will use c and r which refer to the ordi- 
nary unit of heat. For this purpose we must write Ee and 
Er for C and p. 

If we now divide the equations by k, so as to bring the con- 
stants E and k together as much as possible, these equations 

W 
take the following form, from which to calculate -j- , and 

thereby obtain W, the work done : — 



k 



u, 



(32). 



E 

The quantity -r has the following value : 

E 423-55 



k 13-596 



= 31-1625 .(33). 



§ 19. Determination of the Temperatures T, and T . 
The second of equations (32) may be written as follows : 

T^,^C'Va{t,--t,)--h{p,^p,) (34), 

where C, a and h are independent of T^, and have the values 



-^,,[?^-''lfx'^=^-^--'-}] 



6= 



€F-?<r 



(34a). 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 263 

Of the three terms on the right-hand side of (34) the first 
is by fax the most important; and it. is thus possible to 
determine T^g^y and thereby also the temperature i^, by 
successive approximations. To obtain the first approximation 
to Tg, which we may call Tg\ we may write t^ for t^y and 
Pj for^j. Then we have 

ry=o (35). 

The temperature i corresponding to this value of Tg 
must be found from the table. Then to obtain the second 
approximation to Tg we may write the value t' thus found 
for t^ in equation (34), and the corresponding value p of the 
pressure for p^. Thus, remembering equation (35), we have 
for the second approximation 

T"g"^ Tg' + a («, -«') - h {p,-p) (35a). 

The temperature t'' corresponding to this value of Tg 
must be found as before from the table. If a second ap- 
proximation be not sufficient, the process must be repeated. 
Writing in equation (34) t'' and jp" in the place of t^ and jp^, 
and remembering equations (35) and (35a), we have 

ry = ry+ait'-f) - b {p' -f) (355), 

The new temperature f' can again be found from the table. 

In this way we may proceed to any degree of approxima^ 
tion ; but the third approximation only differs by about -^ of a^ 
degree, and the fourth by less than ^^ ^^ ^ degree, from the 
true value of t^. 

The treatment of the third of equations (32) is very 
similar. If we divide by F— i<r, and for convenience of calcu- 
lation replace the natural by common logarithms (for wbich 
purpose we have to divide by the modulus M) the equation 
takes the form 

^3=(7+aLog|^ ..(36), 

where C and a have the following values independent of T^ : 



^ eV—la- 



E 



k '^ if ( K- la) 



.(36a). 



264 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

In equation (36) the first term is again the most im- 
portant, and we can therefore proceed by successive approxi- 
mations. First write T for T^\ we then have as the first 
approximation for g,, 

g'^C (37). 

The corresponding temperature t' can be found from the 
table, and from this we can easily obtain the absolute tem- 
perature T\ Write T for T^ in equation (36); then we have 

gr"=5r' + aLogJ ...(37a). 

This gives T'\ Similarly we can obtain the equation 

/' = / + alog^ (376), 

which again gives T'"; and so on. Here again a very few 
approximations will give a value which very closely agrees 
with the actual value of T^. 

§ 20. Determination ofc and r. 

It now only remains to determine the quantities c and r, 
before proceeding to the numerical application of equations 

(32)- ... 

The quantity c, or the specific heat of the liquid, has 

hitherto been treated as constant. This is not perfectly correct, 

since it increases slightly as the temperature increases. If 

however we take as its general value the correct value for 

the mean of the temperatures which occur in the investigation, 

the divergencies may be neglected. This mean temperature 

in the case of engines driven by steam may be taken at 100*, 

which for an ordinary high-pressure condensing engine is 

about a mean between the temperature of the boiler and that 

of the condenser. Taking therefore the value of the specific 

heat which Regnault gives for water at 100^ we may put 

c = l-013 (38). 

To determine r we start from the equation which Regnault 
gives for the whole quantity of heat required to -heat a 
unit-weight of water from 0** to the temperature t, and to 
transform it at that temperature into steam. This equation is 

\ = 606-5 + 0-305^. 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE, 265 

If here we substitute for \ the expression corresponding 

to the foregoing definition, viz, i cdt + r, we have 

Jo 

r = 606-5 + 0-305^ - ( cdt. 

Jo 

In the integral we must use for c the function of tem- 
perature exactly determined by Eegnault*, if we are to 
obtain for r the precise values which Regnault gives. For 
the present purpose it is perhaps suflScient here also to use 
for c the constant above-mentioned. This gives 



f. 



cdt^VOlSt; 



and the two terms involving t in the last equation can now 
be combined into one, viz. — 0*708^. We must at the same 
time make some change in the constant term of the equa- 
tion. This we will so determine, that the same value of r 
which is probably the most accurate of all given by observa- 
tion, shall also be correct as given by the formula. Now 
at 100** Eegnault found for X, as the mean of 38 observations, 
the value 636'67. If from this we subtract the quantity of 
heat required to heat the unit-weight of water from 0* to 
100^ which according to Regnault is 100*5 heat-units, there 
remains to one place of decimals only 

rioo = 536-2t. 
Applying this value we obtain for r the formula 

r = 607- 0-708^ (39). 

This formula is abeady laid down in Chapter VII., § 3 ; 
and a short table is there given, which exhibits the close 
accordance between the values of r as calculated by this 
formula, and as given by Eegnault in his tables. 

§ 21. Special Form of Eqimtion (32) for an Engine 
working without expansion. 

In order to distinguish the effects of the two different 
kinds of expansive action, to which the two latter of equa- 

• Belation des experiences. Vol. i. p. 748. 

t Begnault himself used in his tables the nmnber 536*5 instead of the 
above; this simply arises from the fact that he has used the round number 
637 for X at 100^ instead of 636*67 as given above. 



266 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

tions (32) refer, it seems desirable first to consider an engine 
in which only one of the two occurs. We w;ill therefore 
begin with an engine that works without expansion. In this 
case we may substitute for e, or the ratio of the volumes 
before and after expansion, the value 1 ; sand may also put 
2^3= jTj. The equations (32) are thus greatly simplified. 
The last becomes an identity, and is therefore useless. In 
the second the right-hand side remains unaltered, whilst the 
left-hand side becomes (V—l<r)T^^. Finally the first 
equation takes the form 

w w 

J = f{r. + fc(r,-7;)}-(F-fo)(2;flr.-;,,+l,,) 

k % 

If we here replace (V-^la) T^g^ by the expression on the 
right-hand side of the second equation, all the terms con- 

E 
taining j- as factor cancel each other, as do two terms con- 
taining lor as factor, and the terms which remain can be 
collected together as two products. Then the two equations 
are 



W 

_ = F(l-e)(i),-jPo)-?o-(Pi-l>o) 

(r-Zir)?;.y,=fK + fc(y,-.2;)i 



+ 6F{f x ^- '^^' ^'^ -^p.-p^+Mp.-p.)^ 



(40), 



The first of these equations is exactly the same as is 

given by Pambour's theory, if in equation (18) we put e = 1, 

and then by means of equation (12) (having first put e = 1 

if 
and — = F in that equation) replace B by the volume V, 

The only difference therefore is in the second equation, which 
replaces the simple relation between volume and pressure 
assumed by Pambour. 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 267 

§ 22. Numerical Vahies of the Constants. 

The quantity € which occurs in these equations, and re- 
presents the ratio of the waste space to the whole space left 
open to the steam, may be taken as 0*05. The quantity of 
water which the steam carries over with it into the cylinder 
is diflferent in different engines. Pambour considers that it 
averages 0*25 of the whole mass entering the cylinder in the 
case of locomotives, but much less, 005, in the case of station- 
ary engines. We will here take the latter value, which gives 
1 : 0*95 as the ratio of the whole mass entering the cylinder 
to that part of it which is in the form of steam. Further, 
let the pressure in the boiler, or p^^ be five atmospheres, to 
which con'esponds the temperature 152'22*; and let it be 
supposed that the engine has no condenser, or, which is the 
same thing, a condenser at the pressure of one atmosphere. 
The mean back-pressure in the cylinder is then greater than 
one atmosphere. With locomotives this excess of back- 
pressure may be considerable, for the special reasons already 
mentioned ; with stationary engines it is insignificant. Pam- 
hour, in his tables for stationary non-condensing engines, has 
altogether neglected this excess ; and since our present object 
is to compare the new formula with his, we will follow his 
example and put^^ = one atmosphere. 

We have then in this case the following values to insert 
in equations (40) : 

€ = 005 



^ = 4 = ^'^^3 



(41). 



/?, = 3800 
jPo = 760 

We may also fix once for all the following values : 

k = 13-696, 
<r = 0001. 

There now remain only the quantities V and p^ undeter- 
mined in equations (40), in addition to the quantity W, of 
which we are seeking the value. Of these V is the volume 
of steam in the cylinder per unit-weight, and p^ is the final 
pressure within the cylinder. 



268 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 23. The least possible Vahie of Y, and the correspond- 
ing amount of Work. 

We must first enquire what is the least possible value 
of F. This value corresponds to the case m which the 
pressure in the cylinder is the same as in the boiler, and we 
have therefore only to substitute p^ for p^ in the last of 
equations (40). Thus we obtain 

In order to give an example of the influence of the waste 
space, two values have been calculated from this expression ; 
the first that which would exist if there were no waste space, 
and therefore e = ; the second that which exists upon our 
assumption that e = 005. These two values expressed in 
cubic metres per kilogram of steam passing out of the boiler 
are 0-3637 and 0*3690. 

The reason why the second value is greater than the first 
is that the steam rushes at first into the waste space with 
great velocity; the vis viva of this motion is then transformed 
into heat, and this heat again evaporates some part of the 
priming water. A second reason is that the steam already 
existing in the waste space before the admission goes to 
increase the whole quantity of steam during the rest of the 
process. 

If we substitute these two values of V in the first of 
equations (40), at the same time putting € = in the one 
case, and e = 0*05 in the other, the corresponding quantities 
of work, expressed in kilogrammetres, are respectively 14990 
and 14450. 

According to Pambour's theory it makes no diflference 
with regard to the volume, whether part of it is waste space 
or not; in both cases it is given by the same equation (116), 
if for p is substituted the special value p,. The value thus 
obtained for the volume is 0*3883. The fact that this value 
is greater than the value 0*3637 found above for the same 
quantity of steam, is explained by the circumstance that it 
has been until now usual to assume for steam at its maxi- 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 2t)9 

mum density a volume greater than is allowed by the 
mechanical theory of heat; this view finds its expression in 
equation (11 J). If by means of this latter volume we deter- 
mine the work from Pambour*s equation upon the two 
assumptions that € = and that e = 0*05, the values obtained 
are 16000 and 15200. These quantities, as follows immedi* 
ately from the greater volume, are both greater than those 
found above, but not in the same ratio, because the loss of 
steam due to the waste space is smaller according to our 
equations than according to Pambour's theory. 

§ 24. Calculation of the Work for other Values ofV, 

With an engine of the kind here considered, the eflS- 
ciency of which was investigated by Pambour, the speed 
which the engine actually assumed bore a proportion in one 
case of 1'275 : 1, and in another, with a lighter load, of 
1*70 : 1, to the minimum speed as calculated by his theory 
for the same intensity of evaporation, and for the same 
boiler-pressure. To these speeds correspond in our case the 
volumes 0*495 and 0*660 respectively. We will now, as an 
example of the mode of determining the work done, choose a 
speed which lies between these two, say in round numbers 

V^ 0-6. 

Our first business is now to find the value of T^ corre- 
sponding to this value of V. For this purpose we use equa- 
tion (34), which takes the following special form : 

T^^ = 26-577 + 56-42 (t, - t^j - 00483 (p, ^p^ • . .(43). 

If by means of this equation we obtain successive approxi- 
mations to t^, as described in section (19), the series of values 
is as follows : 

e' =133-01, 

e" =134-43, 

f =134-32, 

t'"' = 134-33. 

Further approximations would diflfer only in higher places of 
decimals, and if we confine ourselves to two places we may 



270 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



take the last number as the true value of t^. The corre- 
sponding pressure is 

i), = 2308-30. 

If we substitute in the first of equations (40) these values 
of V and p,, together with the appro:^imate values of con- 
stants as fixed in § 22, we obtain 

Tr= 11960. 
By Pambour*s equation (18) we have for the same volume 0*6 

Tr= 12520. 

In order to exhibit more clearly the dependence of the 
work upon the volume, and at the same time the divergence 
between Pambour's theory and the author's on this point, 
calculations similar to that for volume 0*6 have been made 
for a series of other volumes increasing by equal intervals. 
The results are given in the following table. The first hori- 
zontal row of numbers, which is separated from the rest, 
contains the values for an engine without waste space. The 
further arrangement of the table is easily understood. 



• 



Pambour 


*8 Values 


V 


/ 


W 


1 


^i 


V 


. W 


0-3637 


152-220 


14 990 


0-3883 


16 000 


0-3690 


152-220 


14 450 


0-3883 


15 200 


0-4 


149-12 


14100 


0-4 


15 050 


0-5 


140-83 


13 020 


0-5 


13 780 


0-6 


134-33 


11960 


0-6 


12 520 


0-7 


129-03 


10 910 


0*7 


11250 


0-8 


124-55 


9 880 


0-8 


9 980 


0-9 


120-72 


8 860 


0-9 


8 710 


1 


117-36 


7 840 


1 


7 440 



It will be seen that the quantities of work, when calculated 
by Pambour's theory, decrease more rapidly as the volume 
increases than when calculated by the author's ; so that whilst 
at first they are considerably the larger they get nearer and 
nearer to the latter and finally become smaller. The ex- 
planation is that by Pambour's theory, whilst the expansion 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 271 

IS going on during the admission, the amount of steam re- 
mains always the same as it was at the commencement; 
while, according to the author's theory, a part of the priming 
water is afterwards evaporated, and this quantity is greater 
the greater the expansion. 

§ 25. Work done for a given Value of V by an Engine 
working with Expansion, 

We will now treat in the same way an engine working 
with expansion, and will choose as our example a condensing 
engine. To fix the degree of expansion, we will assume that 
the steam is cut off at one third of the stroke. We then 
have, to determine e, the equation 

6-6 = :^ (l-e); 
whence, giving to € the value 005, we have 

e=y = 0-3666. 

Let the boiler-pressure be as before five atmospheres. The 
condenser-pressure can with good arrangements be kept 
below -j^ atmosphere. But since it is not always so small, 
and in addition the back-pressure in the cylinder somewhat 
exceeds the pressure in the condenser, we will assume the 
mean back-pressure p^ to be in round numbers ^ atmosphere, 
or 152 millimetres. ' To this corresponds the temperature 
t^ = 60*46^ If lastly we give to I the same value as before, 
the constants to be used in our example will be as follows : 



e = 0-36667 
€ = 0-05 
I = 1053 

p^ = 3800 

i>o=152 



(44). 



To be able to calculate the work done, we only now need 
to know the value of V, To assist us in choosing this, 
we must first know the least possible value of V. This is 
found exactly as in the case of the .engine without expansion, 
by putting p^ for p^ in the second of equations (32)^ axid 



272 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

altering the other magnitudes, which are in combination 
with p , in the same way. We thus obtain in the present 
case the value 1*010. Starting from this, we will first 
suppose that the actual speed of the engine exceeds the least 
possible in the ratio 3 : 2. We may then put in round 
numbers F= 1*5, and we will calculate the work done at this 
speed. 

We first determine the two temperatures t^ and ^3, by 
substituting this value of V in the two last of equations (82). 
Of these t^ has already been approximately found for the 
non-condensing engine; and since the present case only 
differs from the former inasmuch as the quantity e, which 
was there taken equal to 1, has here a different value, we 
need not go through the process again, but will merely give 
the final result, which is 

t, = 137-43'. 

To determine t^ we have equation (36), which takes in 
this case the form 

5^3 = 26-604 + 51-515 Log J? (45). 

From this we obtain the following successive approxima- 
tions : 

e' =99-24'^ 

t" =101-93 

r =10174 

r' = 101-76 J 

The last of these, from which further approximations would 
only diverge in higher places of decimals, we will consider 
to be the correct value of L, and will apply it, together with 
the known values of ^^ and t^, to the first of equations (32). 
Thus we obtain 

Tr= 31080. 

If, taking the same value for F, we calculate the work 
done by Pambour's equation (18), remembering to determine 
JB and b not from equation (11 J) as with the non-condensing 
engine, but from equation (11a) which refers to condensing 
engines, we find 

Tr= 32640. 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE, 273 

• ... • • . # 

§ 26. Summary of Various Cases relating to the Workr 
ing of the Engine, 

The work done for the volumes 1*2, 1*8 and 21 has 
been calculated in the same way as described above for the 
volume 1*5. Further, in order to make clear by an example 
the influence, which the different imperfections of an engine 
have upon the amount of the work done, the following cases 
are subjoined. 

(1) The case of an engine which has no wa.te space, 
and in which the cylinder pressure is equal to the boiler 
pressure, and the expansion carried so far that the pressure 
has fallen from its original value p^ to p^. If we only assume 
further that p^ is exactly equal to the condenser pressure, 
this case is that to which equation (9) relates, and which gives 
the greatest possible amount of work for a given quantity 
of heat, when the temperatures at which the heat is taken 
in and given off are also given. 

(2) The case of an engine, where there is again no waste 
space, and the cylinder and boiler-pressures are equal, but 
where the expansion is not as before complete, but is only in 
the proportion of e : 1. This is the case to which equation (6) 
refers ; except that there, in order to determine the magnitude 
of the expansion, the change of temperature in the steam 
caused thereby was assumed to be known, whereas here the 
expansion is fixed by the volume, and the change of tem- 
perature must be calculated therefrom. 

(3) The case of an engine having waste space and in- 
complete expansion, in which the only one of the above 
favourably conditions which remains is the fact that the 
steam in the cylinder has during admission the same pres- 
sure as in the boiler, so that the volume has its least possible 
value. To this are appended the cases already mentioned, 
in which this last favourable condition is also absent, and 
the volume has some other given value instead of the least 
possible. 

For purposes of comparison Pambour's theory has also 
been applied to all these casea except the first, for which 
equations (11a) and (115) do not hold, inasmuch as even 
the equation which he has determined for low pressures cas^ 

c. \^ 



274 



ON THE MECHANICAI* THEORY OF HEAT. 



only be applied to J or at the lowest J^ of an atmosphere, 
whereas here the pressure has to descend to ^ of an atmo- 
sphere. For this first case the numerical values given by our 
equations are as follows : 

Volume before expansion = 0*3637, 

„ after „ =6*345, 
Work done = 50460. 

The result for all the other cases are contained in the 
following table ; in which a line is drawn between the values 
for an engine without waste space and the remaining values. 
For the volume are given only the values after expansion, 
because those before expansion can be at once derived from 
these by diminishing them in the ratio 1 : e or 1 : 0*36667. 



V 


h 


's 


W 


Pambour's Values 


r 

V . 


1 
W 


0-992 


152-22'* 


113-7P 


34300 


1-032 


36650 


1-010 

1-2 

1-5 

1-8 

2-1 


152-22" 

145-63 

137-43 

131-02 

125-79 


113-680 

108-38 

101-76 

96-55 

92-30 


32430 
31870 
31080 
30280 
29490 


1-032 

1-2 

1-5 

1-8 

2-1 


34090 
33570 
32640 
31710 
30780 



§ 27. Work done per Unit of Heat delivered from the 
source of heat 

The quantities of work done, as given in the above table, 
and in the previous table for non-condensing engines, are 
calculated per kilogram of steam received from the boiler. 
It is easy to deduce from this the quantity of work. done 
per unit of heat delivered from the source of heat, if we 
remember that for each kilogram of steam so much heat 
must be delivered, as is necessary to raise the mass I, which 
is somewhat greater than one kilogram, from the initial 
temperature, at which it enters the boiler, to the boiler 
temperature itself, and transform it at this latter temperature 
into steam. This quantity of heat can be calculated from 
the data already given. 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 275 

§ 28. Friction. 

Something must be said in conclusion on the subject of 
friction. This will be confined to a justification of the course 
adopted in leaving friction altogether out of account in the 
equations hitherto developed. For this purpose we will shew 
that instead of introducing friction at once into the first 
general expressions for the work, as Pambour has done, the 
same principles will allow us to take it into account sub- 
sequently, according to the method already adopted by other 
authors. 

The forces which the engine has to overcome during its 
stroke may be distinguished as follows : (1) The resistance 
which it meets with from without, and in overcoming which 
consists its useful work. Pambour has named this the load 
(charge) of the engine. (2) The resistances which originate 
vrithin the machine itself, so that the work expended in 
overcoming them produces no useful eflfect. These latter 
resistances we combine under the name of Friction, although 
in strictness they comprise other forces than those of friction, 
especially the resistances of the various pumps driven by the 
engine, with the exception of the feed-pump, the effect of 
which has already been considered. 

Both these kinds of resistances Pambour takes into ac- 
count as forces which oppose the motion of the piston ; and 
in order to be able to combine them readily with the pres- 
sures of the steam on both sides of the pi^on, he made his 
method of denotation agree with that used in the case of the 
steam pressures, so that the symbol denotes not the whole 
force, but the force referred to one unit of surface of the 
piston. On this understanding let the load be represented 
hjR. 

A yet further distinction must be made with regard to 
the friction. This has not the same constant value for any 
one engine, but increases with the load. Pambour divides 
it therefore into two parts, that which exists when the engine 
runs unloaded and that which is brought into action by 
the load. The latter he takes to be proportional to the load 
itself. He accordingly expresses the friction per unit of 
surface by /-f- BR, where / and 8 are quantities which 
depend on the construction and dimensions of the ^xi^ai'^^ 



276 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

but for any one engine may according to Pambonr be con- 
sidered as constant. 

We may now refer the work done by the engine to these, 
resisting forces, instead, as hitherto, to the moving force 
of the steam. The negative work done by the former must 
equal the positive work done by the latter, because otherwise 
an acceleration or retardation of the speed would take place, 
and this is against our original assumption that the speed is 
uniform. Whilst one unit-weight of steam enters the cylin- 
der, the piston passes through the space (1 — e) F, and we 
thus obtain the following expression for the work W: 

Tr=(l-e) V[{l + S)R+fl 

The useful part of this work, which for distinction we may 
call {W)f is expressed as follows : 

(Tr) = (l-6)Fxi2. 

If we eliminate JJ from this equation by means of the one 
above, we obtain 



^^^_w-a-.)vf ^^,_ 



+ 

By help of this equation, since V is assumed to be known, 
we can deduce the useful work {W) from the whole work 
W, as soon as / and B are given us. The manner in which 
these are determined by Pambour will not be entered upon 
here, since that determination rests upon insecure grounds, 
and friction is not the special subject of this chapter. 

§ 29. General Investigation of the Action of Thermo- 
dynamic Engines and of its Relation to a Cyclical Process. 

We have now so far completed our treatment of the 
steam-engine, that we have followed out all the processes 
which take place, determined the several positive or nega- 
tive quantities of work performed therein, and combined 
these into one algebraic expression. We will proceed to 
consider thermo-dynamic engines from a more general point 
of view. The expression that an engine is driven by heat 
must not of course be understood of the direct action of the 
heat, but only that some substance within the engine sets 
the working parts in motion through the changes which it 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. , 277 

undergoes by means of heat. This substance we will call the 
transmitter of the heat's action. 

If a continuously working engine is at uniform speed, 
all the changes which occur must be periodic, so that the 
same condition in which the engine and all its parts may be 
found at any given time, will recur at regular intervals. 
Therefore the substance transmitting the heat's action must 
also at such recurring moments exist within the engine in the 
same quantity and under the same conditions. This may be 
accomplished in two different ways. (1) The same original 
quantity of this substance may always remain within the 
engine; in which case the changes which it undergoes during 
the motion must be such, that at the end of each period it 
returns to its original condition, and the same cycle of 
changes then begins anew. (2) The engine may get rid at 
the end of each period of the substance which during that 
period has served to produce its action, and may then take 
in the same quantity of the same substance from without. 

This latter method is the more usual in practice. It ex- 
ists, e.g. in the hot-air engine, as hitherto constructed, since 
after every stroke the air which has driven the piston in the 
working cylinder passes out into the atmosphere, and is 
replaced by an equal quantity of air drawn from the atmo- 
sphere by the feeding cylinder. The same is the case with 
the non-condensing steam-engine, m which the steam passes 
from the cylinder into the atmosphere, and is replaced by 
fresh water, pumped from a reservoir into the boiler. It 
also applies, partially at least, to the ordinary condensing 
steam-engine. In this the condensed water is indeed in part 
pumped back into the boiler, but not as a whole, because 
it mixes with the cold water, a part of which also enters 
the boiler. The part of the condensed water which is not 
used again, together with the remainder of the cold water, 
must go to waste. 

The first method has hitherto been applied in a few 
engines only, amongst others in engines driven by two dif- 
ferent vapours, e.g. steam and ether*. In these the steam 
is condensed by contact with metal pipes filled inside with 
liquid ether, and is then wholly pumped back into the 

* Annates des Mines, 1853, pp. 203, 281. 



278 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

boiler. Similarly the ether vapour is condensed in metal 
pipes surrounded by cold water, and is then pumped back 
into the vessel used for evaporating the ether. To keep up 
a uniform working, it is therefore necessary merely to add 
so much water and ether as is lost by leakage. 

• In an engine of this kind, in which the same mass of 
vapour is continually used anew, the dififerent changes which 
this mass undergoes during each period must, as shewn above, 
form a complete cu-cuit, or in the terms of this treatise a 
cyclical process. On the contrary the engines in which a 
periodical admission and emission of vapour takes place are 
not necessarily subject to this condition. Nevertheless they 
may fulfil it, provided that they emit the vapour in the same 
condition in which they received it. This is the case with a 
condensing steam-engine, in which the steam passes away 
from the condenser as water and at the same temperature at 
which it passed from the condenser into the boiler. The 
waste water, which enters the condenser cold and leaves it hot, 
need not be taken into account, because it does not appertain 
to the substance transmitting the heat's action, but merely 
serves as a negative source of heat. 

With other engines the conditions at the emission and 
admission are diflFerent. For example, hot-air engines, even 
if fitted with a regenerator, send the air back to the atmo- 
sphere at a higher temperature than that at which it enters ; 
and non-condensing engines take in water and emit steam. 
In these cases no complete cyclical process takes place ; but 
it is always possible to conceive that the actual engine has 
another attached to it, which receives the vapour from the 
first, restores it in some way to its original condition, and 
then lets it escape. The two can then be considered as one 
engine satisfying the above condition. In many cases the 
process can be completed in this way, without making the 
investigation too complicated ; e.g. we may suppose that a 
non-condensing steam-engine, assuming that the feed water 
is at 100°, is replaced by an engine having a condenser, the 
temperature of which is 100^ 

We may thus apply to all thermo-dynamic engines the 
principles which hold for a cyclical process, if we only sup- 
pose those engines which do not of themselves fulfil the con- 
dition^ to be completed in the manner described : and we can 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 279 

thereby arrive at certain conclusions which are independent 
of the special nature of the process in each particular engine. 

§ 30. Equations for the Work done^ during any Cyclical 
Process. 

For any cyclical process the two equations hold which 
have been previously developed (Chs. II. and IV.) as analytical 
expressions of the two fundamental principles, provided the 
second is further extended so as to embrace non-reversible 
changes. These equations are 



/ 



where N denotes the uncompensated transformation occurring 
during the process, which is always positive, and has for 
reversible processes the limiting value zero. 

If we apply these equations to the cyclical process which 
takes place during a period of the thermo-dynamic engine, 
we see at once that if the whole quantity of heat taken in by 
the substance transmitting the heat's action is given, then 
the work also is immediately given by the first equation, 
without our needing to know the nature of the process itself. 
By combining the two equations we may also determine the 
work from other data in an equally general manner. 

We will suppose that the quantities of heat, which the 
variable body receives successively, and its temperature at 
the moment of receiving each, are given, with the exception 
of one temperature T^, at which the body receives a certain 
quantity of heat (or if it is negative generates it) the magni- 
tude of which is not at present known. Let Q^ be the sum 
of all the known quantities, and let Q^ be the unknown 
quantity of heat. Now let us divide the integral in the 
second of equations (47) into two parts, one of which relates 
to the known quantity of heat Q^, and the other to the un- 
known quantity Q^. In the latter T has the constant value 
T^; it is therefore immediately integrable, and gives the 
expression 

Q, 



SSO on' the mechanical THJEOKY OF HEAT. 

The second equation thus becomes 



whence 



Jo T^T, 



I 

Again, since Q = ^^4- Q^,, the first equation gives 
or, substituting for Q^ its value just found, 



F= Q,- T,P'^ - T,N- (48). 



If we make the special assumption that the whole process 
is reversible, then N= 0, and the above equation becomes 



=(?,-n/;7.-. .-.(49). 



This equation differs from the former only in the term 
— TqN. Since -AT is always positive, this term must be nega- 
tive ; whence we see, as is easily proved directly, that under 
the conditions fixed above with respect to the imparting of 
the heat, the greatest possible amount of work is obtained 
when the whole cyclical process is reversible ; and that every 
circumstance, which causes the changes in a cyclical process 
not to be reversible, diminishes the amount of work done. 

Equation (48) therefore leads to the required value of 
the work done in a way which is the exact opposite to the 
ordinary; for we do not, as in other cases, determine the 
several quantities of work done during the several changes, 
and then add them together, but we start from the maxi- 
mum of work, and then subtract fi:om this the losses of work 
due to the various imperfections of the process. This me- 
thod may therefore be called the method of subtraction. If 
we limit the conditions under which the heat is imparted, by 
supposing that the whole quantity Q^ is imparted at a given 
temperature T^, then the other part of the integral also 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 281 

becomes immediately integrable, and gives -^. Equation 
(47) then takes the following form for the maximum work : 

T — T 
W^Q,\^ (50). 

§ 31. Application of the above Eqiiations to the Limiting 
-Case in which the Cyclical Process in a Steairv-Engine is 
Reversible, 

Among the cases considered above with regard to the 
action of the steam-engine, there is one which cannot indeed 
be attained in practice, but which it is desirable to approach 
as nearly as possible, viz. the case in which there is no waste 
space, in which the cylinder-pressure is the same as in the 
boiler or condenser respectively, and in which the expansion 
extends so far, that the steam is thereby cooled from the 
temperature of the boiler to that of the condenser. In this 
case the cyclical process is reversible in all its parts. Let us 
suppose that evaporation takes place in the condenser at the 
temperature T^^ ; that a mass M^ of which the part m^ is in the 
gaseous, and the part Jf — tw^ in the liquid form, passes into 
the cylinder and drives the piston upwards ; that by the fall 
of the piston the steam is first compressed until its tempera- 
ture rises to 2\, and then at that temperature forced into the 
boiler ; and that lastly the mass M is again brought out of 
the boiler in the liquid form into the condenser, by means of 
the small pump, and there cools to the initial temperature T^. 
Here the steam passes through the same series of conditions 
as before, but in the reverse order. The various quantities 
of heat are imparted or withdrawn in the opposite sense, but 
to the same amount and at the same temperature of the 
mass ; and all the quantities of work have the opposite signs 
and the same numerical values. Hence it follows that in 
this case there is no uncompensated transformation in the 
process. We may therefore put N^O in equation (48), 
thereby obtaining an equation similar to (49), but in which, 
for the sake of distinction, we will write Tf ' instead of TT, 
viz. 



'^--«.-n/:f. 



282 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Here Q^ is in our case the heat imparted within the boiler to 
the mass M, whereby M is heated as liquid from T^ to T^ 
and then the part m^ transformed into steam. Hence 

Q, = m,p, + MC(T,-T,) (51). 

To determine I -^ we must consider separately the 

two quantities contained in Q^, viz. MGiT^—T^ and m^p^. 
To integrate for the first of these, let us write the element 
dQ in the form MCdT: then this part of the integral 
becomes 



MCJ'''^=MClog^. 



Whilst the latter quantity of heat is being imparted, the 
temperature remains constant at T^, and the integral in this 
case is simply 



'A 



Substituting these values, the expression for W becomes 

= m,p, ?^ + Jf(7 (2; - 2; + r, log |f) . 

This is the exact expression given in equation (9), and found 
in sections 4 and 5 by the successive determination of the 
several quantities of work done during the cyclical process. 

§ 32. Anothet* Form of the Last Expression, 

It was observed in the last section with reference to 
equation (51) that the two quantities of heat which make up 
Q^y viz. m^p^ and MG (2\ — T^), must be treated diflferently 
in the calculation of the work done ; inasmuch as the one is 
imparted to the substance which transmits the heat's action 
at a fixed temperature 2\, and the other at temperatures 
rising continuously from T^ to 2\. Similarly these two 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 283 

quantities of heat occur also in different forms in the expres- 
sion for the work, as is more clearly shewn if we write our 
last equation as follows ; 

W = m,p, ^- • + MC {T, - T,) (l + ™^^ log |J). . .(52). 

Here ra^p^ is multiplied by the factor 

T -T 



T. 



1 



which occurs in equation (50), while MC{T^ — T^ is multi- 
plied by the factor 

T^ T 

T^ 7^ ^^ "T^ * 

In order to compare these factors better with each other, 
we will throw the latter into another form. If for brevity 
we write 

i^=^^V^^ (53), 



T. 



1 



and we thus obtain 

1 + AfT^O^ I" = 1 + ^^* log (1 - Z) 

Z 2? Z^ 

+ ^Ai^ + i; — r + etc. 



1x2 2x3 3x4 

Equation (52) or (9) thus becomes 

(54). 

The value of the infinite series in the bracket, which 
makes the difference between the factor oiMG{T^ — T^ and 
the factor of m^ p^, varies, as is easily shewn, between -J^ and 1, 
whilst z increases from to 1. 



S84 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP . HEAT. 

§ 33. Influence of the Temperature of the Source of 
Heat 

Since, under the assumptions we Tiave made, the cyclical 
process passed through periodically by the engine during its 
motion is reversible in all its parts, as shewn in § 31, and 
since a reversible process gives the maximum work attain- 
able, we are able to lay down the following principle : — 

If the temperatures at which the substance transmitting 
the heat's action takes in the heat from the source, or gives 
it out externally, are taken as given beforehand, then the 
steam-engine, under the assumptions made in the develop- 
ment of equations (9) or (52), is a perfect engine, inas- 
much as with a given quantity of heat imparted to it, it 
performs the greatest quantity of work, which according to 
the Mechanical Theory of Heat it is possible to perform at 
those temperatures. 

It is otherwise, if we consider these temperatures not as 
given beforehand, but as a variable element which must be 
taken into account in our estimate of the engine. 

The fact that the water, whilst being heated and evapo- 
rated, has a much lower temperature than the fire, and there- 
fore the heat imparted to it passes from a higher temperature 
to a lower, produces an uncompensated transformation which 
is not included in iV^ of equation (47), but which greatly 
diminishes the useful efifect of the heat. We see by equa- 
tion (54) that the work obtained by the steam-engine from 
the quantity of heat m,pj + MG (2\ — T^ = Q^, is somewhat 

T —T 

less than Q^ —^ — ? . But if we assume that the substance 

1 
transmitting the heat's action could have, throughout the time 

when it is taking in heat, the same temperature as those parts 

of the fire which furnish that heat; and if we denote the 

mean value of this temperature by T\ and the temperature at 

which the heat is given off, as before, by T^; then under these 

circumstances the work which it is possible to obtain from 

the quantity of heat Q. will by equation (50) be expressed 

T — T 
^y Qi — TpT-^ • To compare the values of this expression in 

various cases, let t^^ the condenser temperature, be fixed at 
50^, and let us take for the boiler temperatures 110®, 150", and 



APPLICATION^ TO THE STEAM-ENGINE, 285 

180**; the two first of which about correspond to those of the 
low-pressure and ordinary high-pressure engines, while the 
last may be considered the limit of temperature, which has 
as yet been practically attempted for the steam-engine. In 

T —T 

these cases —^ — - has the following values (adding, in each 

case the number 273 to give absolute temperatures) : 

When y.^llO^ -^^^ = 0157, 
150' ] 0-236, 



ISO" 0-287. 



On the other hand if for example we assume t' at 1000^ 
the corresponding value of — ^y— ^ is 0-746. 

Hen6e it is easy to see, as already observed by Oamot 
and subsequent authors, that in order to get the greatest 
advantage from engines driven by heat, the most important 
point is to increase the temperature interval T -^ T^. 
For example the hot-air engine can only be expected to 
shew a decided advantage over the steam-engine, when 
the possibility is established of its being worked at de- 
cidedly higher temperatures, such as are forbidden to the 
steam-engine for fear of explosion. The same advantage 
may however be obtained by the use of superheated steam, 
since, as soon as the steam is separated from the water, it 
may be heated with no more risk than a permanent gas. 
Engines which use the steam in the superheated condition 
ought to unite many advantages of the steam-engine with 
those of the air-engine, and may therefore be expected to 
achieve a practical success much sooner than the latter. 

In the class of engines mentioned above, in which besides 
the water another more volatile substance is used, the inter- 
val T^ — Tq is widened, inasmuch as Tq is lowered. It has 
been already suggested that the interval might be widened 
at the higher limit in the same manner, by adding yet a 
third liquid less volatile than water. The fire would then 
directly evaporate the first of the three only ; this in con- 
densing would evaporate the second, and this in like manner 
iihe third. As far as principle goes this combination would 



286 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

undoubtedly be advantageous ; the practical difficulties, which 
might hinder its being carried out, cannot be conjectured 
beforehand. 

§ 34. Example of the application of the Method of Svh- 
traction. 

The ordinary steam-engine, besides the imperfection 
described above, which is inherent in its nature, possesses 
many other imperfections, which are rather due to its con- 
struction in practice : some of these have already been taken 
into account in our investigations to determine the work done. 
We will now in conclusion exhibit the method in which, with 
engines possessing such imperfections, the work done may 
be determined by the method of subtraction given in § 30. 
In order that we may not extend this investigation, which 
is merely an example of the mode of applying this method, to 
too great a length, we will only take into account two of 
these imperfections, viz. the existence of the waste space and 
the difference of the pressures in the cylinder and boiler 
during the admission of steam. On the other hand we will 
suppose the expansion to be complete, so that the final tem- 
perature T^ equals the condenser temperature T^; and we 
will also tase T^ and 2^„" as equal to T^. 

The process is founded on equation (48), which, calling 
the work W\ is as follows : 

Here ^^ — T^ I -^ represents the maximum work, cor- 

responding to the case when the cyclical process is reve:|:sible; 
and 2yV represents the loss of work due to the imperfections 
which arise from the process not being reversible. For this 
maximum work we have in the case of the steam-engine the 
expression already given at the end of § 31, viz. 

m.p,+ifO(r,-!rj-!r.(^>+jf(7iog|). 

It only remains to determine If, the uncompensated 
transformation which occurs in the cyclical process. This 
transformation arises when the steam is passing into the 
waste space and into the cylinder, and the data for its deter- 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAM-ENGINE. 287 

mlnation are already given in § 10. There, by assuming 
that the mass of steam admitted was at once forced bacK 
again into the boiler^ and also that everything was brought 
back by a reversible path to its initial condition, we arrived 
at a special cyclical process, for which we determined all the 
quantities of heat imparted to the variable mass, and to 
which we can now apply the equation 



JV^ 



These quantities of heat^ some positive some negative, are as 
follows : 

The three first of these are impai'ted at the constant 
temperatures jTj, T^ and T^ respectively : and the correspond- 

ing parts of ite integral are ^S -^^« and ^•. The 

two last are imparted at temperatures which vary continu- 
ously between T^ and iT,, and between T, and T^ respectively; 
and the corresponding parts of the integral are 

T T 

MClog-^, and -/iOlog^. 

If we substitute the sum of these quantities for the integral, 
the last equation becomes 

iV— ^> + y«-Jfaiog|^-^' + /*Clogp...(55). 

Multiplying this expression for N" by T^, and subtracting 
the product from the expression given above for the maxi- 
mum work, we obtain finally for W' the equation 

W = m^,-^ mj>, + MG {T, - T^ - {M+^i) CT, log |» + ^^ 

(56). 

To compare this expression for TT' with that given in the 
first of equations (28), we have only to substitute in the 
latter the value of m^^ given in the last of those equations, 
and then put T^ = T^. The expression thus obtained agrees 
exactly with that in equation (56). 



288 ON THE MECHANICAI4 THEORY OF HEAT. 

In the same way we may also deduct the loss of work 
due to incomplete expansion. For this purpose we must cal- 
culate the uncompensated transformation which arises during 
the passage |0f steam from the cylinder to the condenser, and 
then include this in the expression for N, By this calcula- 
tion, which we shall not here perform at length, we arrive 
at the same expression for the work as is given in equation 
(28). 



NOTE ON THE VALUES OF ^. 

at 

Since the differential coefl&cient -^ occurs frequently in researches 

upon steam, it is important to know how far the convenient method of 
determination employed by the author is allowable ; and for this 
puroose a few values are here placed side by side for comparison. 

The. formula employed by Regnault to calculate the pressures of 
steam in his tables, for temperatures above 100^, is the following : 

Logp=a - bed' - cjS", 

where Log denotes the common system of logarithms, a: denotes, the 
temperature from -20^ to the value imder consideration, so that 
x=^ + 20, and the five constants have the following values: 

a =6*2640348, 

Log 6=0-1397743, 

Logc=0-6924351, 

Log a = 9*994049292 - 10, 

Log)S=9*998343862 - 10. 

From this formula we obtain the following equation for -^ : 



;-f=^-'-^A 



where a and /3 have the same values as before, and A and B have the 
following values : 

Log ^=8*5197602 -10, 

Log ^=8*6028403 -10. 



Suppose that from this equation we calculate the value of J- for the 

at 



dp 
temperature 147^ then we obtain 

«90-115, 



w 



jLpplication to the steam-engine. 289 

Next for the approximate method of determination, we obtain from 
Regnault's tables the pressures 

Pm8= 3392-98, 
^46= 3214-74, 

whence ^?«Z£l« = 1?^^90-1^. 

This approximate value agrees so closely with the exact value deduced 
above, that it may be saMy used for it in all investigations upon the 
steam-engine. 

With regard to temperatures between 0^ and 100®, the formula used 
by Eegnault to calculate the pressures of steam between these limits is 
the following : 

log ^ = a + 6o* - cj3*. 

Here the constants, by Moritz*s improved tables, have the following 
values : 

a =4-7393707, 

Log 6= 8-13199071 12 - 10, 

Log 0=0-6117407675, 

Log a=0-006864937152. 

Log /3= 9-996725536856 - 10. 

From this formula we can: again obtain for-^an equation of the form 

where the values of a and /3 are the same as given above, and those of 
A and B are as follows : 

Log^= 6-6930586 -10, 
Log5=8-8513123-10. 

If we calculate from this equation the value of ^ corresponding to a 
temperature of 70°, we obtain 

'f ") =10-1112. 

By the approximate method of determination we obtain 
Pn -i?a ^ 243-380 - 223-154 _^^.^^^ 

2 M 

This result again agrees sufficiently closely with that obtained from 
the more exact equation. 

C. Aa 



c 



290 OK THB MECHAHICAL THKOEY OF HEAT. 

Table giving the vcdues for steam of the pressure p, its 

differffiUiaX coefficient 3^ = g. O'wi the product Tg, fir 

different temperatures : all expressed in fnHlimetres of 
mercury. 



14-421 
15-357 
10-346 
17-391 
18-495 



29-783 
31-548 
33-406 



0-329 
0-351 
0-373 
0-397 
0-423 
0-450 
0-479 
0-509 
0-541 
0-674 

o-eo9 

0-646 
0-68S 
0-725 
0-768 
0-814 
O'Sei 
0-910 



1-074 
1-134 
1-196 
1-262 
1-331 
1-4(12 
1-477 
1-556 



1-W15 
2-002 
2-103 



0-022 
0-022 
0024 
0-026 
(1-027 



0033 
0-035 
0037 
0-039 
0-040 
0043 
0046 
0-047 
0-049 
0052 
0-055 
0-057 



0-075 
OHI79 

o-oa2 

0085 
0-089 
0-093 
0097 
0-101 



APPLICATION TO THB STEAH-ENOINK 



291 



t in 



degrees 



centi- 


P 


grade. 



33 


37-411 


34 


39-565 


35 


41-827 


36 


44-201 


37 


46-691 


38 


49-302 


39 


52-039 


40 


54-906 


41 


57-909 


42 


61-054 


43 


64-345 


44 


67-789 


45 


71-390 


46 


75-156 


47 


79-091 


48 


83-203 


49 


87-497 


50 


91-980 


61 


96-659 


52 


101-541 


53 


106-633 


54 


111-942 


55 


117-475 


56 


123-241 


57 


129-247 


58 


135-501 


59 


142-011 


60 


148-786 


61 


155-834 


62 


163-164 


63 


170-785 


64 


178-707 


65 


186-938 


66 


195-488 


67 


204-368 


68 


213-586 


69 


223-154 


70 


233-082 


71 


243-380 


72 


254-060 


73 


265-132 


74 


276-608 


75 


288-500 



Diff. 



2-154 
2-262 
2-374 
2-490 
2-611 
2-737 
2-867 
3-003 
3-145 
3-291 
3-444 
3-601 
3-766 
3-935 
4-112 
4-294 
4-483 
4-679 
4-882 
5-092 
5-309 
5-533 
5-766 
6-006 
6-254 
6-510 
6-775 
7-048 
7-330 
7-621 
7-922 
8-231 
8-550 
8-880 
9-218 
9-568 
9-928 
10-298 
10-680 
11-072 
11-476 
11-892 



2-103 
2-208 
2-318 
2-432 
2-550 
2-674 
2-802 
2-935 
3-074 
3-218 
3-367 
3-522 
3-683 
3-850 
4023 
4-203 
4-388 
4-581 
4-780 
4-987 
5-200 
5-421 
5-649 
5-886 
6-130 
6-382 
6-642 
6-911 
7-189 
7-475 
7-771 
8076 
8-390 
8-715 
9-049 
9-393 
9-748 
10-113 
10-489 
10-876 
11-274 
11-684 
12-106 



Diflf. 



Tg 



Dm. 



0-105 
0-110 
0114 
0-118 
0-124 
0-128 
0-133 
0139 
0-144 
0-149 
0-155 
0-161 
0-167 
0173 
0180 
0-185 
0-193 
0-199 
0-207 
0-213 
0-221 
0-228 
0-237 
0-244 
0-252 
0-260 
0-269 
0-278 
0-286 
0-296 
0-305 
0-314 
0-325 
0-334 
0:344 
0-355 
0-365 
0-376 
0-387 
0-398 
0-410 
0-422 



644 
678 
714 
751 
791 
832 
874 
919 
965 
1014 
1064 
1116 
1171 
1228 
1287 
1349 
1413 
1480 
1549 
1621 
1695 
1773 
1853 
1936 
2023 
2112 
2205 
2301 
2401 
2504 
2611 
2722 
2836 
2954 
3077 
3203 
3334 
3469 
3608 
3752 
3901 
4054 
4213 



34 

36 

37 

40 

41 

42 

45 

46 

49 

50 

52 

55 

57 

59 

62 

64 

67 

69 

72 

74 

78 

80 

83 

87 

89 

93 

96 

100 

103 

107 

111 

114 

118 

123 

126 

131 

135 

139 

144 

149 

153 

159 



\^— ^ 



ON THE MBCHANICAL TBEORT OF HEAT. 



288-500 
300-820 
313-579 
336-789 
340-4(54 
354-616 
369-258 
384-404 
400-068 
416-262 



505-705 
525-392 
545-715 



610-661 
633-692 
667-443 
681-931 
707-174 
733-191 
760-00 
787-50 
81601 
845-28 
875-41 
906-41 
938-31 
97114 
1004-91 
1039-65 
1075-37 
1112-09 
1149-83 
1188-61 
1228-47 



12-320 
12-759 
13-210 
13C75 
14-152 
14-642 
15146 
15-664 



23-751 
24-488 
25-213 
26-017 



33-77 
34-74 
35-72 



40-94 
43-06 
43-19 



12-106 

12-984 
13-442 
13-913 
14-397 
14-894 
15-405 
16-929 
16-467 
17-019 
17-588 
18-168 
18-765 



20-649 
21-309 
21-985 



0-433 
0-445 
0-458 
0-471 
0-484 
0-497 
051 1 
0-624 
0-638 
0-552 
0-677 
0-582 
0-597 
0-612 

0-644 
0-660 
0-676 



0-747 
0-765 
0-783 
0-787 
0-805 
0-840 
0-855 
0-865 
0-885 
0-915 
0-935 
0-955 
0-975 



4213 
4376 
4544 
4718 
4897 
5082 
5372 



6313 

6540 

6774 
7014 



7778 
8047 
8323 
8608 
8900 
9200 



10146 
10474 
10817 
11167 
11523 
11888 
12266 
12654 
13051 
13458 
13372 
14296 
14730 
15178 
15635 



APPLICATION TO THE STEAH-ENOINE. 



293 



t in 
degrees 
centi- 
grade. 



117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 



1354-66 
1399-02 
1444-55 
1491-28 
1539-25 
1588-47 
1638-96 
1690-76 
1743-88 
1798-35 
1854-20 
1911-47 
1970-15 
2030-28 
2091-90 
2155-03 
2219-69 
2285-92 
2353-73 
2423-16 
2494-23 
2567-00 
2641-44 
2717-63 
2795-57 
2875-30 
2956-86 
3040-26 
3125-55 
3212-74 
3301-87 
3392-98 
3486-09 
3581-23 
3678-43 
3777-74 
3879-18 
3982-77 
4088-56 
4196-59 
4306-88 
4419-45 
4534-36 



Diflf. 



44-36 
45-53 
46-73 
47-97 
49-22 
50-49 
51-80 
53-12 
54-47 
55-85 
57-27 
58-68 
6013 
61-62 
6313 
64-66 
66-23 
67-81 
69-43 
71-07 
72-77 
74-44 
76-19 
77-94 
79-73 
81-56 
83-40 
85-29 
87-19 
89-13 
91-11 
93-11 
95-14 
97-20 
99-31 
101-44 
103-59 
105-79 
108-03 
110-29 
112-57 
114-91 



9 



43-775 
44-945 
46-130 
47-350 
48-595 
49-855 
51-145 
52-460 
53-795 
55-160 
56-560 
57-975 
59-405 
60-875 
62-375 
63-895 
65-445 
67020 
68-620 
70-250 
71-920 
73-605 
75-315 
77-065 
78-835 
aO-645 
82-480 
84-345 
86-240 
88-160 
90-120 
92-110 
94-125 
96-170 
98-255 
100-375 
102-515 
104-690 
106-910 
109-160 
111-430 
113-740 
116-085 



Diff. 



1-170 
1-185 
1-220 
1-245 
1-260 
1-290 
1-315 
1-335 
1-365 
1-400 
1-415 
1-430 
1-470 
1-500 
1-520 
1-550 
1-575 
1-600 
1-630 
1-670 
1-685 
1-710 
1-750 
1-770 
1-810 
1-835 
1-865 
1-895 
1-920 
1-960 
1-990 
2-015 
2-045 
2-085 
2-120 
2-140 
2-176 
2-220 
2-250 
2-270 
2-310 
2-345 



Tg 



17072 

17574 

18083 

18609 

19146 

19693 

20253 

20827 

21410 

22009 

22624 

23248 

23881 

24533 

25199 

25877 

26571 

27277 

27997 

28732 

29487 

30252* 

31030 

31828 

32638 

33468 

34312 

35172 

36048 

36939 

37850 

38778 

39721 

40680 

41660 

42659 

43671 

44703 

45757 

46830 

47915 

49022 

50149 



Diff. 



502 
509 
526 
537 
547 
560 
574 
583 
599 
615 
624 
633 
652 
666 
678 
694 
706 
720 
735 
755 
765 
778 
798 
810 
830 
844 
860 
876 
891 
911 
928 
943 
959 
980 
999 
1012 
1032 
1054 
1073 
1085 
1107 
1127 



OK THE HECHAKICAL THEORT OF HEAT. 



4534-36 
4651 '62 
4771-23 



5017-91 
5144-97 
5274-54 
6406-69 
6541-43 
5678-83 
5818-90 
5961-66 
6107-19 
6255-48 
6406-60 
6560-55 
6717-43 
6877-22 
7039-97 
720572 
7374-52 
7546-39 
7721-37 

6080-84 
8265-40 
8453-23 
8644-35 



9237-95 
9442-70 
9650-93 

10076-04 
10297-01 
10519-63 
10745-95 
10976-00 



122-06 
124-55 
127-06 
129-57 
13215 
134-74 
137-39 
140-08 
142-76 
145-53 
148-29 



159-79 
162-75 
165-75 



184-56 
187-83 
191-12 
194-47 
197-86 
201-27 
204-75 
208-23 
211-78 
216-33 
218-97 



116-085 
118-460 
120-870 
123-316 
125-805 
128-315 
130-860 
133-445 
136-065 
138-735 
141-420 
144-145 
148-910 
149-705 
152-535 
155-415 
158-335 
161-270 



102-795 
196-165 
199-565 
203-010 
206-490 
210-005 
213-555 
217-150 
220-795 
224-470 
228-185 
231-935 
235-730 
239-570 
243-455 



2-375 

2-410 
2-445 
2-490 
2-510 
2-545 
2-585 



2-725 
2-765 
3-795 
2-630 



3-320 
3-370 
3-400 
3-445 
3-480 
3-515 
3-550 
3-595 
3-645 
3-S75 
3-715 
3-750 
3-795 
3-840 
3-885 



50149 
51293 
62458 
53643 
54851 
66073 
57317 
5S582 



70934 
72410 
73912 
75441 



95605 
97442 
99303 
101192 
103111 
105052 
107016 
109009 



CHAPTER XII. 



ON THE CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT 
AND ON THE LIMITS OF ITS ACTJON. 



§ 1. Object of the Investigation. 

The principle assumed by the author as the ground of 
the second main principle, viz. that heat cannot of itself, or 
without compensation, pass from a colder to a hotter body, 
corresponds to everyday experience in certain very simple 
cases of the exchange of heat. To this class belongs the 
conduction of heat, which always takes place in such a way 
that heat passes from hotter bodies or parts of bodies to 
colder bodies or parts of bodies. Again as regards the ordi- 
nary radiation of heat, it is of course well known that not only 
do hot bodies radiate to cold, but also cold bodies conversely 
to hot ; nevertheless the general result of this simultaneous 
double exchange of heat always consists, as is established by 
experience, in an increase of the heat in the colder body 
at the expense of the hotter. 

Special circumstances may however occur during radia- 
tion, which cause the rays, instead of continuing in the same 
straight line, to change their direction ; and this change of di- 
rection may be such, that all the rays from a complete pencil 
of finite section meet together in one point, and there combine 
their action. This can be accomplished, as is well known, by 
the use of a burning-mirror or burning-glass; and several 
mirrors or glasses may even be so an-anged, that several 
pencils of rays from different sources of heat meet together in 
one point. 



296 ON THB MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

For cases of this kind there is no experimental proof that 
it is impossible for a higher temperature to exist at the point 
of concentration than is possessed by the bodies from which 
the rays emanate. Rankine* accordingly, on a special occasion, 
of which we shall speak in another place, has drawn a parti- 
cular conclusion, which rests entirely on the assumption that 
rays of heat can be concentrated by reflection in such a way, 
that at the fOcus thus produced a body may be raised to a 
higher temperature than is possessed by the bodies which 
emit the rays. K this assumption be correct, the principle 
enunciated above must be false, and the proof, deduced by 
means of that principle, of the second fundamental principle 
of the Mechanical Theory of Heat would thus be overthrown. 

As the author was anxious to secure the principle against 
any doubt of this kind, and as the concentration of rays of 
heat, with which is immediately connected that of rays of 
light, is a subject which, apart from this special question, is 
of much interest from many points of view, be has attempted 
a closer mathematical investigation of the laws which govern 
the concentration of rays, and of the influence which this con- 
centration can have on the exchange of heat between bodies. 
The results are contained in the following sections. 

I. Reasons why the ordinaky method of deter- 
mining THE mutual radiation, OF TWO SURFACES 
DOES NOT EXTEND TO THE PRESENT CASE. 

§ 2. Limitation of the treatment to perfectly black bodies, 
and to horhogeneous and unpolarized rays of heat 

When two bodies are placed in a medium permeable to 
heat rays, they communicate heat to each other by radiation. 
Of the rays which fall on one of these bodies, part is in gene- 
ral absorbed, part reflected, part transmitted; and it is known 
that the power of absorption stands in a simple relation to 
the power of emission. As it is not here our object to inves- 
tigate the differences between these relations and the laws 
to which they conform, we will take one simple case, viz. 
that in which the bodies are such that they completely ab- 
sorb all the rays which fall upon them, either actually on the 

* On the Re-concentration of the Mechanical Energy of the Uniyerse, 
P/iii. Mag.^ Series iv., VoL it. p. 358. 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 297 

surface, or in a layer so thin that its thickness may be neg- 
lected. Such bodies have been named by KirchhoflF, in his 
well-known and excellent paper on the relation between 
emission and absorption, " perfectly black bodies*." 

Bodies of this kind have also the maximum power of 
emission. It was formerly assumed to be beyond question 
that their intensity of emission depended only on their tem- 
perature ; so that all perfectly black bodies, at the same 
temperature and with the same extent of surface, would 
radiate exactly the same quantity of heat. But as the rays 
emitted by the body are not homogeneous, but diflfer accord- 
ing to the scale of colours, the question of emission must be 
studied with special reference to this scale ; and Kirchhoff has 
extended the foregoing principle, by laying down that per- 
fectly black bodies at equal temperatures send out not only 
the same total quantity of heat, but also the same quantity 
of each class of ray. As the distinctions between the rays 
according to colour have no place in our investigation, we 
will assume throughout that w^e have to do with only one 
known class of ray, or, to speak more accurately, with rays 
whose wave-length only varies within indefinitely small 
limits. Whatever is true of this class of rays must similarly 
be true of any other class; and thus the results obtained 
from homogeneous heat may easily be extended to heat 
which contains a mixture of different classes of rays. 

With the same object of avoiding unnecessary complica- 
tions, we will abstain from discussing polarization, and assume 
that we have only to do with unpolarized rays. The mode 
of taking polarization into account in such cases has already 
been explained by Helmholtz and Kirchhoff. 

§ 3. Kirchhoff* s fornmla for the mutical Radiation of 
two Elements of Surface, 

Let s^ and s^ be the surfaces of two perfectly black 
bodies of the same given temperature ; aaid let us consider 
two elements of these surfaces ds. and ds^, in order to 
determine and to compare the quantities of heat which they 
mutually send to each other by radiation. If the medium, 
which surrounds the bodies and fills the intervening space, 

♦ Pogg. Ann., Vol. cix. p. 275. 



298 . ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

is homogeneous, so that the rays simply pass in straight lines 
from one surface to the other, it is easy to see that the quan- 
tity of heat which ds^ sends to ds^ must be the same as that 
which ds^ sends to d^^ ; if on the contrary this medium is 
not homogeneous, but there are variations in it which cause 
the rays to be broken up and reflected, the process is less 
simple, and a closer investigation is needed to prove whether 
the same perfect reciprocity holds in this case also. This 
investigation has been performed in a very elegant manner 
by Kirchhoff ; and his results will be briefly stated here, so 
far as they relate to the case in which the rays on their 
way from one element to the other suffer no diminution of 
strength ; in other words in which the breakings up and re- 
flections of the ray take place without loss of power, and 
there is no absorption during its passage. A few variations 
will alone be made in the denotation and in the system of co- 
ordinates, to produce a better accordance with what follows. 

If two points are given, only one of the infinitely large 
number of rays sent out by one point can in general attain 
the other*; or if the rays are so broken up and reflected, 
that several of them meet in the other point, yet they form in 
general only a limited number of separate rays, each of which 
can be treated by itself. The path of such a ray from one 
point to the other is determined by the condition that the 
time expended in traversing this path is a minimum, com- 
pared with the times which would be expended in traversing 
all other neighbouring paths between the same points. This 
minimum time is determined, if where several separate rays 
meet we investigate only one at a time, by the position of 
the two points between which it passes ; and we will denote 
it, as Kirchhoff has done, by T. . 

* The form of expression that a point sends out an infinitely large num- 
ber of rays is perhaps, in the strict mathematical sense, inaccurate, since heat 
and light can only be sent forth from a surface, and not from a mathematical 
point. It would be more accurate to refer the sending out of the heat or light 
not to the point itself, but to the element of area at the point. As, however, the 
conception of a ray is itself only a mathematical abstraction, we may, without 
fear of misconception, retain the statement that an infinitely large number of 
rays proceed from each point of the surface. If it were our object to determine 
quantitatively the heat or light radiated by a surface, it is evident that the 
size of the surface must be taken into account, and that its elements must be 
considered, not as points, but as indefinitely smaU surfaces; the area of 
which must appear as a factor in the formula expressing the quantity of heat 
or light radiated from an element of surface. 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 299 

Eetuming now to the elements of surface ds^ and ds^, we 
will suppose a plane tangential to the surface to be drawn 
through one point of each element; and, we will treat ds^ and 
cfo as elements of these planes. In each of these planes let us 
take any system of rectangular co-ordinates, which we will 
call a?i, y^ in the one case, and x^, y^ in the other*. If we 
now take a point on each plane, the time 2^, expended by 
the ray in passing from one point to the other, is determined, 
as stated above, by the position of the two points; and this 
time may therefore be treated as a function of the four co- 
ordinates of the two points. 

On these assumptions KirchhofF*s expression for the 
quantity of heat, which the element ds^ sends to the element 
ds^ per unit of time, is as follows f: 

ej d^T ^^ d^T d^T ^^ ^^ ]d3d3 
ir\dx^dx^ dy^dy^ dx^dy^ dy^dxj ^ *' 

where ir is the well-known ratio between the circumference 
and diameter of a circle, and e^ is the intensity of emission 
of the surface 5^, in the locality of the element ds^y so that e^ da^ 
represents the whole quantity of heat radiated by ds^ per unit 
of time. 

Conversely to express the quantity of heat which ds^ 
sends to cfoj, we need only substitute for e^,m the above 
expression the quantity e^y which is the intensity of emission 
of the surface s^. Everything else remains unaltered, as 
being symmetrical with regard to the two elements ; for the 
time Ty which a ray expends in traversing the path between 
two points of the two elements, is the same in whichever 
direction it is moving. If we now assume that the surfaces, 
which are supposed to be at the same temperature, radiate equal 
quantities of heat in the same time, then e^ = e^\ and there- 
fore the quantity of heat sent by cfo^ to ds^ is exactly the same 
as that sent by ds^ to rf«j. 

* Eirchhoff has chosen two planes at right angles to the directions of the 
rays in the neighbourhood of the two elements; he has taken axes of co- 
ordinates in these planes, and has projected the elements of surface upon 
them. 

t Fogg. Ann.y Vol. oix. p. 286. 



300 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

§ 4. Indeterminateness of the Formula in the case of the 
Concentration of Rays, 

We have already observed that in general only one ray, or 
a limited number of separate rays, can pass between two given 
points. In special cases, however, it may happen, that an in- 
definitely large number of rays, forming a pencil in either two 
or three dimensions (i.e. in the latter case forming a cone), 
and starting from the first point, may again unite in the 
second. This of course holds with rays of light as well as 
of heat, and it is usual in Optics to call such a point, in 
which all the rays of a certain conical pencil sent out from 
a given point unite again, the image of the given point ; or, 
since conversely the first point may become the image of the 
second, the two points are called conjugate foci. When what 
is here described in the case of two particular points holds 
of all the points of two surfaces, so that every point of 
the one surface is the conjugate focus of some point on the 
other surface, then the one surface is called the optical image 
of the other. 

We may now ask how the exchange of rays takes place 
between the elements of two such surfaces; whether the 
above-mentioned reciprocity holds, so that at equal tempera- 
tures any element of the one surface sends to any element 
of the other exactly the same amount of heat as it received 
from it, and therefore one body cannot heat the other to a 
higher temperature than its own ; or whether in such cases 
the concentration of the rays makes it possible for one body 
to heat another to a higher temperature than it possesses 
itself 

To this case Kirchhoflf *s expression does not directly apply. 
For let the surface s^ be an optical image of the surface s^. 
Then all the rays, which a point p^y lying upon s^, sends out 
within a certain cone, unite on some point p^ of the surface s,, 
and all the surrounding points of s^ receive no rays whatever 
from jPj. Hence if the co-ordinates a?j, y^ of the point p^ are 
given, then the co-ordinates a?,, y^ of the point p^ are no 
longer to be taken at pleasure, but are also fixed ; and 
similarly, if x , y are given, then x^, y^ are also determined. 

A diflerential coeflScient of the form -j — -j— , where x. is con- 

aXiax^ 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 301 

sidered as variable when differentiating according to x^y 
whilst the second co-ordinate y^ of the same point, and the 
co-ordinates x^, y, of the other, are assumed to be constant, — 
and where similarly in differentiating according to x^, this is 
taken as the only variable — can thus represent no real quan- 
tity of finite value. Therefore in this case we must find an 
expression of somewhat different form from Kirchhoff *s ; and 
for this purpose we must first consider some questions similar 
to those considered by Kirchhoff in arriving at his expres- 
sion. 



II. Determination of corresponding points and cor- 
responding ELEMENTS OF SURFACE IN THREE PLANES 
CUT BY THE RAYS, 

§ 5. Equations between the co-ordinates of the points in 
which a ray cuts three given planes. 

Let there be three given planes a, 6, c (Fig. 25), and in 
each of them let there be a system 
of rectangular co-ordinates, which 
we may call respectively ooj/a, ar^yj, 
and xj/g. Let us take a point p„ 
in plane a, and a point p^ in plane b, 
and consider a ray as passing from 
one of these to the other ; then to 
determine its path we have the con- 
dition that the time, which the ray 
expends in traversing it, must be 
less than it would expend in travers- 
ing any other neighbouring path. 
Call this minimum time T^y It is 
a function of the co-ordinates of p^ 
and pi,, i.'e. of the four quantities x^y^ 
T^ be the time of the ray*s passage between two points p^ 
and p^, in planes a and c ; and let 2^ be the time of its pas- 
sage between two points fjjand p^, in planes b and c. T^ is a 
function of the co-ordinates x^y^, xj/^; and T^ is a function 
of the co-ordinates Xf^y^,, xj/^. 

Now as a ray, which passes between two of these planes, 
will in general cut the third plane also, we have for each ray 



Xf^j^. Similarly let 



302 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

three points of section, which are so related to each other 
that any one of them is in general determined by the other 
two. The equations which serve for this determination may 
be easily deduced from the above-mentioned condition. Let 
us first suppose that points p^ andjp^ are given beforehand, and 
that the point is still unlmown in which the ray cuts the 
intermediate plane 6. This point, to distinguish it from 
other points in the plane, we will call p\. Take any point 
whatever jpj in this plane, and consider two rays, which we 
may call auxiliary rays, passing the one from p^ to ^j, and 
the other from p^ to p„. In Fig. 25 these rays are shewn by 
dotted lines, and the primary ray, which goes direct from p^ 
to p^y by a full line*. K, as before, we call the times ex- 
pended by these two rays T^ and Tj^, the value of the sum 
of these times T^ + T^ will depend on the position of j^^, and 
therefore, since the points p^ and p^ are assumed to be given, 
it may be considered as a function of the co-ordinates x^y^, 
of point Pf,, Among all the values, which this sum may 
assume if we give to point p^ various positions in the neigh- 
bourhood of p J, the minimum value must be that which is 
obtained by making p^ coincide with p\, in which case the 
auxiliary rays merely become parts of the direct ray. We 
therefore have the following two equations to determine the 
co-ordinates of this point p\ : 

As T^ and J^j, in addition to the co-ordinates of the un- 
known point Pj, contain also the co-ordinates of the known 
points p^ and p^^ we may consider the two equations thus 
established as being simply two equations between the six 
co-ordinates of the three points in question. These equations, 
therefore, can be applied, not merely to determine the co- 
ordinates of the point in the intermediate plane from those 

* These lines are shewn curved in the figure, to indicate that the path 
taken by a ray between two given points need not be simply the straight line 
drawn between the two points, but a different line determined by the re- 
fractions or reflections which the ray may undergo: it may thus be either a 
broken line, made up of several straight lines, or (if the medium throngh 
which it passes changes its character continuously instead of suddenly) a 
continuous curve. 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYtf OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 303 



of the two other points, but generally to determine any two 
of the six co-ordinates from the other four. 

Next let us assume that the points p^ and p^ (Fig. 26), in 
which the ray cuts planes a and 6, are 
given, and that the point is yet un- 
known in which it cuts plane c. This 
point let us call p\y to distinguish it 
from other points in the same plane. 
Take any point p„ in plane c, and con- 
sider two auxiliary rays, one of which 
goes from p^ to p^, and the other from 

Ph ^o Pc' ^^ ^ig« 26 these are again 
shewn dotted, while the primary ray 
is shewn full. Let T^ and Tj^ be the 
times of passage of these auxiliary 
rays. Then the value of the differ- 
ence T^^ — Tj^ depends on the position 
of p^ in plane c. Among the various 

values obtained by giving to p^ various positions in the neigh- 
bourhood of p\^ the maximum must be that obtained by 
making p^ coincide with p\. For in that case the ray passing 
fromjE?^ to p^ cuts the plane h in the given point f)j, and is there- 
fore made up of the ray which passes from p^ to j)j and of 
that which passes from p^ to p^. Accordingly we may put 

Hence the required difference is given in this special case by 

^am •'■be -*■ db* 

If on the other hand pe does not coincide with p^, then 
the ray which passes from p^ to p^ does not coincide with 
the two which pass from p^ to jOj and from p^ to pc] and 
since the direct ray between p^ and p^ travels in the shortest 
time, we must have 



T^<T^. + T, 



ac 



ab 



be* 



and therefore we have in general for the required difference 
the inequality 



•^ M, "^ -^ be ^ -^^A* 



ae 



ab' 



304 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

This difference is thus generally smaller than in the 
special case where p^ lies in the continuation of the ray 
which passes from p^ to p^, and this special value of the 
difference thus forms a maximum*. Hence we have the 
two following conditions : 

If we lastly assume that the points p^ and p„ in the 
planes 6 and c are given beforehand, while the point in which 
the ray cuts the plane a is still unknown, we obtain by an 
exactly similar procedure the two following conditions : 

dx^ " ' dy, "^ ^'^^• 

In this way we arrive at three pairs of equations, each 
of which serves to express the corresponding relation between 
the three points in which a ray cuts the three planes a, 5, c; 
so that if two of the points are given the third can be 
found, or, more generally, if of the six co-ordinates of 
thp three points four are given the other two may be deter- 
mined. 

§ 6. Relation between Corresponding Elements of Sur- 
face. 

We will now take the following case. Given on one 
of the planes, say a, a point p., and on another, say J, an 
element of surface dsj,] then if rays pass from pa to the 
different points of dsj,, and if we suppose these rays produced 
till they cut the third plane c, they will all cut that plane 
in general within another indefinitely small element of 
surface, which we will call dsc (Fig. 27). Let us now deter- 
mine the relation between ds^, and dse, 

* In Kirchhoff*8 paper (p. 285) it is stated of the quantity there con- 
sidered, which is essentially the same as the difference here treated of, except 
that it refers to four planes instead of three, that it mnst he a minimum. 
This may possihly he a printer's error, and in any case an interchange of max- 
imum and minimnm in this place wonld have no farther inflnenoe, beeanse 
the principle used in the calcuJations which follow, viz., that the differential 
coefdcient=0, holds equally for a maximum or a minimum. 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT, 305 



In this case, of tlie six co-ordinates which relate to each 
ray (viz. those of the three points 
in which the ray cuts the three 
planes) two, viz. x^ and y^, are 
given beforehand. If we now 
take any values we please for 
Xj, and y^, the co-ordinates x^ and 
y^ are in general thereby deter- 
mined. Thus in this case we 
may consider x^ and y^ as two 
functions of Xf, and y^. As the 
form of the element ds^, may be 
any whatever, let it be a rect- 
angle dxj^y dy^,, and let us find the 
point in plane c corresponding 
to every point in the outline of this rectangle. We shall 
then have on plane c an indefinitely small parallelogram 
which forms the corresponding element of surface. 

The magnitude of this . parallelogram is determined as 
follows. Let \ be the length of the side which corresponds 
to the side da?j of the rectangle in plane J, and let (XorJ and 
(\yj be the angles which this side makes with the axes 
of CO- ordinates. Then 



Fig. 27. 



dx dti 

Xcos(\a?J= -^dx^'y Xcos(\yc) = ^^^ft- 



dx^ 



dx^ 



Again, let /it be the other side of the parallelogram, and let 
(/Aa?J and (jty^ be the angles it makes with the axes. Then 
we have 

/A cos (/ia7j = ^^ dy, ; MCOs(^ye)=^rfy». 



Let (\/a) be the angle between the sides \ and /a. Then we 
have 

cos (X/a) = cos (Xa?J cos (iJLX^ + COS (XyJ COS (/LtyJ 



\^^ dyt, dx^ dyj X/a 



C. 



^^ 



306 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Now to determine the area ds^ of the parallelogram, we 
may write 

da^ = X/A sin (X/a) 

= X/[A ^y 1 — cos' (X/[a) 

= ^xy - COS* (X/a) xy. 

Here we may substitute for cos(X/a) the expression just 
given, and for X' and /a' the following expressions derived 
from the above equations : — 

Then several terms under the root cancel each other, and 
the remainder form a square as follows : 



"^'^ \[dx,dy, dy.dj'^''^^' 

V \dx^ dj/^ dy^ dxj * * 

This quadratic equation can therefore be solved at once. 
But it must be observed that the diflference within the 
brackets may be either positive or negative, and, as we 
have only to do with the positive root, we will denote this 
by putting the letters v.n. (valor numericus) before this 
diflference. We can then write 

To ascertain how x^ and y^ depend upon rr^ and y^, we 
must apply one of the three pairs of equations in § 5. We 
will first choose equations (1). If we diflTerentiate those 
equations according to x^ and y^, remembering that each of 
the quantities denoted by T contains two of the three pairs 
of co-ordinates x^, y^, x^, y^, x^, y^, as denoted by the indices; 
and if in diflTerentiatiug we treat x^ and y^ as functions of 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 307 



x^ and yj, whilst we take x^ and y^ as constant; then we 
obtain the following four equations : 



eP{T^,+ T^) . cfTL „dr, 



+ 



+ 



dT. 



». y^ dVt 



dx^dx, dXf dx^dy, dx„ 

dy. 



= 



+ d^T, 



dxj^dyj, 

{dy,T dy^dx^ 



dx„^ d^T,, 



x^*=0 



dy.dx^ dy^ dx^dy^ dy^ 



dy^dx, 
d'T, 



X 



dx. 



+ 



d^T. 



dXb dy^ dy 
dx. . d^T. 



he y^dy. 



dxt 

dy, 

dy^ ' dy^dy^ ^ dy^, 



— X 



= 



= 



•• • • \i^}* 



If by help of these equations we determine the four 

diX dx d'u d'u 
diflferential coefficients t-" , -y-*' , -4^ , -r^ and substitute 

dx^ dy^ dx^ dy^ 

the values thus found in equation (4), we obtain the required 

relation between dsj, and ds^. To be able to write the result 

more briefly, we will use the following gymbols : 



A = v.n. 



(fr, 



he 



X 



c?r. 



he 



d'T^__ ^ d'T^ 



dx^dx, dy^dy, dx^dy, dy^dx^ 



(6). 



(7). 

Then the required relation may be written as follows : 



ds^^E 
ds^ " A 



(8). 



Again, if we suppose in like manner that a point pc is 
given on plane c (Fig. 28), and find on plane a the element 
ds^y which corresponds to the given element dSj, on plane 6, 
then the result can be derived from that last given by simply 
interchanging the indices a and c. If for brevity we write 



G = v.n. (^ 



d'T^ d'T^ ^ 

- — — ^ — , - Ps 



d^T. 



at 



\dx,dxt dyjiy^ dx,dy^ dyja;, 



)...(9), 



"iQ— 'i 



308 



ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBt OF HEAT. 



then we have 



da, C 



(10). 



Lastly, suppose a point p^ to be given on plane 6 (Fig. 29) 



and choose any element of surface ds^ on plane a. Let 
us suppose that rays from different points of this element 
pass through p^, and that they are produced to the plane c 
Then the magnitude of the element of surface dsc, in which 
all these rays meet plane c, is found, using the same symbols 
as before, to be as follows : 



G 
A 



,..(11). 



From this we see that the two corresponding elements in 
this case bear exactly the same relation to each other, as the 



CONQENTRATION OF RATS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 309 

two elements which are obtained when we have an element 
cfoj given in plane b, and then, having assumed as the 
origin of the rays a point first in plane a, and secondly 
in plane, c,. determine in each case the element of surface 
in the third plane corresponding to the element ds^ 

§ 7. Fractions formed out of six quantities to express 
the Relations between Corresponding Elements. 

In the last section we have only employed the first of the 
three pairs of equations in § 5. We can however employ the 
two other pairs (2) and (3) in the same manner. Each pair 
leads us to three quantities of the same kind as those already 
denoted by -4, 0, and E, These quantities serve to express 
the relations between the elements of surface. Of the nine 
quantities thus obtained, however, there are four which are 
equal to each other, whereby the actual number is reduced to 
six. The expressions for these six are here placed together 
for the sake of convenience, although three of them have been 
already given. 

" ' '\d(c^dx^ dy^dy^ dx^dy^ dy^dxj 

\dx,dx, dy^dy, dxjly, dyJUoJ 

■ \dx,dx^ dy^dy^ dx,dy^ dyJLxJ 

I idx:f "" (dy,y I dxjdy, Jl 

(I.)- 

By help of these six quantities every relation between 
two elements of surface can be expressed by three different 
fractions, as may be shewn in tabular form as follows : 



810 ON THJ; MECHAKICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



<?*o 


E 


A 



dSj, 


A' 


~ F' 


" B 


cfej 


C 


B 


D 


da. 


E' 


'A~ 


'G 


<fo. 


A 


F 


B 


ds,- 


"C 


"jB" 


' D. 



(II.). 



It is easily seen that the three horizontal rows relate to the 
three cases^ in which the given point through which the 
rays must pass is taken either in plane a, plane Cy or plane h. 
Of the three vertical rows of fractions, which express the 
relations between the elements of surface, the first is deduced 
from equation (1) of § 5, the second from (2) and the third 
jfrom (3). 

Since the three fractions, which express a given relation' . 
between two elements of surface, must be equal to each 
other, we have the following equations between the six 
quantities : 

J>.q., ^,?A, ^^^ (,,,^ 

A'-=-EF) B'==FD; C^^DE (13). 

Our further investigations will be performed by means of 
these six quantities ; and since every relation between two 
elements of surface is expressed by three different fractions, 
we can always choose amongst these the fraction most suit- 
able for each special case. 

III. Determination of the mutual radiation, when 

THERE IS NO CONCENTRATION OF RAYS. 

§ 8. Magnitude of the Element of Surface corresponding 
to ds^ on a plane in a particular position. 

We will first consider the case to which KirchhoflTs ex- 
pression refers, and seek to determine how much heat two 
elements send out to each other, on the assumption that 
every point of one element receives from every point of the 
other one ray and only one ; or at most a limited number of 
particular rays, which may be considered separately. 



CONCENTRATION OF RATS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 311 



Given two elements ds^ and ds^ in planes a and c (Fig. 
30), we will first determine the heat 
which (fe, sends to (fo;. For this pur- 
pose let us suppose the intermediate 
plane 6 to lie parallel to plane a at a 
distance p, which is so small, that 
the part which lies between these 
two planes of any ray passing from 
ds^ to ds^ may be considered as a 
i^traight line, and the medium through 
which it passes as homogeneous. Let 
us now take any point in element 
ds^, and consider the pencil of rays 
which passes from this point to the 
element ds^. This pencil will cut 
plane 6 in an element ds^ whose magnitude is given by one 
of the three fractions in. the uppermost horizontal row of 
equations (II.). Choosing the last of these we have the 
equation 



Fig. 30. 



dsj,= gd8^ 



(14). 



The quantity C may in this case be brought into a 
specially simple form, on account of the special position of 
plane 6. For this purpose let us follow EarchhoflF in choos- 
ing the system of co-ordinates in 6 so as to correspond 
exactly with that in the parallel plane a; i.e. let the origins 
of both lie in a common perpendicular to the two planes 
and let each axis of one system be parallel to the correspond- 
ing axis of the other. Let r be the distance between two 
points lying on the two planes, and having co-ordinates or,, 
y^ and a*j, y^ respectively. Then 



r = ^//>-+(ar,-a:,r-h(y,-yJ^ 



.(15). 



Let us now suppose a single ray to pass from one of these 
points to the other ; then, since its motion between the two 
planes is supposed to be rectilinear, the length of its path 
will be simply represented by r ; and if we denote by v^ its 
velocity in the neighbourhood of plane a, which by the 
assumption will remain nearly constant between a and 6, 



312 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

then the time which the ray expends in the passage will he 
given by the equation 

T =- 

The expression for C may therefore be written 

f- I ( cPr cPr cPr cPr \ 

'^^'^' v^Kdx^dx^ dy^dy^ dx^dy^ dy^dxj* 

Substituting for r its value as given by (15), we obtain 

C = Ax^ (16). 



v: r 



Hence equation (14) becomes 



T 



ds^^^v^y.-^Bds, (17). 

If we denote by 6 the angle which the indefinitely small 
pencil of rays, which starts from a point on <fe„, makes with 

the normal at that point, then cos 0=-; and the last equa- 
tion also takes the form 

d8, = ^!^Bds, (18). 

* cos'^ * ^ ' 

§ 9. Expressions for the quantities of Heat which ds^ and 
dSg radiate to each other. 

When the magnitude of the element of surface ds^ is 
determined, the quantity of heat which ds^ sends to ds^ can 
be easily expressed. 

From every point of ds^ an indefinitely small pencil of 
mys goes to ds^\ and the solid angle of the cone made by the 
pencil from each of these points may be taken as the same. 
The magnitude of this angle is determined by the magnitude 
and position of that element dsj, in which the cone cuts 
plane b. To express this angle geometrically, let us suppose 
that a sphere of radius p is drawn round the point from 
which the rays start, and that within this sphere we may 
consider the path of the rays as being rectilinear. If da is 



CONQENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. Sift 

the element of surface in which this sphere is cut by the 

pencil of rays, then — ^ represents the angle of the cone. But 

since the element dsj, is at the distance r from the vertex of 
the cone, and since the normal to the surface at dSf^, which 
is parallel to the already mentioned normal to the surface at 
(fo^, forms with the indefinitely small cone of rays the 
angle 0, we have the equation 

dc __ cos dxdsi, . . 

p T 

If we substitute for ds^ its value from (18), we obtain 

da- v^ 



p* cos 



Bds, (20). 



We have now to determine the magnitude of that part of 
the heat sent from da^ which corresponds to this indefinitely 
small cone; or in other words, how much heat ds^ sends 
through the given element d<T upon the spherical area. This 
quantity of heat is proportional (1) to the magnitude of the 
radiating element (fo„, (2) to the angle of the cone, or to 

-^, and (3), according to the well-known law of radiation, to 

V 

the cosine of the angle 0, which the indefinitely small cone 
makes with the normal. It may therefore be expressed by 

6 cos ^ — 2 ds.y 
P 

where 6 is a factor depending on the temperature of the 
surface. To determine this factor we have the condition 
that the whole quantity of heat which ds^ radiates, or which 
it sends to the whole surface of any hemisphere above plane 
a, must equal ejis^ where e^ is the intensity of emission from 
plane a at the position of ds^. Hence we have 

-^ I cos da- = e^. 

The integration extends over the whole of the hemisphere, 
and gives 



314 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

Substituting this value of e in the above expression, we 
obtain for the quantity of heat which ds^ sends through da 
the formula 

— COB u—^ds^. 
w p 

We have only to substitute in this formula the value for 

—J given in equation (20), and we obtain the required expres- 

sion for the quantity of heat which ds^ sends to ds^, viz.: 

IT 

If conversely we require the quantity of heat which ds^ 
sends to ds^^ and if we denote by e^ the intensity of emission 
from plane c at the position of da^y and by t\ the velocity of the 
rays in the neighbourhood of ds^, we obtain the expression : 

ej)^ - ds^ds.. 



TT 



§ 1 0. Radiation as dependent on the surrounding Medium, 

The expressions obtained in the last section are in general 
the same as Kirchhoff's expression given in § 3, and diflFer 
only inasmuch as they contain as factor the square of the 
velocity, which does not occur in KirchhoflF's expression, 
because he considers nothing but the velocity in vacuo, and 
takes this as unity. Since however the bodies, whose mutual 
radiation we are considering, may often be in diflFerent media, 
where the velocity of the rays is different, this factor is not 
without importance; and its introduction leads also to a 
special conclusion of some theoretical interest. 

As mentioned in § 2, it has been hitherto assumed that 
with perfectly black bodies the intensity of emission depends 
only on the temperature, so that two such bodies of equal 
temperature would radiate equal quantities of heat from 
equal areas of surface. As far as the author knows, the ques- 
tion whether the surrounding medium has also an influence 
on the intensity of emission has never been considered. 
Since however the two expressions given above for the 
mutual radiation of two elements contain a factor which 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HfiAT. 815 

depends on the nature of the medium, it becomes necessary 
to consider this medium, and the method of determining its 
influence. 

If from the above two expressions we omit the factor 

which is common to both, viz. — ds^ds,, we have the result 

TT 

that the quantity of heat, which the element ds^ sends to the 
element ds^, bears to that which ds^ sends to ds^ the ratio 
e^v^ : ejv^. If we now assume that at equal temperatures 
the radiation is always equal, even when the media in contact 
with the two elements are diflFerent, then for equal tempera- 
tures we must put e^^e^; and the quantities of heat, which 
the two elements radiate to each other, would then not be 
equal, but would be in the ratio v/ : v*. It would follow 
that two bodies which are in diflferent media, e.g. one in 
water and the other in air, would not tend to equalize 
their temperatures by mutual radiation, but that one would 
be able by radiation to raise the other to a higher temperature 
than that which itself possesses. 

If on the other hand we maintain the universal correct- 
ness of the fundamental principle laid down by the author, 
viz. that heat cannot of itself pass from a colder to a hotter 
body, then we must consider the mutual radiations of two 
perfectly black elements of equal temperature as being 
themselves equal, and must therefore put 

e.v:^e,v; (21). 

Hence 

e, :e.::v::v: (22). 

Since the ratio of the velocities is the reciprocal of that 
of the coeflScients of refraction, which we may call n^ and n^, 
this proportion may be written 

e^ : e, :: n/ : w/ (23). 

Hence the radiation of perfectly black bodies at equal 
temperatures is diflferent in diflferent media, and varies in- 
versely as the squares of the velocities in those media, or 
directly as the squares of the coeflBcients of refraction. Thus 
the radiation in water must bear to that in air the ratio 
(f)* : 1, nearly. 



316 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

We have also to remember that in the heat radiated from 
perfectly black bodies there are rays of very different wave- 
lengths; and if we assume that the equality of mutual 
radiation holds, not merely for the heat as a whole, but also 
for each wave-length in particular, we must have for each 
of these a proportion similar to (22) and (23) but in which 
the quantities in the right-hand ratio have somewhat dif- 
ferent values. 

Lastly, instead of perfectly black bodies, let us consider 
bodies in which the absorption of the rays received is partial 
only. We must then introduce in the formula, in place of 
the emission, a fraction having the emission as numerator and 
the coefficient of absorption as denominator. For this fraction 
we can obtain relations similar to those obtained for the 
emission alone. This generalization, in which the influence 
of the direction of the rays upon the emission and absorption 
must also be taken into account, need not here be entered 
upon. 



IV. Determination of the mutual radution of 
TWO elements op surface, in the case when one 

IS THE OPTICAL IMAGE OF THE OTHER. 

§ 11. Relations between B,'D, F and E. 

We have hitherto assumed that the planes a and c, so 
far as we are concerned with them, give out their rays in 
such a way, that one ray and one only, or at most a limited 
quantity of individual rays, pass from any point in the one 
to any point in the other. We will now pass on to the case in 
which this does not hold. The rays which diverge from points 
in the one plane may be made to converge by reflections 
or refractions, and to meet again on the other plane ; so that 
for any point p^ on plane a there may be one or more points 
or lines on plane c, in which an indefinitely large number 
of the rays coming from p^ cut that plane, whilst other parts 
of the same plane receive no rays whatever from p^. The 
same of course holds of the rays which start from plane c 
and arrive at plane a, since the rays passing to and fro be-» 
tween the same points describe the same paths. 

Among the innumerable cases of this description we will, 



CONCBNTRATIGN OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 317 



Fig. 31. 



for the sake of clearness, consider 
first the extreme case illustrated 
in Fig. 31. In this case all the 
rays sent out by p^ within a cer- 
tain definite cone meet again in a 
single point p^ of plane c. This 
case occurs for example, when the 
deflection of the rays is eflFected 
by a lens, or by a spherical mirror, 
or by any system of concentric 
lenses or mirrors. We are here 
supposed to neglect the spherical 
and chromatic aberration, which 
we have a right to do with regard 
to the latter, inasmuch as we have confined ourselves to 
homogeneous rays. Two points thus corresponding to each 
other, as the points of starting and of re-union of the rays, 
are called, as already mentioned, conjugate foci. For each 
ray in such a case the co-ordinates a?^, y^ of the point p^ in 
which it strikes plane c, are determined by the co-ordinates 
x^ y« of the starting point p^. The other points on plane c 
in the neighbourhood of p^ receive no rays from »„; for 
there is no path to them which has the property that the 
time in which the ray would traverse it is a minimum, as 
compared with the time in which it would traverse any other 
adjacent path. Hence the quantity T^ which expresses 
this minimum time, can have a resd value only for p^, and 
not for any of the points round it. The differential coeffi- 
cients of I'^y in which the co-ordinates a?„, y^ are assumed to 
be constant and one of the co-ordinates x^ y^ to be variable, 
(or conversely a?^, y^ to be constant and one of the co-ordinates 
^a> Va ^ ^® variable) can thus have no real finite values. 
It follows that of the six quantities -4, jB, (7, I>, Ey F, which 
have been determined by equations (I.), the three B, J), F 
are not applicable to the present case, inasmuch as they 
contain differential coefficients of T„^; whilst the three 
others A, (7, E contain only differential coefficients of 
T^ and T^^. Let us now assume that plane b is so chosen 
that between it and the planes a and c, so far as we are 
concerned with them, the radiation takes place on the 
former system, so that one ray and one only, or at most a 



318 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

limited number of rays, pass from any point on plane b 
to any point on plane a or c. Then for all the points with 
which we are concerned, the quantities T^ and T^^ and their 
diflferential coeflBcients have real values not indefinitely large. 
The quantities A, C and E are then as applicable in this case 
as in the former. 

One of these quantities, E, takes in this case a special 
value, which may at once be found. For the three points 
in which the ray cuts the three planes a, fe, c, the two equa- 
tions given in (1) must hold, viz. : 

In the present case the position of the point in which the 
ray cuts plane 6 is not determined by the position of the two 
points p^ and p^, but plane 6 may be cut in all points of 
a certain finite area. Hence the two equations above must 
hold for all these points, and therefore the equations obtained 
by differentiating these according to a?j and y^ must also hold, 
viz. : 

dx,* ' dxj,dy^ ' dy* '"^ ^' 

If we apply this to the equation determining E in equa- 
tions (I.), we obtain 

E^O (25). 

The two other quantities A and G have in general finite 
values, which differ in different circumstances, and which we 
must now use in our further investigation. 

§ 12. Application of A and C to determine the Relation 
bstween the Elements of Surface. 

Let us suppose that the element ds^ on plane a has an 
optical image ds^ on plane c, so that every point of ds^ has 
a point on ds^ as its conjugate focus, and vice vers&. We 
have now to enquire whether the quantities of heat, which 
these elements send to each other, when taken as elements 
of the surfaces of two perfectly black bodies of equal tem- 
peratures, are equal or not. 



CONCENTBATION OF BAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 319 

Fii'st to determine the position and magnitude of the 
image ds^ corresponding to the given element ds^. Take 
any point pj, on the intermediate plane b, and consider all 
the rays starting from points on ds^^ which pass through 
/?4, Each of these rays strikes plane c in the conjugate focus 
to that from which it starts ; and therefore the element of 
surface in which this pencil of rays cuts plane c is pre- 
cisely the optical image ds^ of the element ds^. Therefore, 
to express the ratio between the areas of ds^ and cfo„, we 
may use one of the three fractions in the lowest row of 
equations (II.), which express the relation between the two 
elements of surface, in which an indefinitely small pencil, 
passing through a single point p^, of plane 6, cuts the two 
planes a and c. Of these three fractions the first is alone 
applicable in this case, since the other two are undetermined. 
We have thus the equation 

l-^^ «■ 

This equation is interesting also from an optical point 
of view, as being the most general equation which can be 
given to determine the ratio between the area of an object 
and that of its optical image. It should be remarked that 
the intermediate plane 6, to which the quantities A and G 
are related, may be any whatever, and can therefore in any 
particular case be chosen as is most convenient for calcula- 
tion. 

§ 13. Relation between the Qaardities of Heat which 
ds, and ds^ radiate to each other. 

Having thus determined the element of surface ds^ which 
forms the image of ds^^ let us take on plane 6, instead of a 
single point, an element of surface ds^^ and let us con- 
sider the rays which the two elements ds^ and ds^ send 
through this element ds^,. All the rays, which start from 
one point of ds^ and pass through ds^,, unite again in ouq 
point of ds^ ; and thus all the rays which d$^ sends through 
dSf, exactly strike the element ds^y and vice versli. The 
two quantities of heat which ds^ and da^ send to dsj, are thus 
the same as the quantities of heat which ds^ and ds^ send 



320 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

to each other through the intermediate element ds^. These 
quantities of heat are therefore given at once by what has 
gone before. Thus for the quantity of heat which ds^ 
sends to (fo^, the same expression will hold, as held in 
§ 9 for the quantity of heat which ds^ sends to ds^, provided 
we substitute C for B and ds^, for ds^. The expression thus 
becomes 

IT 

^milarly for the quantity of heat which ds^ sends to (fo^, 
the expression will be the same as that for the quantity of 
heat which ds^ sends to cfo„, provided we substitute A for B 
and ds, for ds,, or will be 

efi^ — ds^ds^. 

TT 

Remembering that by equation (26) 

Cds^ — Ads^y 

we see that these two expressions stand to each other in the 
ratio e^v^ : e,v^. 

We obtain precisely the same result, if we take any other 
element ds^ on plane J, and consider the quantities of heat 
which the two elements ds^ and ds^ send to each other 
through this new element. These will always be found to 
stand to each other in the ratio e^v^ : e^v^. Since the quan- 
tities of heat, which ds^ and ds^ send to each other on the 
whole, are made up of those which they send to each other 
through all the different elements of the intermediate plane, 
the same ratio must hold for the whole ; and we thus obtain 
the final result, that the total quantities of heat which ds^ and 
ds^ radiate to each other, stand in the ratio e^v^ : e^v^. 

This is the same relation as was found in sections* 8 and 9 
for the case where there is no concentration of rays ; it thus 
follows that the concentration of rays, however much it alters 
the absolute magnitudes of the quantities of heat which two 
elements radiate to each other, leaves the ratio between them 
exactly the same. 

It was shewn in § 10, that if in the case of ordinary un- 
concentrated radiation the principle holds that heat cannot 
from a colder to a hotter body, then the radiation must 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 821 

differ in different media^ and must be such that for perfectly 
black bodies of equal temperatures 

If this equation is satisfied, then in the present case also, 
where the elements ds^ and ds^ are images one of llhe other, 
the quantities of heat which they mutually radiate must be 
equal; and therefore, in spite of the concentration of the rays, 
one element cannot raise the other to a higher temperature 
than its own. 



V. Relation between the increment of area and the 

RATIO OF THE TWO SOLID ANGLES OF AN ELEMENTARY 
PENCIL OF RAYS. 

§ 14. ^Mi,tement of the Proportions for tiiis Case. 

As an immediate result of the foregoing we may here 
develope a proportion, which appears to have some general 
interest, inasmuch as it illustrates a peculiar difference in the 
behaviour of a pencil of rays in the case of an object and of 
its image. This difference must always exist and have a de- 
terminate value, when the object and the image have differ- 
ent areas. 

Consider an indefinitely small pencil of rays, which starts 
from a point on cb., passes through the element ds^, on the 
intermediate plane, and then unites again in a point on ds^. 
We may compare the divergence of the rays at their starting 
point with the convergence of the same at their point of re- 
union. This divergence and convergence (or, to use the 
qrdinary phrase, the solid angles of the indefinitely small cones, 
which the pencil forms at its points of starting and re-union) 
are given directly by the same method which we have used 
in § 9, as follows : — 

Suppose that round each of the points there is described 
a sphere of so small a radius, that we may consider the rays 
as going in straight lines as far as the surface of this sphere; 
and then consider the element of surface in which the pencil 
of rays cuts the sphere. Let da- be this element and let p be 
the radius of the sphere; then the angle of the indefinitely 
small cone, which contains the rays so far as they are recti- 

c. ^^. 



322 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

linear, will be expressed by — ^ . This fraction we have de- 
termined for a similar case in § 9 by equation (20), and in 
the expression there given we have only to alter the letters 
in order to transform it into the expression for the present 
case. In order to express the angle of the cone for that 
starting point of the rays which lies in plane a, we have only 
to substitute in that expression ds^, for ds^, and G for B. In 
addition, the symbol 0, which expresses the angle between 
the pencil of rays and the normal to the surface of ds^, may 
be changed to a^, so as to express more clearly that it relates 
to plane a; and for the same reason the suflSx a may be 

7 

added to — « . Thus we obtain 
P 

'^) ^J^l^Cds, (27). 

To obtain the other equation, which gives the angle of the 
cone at the point of re-union on plane c, we have only to 
change the suffix a into c throughout, and also to substitute 
A for (7. Thus we have 

^)=J!l^Ads, (28). 

From these two equations we obtain the proportion 

since by equation (26) Cds^ = Ads^, 

If we substitute for the velocity the coefficient of refraction, 
this proportion becomes 

nlco^dA-^\ : n^^cos0(-^j :: ds^ : ds^ (30). 

Here the ratio on the right-hand side is the ratio between 
the area of an element of surface of the image, and the area of 
the corresponding element of the object, or in short the propor^ 
tionate increment of area ; and we thus obtain a simple rela- 
tion between this increment and the ratio of the angles of the 
cones made by an elementary pencil of rays. It is easily seen 



.CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 323 

that it is not necessary for the truth of this proportion that the 
rays should finally converge, and meet at one point, but they 
may also be divergent, in which case their directions meet in 
one point when produced backwards, and form what is called 
in optics a virtual image. 

If we take the special case in which the medium at the 
point of starting and of re-union is the same (e.g. where 
the rays issue from an object which is in air, and, after cer- 
tain refractions, or reflections, form an image which really 
or virtually is also in air), then v^ = v„ and n^ = n^; whence 
we have 

^osOai—^) ' cos^J-yJ :: ds^ : ds^. 

If we add the further condition, that the pencil of rays 
makes equal angles with the two elements of surface (e.g. 
that both are right angles), then we have 



$1 '■ (7). '■'- ^'' '■ ^'- 



In this case the angles of the cones formed by the pencil 
of rays at the object and at the image stand simply in the 
inverse ratio of the areas of the corresponding elements of 
object and image. 

In the valuable demonstration which Helmholtz has given 
in his "Physiological Optics"* of the laws of refraction in 
the case of spherical surfaces, he seeks to connect with these 
the case of the refractions which take place in the eye ; and 
he finds in page 50, and extends further in page 54, an equa- 
tion which expresses the relation between the size of the 
image and the convergence of the rays, for the case in which 
the change of direction of the rays takes place by refraction 
or by reflection at the surface of co-axial spheres, and in which 
the rays are approximately perpendicular to the planes which 
contain the object and the image. The author however be- 
lieves that the relation has not before been given in its 
general form, as in proportions (29) and (30). 

* Ear&ten's Universal Encyclopedia of Physics. 



324} ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 



VI. General determination of the mutual radiation 

BETWEEN TWO SURFACES, IN THE CASE WHERE ANY 
CONCENTRATION WHATEVER MAY TAKE PLACE. 

§ 15. General View of the Concentration of Rays. 

We must now extend our investigation so as to embrace 
not only the extreme case, in which all the rays which issue 
from a point on plane a within a certain finite cone unite 
again in one point forming a conjugate focus on plane c, but 
also every conceivable case of the concentration of rays. 

To obtain a closer view of the phenomena of concentration, 
we may use the following definition. If rays issue from any 
point p^ and fall on plane c, and if these rays when close to 
that plane have such directions that on one part of the plane 
the density of the impinging rays is indefinitely great com- 
pared to the mean density, then at this part there is concen- 
tration of the rays which issue from p^. With this definition 
we may easily treat mathematically the case of concentration. 
Between point p^ and plane c take any intermediate plane 6, 
which is so placed that there is no concentration in it of the 
rays issuing from p^ ; and also that its relation to plane c is 
such, so far as we are concerned, that the pencils of rays issu- 
ing from points on one of those planes sufier no concentration 
on the other. Now consider an indefinitely small pencil, 
which starts from p^ and cuts the planes h and c. Let us 
compare the areas of the elements dsj, and ds^ in which these 
planes are cut. If ds^ vanishes in comparison to cfej, so that 
we may put 

l;=o (31). 

this is a sign that there is a concentration of rays, in the 
sense defined above, at plane c. 

Let us now return to equations (II.) of § 7. The equations 
in the first horizontal row are those that refer to the present 
case : and of the three fractions, which there represent the 
ratio of the elements of surface, the first applies to our case, 
because under the assumption made as to the position of the 
intermediate plane we may determine A and E in the ordi- 



\ 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 325 

nary manner. We have thus the equation 

ds^ A ' 

This fraction can only equal zero if the numerator E is 
zero, since under the assumption made as to the position of 
the intermediate planes the denominator A cannot be indefi- 
nitely large. We have then as a mathematical criterion, 
whether the rays issuing from p^ suflfer concentration at plane 
c or not, the condition 

E^Q (32), 

which must be fulfilled where there is concentmtion. 

Now assume conversely that on plane c a point p^ is given, 

and that we have to decide whether the rays issuing from 

this point suiSfer concentration at any part of plane a. Then 

ds 
we have in the same way the condition j-''= 0; ^^^ since by 

(II.) --^ = -^ , we arrive at the same final condition 

E^O. 

It is in fact easy to see that when the rays issuing from a 
point on plane a suflfer concentration at plane c, then con- 
versely the rays issuing from the latter point must suflfer con- 
centration on plane a. 

Since equations (13) express the relations which hold be- 
tween the six quantities A, B, C, JO, E, F, we may apply 
those equations to ascertain what becomes of B, D and F, 
in the case where E=0, whilst A and C have finite values. 
By those equations 

Hence it follows that all three quantities must in the present 
case be indefinitely great. 

§ 16. Mutual Radiation of an Element of Surface and 
of a Finite Surface, through an Element of an Intermediate 
Plane. 

We will now attempt so to determine the ratio between 
the quantities of heat which two surfaces radiate to each 



326 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

other, that the result must hold in all cases, independently 
of the question whether there is any concentration of heat 
or no. 

For greater generality we will substitute for the planes a 
and c, as hitherto considered, two surfaces of any kind, which 
we may call s^ and s^. Between them let us take any third 
surface 5^, which need only fulfil the condition that the rays 
which pass from s^ to s^, or vice verssl, suffer no concentration 
in 5j. Now choose in s^ any element ds^, and in s^, an ele- 
ment dSf,, so situated that the rays which pass through it 
from d^^ will when produced strike the surface s^. Then we 
will first determine how much heat ds^ sends through ds^ to 
the surface s^, and how much heat it receives back from s^ 
through the same element of the intermediate plane. To 
ascertain the first mentioned quantity of heat, we have only 
to determine how much heat ds^ sends to cfo^, since, by our 
assumption as to the position of d^j, all this heat after pass- 
ing dSf^ must strike the surface s^. This quantity of heat may 
be expressed at once by means of our previous formulae. 
Suppose a tangent plane to be drawn to s^ at a point of the 
element ds^, and similarly a tangent plane s^, at a point of ds^; 
and consider the given elements of surface as elements of 
these planes. If in these tangent planes we take two sys- 
tems of co-ordinates a?„, y^, and a?5, y^, and if we form the 
quantity C by means of the third of equations (I.), then the 
required quantity of heat, which ds^ sends through ds^ to the 
surface s^, is given by the expressions 

IT 

Next with regard to the quantity of heat which ds^ re- 
ceives through dSj from the surface s^, the relations of the 
points in s^, from which these rays issue, are not in general 
so simple as that which holds in the special case, where ds^ 
has an optical image ds^ lying on 8^, and therefore is also 
itself the optical image of ds^. If we choose a known point 
j9j on the intermediate element d.9j, and consider the rays 
which pass through this point from all points of ds^, we have 
an indefinitely small pencil of rays, cutting s^ in a certain 
element of surface. It is this element which sends rays to 
ds^ through the selected point ^j. But if we now choose 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT ANP HEAT. 827 

potter poiixt of dij as the .vertex of the pencil, W0 arrive 
at a somewhat different eletnent on the surface s^ Thua 
the rays, which ds^ receives from s^ through different points 
on cfoj, do not all issue from one and the same element 
of s,. . 

Since however the area of ds^ may be any whatever, 
nothing hinders us from supposing it so small, that it is an 
indefinitely small quantity of a higher order than ds^. In 
this case, if the vertex of the pencil changes its position 
within dSf,, then the element of s^ which corresponds to ds^ 
will change its position through a distance so small that 
in comparison with the dimensions of the element it is 
indefinitely small and may be neglected. Hence in this 
case the element cfe^, which we obtain when we choose any 
point whatever /?j on element cfoj, and make it the vertex of 
the pencil of rays issuing from ds^^ may be considered as the 
part of ds^ which, exchanges rays with ds^ through (fo^. The 
area of this element ds^ is easily found from what precedes. 
Let us suppose as before that a tangent plane to the surface s^ 
is drawn at ^p^, and that tangent planes to the surfaces s^ and 
Sg are drawn at points on the elements ds^ and ds^ respectively; 
and let us consider the two latter elements as elements of 
the tangent planes. Take systems of co-ordinates on these 
three tangent planes, and form the quantities A and (7, as 
given by the first and third of equations (I.). Then by 
equation (II.) we have 

The quantity of heat which ds^ sends to ds^^ and which^ 
as mentioned above, may be considered as the quantity which 
ds^ receives from the surface s^ through (fe^, is expressed by 

IT 

or, substituting for ds^ its value given above, 

e^v^-ds^dsj,. 

IT 



328 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

If we compate this expression with that found above, 
which expresses the quantity of heat sent by ds^ through ds^ 
to B^y we see that the two stand to each other in the ratio 
e'J}'^' : e^vl. If we now suppose that *„ and 8^ are the sur- 
faces of two perfectly black bodies of equal temperature, and 
make for such surfaces the assumption (which we have al- 
ready seen to be necessary^ in the case of radiation without 
concentration), that the two products e^v* and e^v^ are equal, 
then the quantities of heat given by the two expressions above 
are also equal 

§ 17. Mutual Radiation of Entire Surfaces. 

If on the intermediate surface Sj, we take, instead of the 
element hitherto* considered, another element which is also 
supposed to be an indefinitely small quantity of a higher 
Order, then the element of s^y which exchanges rays with ds^ 
through this element of «^, has a different position from that 
in the last case ; but the two quantities of heat thus ex- 
changed are again equal to each other ; and the same holds 
of all other elements of the intermediate surface. 

To obtain the quantity of heat which ds^ sends to s^ not 
through a single element of the intermediate surface, but as 
a whole, and similarly the quantity of heat which as a whole 
it receives from s^ we must integrate the two expressions 
found above over the surface «j, so far as this surface is cut 
by the rays which pass from ds^ to 8^ and vice vers4. It is 
evident that if for each element of surface ds^ the two 
differentials are equal, then the whole integrals must also 
be equal. 

Lastly, to find the quantities of heat, which the whole 
surface 8^ exchanges with 8^, we must integrate both these 
expressions over the surface 8^. This process again will not 
disturb the equality, which exists for each of the separate 
elements ds^. 

Thus the principle previously discovered in a special case, 
viz. that two perfectly black bodies of equal temperatures ex- 
change equal quantities of heat with each other, so far as the 
equation e^v* = e^v^ holds for them, appears also as the result 
of an investigation, which in no way depends upon whether 
the rays issuing from s^ suffer a concentration at 8cy and vice 
vers4, or not; since the only condition was, that the rays 



CONCENTRATION OF RA.YS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 329 

issuing from 8^ and 8^ suffer no concentration at the inter- 
mediate surface «j, a condition which may be always fulfilled, 
since this surface may be chosen at pleasure. 

It follows further from, this result that, if a given black 
body exchanges heat not only with cme but with any number 
of black bodies, it receives from all of them exactly the same 
quantity of heat as it sends to thenu 

§ 18. Consideration of Various Collateral Circumstances. 

The previous investigation has been made throughout 
under the assun^tion that any reflections and refractions 
take place without loss, or that there is no absorption of 
heat. We can, however, easily go on to* shew that the results 
are not altered, if this condition is dropped.. For consider 
any one of the different processes, by which a ray may be 
weakened on its way from one body to another ; say that at 
a place where the ray cuts the boundary of two media, one 
part passes into the further medium, by refraction, and the 
other is reflected. Then whethw we consider the one part 
or the other as the continuation of the original ray, we have 
in both cases a weakened ray to deal with; The same holds 
if a ray be partially absorbed by entering a medium. But 
in each of these cases we have the law that two rays which 
traverse the same path in opposite directions are weakened 
in equal proportion. The quantities o£ hearfi, which two 
bodies mutually send to each other, are therefore weakened, 
by such processes to tiie same extent ; so that, if they would 
be equal without such weakening,, they will also be equal 
when thus weakened. Another circumstance may be con- 
sidered in connection with the processes above mentioned, 
viz. that a body may receive from the same direction rays 
which proceed from difiFerent bodies. For example, a body A 
may receive from a point, which lies on the bounding surface 
of two media, two rays coinciding in direction, but issuing 
from two diflerent bodies B and C. One of these may come 
from the bounding medium and be refracted at the point, 
whilst the other is already in the bounded medium, and is 
reflected at the point. In this case, however, the two rays are 
weakened by refraction and reflection in such a way, that, if 
both were before of equal inttosity, their sum afterwards is 



330 ; ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. < , 

of the same intensity as either one of them had beforehand.' 
Now suppose a ray of the same intensity to issue from the 
body A in the opposite direction, this will be divided, at the 
same point, into two parts, of which one enters the bounding 
medium, and passes forward to the body -B, while the other 
is reflected and passes to the body (7. The two parts which 
thus reach B and G from A are exactly as great as those which 
A receives from B and (7. The body A thus stands to each 
of the bodies jB and G in such a relation, that, assuming 
equal temperatures, it exchanges with them equal quantities 
of heat The equality of the modifications which two rays 
undergo, when passing in opposite directions in any path 
whatever, must produce the same result in all other cases 
however complicated. 

Again if, instead of perfectly black bodies, we consider 
such as only partially absorb the rays faljing on them; or if 
instead of homogeneous heat we consider heat which con- 
tains systems of waves of different lengths ; or lastly, if 
instead of taking all the rays as unpolarized we include the 
phenomena of polarization; still in all these cases we have to 
do only with facts, which hold equally for the heat sent out 
by any one body, and for that which it receives from other 
bodies. It is not necessary to consider these facts more 
closely, since they also take place with ordinary radiation 
without concentration, and the object of the present investi- 
gation was only to consider the special actions which might 
possibly be produced by concentration of the rays, 

§ 19. Summary of Results, 

The main results of this investigation may be briefly 
stated as follows: 

(1) In order to bring the action of ordinary radiation, 
without concentration, into accordance with the fundamental 
principle, that heat cannot of itself pass from a colder to a 
hotter body, it is necessary to assume that the intensity of 
emission from a body depends not only on its own composi- 
tion and temperature, but also on the nature of the sur- 
rounding medium; the relation being such, that the in- 
tensities of emission in different media stand in the inverse 
ratio of the squares of the velocities of radiation in the 



CONCENTRATION OF RAYS OF LIGHT AND HEAT. 331 

media, or in the direct ratio of the squares of the coefficients 
of refraction. 

(2) If this assumption as to the influence of the sur- 
rounding media is correct, the above fundamental principle 
is not only fulfilled in the case of radiation without concen- 
tration, but must also hold good when the rays are concen- 
trated in any way whatever by reflections or refractions ; 
since this concentration may indeed change the absolute 
magnitudes of the quantities of heat, which two bodies 
radiate to each other, but not the ratio between these 
quantities. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

DISCUSSIONS ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT 
AS HERE DEVELOPED, ANI> ON ITS FOUNDATIONS. 

§ 1. Different Viewa^ as to the- Relation between Heat and 
Work. 

The papers of the author on the Mechanical Theory of 
Heat, as reproduced in all essential particulars in this volume, 
have frequently met with opposition; and it may be desirable 
to give here sonie of the discussions which have taken place 
on the question, since many points are raised in them, on 
which the reader may even yet be in doubt. The removal 
of these doubts may be facilitated by his learning what has 
been already written upon these points. 

As already mentioned in Chapter III., the first important 
attempt to reduce to general principles the action of heat in 
doing work was made by CJarnot. He started from the 
assumption that the total quantity of heat existing was in- 
variable, and then supposed that the faQing of heat from a 
higher to a lower temperature brought about mechanical work, 
in the same way as the falling of water from a higher to a 
lower level. But simultaneously with this conception the 
view gained ground that heat is a mode of motion, and that in 
producing work heat is expended. This view was set forth 
at intervals from the end of the last century by individual 
writers, such as ii^^umford, Davy, and Seguin*; but it was not 
till 1840 that the law corresponding to this view, viz. that of 

* In a paper by Mohr, published 1837t ^eat is in some places called a 
motion, in others a force. 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 333 

tlie equivalence of heat and work, was definitely laid do^vn 
by Mayer and Joul«, and proved by the latter to be correct 
by means of numerous and brilliant experiments. Soon 
afterwards the general principle of the conservation of energy 
was laid down by Mayer* and Helmholtz-|- (by the latter in a 
^specially clear and convincing manner), and was applied to 
various natural forces. 

A fresh starting point was thus given to researches on 
the science of heat ; but in carrying these out great diflScul- 
ties presented themselves, as was natural with so widely 
extended a theory, which was intertwined with all branches 
of natural science, and influenced the yrhole range of physi- 
cal thought. In addition, the wide acceptation which Car- 
net's treatment of the mechanical action of heat had won for 
itself, especially after being brought by Clapeyron into an 
elegant analytical form, was unfavourable for the reception 
of the new theory. It was believed that there was no alter- 
native but either to hold to the theory of Carnot, and reject 
the new view according to which heat must be expended to 
produce work, or conversely to accept the new view and 
reject Carnot's theory. 

§ 2. Papers on the Subject by Thomson and the Author. 

A very definite utterance on the then position of the 
question was given by the celebrated English physicist, now 
8ir William Thomson, in an interesting paper which he pub- 
lished in 1849 (when most of the above-mentioned researches 
of Joule had already appeared and were known to him), 
under the title, *'Aii Account of Ckrnot's Theory of the 
Motive-Power of Heat, with numerical results deduced from 
Regnault*s experiments on steam J." He still maintains the 
position of Carnot, that heat may do work without any change 
in the quantity of heat taking place. He however points 
out a diflSculty in this view, and goes on to say, p. 545 : " It 
might appear that this diflSculty might be wholly removed, if 
we gave up Camot's fundamental axiom, a view which has 
been strongly urged by Mr Joule," He adds, " but if we do 

* Die organiscke Bewegung in ihrem ZusanrnienJiange mit dem Stqff' 
wechsel, Heilbronn, 1845. 

+ Ueber die. Erhaltung der Kraft, 1837. 

7 Trans, Boyal Soc, of Edin,, Vol. zvi. p. 541. 



334 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

this we stumble over innumerable other difficulties, ^which 
are insuperable without the aid of further experimental 
researches, and without a complete reconstruction of the 
Theory of Heat. It is in fact experiment to which we 
must look, either for a confirmation of Carnot's axiom, and a 
clearing up of the difficulty which we have noticed, or for a 
completely new foundation for the Theory of Heat." 

At the time when this paper appeared the author was 
writing his first paper "On the Mechanical Theory of Heat," 
which was brought before the Berlin Academy in 1850, and 
printed in the March and April numbers of Poggendorff's 
Annalen, In this paper he attempted to begin the recon- 
struction of the theory, without waiting for further experi- 
ments; and he succeeded, he believes, in overcoming the 
difficulties mentioned by Thomson, so far at least as to leave 
the way plain for any further researches of this character. 
He there pointed out the way in which the fundamental 
conception, and the whole mathematical treatment of heat, 
must be altered, if we accepted the principle of the equiva- 
lence of he^.t and work ; and he further shewed that it was 
not needful wholly to reject the theory of Camot, but that 
we might adopt a principle, based on a different foundation 
from Camot's, but differing only slightly in form, which 
might be combined with the principle of the equivalence of 
heat and work, to form with it the ground-work of the new 
theory. This theory he then developed for the special cases 
of perfect gases and saturated vapour, and thereby obtained 
a series of equations, which have been universally employed 
in the form there given, and which will be found in Chap- 
ters II. and Vl. of this volume. 

§ 3. On Eanhiiie's Paper and ThomsorCs Second Paper. 

In the same month (February, 1850) in which the 
author's paper was read before the Berlin Academy, a valu- 
able paper by Rankine was read before the Royal Society of 
Edinburgh, and was afterwards published in their Trans- 
actions (Vol. 20, p. 147)*. 

Rankine there proposes the hypothesis, that heat consists 
in a rotary motion of the molecules ; and thence deduces with 

* In 1854 it was reprinted with some alterations, in the Phil, Mag,, 
Series 4, Vol. vii. pp. 1, 111, 172. 



DISCUSSIONS ON THfi THEORY. 335 

mucli skill a series of principles on the action of heat, which 
agree with those deduced by the author from the first main 
principle of the mechanical theory*. The second main prin- 
ciple was not touched by Rankine in this paper, but was 
treated in a second paper, which was brought before the 
Boyal Society of Edinburgh a year afterwards (April, 1851). 
In this he remarks*!* that he had at first felt doubtful of the 
correctness of the mode of reasoning by which the author 
had arrived at this second principle ; but that having com- 
municated his doubts to Sir W. Thomson, he was induced 
by him to investigate the subject more closely. He then 
found that it ought not to be treated as an independent 
principle in the theory of heat, but might be deduced from 
the equations, which he had given in the first section of his 
former paper. He proceeds to give this new proof of the 
principle, which however, as will be shewn further on, is in 
opposition, for certain very important cases, with his own 
views, as elsewhere expressed. 

This paper of 1851 Rankine added as a fifth section to 
his former paper on account of the connection between them. 
Thence has arisen with some authors the mistaken idea that 
this new paper was actually part of the former one, and that 
Rankine had therefore given a proof of the second main 
principle at the same time as the author. From the fore- 
going it will be seen that his proof (waiving the question 
how far it is satisfactory) appeared a year later than the 
author's. 

In March of the same year, 1851, a second paper by Sir 
W. Thomson on the Theory of Heat was laid before the 
Royal Society of Edinburgh J. In this paper he abandons his 
former position with regard to Camot's theory and assents to 
the author's exposition of the second main principle. He 
then extends the treatment of the subject. For whilst the 
author had confined himself in the mathematical treatment 
of the question to the case of gases, of vapours, and of the 
process of evaporation, and had only added that it was easy 
to see how to make similar applications of the theory to other 

• Edinb. Trans,, Vol. xx. p. 205; Phil, Mag,, Series 4, Vol. vii. p. 249. 
t Phil Mag,, Vol. vii. p. 250. 

X Edin, Tram,, Vol. xx. p. 261 j Phil. Mag,, Series 4, Vol. iv. pp. 8, 105, 
168. 



336 ON THE MECH4.NICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

cases, Thomson developes a series of general equations, which 
are independent of the body's condition of aggregation, and 
only then passes on to more special applications. 

On one point this second paper still falls short of the 
author's. For here also Thomson holds fast by the law of 
Mariotte and Qay-Lussac in the case of saturated vapour, 
and hesitates to accept an hypothesis with respect to perma- 
nent gases, which the author had made use of in his investi- 
gation (see Chapter II., § 2, of this work). On this he 
remarks*: "I cannot see that any hypothesis, such as that 
adopted by Clausius fundamentally in his investigations on 
this subject, and leading, as he shews, to determinations of 
the densities of saturated steam at different temperatures, 
which indicate enormous de\dations from the gaseous laws of 
variation with temperature and pressure, is more probable, 
or is probably nearer the truth, than that the density of sa- 
turated steam .does follow these laws, as it is usually assumed 
to do. In the present state of science it would perhaps be 
wrong to say that either hypothesis is more probable than 
the other." Some years later, after he had proved by his 
joint experiments with Joule that this hypothesis is correct 
within the limits assigned by fhe author, he used the same 
method as the author to determine the density of saturated 
vapour •[•. 

Rankine and Thomson, so far as the author knows, have 
always recognized most frankly the position here assigned to 
the first labours of themselves and the author on the me- 
chanical theory of heat. Thomson remarks in his paper J: 
^* The whole theory of the moving force of heat rests on the 
two following principles, which are respectively due to Joule 
and to Carnot and Clausius." Similarly he introduces the 
second main principle as follows: "Prop. II. (Carnot and 
Clausius)." He then proceeds to give a proof discovered by 
himself, and goes on§: "It is with no wish to claim priority 
that I make these statements, as the merit of first estabUsh- 
ing the proposition on correct principles is entirely due to 
Clausius, who published his demonstration of it in the month 

• Edin, Trans., Vol. xx. p. 277; Phil, Mag,, Vol. r^. p. 111. 

t Phil, Trans., 1854, p. 321. 

t Edin. Trans., Vol. xx. p. 264 ; Phil Mag,, Vol. iv. p. 11. 

§ Edin. Trans,, Vol. xx. p. 266 ; Phil. Mag,, VoL iv. pp. 14, 242. 



DISCUSSIONS OlSr THE THEORY. 337 

of May last year, in the second part of his paper on the 
Motive Power of Heat." 

§ 4. Holtzmann's objections. 

From other quarters repeated and in some cases violent 
objections were raised to the author's first paper, to which, in 
the same and following years, a series of other papers, serving 
to complete the theory, were added. The earliest of these 
objections came from Holtzmann, who had published in 1845 
a short pamphlet* on the subject. In this it would at first 
appear as if he wished to treat the question from the point 
of view, that for the generation of work there was necessary 
not merely a change in the distribution of heat, but also an 
actual destruction of it, and that conversely by destroying 
work heat could be again generated. He remarks (p. 7); 
" The action of the heat which has passed to the gas is thus 
either a raising of temperature, combined with an increase of 
the elastic force, or a certain quantity of mechanical work, or 
a mixture of the two ; and a certain quantity of mechanical 
work is equivalent to the rise in temperature. Heat can only 
be measured by its eflfects; of the two above-named eflFects 
mechanical work is especially adapted for measurement, and it 
will be chosen accordingly for the purpose. I call a unit of 
heat that amount of heat, which by its entrance into a gas 
can perform the mechanical work a, or, using definite mea- 
sures, which can raise a kilograms to a height of 1 metre." 
Further on (p. 12) he determines the numerical value of the 
constant a by the method previously used by Mayer, and 
explained in Chapter II., § 5; the number thus obtained cor- 
responds perfectly with the mechanical equivalent of heat, as 
determined by Joule by various other methods. In extend- 
ing his theory however, i.e. in developing the equations by 
which his conclusions are arrived at, he follows the same 
method as Clapeyron ; so that he tacitly retains the assump- 
tion that the total quantity of heat which exists is invariable; 
and therefore that the quantity of heat which a body takes 
in, while it passes from a given initial condition to its 
present condition, must be expressible as a function of the 
variables, which determine that condition. 

* Ueber die Warme und Elasticit&t der Gase und Ddmpfe; von C. 
Holtzmann. Mannheim, 1845 ; also Pogg. Ann., Vol. Lxzua. 

C. ^^ 



338 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

In the author's first paper the inconsequence of this 
method was pointed out, and the question treated in another 
way ; on which Holtzmann wrote an article*, in which he 
endeavoured to shew that this method of treatment, and 
specially the assumption that heat was expended in pro- 
ducing work, was inadmissible. The first objection which 
he raised was of a mathematical character. He carried out 
an investigation similar to that in the author's paper, in 
order first to determine the excess of the heat which a body 
takes in over that which it gives out, during a simple cyclical 
process consisting of indefinitely small variations, and secondly 
to compare this excess with the work done. But in such a 
process both the work done and the excess of heat must be 
indefinitely small quantities of the second order ; and there- 
fore in the whole investigation, care must be taken that all 
quantities of the second order, which do not cancel each 
other, shall be taken into account. This Holtzmann neg- 
lected to do ; and he was thus led to a final equation, which 
Contained a self-contradiction, and in which he therefore 
imagined that he had found a proof of the inadmissibility of 
the whole method. This objection was easily disposed of 
by the author in his reply. 

He further brought forward as an obstacle to the theory, 
that, according to the formulae given, the specific heat of a 
perfect gas must be independent of its pressure, whereas the 
experiments of Suermann, and also those of De la Roche 
and B^rard, shewed that the specific heat of gases increased 
as the pressure diminished. On this conflict between his 
own theory and the experiments which were then known 
and supposed to be correct, the author remarked in his reply 
as follows : "On this point I must first point out that, even 
if these observations are perfectly correct, they yet say nothing 
against the fundamental principle of the equivalence of heat 
and work, but only against the approximate assumption 
which I have made, viz. that a permanent gas, if it expand 
at constant temperature, absorbs only so much heat, as is 
required for the external work which it thus performs. But 
besides it is suflSciently known how unreliable are in general 
the determinations of the specific heats of gases ; and all the 

* Pogg. Ann.f Vol. lxxxii. p. 445. 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 339 

more in those few observations which have been hitherto 
made at varying pressures. I did not therefore conceive 
myself bound to abandon the above assumption on account 
of these observations, although they were well known to me 
at the time when I wrote my former work; because the 
other grounds, which may. be alleged for the correctness of 
the assumption within the limits which I had there laid 
down, are not wholly destroyed by the grounds which may 
be alleged against it." 

This remark found its full confirmation in Regnault's 
Researches, published some years afterwards, on the specific 
heats of gases, which actually led to the result that these 
earlier observations were inaccurate, and that the specific 
heat of permanent gases is not visibly dependent on the 
pressure. 

§ 5. Decker's Objections, 

Another most energetic attack on the author's theory 
was made in 1858, by Professor G. Decher, in a paper " On 
the Nature of Heat," published in Dingler's Polytechnischer 
Journal, Vol. 148, pp. 1, 81, 161, 241. He characterizes the 
author's mathematics, in the first half of his paper of 1850> 
and in another paper of 1854, as an abuse of analysis, and 
bungling nonsense ; he quotes the equations and principles 
there cited with single or double notes of admiration, and 
finally, after proving completely to his own satisfaction that 
the results are untenable, concludes thus: "These then are the 
data on which the fundamental principles of the new theory 
of Heat should rest, and by which its agreement with ex- 
perience should be proved ; they shew in the clearest light 
that the celebrated work of Herr Clausius, on which he him- 
self and other physicists have built as on a secure foundation, 
is nothing more than a rotten nut, which looks well from the 
outside, but in reality contains nothing whatever." 

Of the second half of the paper of 1850, which relates to 
the second main principle of the theory, Herr Decher ob- 
serves (p. 163), that having mastered the first half, he saw 
ho inducement to consider the second any further. 

On examining more closely the objections raised by Herr 
Decher against the author's mathematical investigation, it is 
seen that they are due to the fact that he has not understood 



340 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORIT OF HEAT. 

the diflferential equations there formed, which, though not 
generally integrable, become so as soon as one further rela- 
tion is assumed to exist among the variables. In spite of all 
which the author has said, he has throughout treated the 
quantities to which these equations refer, viz. the quantities 
of heat taken in by a body in passing from a given initial 
condition to its present condition, as mere functions of the 
variables which determine the condition of the body. After 
quoting the author's equation for gases, viz. 



dt\dv) dvKdt) V ^ ^' 



dt 

where A is the heat-equivalent of the unit of work, i.e. the 
reciprocal of E, he remarks, page 243: "In equation (1) 

f-pj and (-1^) are fully determined as the differential co- 
efficients of a known function of v and ^, viz. Q, taken ac- 
cording to V and t respectively as sole variables ; and in 
whatever way this function may be formed, and whatever 
relation may be supposed to exist between v and t, the righ^ 
side of the equation must always equal zero." 

This incorrect conception, thus formed by a professed 
mathematician, convinced the author that the meaning and 
treatment of this kind of differential equation, although long 
before established by Monge, was not so generally known as 
he had supposed; accordingly in his reply*, after a brief 
notice of some other points raised by Decher, he treated the 
subject more fully, giving a mathematical explanation, which 
seemed to him sufficient to obviate any such misunderstand- 
ings in future. This was afterwards prefixed to the collection 
of the author's papers as a mathematical introduction ; and 
the essential part of it has been imported into the mathe- 
matical introduction to the present work. 

§ 6. Fundamental Principle on which the Author's Proof 
of the Second Main Principle rests. 

The more recent objections to the author's theory, and 
the departure from his views in more recent treatises, chiefly 

* Dingler*s Polytechnischer Journal^ Vol. ql. p. 29. 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 341 

refer to his method of proving the second main principle of 
the theory. This proof rests, as shewn in Chapter III., on the 
following fundamental principle: — Heat cannot of itself (or 
without compensation) pass from a colder to a hotter body. 

This fundamental principle has been very variously re- 
ceived by the scientific public. Some appear to consider it 
so self-evident that it is needless to state it as a specific 
principle, whilst others on the contrary doubt its correctness. 

§ 7. Zemier's first Treatment of the Subject, 

The first of the two modes of viewing the question men- 
tioned in the last section appears in Zeuner's valuable paper 
of 1860 " On the Foundations of the Mechanical Theory of 
Heat." Here Zeuner gives the author's proof of the second 
main principle essentially in the same form as it has also 
been given by Reech*. The two diflFer only in one point. 
Reech gives the principle, that heat cannot of itself pass 
fi'om a colder to a hotter body, expressly as a fundamental 
principle laid down by the author, and bases his proof 
upon it. Zeuner on the contrary does not mention this 
principle at all : he shews that if for any two bodies the 
second main principle of the theory did not hold, then by 
means of two cyclical processes performed with these two 
bodies in opposite directions, heat could be made to pass 
from a colder to a hotter body without any other special 
change, and he then goes on "as we may repeat both pro- 
cesses as often as we please, using the two bodies alternately 
in the way described, it would follow that we might, with 
the aid of nothing and without using either work or heat, 
continually transfer heat from a body of lower to one of 
higher temperature, which is an absurdity." 

Few readers would probably assent to the opinion that 
the impossibility of transferring heat from a colder to a 
hotter body is so self-evident, as is here indicated by the 
short remark "which is an absurdity." Taking the facts of 
conduction, and of radiation under ordinary circumstances, 
we may undoubtedly say that this impossibility is established 
by daily experience. But even with radiation the question 

* Recapitulation trh-succincte des recherches alg^briques faites sur la 
tMorie des ejects m^caniqties de la chaleur par diff^rents auteurs : Joum. de 
Liouvilley Ser. II. Vol. i. p. 68. 



342 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

arises, whether it is not possible to concentrate the rays of 
heat artificially by means of mirrors or burning-glasses, so as 
to produce a higher temperature than that of the radiating 
bodies, and thus to effect the passage of the heat into a 
hotter body. The author has, therefore, thought it necessary 
to treat this question in a special paper, the contents of 
which are given .in Chapter XII. Matters are still more 
complicated in cases when heat is transformed into work, and 
vice vers^, whether this be by effects such as those of 
friction, resistance of the air, and electrical resistances, or 
whether by the fact that one or more bodies suffer such 
changes of condition, as are connected partly with positive 
and partly with negative work, both internal and external 
For by such changes heat, to use the common expression, 
becomes latent or free, as the case may be ; and this beat the 
variable bodies may draw from or impart to other bodies of 
different temperatures. 

If for all such cases, however complicated the processes 
may be, it is maintained that without some other permanent 
change, which may be looked upon as a compeusation, heat 
can never pass from a colder to a hotter body, it would seem 
that this principle ought not to be treated as one altogether 
self-evident, but rather as a newly-propounded fundamental 
principle, on whose acceptance or non-acceptance the validity 
of the proof depends. 

§ 8. Zeuner^s later Treatment of the Stibject. 

The mode of expression employed by Zeuner was criticized 
by the author on the grounds stated in the last section, in a 
paper published in 1863. In the second edition of his 
book, published in 1866, Zeuner has therefore struck out 
another way of proving the second main principle. Assum- 
ing the condition of the body to be determined by the 
pressure p and volume v, he forms for the quantity of heat 
'^S^.* dQ, taken in by the body during an indefinitely small varia- 
tion, the differential equation 

dQ = A{Xd^+7dv).... (2), 

where X and Fare functions of p and v, and A is the heat- 
equivalent of work. This equation, as is well known, cannot 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 3*3 

be integrated so long as p and t; are independent variables. 
He then proceeds (p. 41) : 

" But let fif be a new function of p and v, the form of 
which may be taken for the present to be known as little as 
that of X and Y, but to which we will give a signification, 
which will appear immediately from what follows. Multiply- 
ing and dividing the right-hand side of the equation by S, 
we have 



dQ = -4fifr^cZp + |^cZi;l ...<3). 



I'- 



We may now choose 8, so that the expression in brackets is 

B, perfect differential ; in other words, so that -^ may be the 

integrating factor, or 8 the integrating divisor, of the expres- 
sion within brackets of equation (2)." 

From this it follows that in the following equation derived 
from (3), 

^ = ^[|dp + |c?t,] (4), 

the whole right-hand side is a perfect differential, and there- 
fore for a cyclical process we must have 

f = (5). 

In this way Zeuner arrives at an equation similar to equation 
(7) of Chapter IV., viz. 

The resemblance, however, is merely external. The essence 
of this latter equation consists in this, that t is a function of 
temperature only, and further a function which is inde- 
pendent of the nature of the body, and is therefore the same 
for all bodies. Zeuner's quantity 8, on the contrary, is a 
function of both the variables, p and v, on which the bodies' 
condition depends ; and further, since the functions X and YJ 
in equation (2), are different for different bodies, it must be^ 
true of 8 also that it may be different for different bodies. 
So long as this holds with regard to 8, equation (5) has 
done nothing for the proof of the second main principle ; 



I'- 



344 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOKY OF HEAT. 

since it is self-evident that there must in general be an 

1 

integrating factor, which may be denoted by -^, and by 

which the expression within brackets in equation (2) may 
be converted into a complete dififerential. Accordingly, in 
Zeuner's proof, as he himself concludes, everything depends 
on the fact that 5 is a function of temperature OEJy, and a 
function which is the same for all bodies, so that it may be 
taken as the true measure of the temperature. 

For this purpose he supposes a body to undergo dififerent 
variations, which are such that the body takes in heat whilst 
8 has one constant value, and gives out heat whilst ^8^ has 
another constant value ; and which together make up a cycli* 
cal process, shewing a gain or loss of heat. This procedure 
he compares with the lifting or dropping of a weight from 
one level to another, and with the corresponding mechanical 
work ; and he proceeds (p. 68) : "A further comparison leads 
to the interesting result that we may consider the function S 

as a length or a height, and the expression -j^, as a weight ; 

in what follows therefore I shall call the above value the 
Weight of the Heat." Since a name has here been introduced 
for a magnitude containing 8, in which name there is nothing 
which relates to the body under consideration, it appears 
that an assumption has here been tacitly made, viz. that 8 is 
independent of the nature of the body, which is by no means 
borne out by the earlier definition. 

Zeuner then carries still further the comparison between 
the processes relating to gravity and those relating to heat, and 
transfers to the case of heat some of the principles which hold 

for gravity ; in so doing he treats /Sf as a height, and -j^ as a 

weight, just as before. Then, having finally observed that 
the principles thus obtained are true if we take 8 to mean 
the temperature itself, he proceeds (p. 74) : " We are there- 
fore justified in taking as the basis of our further researches 
the hypothesis that S is the true measure of temperature." 

It appears from this that the only real foundation of the 
reasonings, which in his second edition Zeuner puts forward 
as the basis of the second main principle, is the analogy 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 345 

between the performance of work by gravity and by heat ; 
and moreover that the point which has to be proved is in 
part tacitly assumed, in part expressly laid down as a mere 
hypothesis. 

§ 9. Ranhine^s Treatinervt of the Subject 

We may now turn to those authors who have considered 
that the fundamental principle is not sufficiently trustworthy, 
or even that it is incorrect. 

Here we must first examine somewhat more closely the 
mode of treatment which, as already mentioned, Rankine 
considered must be substituted for that of the author. 

Rankine, like the author, divides the heat which must be 
imparted to the body, in order to raise its temperature, into 
two distinct parts. One of these serves to increase the heat 
actually existing in the body, and the other is absorbed in 
work. For the latter, which comprises the heat absorbed in 
the internal and in the external work, Rankine uses an 
expression, which in his first section he derives from the 
hypothesis that matter consists of vortices. Into this method 
of reasoning we need not enter further, since the circum- 
stance that it rests on a particular hypothesis as to the 
nature of molecules and their mode of motion, makes it 
sufficiently clear that it must lead to the consideration of com- 
plicated questions, and thus leaves much room for doubt as 
to its trustworthiness. In the author's treatises he has based 
the development of his equations, not on any special views 
as to the molecular constitution of bodies, but only on fixed 
and universal principles ; and thus, even if the above fact 
were the only one which could be alleged against Rankine's 
proof, the author would still expect his own mode of treating 
the subject to be finally established as the most correct. 
But yet more uncertain is Rankine's mode of determining 
the second part of the heat to be imparted, viz. that which 
serves to increase the heat actually existing in the body. 

Rankine expresses the increase of the heat within the 
body, when its temperature t changes by dt, simply by the 
product Kdt, whether the volume of the body changes at the 
same time or not. This quantity K, which he calls the real 
specific heat, he treats in his proof as a quantity inde- 
pendent of the specific volume. Any sufficient ground for this 



346 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAt. 

procedure will be sought in vam in his paper ; on the contrary, 
data are found which stand in direct opposition to it. In the 
introduction to his paper he gives, under equation (13), an 
expression for the real specific heat K^ which contains a 
factor i, and of which he speaks as follows*: "The co- 
efficient k (which enters into the value of the specific heat) 
being the ratio of the vis viva of the entire motion impressed 
on the atomic atmospheres by the action of their nuclei, to 
the vis viva of a peculiar kind of motion, may be conjectured 
to have a specific value for each kind of substance, depending 
in a manner yet unknown on some circumstance in the con- 
stitution of its atoms. Although it varies in some cases for 
the same substance in the solid, liquid, and gaseous states, 
there is no experimental evidence that it varies for the same 
substance in the same condition." Hence it appears to be 
Eankine*s view that the real specific heat of the same sub- 
stance may be different in different states of aggregation ; 
and even for the assumption that it may be taken as in- 
variable for the same state of aggregation he produces no 
other ground than that there is no experimental proof to the 
contrary. 

In a later work, A Manwd of the Steam Engine and other 
Prime Movers, 1859, Rankine speaks yet more distinctly on 
this point as follows (p. 307): "A change of real specific 
heat, sometimes considerable, often accompanies the change 
between any two of those conditions" (i.e. the three con- 
ditions of aggregation). How great a difference Rankine 
conceives to be possible between the real specific heats of one 
and the same substance in different states of aggregation, is 
shewn by his remark at the same place, that in the case of 
water the specific heat as determined by observation, which 
he calls the apparent specific heat, is nearly equal to the real 
specific heat. Now Rankine well knew that the observed 
specific heat for water is twice as great as that for ice, and 
more than twice as great as that for steam. Since then the 
real specific heat for ice and steam can never be greater than 
the observed, but only smaller, Rankine must assume that 
the real specific heat of water exceeds that of ice and steam 
by 100 per cent, or more. 

If we now ask the question how on this supposition the 

* Phil, Mag., Ser. 4, Vol. vn. p. 10, 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORT. 347 

increase of heat actually present in a body, which occurs 
when its temperature t increases by dt, and its volume v by 
dVf is to be expressed, the answer will be as follows : When 
the body, during its change of volume, suffers no change in 
its state of aggregation, we shall be able to express the 
increase of heat, as Rankine has done, by a simple product 
of the form Kdt ; but the factor K must have different values 
for different states of aggregation. In cases, however, where 
the body during its change of volume also changes its state 
of aggregation (e.g. the case we have treated so often, where 
we have a certain quantity of matter partly in the liquid and 
partly in the gaseous condition, and where the magnitude of 
these two parts changes with the change in volume, either by 
the evaporation of part of the liquid, or by the condensation 
of part of the vapour), we can then no longer express the 
increase of heat connected with a simultaneous change in 
temperature and volume by a simple product Kdt ; but must, 
use an expression of the form 

Kdt + K^dv. 

For if the real specific heat of a substance were different in 
different states of aggregation, it would be necessary to con- 
clude that the quantity of heat existing in it must also 
depend on its state of aggregation ; so that equal quantities 
of the substance in the solid, liquid, and gaseous condition 
would contain different amounts of heat. Accordingly, if 
part of the substance change its state of aggregation witnout 
any change of temperature, there must also be a change in the 
quantity of heat contained in the substance as a whole. 

Hence it follows that Rankine by his own admission can 
only treat the mode in which he expresses the increase of heat, 
and the mode in which he uses that expression in his proof, as 
being allowable for the cases in which there are no changes 
in the state of aggregation ; and, therefore, his proof holds 
for those cases only. For all cases where such changes occur 
the principle remains unproved ; and yet these cases are of 
special impoi*tance, inasmuch as it is chiefly to these that the 
principle has hitherto been applied. 

In fact we must go further, and say that the proof thus 
loses all strength even for cases where there is no change in 
the state of aggregation. If Rankine |issumes that the real 



348 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT, 

specific heat may be different in different states of aggrega- 
tion, there seems no ground whatever left for supposing 
that it is invariable in the same state of aggregation. It is 
known that with solid and liquid bodies chancfes may occur 
in the conditions of cohesion, apart from any chaiige> the 
state of aggregation. With gaseous bodies also, in addition 
to their gi-eat variations in volume, we have the distinction, 
that the more or less widely they are removed from their 
condensation-point the more or less closely do they follow the 
law of Mariotte and Gay-Lussac. How then, if changes in 
the state of aggregation may have an influence on the real 
specific heat, can we refuse to ascribe a similar, even if 
a smaller, influence to changes like the above? Thus the 
proposition, that the real specific heat is invariable in the 
same state of aggregation, is not only left unproved by 
Rankine, but, if we accept his special assumption, becomes in 
a high degree improbable. 

To this criticism on his proof, which appeared in a 
paper of the author's, published in 1863*, Rankine made no 
reply; but in a later article on the subject'!' he expressly 
maintained the truth of his view, frequently before stated, 
that the real specific heat of a body may be different in 
different states of aggregation; whereby the force of his 
proof is limited to the cases in which no change in the state 
of aggregation takes place. 

§ 10. HirrCs Objection. 

A yet more definite attack upon the author's funda- 
mental principle, that heat cannot of itself pass from a 
colder to a hotter body, was made by Him in his work, pub- 
lished in 1862, Exposition Arudytique et Experimentale de la 
ihSorie mecanique de la chaleur, and in two subsequent articles 
in Cosmosl. He has there described a particular operation 
which gives at first sight an altogether startling result. After 
a reply from the author §, he explained || his attack as having 
for its object only to mark an apparent objection to the 
principle, whilst in reality he agreed with the author ; and 
he has expressed himself to the same effect in the second 
and third editions of his valuable work. 

* Pogg. Ann,, Vol. cxx. p. 426. 

t Phil. Mag., Ser. 4, Vol. xxx. p. 410. 

J Vol. XXII. pp. 283, 4ir« § Vol. xxn. p. 660. J Vol xxn. p. 734. 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 349 

la spite of thia it seems worth while to state here the 
attack and the reply, because the conception of the subject 
there expressed is oue very near the truth, and which might 
easily hold under other circumstances. An objection thus 
raised has a real scientific value of its own ; and when it is 
put in so clear and precise a light, as Him has done in this 
case by means of his skilfully-conceived operation, it can 
only be advantageous for science : since the fact that the 
apparent objection is defined and placed clearly in view will 
greatly facilitate the cteairing up of the point. In this way 
we shajl attain the advantage that a difficulty, which other- 
wise might probably lead to many misunderstandings, and 
necessitate repeated and long discussions, will be disposed of 
once and for ever. In thus referring once more to this 
question, the author is far from wishing to make the objec- 
tion a ground of complaint against Him, but rather believes 
that this objection has increased the debt which the Mechani- 
cal Theory of Heat owes to him on other accounts. 

The operation alluded to, on which Him has based his 
observations, is as follows : Let there be two cylinders A and 
B {Fig. 32) of equal area, which are 
connected at the bottom by a compara- 
tively narrow pipe. In each of these let 
there be an air-tight piston; and let 
the piston-rods be fitted with teeth 
engaging on each side with the teeth 
of a spur wheel, so that if one piston 
descends the other must rise through 
the same distance. The wliole space 
below the cylinders, including the 
connecting pipe, must thus remain 
invariable during the motion, because 
as the space diminishes in one cylinder 
it increases in the other by an equal 
amount. 

First, let us suppose the piston iu 
.S to be at the bottom, and therefore 
that in A at the top ; and let cylinder 
A be filled with a perfect gas of any 

f'ven density and of temperature *„. 
ow let the piston descend iu A, and 



350 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

rise in B, so that the gas is gradually driven out of A into 
J5. The connecting pipe through which it must pass is 
kept at a constant temperature t^, which is higher than t^, so 
that the gas in passing is heated to temperature t^, and at 
that temperature enters cylinder J5. The walls of both 
cylinders, on the other hand, are non-conducting, so that 
within them the gas can neither receive nor give off heat, 
but can only receive heat from without as it passes through 
the pipe. To fix our ideas let the initial temperature of the 
gas be that of freezing, or 0®, and that of the connecting pipe 
100^ the pipe being surrounded by the steam of boiling w^ter. 

It is easy to see what will be the result of this operation. 
The first small quantity of gas which passes through the pipe 
will be heated from 0® to 100®, and will expand by the cor- 
responding amount, i.e. |^ of its original volume. By this 
means the gas which remains in A will be somewhat com- 
pressed, and the pressure in both the cylinders somewhat 
raised. The next small quantity of gas which passes through 
the pipe will expand in the same way, and will thereby com- 
press the gas in both cylinders. Similarly each successive 
portion of gas will act to compress still further not only the 
gas left in A, but also the gas which has previously expanded 
in B, so that the latter will continually tend to approach its 
initial density. This compression causes a heating of the gas 
in both cylinders ; and as all the gas which enters B enters 
at a temperature of 100°, the subsequent temperature must 
rise above 100^ and this rise must be the greater, the more 
the gas within B is subsequently compressed. 

Let us now consider the st^te of things at the end of the 
operation, when all the gas has passed from A into B, In 
the topmost layer, just under the piston, will be the gas 
which entered first, and which, as it has suffered the greatest 
subsequent compression, will be the hottest. The layers 
below will be successively less hot down to the lowest, which 
will have the same temperature, 100**, which it attained in 
passing the pipe. For our present purpose there is no need 
to know the temperature of each separate layer, but only the 
mean temperature of the whole, which is equal to the tem- 
perature that would exist if the temperatures in the different 
layers were equalized by a mixing up of the gas. This mean 
temperature will be about 120^ 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 361 

In a later article published in Cosmos, Hirn has com* 
pleted this operation, by supposing that the gas inB is finally 
brought into contact with mercury at 0^ and thereby cooled 
back again to 0°; that it is then driven back from J5 to -4 
under the same conditions as from A to B, and is therefore 
heated in the same manner ; that it is then again cooled by 
mercury, again driven from A to B, and so on. Thus we have 
a periodical operation, in which the gas is continually brought 
back to its original condition, and all the heat given ofif by 
the source of heat passes over to the mercury employed for 
cooling. Here we will not enter into this extension of the 
process, but confine ourselves to the first simple operation, 
in which the gas is heated from 0^ to a mean temperature of 
120^; for this operation comprises the essence of Hirn's ob- 
jection. 

In this operation it is clear that no heat is gained or lost ; 
for the pressure in both cylinders is always equal, and there- 
fore both pistons are always pressed upwards with equal 
force. These forces are communicated to the wheel which 
gestrs with the piston-rods ; and thus, neglecting friction, an 
indefinitely small force will be sufficient to turn the wheel in 
one or the other direction, and thereby move one piston up 
and the other down. The excess of heat in the gas cannot 
therefore be created by external work. 

The process, as is easily seen, is as follows. Whilst a quan- 
tity of gas, which is a very small fraction of the whole, is heated 
and expanded in passing through the pipe, it must take in 
from the source sufficient heat to heat it at constant pressure. 
Of this, one part goes to increase the heat actually existing 
in the gas, and another part to do the work of expansion. 
But since the expansion of the gas within the pipe is followed 
by a compression of the gas within the cylinders, the same 
quantity of heat will be generated in the one place as is 
absorbed in the other. Thus that part of the heat derived 
from the source, which is turned into work within the pipe, 
appears again as heat within the cylinders; and serves to 
heat the gas left in A above 0^ its initial temperature, and 
the gas which has passed into B above 100°, the temperature 
at which it entered ; in other words to produce the rise in 
temperature already mentioned. Accordingly, without con- 
sidering the intermediate process, we may say that all the 



352 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

heat, which the gas contains at the end of the operation 
more than at the beginning, comes from the source of heat 
attached to the connecting-pipe. Hence we have the sin- 
gular result, that by means of a body whose temperature is 
100®, i.e. the steam Surrounding the pipe, the gas within the 
cylinders is heated above 100®, or, loo*king only to the mean 
temperature, to 120®. Here then, is a contradiction of the 
fundamental principle that heat cannot of itself pass from a 
colder to a hotter body, inasmuch as the heat imparted by 
the steam to the gas has passed from a body at 100® to a 
body at 120®. 

One circumstance however has been forgotten. If the 
gas had had an initial temperature of 100® or more, and 
had then been raised to a still higher temperature by steam, 
whose temperature was only 100®, this would no doubt be a 
contradiction of the fundamental principle. But this is not 
the real state of things. In order that the gas may be above 
100® at the end of the operation, it must necessarily be below 
100® at the beginning. In our example, in which the final 
temperature is 120®, the initial is 0®. The heat, which the 
steam has imparted to the gas, has therefore served in part 
to heat it from 0® to 100®, and in part to raise it from 100® to 
120®. But the fundamental principle refers only to the 
temperatures of the bodies between which heat passes, as 
they are at the exact moment of the passage, and not as they 
are at any subsequent time. Accordingly we must conceive 
the passage of heat in this operation to take place as follows. 
The one part of the heat given off by the steam has passed 
into the gas, whilst its temperature was still below 100®, and 
has therefore passed Into a colder body ; and only the other 
part, which has served to heat the gas beyond 100®, has passed 
into a hotter body. If then we compare this with the funda- 
mental principle, which says that, when heat passes from a 
colder to a hotter body, without any transformation of work 
into heat or any change in molecular arrangement, then of 
necessity there must be in the same operation a passage of 
heat from a hotter to a colder body, we easily see that 
there is complete agreement between them. The peculiarity 
in Him's operation is only this, that there are not two differ- 
ent bodies concerned, of which one is colder and the other 
hotter than the source of heat; but one and the same body, 



DISCUSSIONS OK THE THEORY. 353 

the gas, takes in one part of the operation the place of the 
colder, and in another part that of the hotter body. This in- 
volves no departure from the principle, but is only one special 
case out of the many which may occur. Dupre has raised 
similar objections against the fundamental principle ; but as 
there is nothing in them essentially new, they will not here be 
entered upon. 

§ 11. Warid's Objections, 

Some years later Th. Wand treated of the same principle 
in a paper entitled "Kritische Darstellung des zweiten Satzes 
der Mechanische Warmetheorie*." He gives his conclusions 
in the three propositions following: (1) "The second prin- 
ciple of the mechanical theory of heat, i.e. the impossibility 
of a passage of heat to a higher temperature without a conver- 
sion into work or a corresponding passage of heat to a lower 
temperature, is false.'* (2) "The deductions from this prin- 
ciple are only approximate empirical truths, which hold only 
so far as they are established by experiment." (3) "For 
technical calculations the principle may be taken as correct, 
since experiments on the substances used for the generation 
of work and of cold shew a very close agreement with it." 

The placing of such propositions side by side seems in 
itself a doubtful measure. If a principle has been found to 
agree with fact in so many cases, as to compel us to say that 
for technical calculations it may be taken as correct, it seems 
dangerous to conclude nevertheless that it is false, in the 
face of the probable supposition that the apparent objections 
which yet remain would be cleared up by closer examination. 

The following appear to be the chief grounds on which 
Wand bases his rejection of the principle; excluding those 
which relate to internal work and electrical phenomena, be- 
cause these subjects are not here treated of. 

" If we suppose," he says on p. 314, " that in the bring- 
ing of a certain quantity of heat from a lower to a higher • 
temperature a. certain quantity of work must of necessity be 
destroyed, it follows that, if the same quantity of heat falls 
from a higher to a lower temperature, the same quantity of 
work must re-appear. Now suppose that this fall takes 

* Earl's Repertoriiim der Experimental-Physik, Vol. iv. pp. 281, 369. 
C. ^^ 



354 ON THE MECHAKICAL THEORY OP BEAT. 

place by simple conduction or by a non-reversible cyclical 
process. Then the above is not true, because the falling of 
heat by conduction goes on without any other change what- 
ever. Therefore for equalizations of temperature by simple 
conduction there is nothing equivalent to the second prin- 
ciple ; and this from the logical point of view is one of the 
weakest points in that principle, and leads to much subse- 
quent inconvenience.*' The circumstance here mentioned, 
that compensation is required only in the passage of heat to 
a higher temperature, and not to a lower, has been frequently 
stated above ; and in Chapter X. is expressed in the genend 
form, that negative transformations cannot take place with- 
out positive, but that positive transformations can take place 
without negative. From this circumstance the second main 
principle becomes doubtless less simple in form than the 
first, but it would be hard to shew that it is logically im- 
perfect. 

The inconveniences mentioned by Wand in the above 
paragraph he arrives at by the following considerations. He 
supposes a simple cyclical process to be carried out, during 
which the two bodies between whidh the heat passes, and 
which he calls the heating and cooling body, have tempera- 
tures which are close to 0®, and differ from each other by 
an indefinitely small quantity, which he calls dt For this 
symbol, which will appear with another signification in the 
analysis which follows, we will substitute 8, and will call the 
temperatures of the two bodies, reckoned from freezing-point, 
and h respectively. Further, Wand supposes the cyclical 
process to be so arranged, that one unit of heat passes over 
from the hotter to the colder body, and therefore that the 

quantity of heat ^^^ is transformed into work. He then pro- 

ceeds : " The process being ended, I will heat the whole ap- 
paratus, comprising both the heating and the cooling body, 
by 100^ The difference of temperature between the two 
bodies will remain unaltered. If we now wish to destroy the 
heat thus obtained by means of the reverse cyclical process, 
we must take from the colder body the heat ff|. The colder 
body thus loses the heat ^^, and gives it up to the hotter 
body ; and if by the reverse process all is cooled back again 
to the initial temperature 0°, the initial condition of things 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 365 

is restored. There is no work performed or consumed, and 
yet a passage of heat has taken place from the second body, 
which has remained the colder, to the first which has remained 
the hotter throughout the process. This however is no refu- 
tation of the second principle. For to obtain this result there 
must be a continuous succession of alternate heatings and 
coolings of the apparatus, i.e. heat must pass from a hotter 
to a colder body; but this passage takes place by conduction, 
for which there is no equivalent. Hence it follows from the 
process here described, that with regard to the distribution 
of the heat it is by no means the same thing, whether we 
do nothing at all, or carry out a compound cyclical process as 
here described." 

We have here the case of two opposite cyclical processes 
carried out at diflferent temperatures, in which the work 
done and the work consumed cancel each other, but more 
heat passes from the hotter to the colder body than vice 
vers&; and Wand holds that the passage of the surplus heat 
from the colder to the hotter body has taken place without 
compensation. He has however neglected certain diflferencos 
of temperature, which occur in this somewhat complicated 
operation. For after the first process, in which the hotter 
body has given off and the colder body taken in heat, he 
heats the whole apparatus and the two bodies by 100°; and 
he cools them by 100° after the second process, in which 
the colder body has given off heat and the hotter taken 
it in. But in giving off and taking in heat the two bodies 
alter their temperature somewhat, and the reservoirs of heat, 
which perform the heating and cooling, do not therefore 
take back the heat during the cooling at the same tempera- 
ture as they gave it out during the heating. Hence arise 
passages of heat of which Wand has taken no account. 

These differences of temperature are of course very small, 
since the two bodies must be assumed so large, that the varia- 
tions of temperature produced in them by the cyclical 
process may remain small compared to the difference of 
the original temperatures. But then the quantities of heat, 
which the bodies take from and give back to the reservoirs 
during their heating and cooling, are also very large ; and 
since to determine the heat which has passed we must 
multiply the differences of temperature by the actual 



356 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT. 

quantities of heat, we arrive at magnitudes which are quite 
large enough to compensate for the surplus heat which has 
passed between the bodies. 

To prove this point we will make the calculation itself. 
First, with regard to the actual surplus heat which has passed 
between the bodies, since the temperatures are and S, and 

the quantity of heat equals ^=^ , this has the equivalence 

value 2^3 (273 + 8 ""273) ^^' ii^glecting terms of a higher 

order than the first with regard to S, — —^ 8. We have now 

to determine the equivalence value of the passages of heat, 
which take place during the heating and cooling of the body 
by 100°. By Chapter IV., § 5, we must divide the element 
of heat taken in by one of the two bodies from a reservoir of 
heat (reckoning heat given off as negative heat taken in) 
by the absolute temperature which the body has at the 
moment, and we must then form the negative integral for 
the heating and cooling. 

Let M be the mass of each body, and G its specific heat, 
which we suppose constant; then the quantity of heat> 
which it takes in during a rise of temperature dt, equals 
MCdt, and this we shall take as expressing the element of 
heat. If for convenience we put 

^ = MG (^)' 

1 

the element will be expressed by -dt We must consider 

MG as very large, and therefore e as very small, so much 
so as to be small even in comparison with the small difference 
of temperature S. 

If we now take the first cyclical process, the colder body 
has, to begin with, the temperature 0, and the hotter the 
temperature 8. During the process the former takes in the 

quantity of heat 1, and the latter loses the quantity 1 + ^=^ . 

These must be divided by MG, or multiplied by e, to obtain 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 357 

the changes of temperature which they produce in the 
bodies ; thus at the end of the process the colder body has 
the temperature e, and the hotter the temperature 

From these temperatures both bodies are now to be heated 
bylOO^ 

The negative integral relating to the heating of the colder 
body is 

'100+» 1 

-dt 
A ' 



273 + r 
If we put T = t — €, then 



/•lOO 1 

f JfL^ 

L 273 + T + e* 



A 

■'o 

Neglecting higher terms in the expansion of e, we have 

1 1 e 

273 + T + e 273 + T (273+t)'" 

whence A = --j^ WsTr^L (273T^' ^^^^ 

The negative integral relating to the heating of the 
hotter body is 



Aoo+«-^i+j 



B • 



-(1+4)- 273 + r 
Whence we obtain in the same way as before 

1 rioo^^_dr /. . M f ^^^ ^ dr 

^■" €Js 273 + T V "^273;; a (273 + 7/ ^ ^* 

During the second cyclical process the colder body gives 

373 

off a quantity of heat = w^^ , and the hotter body receives a 



358 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

quantity ™r + o=«. The temperatures of the two bodies, 
after the second cyclical process, become respectively 

100 + 6-273^ = 100-273"' 



100 + S-(l + 4)e + (|| + 4)e = 100 + 8 + ^ 



100 
273"* 



From these temperatures both bodies are cooled down by 
100®. The negative integral relating to this cooling is for 
the colder body 

|-«s* -dt I '""-«$' -dt 

'.^~~ 1,^ 100 t = I 100 ^ . 

•'1*'- ire' 273+ « ■'-278' 273+<' 

whence as before we have 

1 no o dr 100 n'>'_dr__ 
^~eJo 273 + t'^273Jo (273 + t)« '-''-'• 

For the cooling of the hotter body we have similarly 

1 rioo^ i dr 100 rio<'+ * dr 

eJt 273 + T 273 j, (273 + t)''"-^^"^- 

By adding together A, B, C, D, we obtain the equivalence 
value of all the transferences of heat during the heating and 
cooling. In this addition the integrals which have the factor 

- cancel each other, and two of the others may be combined 

together. Whence we have 

/373 8\p^ * dr 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEORY. 359 

Performing the integration, the right-hand side becomes 

373 / _1_ 1_\ _ /373 J\ / _1 1 \ 

273 [ 373 "^ 27;V V273 ^ 273/ V 373 + S 273 + s) ' 

If we expand the second product in terms of S to the 
first order, most of the resulting terms cancel each other, and 
the expression for the equivalence value of the transference's 
of heat during the heating and cooling becomes finally 

100 3^ 



(273)^ 

This expression fulfils the condition of being equal and 
opposite to the equivalence value of the surplus heat 
actually transferred between the two bodies. This transfer 
therefore is not uncompensated, but fully compensated as the 
second principle requires. We thus see that the operation 
suggested by Wand does not give the smallest ground for 
objecting to the principle. 

Another objection is drawn by Wand from the follow- 
ing considerations. He proposes the question whether the 
principle can be derived by mechanical reasoning from the 
ideas which we can form of the nature and action of heat. 
With this object he first applies the hypothesis main- 
tained by the author and others as to the molecular motion 
of gaseous bodies, and finds that this does actually lead 
to the principle in question. He then says that it is 
not sufficient to prove that one particular hypothesis leads 
to the principle, but that all possible mechanical hypo- 
theses on the nature of heat must be shewn to lead to it. 
Accordingly as a second example he takes another hypo- 
thesis, which he conceives specially adapted to represent the 
phenomena of expansion, and of the increase of pressure by 
heat. On this hypothesis a row of elastic balls, any two of 
which are connected by an elastic spring, vibrate in such a 
way that all of them are in similar phases. From this 
hypothesis he arrives at an equation different from that which 
he has chosen as the criterion of the second principle, and 
then draws the conclusion, "the second principle cannot 
therefore be universally derived from the principles of 
mechanics." But upon such a conclusion the question may 



360 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

be asked, whether in reality the hypothetical motion, Which 
he supposes, agrees with the actual motion, which we call 
heat, in such a way that the same equations must hold for 
both. So long as this is not proved the conclusion cannot be 
considered to be made out. 

Finally, Wand considers the process which occurs in 
nature, when in the growth of plants, under the influence of 
the sun's rays of light and heat, carbonic acid and water are 
absorbed, and oxygen liberated ; whilst the organic substances 
thus formed, if afterwards burnt or serving as nourishment 
to animals, unite themselves again with oxygen to form car- 
bonic acid and water, and thereby generate heat. This 
transformation of the siin's heat he considers to be in flat 
contradiction to the second principle. To the analysis which 
he gives many objections might be taken ; but the author 
considers that a process in which so much is still unknown, 
as that of the growth of plants under the influence of the 
sun, is altogether unfit to be used as a proof either for or 
against the principle in question. 

§ 12. Tail's Objections, 

Finally the author has to mention certain objections re- 
cently raised against his theory by Tait ; objections which have 
surprised him equally by their substance and by their form. 
In an article which appeared in 1872 on the History of the 
Mechanical Theory of Heat*, the author had observed, that 
Tait's work, A sketch of Thermodynamics, no doubt owed its 
existence chiefly to the wish of claiming the Mechanical 
Theory of Heat as far as possible for the English nation ; — ^a 
supposition for which the clearest groimds can be adduced. 
Further on in the article he had observed that Tait had 
ascribed to Sir William Thomson a formula due to the 
author, and had quoted it as given by Thomson in a 
paper which contained neither the formula itself nor any- 
thing equivalent to it. The author expected that Mr Tait, 
in answering this article, would specially address himsett to 
these two points, of which the latter particularly required 
clearing up. A reply appeared indeed "f", and one written in 

* Pogg. Ann,y Vol. cxlv. p. 132. 
t Phil, Mag,y Series 4, Vol. xlui. 



DISCUSSIONS ON THE THEOBY. 361 

a very acrimonious tone ; but to the author's surprise these 
two points were nowhere touched upon, a different turn 
being given to the whole matter. For whilst in the work 
previously alluded to the author's researches on the Mechani- 
cal Theory of Heat, even if in his own view they were not 
put in their right relation to those of English writers, were 
yet described at great length and with a general recognition 
of their merit, their correctness was here at once assailed, by 
the declaration that the fundamental principle, that heat 
cannot of itself pass from a colder to a hotter body, is 
untrue. 

To prove this two phenomena relating to electric currents 
are adduced. But in a rejoinder published shortly afterwards * 
the author was easily able to prove that these phenomena 
in no way contradict the principle, and that one of them is 
even so evidently in accordance with it, that it may serve as 
an example specially adapted to illustrate and establish it. 
As electrical phenomena are not here treated of, this is not 
the place to enter further into this subject. 

Tait further observed in his reply, that by the author's 
introduction of what he named Internal Work and Disgrega- 
tion, he had done a serious injury to science, offering however 
nothing to support this, beyond the brief remark : " In our 
present ignorance of the nature of matter such ideas can do 
only harm." What Tait has to object to the conception of 
internal work, it is difficult to understand. In his first 
paper on the Mechanical Theory of Heat the author divided 
the work during the body's change of condition into External 
and Internal Work, and shewed that those two quantities of 
work differed essentially in their mode of action. Since 
that time this distinction has been similarly made by all 
writers, so far as he is aware, who have treated of the Mecha- 
nical Theory of Heat. 

As regards the method (which will be described on a 
future occasion) of calculating the combined internal and 
external work, and the conception of disgregation introduced 
by the author with this object, purely mechanical investiga- 
tions have recently led to an equation, exactly corresponding 
with that which the author proposed in the science of heat, 
and in which the disgregation makes its appearance. If 

* PML Mag.f Series 4, Vol. xlhi. 



362 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

these investigations cannot yet be considered as complete, 
they nevertheless shew, at least in the author's opinion, that 
the nature of things requires the introduction of this con- 
ception. 

He therefore leaves the objections of Tait, with as much 
confidence as those of Holtzmann, Decher, and others, to the 
good judgment of the reader* 

* For a rejoinder by Prof. Tait to these observations, see Sketch of 
Thermodynamics^ 2nd edition, 1877, p. xv. 



Finis. 



APPENDIX I. 

ON THE THERMO-ELASTIC PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS. 

Sir William Thomson was the first who examined the thermo- 
elastic properties of elastic solids. Instead of abstracting his 
investigation {Quarterly Mathematical Journal, 1865) it may be 
well to present the subject as an illustration of the method of 
treatment by the Adiabatic Function. 

Consider any homogeneously-strained elastic solid. To define 
the state of the body as to strain six quantities must be specified, 
say Uy V, Wy x, y, z: these are generally the extensions aloug three 
rectangular axes, and the shearing strains about them, each 
relative to a defined standard temperature and a state when the 
body is free from stress. The work done by external forces when 
the strains change by small variations may always be expressed in 
the form 

( U^ + F8t; + . . . ) X volume of the solid, 

because the conditions of strain are homogeneous. U, V are 

the stresses in the solid : each is a function of uv and of the 

temperature, and is determined when these are known. Let 6 
denote the temperature (where is to be regarded merely as the 
name of a temperature, and the question of how temperatures are 
to be measured is not prejudged). 

Amongst other conditions under which the strains of the 
body may be varied, there are two which we must consider. 
First, suppose that the temperature is maintained constant; or 
that the change is effected isothermally. Then $ is constant. 
Secondly, suppose that the variation is effected under such con- 
ditions that no heat is allowed to pass into or to leave the 
body ; or that the change is effected adiahatically. In the latter 
case 6f Uy Vy are connected by a relation involving a para- 
meter which is always constant when heat does not pass into 



364} ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

or out of the solid : this parameter is called the adiahalic fane- 
iion. 

We have now fourteen quantities relating to the body, viz. 
six elements of strain^ six of stress, the quantity which defines 
the temperature, and the parameter <^ the constancy of which 
imposes the adiabatic condition. Any seven of these may be 
chosen as independent variables. 

Let the body now undergo Camot's four operations as fol- 
lows : — 

V, Let the stresses and strains vary slightly under the sole 
condition that the temperature does not change. Let the conse- 
quent increase of <^ be 8<^. Heat will be absorbed or given out, 
and, since the variations are small, the quantity will be propor- 
tional to 8<^, say 

/{$, Uy V, w, ) 8<^. 

2°. Let the stresses and strains further vary adiabatically, 
and let hO be the consequent increase of temperature. 

3^ Let the stresses and strains receive any isothermal varia- 
tion, such that the parameter <f> returns to its first value. Heat 
will be given out or absorbed, equal to 

4°. Let the body return to its first state. 

Here we have a complete and reversible cycle. The quantity 
of heat given off 8/*x 8<^ is equal to the work done by external 
forces. Now Camot's theorem (or the Second Principle of 
Thermodynamics) asserts that the work done, or B/x 8<^, divided 
by the heat transferred from the lower to the higher tempera- 
ture, / X S<^, is equal to a function of 6 only (which function is 
the same for all bodies) multiplied by 8$, Thus 



log (/) = j-^OdO + a function of <^ ; 



the function of <^ being added because the . variation was per- 
formed under the condition that <^ was constant. By properly 
choosing the parameter <^ this function may be included in 8<^, 
and we have, as the quantity of heat absorbed in the first 
operation, 



THERMO-ELASTIC PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS. 365 

The mode of measuring temperaturjB being arbitrary, we shall 
find it convenient to define that temperature is so measured that 

F {$) =z -^l then we have : — 

Heat absorbed in first operation = ^8<^ (1) ; 

Work done by external forces = 8d x 8<^ (2). 

We must now examine more particularly the variations in the 

stresses and strains. Denote the values of Z7, F, > ^j v, by 

different suflGbces for the four operations. 

The work done by the external forces in these operations is 
respectively 

-L^-« (t*, - w,) + -i-y-i (v, - r,) + &c., 



and the sum of these is equal to 8<^8d. 

Hence a variety of important relations may be obtained. 
Let all the strains but one be constant : then we have 

du .. 

« * d6 ' 
du 

with similar equations for U^^ &c. Hence the Work done in the 
successive operations is, 



366 ON THE MECHANICAL THEOBY OF HEAT. 

2 ''d^'^' 

Adding these, the total Work done becomes 



(■ 



du dU du dU\ ,/,,, 



the differentiations being performed when u and V are expressed 
as functions of B^ <^ and the five other strains. 

The same is true if five stresses are constant, that is if t^ and 
U are expressed as functions of By <^ and the five other stresses. 

But from (2) the Work done = dBx d(f>. Hence it follows 
generally (using the well-known theorem as to Jacobians) that 

d(l> dB d<l> dB - ,«. 

dU dii" dm dU"" ^ ^' 

<^ and B being expressed as functions of u, U; and either the five 
other stresses or the five other strains being constant. 

These equations are still true if the independent variables are 
partly stresses and partly strains, so long as no two are of the 
same name ; e.g. if they are vwXYZ. 

From equation (3) all the thermo-elastic properties of bodies 
may be deduced. We have generally 

dB^fr^dU^^du (4), 

dU du ^ ' 

'*=P^^P" (^)- 



THERMO-ELASTIC PROPEETIES OP SOLIDS. 367 

Putting {^^ = 0, we have 

J- (when <f> is constant) = - j- . 

dU 
Putting d$ = 0, we have 

d^ 

-J- (when is constant), = - — . 

dU 

Let -~- denote -;- under the condition that ^ is constant, 
au du ^ ' 

that is, where $ is expressed as a function of Au instead of Uu. 

Then by (4) 

d<l> 
d^dBdU d0^_dO^ ^ dO 
du dU du du dU d<t> du 

Tu 

dU 

This is the fourth thermodynamic relation (see Maoswell on 
Heat, 1877, p. 169). 

The others are obtained in a similar way thus : — 

d^ 

<kO _de__de^ dU_ \ __diju 

dU~ dU du dffi' c/<^~ d4 ' 

du du 

dl 
doKJ} _ d<l} d<f> du 1 duU 

'du~~du'~dU W^''de^'"~de' 

W dU 

de^ 

decfi ^ dffi d<f> dU ^ 1 _ diju 
dU" dV^ du dO_^ ^" 'dd' 

du du 



368 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

These relations are true provided each of the other strains, or 
else its corresponding stress, is constant. 

Take the last of these for interpretation. When $ is con- 
stant we have by (1), 

Heat absorbed in any change (or dq) = 6d<f^. 

or, by the fourth relation, 

dfj^ 1 dq 

df^edif' 

Here —-- is the coefficient of dilatation. This, under the condi- 
(it/ 

tions assumed, will, of course, be different according as the 

other stresses or other strains are maintained constant. In the 

case of a bar of india-rubber stretched by a variable weight, 

all the elements of stress but one vanish or are constant. If the 

stress be somewhat considerable it is found that ~j^ is nega* 

tive. It follows that increase of weight will liberate heat in 
the india-rubber. But the same will not be true if the stretching 
weight be nil or very small, nor again if the periphery of the 
bar is held so that it cannot contract transversely as the weight 
extends it longitudinally, unless (which is improbable) it should 
be found that in these cases the coefficient of dilatation is 
negative. 



APPENDIX II. 



ON CAPILLARITY. 



The equations obtained in Appendix I. may also be applied to 
the equilibrium of the surface £lm of a liquid in contact with its 
own vapour. This subject is generally known under the name of 
Capillarity, from its having first been studied in connection with 
Capillary tubes (Maxwell, On Heat, 1871, p. 263). Thus let the 
body considered be the film of fluid at the surface of a fluid, and 
let it be so small in volume that its capacity of heat in virtue of 
its volume may be neglected. Let T be the surface tension, and 
S the surface. Then ^ is a function of 6 only : hence, from an 
equation analogous to Equation (3), Appendix I., we obtain 



or 



dT 

de"" 


dS 
d<t> 


■1, 


dT 

de" 


d<l> 

ds~ 


1 dq 

eds 



(by Equation (1), Appendix I.), where q is heat absorbed. 

dT 
If then j^ is negative, as is iisnally the case, extension of 

surface means absorption of heat. 

The question of the equilibritfm of vapour at a curved sur- 
face of liquid has been treated by Sir Wm. Thomson. The 
following is mainly taken from his paper {Proc. Royal Society of 
Edinburgh, 1870, Vol. vii., p. 63). 

In a closed vessel containing only liquid and its vapour, all 
at one temperature, the liquid rests, with itis free surface raised or 
depressed in capillary tubes and in the neighbourhood of the solid 
boundary, in permanent equilibrium according to the same law of 
relation between curvature and pressure as in vessels open to the 
air. The permanence of this equilibrium implies physical equi- 
librium between the liquid and the vapour in contact with it at 
all parts of its surface. But the pressure of the vapour at 
different levels differs according to hydrostatic law. Hence the 
pressure of saturated vapour in contact with a liquid differs 

C. ^4 



370 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

according to the curvature of the bounding surface, being less 
when the liquid is concave, and greater when it is convex. And 
detached portions of the liquid iu separate vessels, all enclosed in 
one containing vessel, cannot remain permanently with their 
free surfaces in any other relative positions than those they would 
occupy if there were hydrostatic communication of pressure 
between the portions of liquid in the several vessels. There must 
be evaporation from those surfaces which are too high, and con- 
densation into the liquid at those surfaces which are too low — a 
process which goes on until hydrostratic equilibrium, as if with 
free communication of pressure from vessel to vessel, is attained. 
Thus, for example, if there are two large open vessels of water, 
one considerably above the other in level, and if the temperature 
of the surrounding matter is kept rigorously constant, the liquid 
in the higher vessel will gradually evaporate until it is all gone 
and condensed into the lower vessel. Or we may suppose a 
capillary tube, with a small quantity of liquid occupying it from its 
bottom up to a certain level, to be placed upright in the middle of a 
quantity of the same liquid with a wide free surface, and con- 
tained in a hermetically sealed exhausted receiver. The vapour 
will gradually become condensed into the liquid in the capillary tube, 
until the level of the liquid in it is the same as it would be were the 
lower end of the tube in hydrostatic communication with the 
large mass of liquid. The effect would be that in a very short 
time liquid would visibly rise in the capillary tube, and that, pro- 
vided care were taken to maintain the equality of temperature all 
over the surface of the hermetically sealed vessel, the liquid in the 
capillary tube would soon take very nearly the same level as it 
would have were its lower end open ; sinking to this level if the 
capillary tube were in the beginning filled too full, or rising to it 
if there is not enough of the liquid in it at first to fulfil the con- 
dition of equilibrium. 

The following shews precisely the relations between curva- 
tures, differences of level, and differences of pressure with which 
we are concerned. 

Let p be the pressure of equilibrium above the curved surface 
in the tube, rr' the principal radii of curvature of that surface, 
and T the surface tension : then by tlie principles of Capillarity 

the upward drag on the surface, due to the tension, la T f~ +-A, 

Hence the pressure within the liquid, immediately below the 
surface is 



-^(^')- 



ON CAPILLARITY. 371 

Let TT be the equilibrium pressure of the vapour at the plane sur- 
face of the liquid, p the density of the liquid, o- the density of the 
vapour, h the height at which the liquid stands in the tube above 
the plane surface : then clearly 



TT 

But also 



= [p-^(J+^')]+A/, (1). 



v^p + ha- (2). 

Therefore 



TT 



or 



which gives the relation between the pressure of equilibrium above 
the curved surface and that above the plane surface. 

In strictness the value of or to be used ought to be the mean 
density of a vertical column of vapour extending through the 
given height. But in all cases in which we can practically 
apply the formulae, according to our present knowledge of the pro- 
perties of matter, the difference of densities in this column is very 
small, and may be neglected. Hence, if If denote the height 
above the plane surface of the liquid of an imaginary homogeneous 
fluid which, if of the same density as the vapour at that plane, 
would produce by its weight the actual pressure ?r, we have 

But by Equations (1) and (2) 
hence by Equation (3) 

TT - o-A = TT r 1 - -^ j . 

For vapour at ordinary atmospheric temperatures, If is about 
1,300,000 centimetres. Hence in the capillary tube which would 
keep water up to a height of 13 naetres above the plane level, the 
curved surface of the water is in equilibrium with the vapour in 
contact with it, when the pressure of the vapour is less by about 
yg^*** of its own amount than the pressure of vapour in equilibrium 
at a plane surface of water at the same temperature. 



APPENDIX III. 

ON THE CONTINUITY OF THE LIQUID AND 
GASEOUS STATES OF MATTER. 

The chapters on Fusion and Vaporization will be rendered more 
complete by a brief account .of Dr Andrews' important researches 
on the continuity between the liquid and gaseous states of matter. 
This account is mainly taken, by permission of Messrs Longmans, 
from the late Prof. Maxwell's work, on The Theory of HefUy 1877, 
Ch. VI. 

In Fig. 1 the full lines represent certain Isothermal lines 
for Carbonic Acid Gas (CO,), i. e. curves produced by making it 
vary in pressure and volume, while the temperature is kept con- 
stant at the value written (in degrees Cent.) along each line. The 
ordinates represent pressures in atmospheres, .and the abscissse 
represent volumes. The variation is supposed to "be produced by 
diminishing the volume, e.g. the gas may be supposed to be 
contained in a cylinder, the piston of which is gradually lowered. 

Take one of these isothermals, e.g. that at 21** '5. Beginning 
from the right hand, we have first a curved line AB, During 
this part of the compression, the substance is entirely in the state 
of a gas. As the volume diminishes the pressure increases, and 
the result is a regular curve, which if the gas were perfect, or pv 
constant, would be an equilateral hyperbola. At the point B^ 
corresponding to about 60 atm., the gas commences to liquefy. 
From this point the decrease of volume produces no increase of 
pressure, but simply liquefies more and more of the gas. The 
curve becomes therefore a horizontal straight line BO, At the 
point the whole of the gas is liquefied. From this point any 
further reduction of volume is resisted by the elastic force of the 
liquid, which is very great; and the isothermal line therefore rises 
in the almost vertical curve CD. 

Now the length of the horizontal part BG, during which the 
gas is partly in the liquid, partly in the gaseous state, is not the 
same for different temperatures. For IS^'l its length is seen to be 
EFy which is much greater than BC ; while for temperatures above 



CONTINUITY OF THE LIQUID AND GASEOUS STATES. 373 

21"-5 it is found to be shorter than BC. The dotted line DBEGF 
is the boundary of all these horizontal lines, up to a certain point G^ 



"80 



"S9 



Fig. 1. 

corresponding to 30*-92, at which thdr length vanishes. In othw 
words, at temperatures above 30^*92 the *' gas line " AB, and the 



374 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OP HEAT. 

** liquid line" CD meet each other, without any intervening 
portion. 

In the case of steam, for which such isothermal lines were first 
drawn, similar phenomena occur ; and when it was seen that the 
gas line and the liquid line thus continually approached each other 
as the temperature was raised, the question naturally arose, Do 
they ever meet 1 If they do meet, then at that temperature the 
substance cannot exist partly as a liquid and partly as a vapour, 
but must be entirely converted, at the corresponding pressure, 
from the state of liquid to that of vapour ; or else, since in this 
case the vapour and liquid have the same density, it may be 
suspected that the distinction between liquid and vapour has here 
lost its meaning. 

The answer to this question has been to a great extent sup- 
plied by a series of very interesting researches. 

In 1822 M. Cagniard de la Tour * observed the effect of a high 
temperature upon liquids enclosed in glass tubes of a capacity not 
much greater than that of the liquid itself. He found that when 
the temperature was raised to a certain point, the substance, 
which till then was partly liquid and partly gaseous, suddenly 
became uniform in appearance throughout, without any visible 
surface of separation, or any evidence that the substance in the 
tube was partly in one state and partly in another. 

He concluded that at this temperature the whole became 
gaseous. The true conclusion, as Dr Andrews has shewn, is that 
the properties of the liquid and those of the vapour continually 
approach to similarity, and that, above a certain temperature, the 
properties of the liquid are not separated from those of the vapour 
by any apparent distinction between them. 

In 1823, the year following the researches of Cagniard de la 
Tour, Faraday succeeded in liquefying several bodies hitherto 
known o^ly in the gaseous form, by pressure alone, and in 1826 
he gjreatly extended our knowledge of the effects of temperature 
and j^essure on gases. He considers that above a certain tempe- 
jE:ature, which, in the language of Dr Andrews, we may call the 
critical temperature for the substance, no amount of pressure will 
produce the phenomenon which we call condensation, and he 
supposes that the temperature of 166° F. below zero is probably 
above the critical temperature for oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, 
Dr Andrews has examined carbonic acid under varied con- 
ditions of temperature and pressure, in order to ascertain the 
relations of the liquid and gaseous states, and has arrived at the 
conclusion that the gaseous and liquid states are only widdy 
^ Ann(ile$ de Gkimier 2nd Series, Yolfl. zzL and zzii* 



CONTINUITY OF THE LIQUID AND GASEOUS STATES. 875 

separated forms of the same condition of matter, and may be 
made to pass one into the other without any interruption or 
breach of continuity \ 

The diagram, Fig. 1, for carbonic acid is taken from Dr 
Andrews' paper, with the exception of the dotted line shewing 
the region within which the substance can exist as a liquid in 
presence of its vapour. The base line of the diagram corresponds, 
not to zero pressure, but to a pressure of 47 atmospheres. 

The lowest of the isothermal lines is that of 13°'l C. or 
55°-6 F. 

This line shews that at a pressure of about 47 atmospheres 
condensation occurs. The substance is seen to become separated 
into two distinct portions, the upper portion being in the state of 
vapour or gas, and the lower in the state of liquid. The upper 
surface of the liquid can be distinctly seen, and where this surface 
is close to the sides of the glass containing the substance it is seen 
to be curved, as the surface of water is in small tubes. 

As the volume is diminished, more of the substance is liquefied, 
till at last the whole is compressed into the liquid form. 

Liquid carbonic acid, as was first observed by Thilorier, dilates 
as the temperature rises to a greater degree than even a gas, and, 
as Dr Andrews has shewn, it yields to pressure much more than 
any ordinary liquid. From Dr Andrews' experiments it also 
appears that its compressibility diminishes as the pressure in- 
creases. These results are apparent even in the diagram. It is, 
therefore, far more compressible than any ordinary Uquid, and it 
appears from the experiments of Andrews that its compressibility 
diminishes as the volume is reduced. 

It appears, therefore, that the behaviour of liquid carbonic 
acid under the action of heat and pressure is very difierent from 
that of ordinary liquids, and in some respects approaches to that 
of a gas. 

If we examine the next of the isothermals of the diagram, 
that for 21°'5 C. or 70*'-7 F., the approximation between the 
liquid and the gaseous states is still more apparent. Here con- 
densation takes place at about 60 atmospheres of pressure, and 
the liquid occupies nearly a third of the volume of the gas. The 
exceedingly dense gas is approaching in its properties to the 
exceedingly light liquid. Still there is a distinct separation 
between the gaseous and liquid states, though we are approaching 
the critical temperature. This critical temperature has been 
determined by Dr Andrews to be 30'»-92 C. or 87<*-7 F. At this 
temperature, and at a pressure of from 73 to 75 atmospheres, 

1 Phil, Trans, 1869, p. 575. 



376 ON THE MECHANICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 

carbonic acid appears to be in the critical condition. No sepa- 
ration into liquid and vapour can be detected, but at the same 
time very small variations of pressure or of temperature produce 
such great variations of density that flickering movements are 
observed in the tube* "resembling in an exaggerated form the 
appearances exhibited during the mixture of Hquids of different 
densities, or when columns of heated air ascend through colder 
strata." 

The isothermal line for 3V'l C. or 88* F. passes above this 
critical point. During the whole compression the substance is 
never in two distinct conditions in different part* of the tube. 
When the pressure is less than 73 atmospheres the isothermal 
line, though greatly flatter than that of a perfect gas, resembles 
it in general features-. From 73 to 75 atmospheres the* volume 
diminishes very rapidly, but by no means suddenly, anfd above 
this pressure the volume diminishes more gradually than in the 
case of a perfect gas, but still more rapidly than in most liquids. 

In the isothermals for 32^-5 C. or 90^*5 F. and for 35^-5 C. or 
9 5** 9 F. we can still observe a slight increase of conq)res8ibility 
near ^e same part of the diagram, but in the isothermal line for 
48°- 1 C. or 11 8° -6 F. the curve is concave upwards throughout its 
whole course, and differs from the correspondfaig isothermal line 
for a perfect gas only by being somewhat flatter, shewing that for 
all ordinary pressures the volimie is somewhat l>ess tha& that 
assigned by Boyle's law. 

Still at the temperature of 118°*6 F. carbonic acid has aU the 
properties of a gas, and the effects of heat and pressure on it differ 
from their effects on a perfect gas only by quantities requiring 
careful experiraents to detect them. 

We have no reason iso believe that any phenomenon sinuhir to 
condensation would occur, however great a pressure were applied 
to carbonic acid at this temperature. 



CAMLllIDOE : PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A., AT THE UNIVERSITY PBEB8. 



Bedford Street, Covent Garden, London, 

March 1879. 



Macmillan ^ Co:s Catalogue of Works 
in Mathematics and Physical Science; 
including Pure and Applied Mathe- 
matics; Physics^ AsTRONOMYy Geology, 
Chemistry, Zoology, Botany; and of 
Works in Mental and Moral Philosophy 
and Allied Subjects, 



MATHEMATICS. 

Airy.— Works by Sir G. B. Airy, K.C.B., Astronomer Royal :— 
ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL 
EQUATIONS. Designed for the Use of Students in the Univer- 
sities. With Diagrams. New Edition. Crown 8vo. 5^. (xi. 

ON THE ALGEBRAICAL AND NUMERICAL THEORY OF 
ERRORS OF OBSERVATIONS AND THE COMBINA- 
TION OF OBSERVATIONS. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 

UNDULATORY THEORY OF OPTICS. Designed for the Use of 
Students in the University. New Edition. Crown 8vo. 6j". ^(/, 

ON SOUND AND ATMOSPHERIC VIBRATIONS. With 
the Mathematical Elements of Music. Designed for the Use of 
Students of the University. Second Edition, revised and enlarged. 
Crown 8vo. gs, 

A TREATISE ON MAGNETISM. Designed for the Use of 
Students in the University. Crown 8vo. 9^. 6</. 

Ball (R. S., A.M.)— EXPERIMENTAL MECHANICS. A 
Course of Lectures delivered at the Royal College of Science for 
Ireland. By Robert Stawell Ball, A.M., Professor of Applied 
Mathematics and Mechanics in the Royal College of Science for 
Ireland (Science and Art Department). Royal 8vo. 16s, 

" JVe have not met with any book of ike sort in English i It elucir 
dates instructively the methods of a teacher of the very highest 
rank. We most cordially recommend it to all our readers,^^ — 
Mechanics' Magazine. 

S.ooc. 3. 79 A 



SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



Bayma.— THE ELEMENTS OF MOLECULAR MECHA- 
NICS. By Joseph Bayma, S.J., Professor of Philosophy, 
Stonyhurst College. Demy 8yo. cloth. lor. 6d, 

Boole. — ^Works by G. Boole, D.CL, F.R.S., Professor of 
Mathematics in the Queen's University, Ireland :^r- 

A TREATISE ON DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. Third 
Edition. Edited byl. Todhunter. Crown 8vo. doth. 14J. 

*^A treatisfi incomparably superior to any other elementary hook on the 
subject with which we are ctcquainted" — Philosophical Magazine. 

A TREATISE ON DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. Supple- 
mentary Volume. Edited by I. Todhunter. Crown 8to. doth. 

THE CALCULUS OF FINITE DIFFERENCES. Crown 8vo. 
doth, los, 6d. New Edition revised. 

I 

Cheyne. — AN elementary treatise on the 

PLANETARY THEORY. With a Collection of Problems. 
By C. H. H. CHEYNEi M.A., F.R.A.S. Second Edition. Crown 
8vo. cloth. 6s. dd, 

Clifford.— THE ELEMENTS OF DYNAMIC. An Introduction 
to the study of Motion and Rest in Solid and Fluid Bodies. By 
W. K. Clifford, F.R.S., Professor of Applied Mathematics and 
Mechanics at University College, London. Part I. — Kinematic. 
Crown 8vo. *is, 6d, 

Gumming.— AN INTRODUCTION TO THE THEORY OF 
ELECTRICITY. With numerous Examples. By Linnaeus 
CuMMiNG, M. A., Assistant Master ^t Rugby School. Crown 8yo. 
Zs,6d. 

CuthbertSOn.— EUCLIDIAN GEOMETRY. By F. Cuth- 
BERTSON, M .A., Head Mathematical Master of the City of London 
School. Extra fcap. 8vo. 4f. 6d» 

Ferrers.— Works by the Rev. N.M. Ferrers, M. A., F.R.S., Fellow 
and Tutor of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge : — 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON TRILINEAR CG-ORDI- 
NATES, the Method of Reciprocal Polars, and the Theory of 
Projectors. Third Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. 6s, 6d. 

SPHERICAL HARMONICS AND SUBJECTS CONNECTED 
WITH THEM. Crown 8vo. ^s. 6d, 



MATHEMATICS, 



Frost. — Works by Percival Frobt, M.A., late Fellow of St. 
John's College,- Mathematical Lecturer of King's Coll. Cambridge:— 

THE FIRST THREE SECTIONS OF NEWTON'S PRIN- 
CIPIA. With Notes and Illustrations. Also a Collection of 
Problems, principally intended as Examples of Newton's Methods. 
Third Edition. 8vo. cloth. I2s. 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON CURVE TRACING. 
8vo. 12S, 

. SOLID GEOMETRY. Being a New Edition, revised and enlarged, 
of the Treatise by Frost and Wolstenholme. Vol. I. 8vo. i6s, 

Godfray. — Works by Hugh Godfray, M.A., Mathematical 
Lecturer at Pembroke College, Cambridge : — 

A TREATISE ON ASTRONOMY, for the Use of Colleges and 
Schools. 8vo. cloth. I2s, 6d. 

**// is a working book" says the Guardian, ^^ taking Astronomy 
in its proper place in the Mathematical Sciences, , . . It is a book 
which is not likely to be got up unintelligently," 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON THE LUNAR 
THEORY, with a Brief Sketch of the Problem up to the time of 
Newton. Second Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. cloth. 5^. 6cl, 

**As an elementary treatise and introduction to the subject, we think 
it may justly claim to supersede all former ones," — London, Edin- 
burgh, and Dublin Phil. Magazine. 

Green (George).— mathematical papers of the 

LATE GEORGE GREEN, Fellow of Gonville and Caius 
College, Cambridge. Edited by N. M. Ferrers, M.A., Fellow 
and Tutor of Gonville and Caius College. 8vo. 155-. 

**i? has been for some time recognized that Greenes writings are 
amongst the most valuable mathematical productions we possess"-^ 
Athenseum. 

Hemming.— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON THE 
DIFFERENTIAL AND INTEGRAL CALCULUS. For the 
Use of Colleges and Schools. By G. W.. Hemming, M.A., 
Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge. Second Edition, with 
Corrections and Additions.. 8yo. cloth. 9^. 

Jackson.— GEOMETRICAL CONIC SECTIONS. An Ele- 
mentary Treatise in which the Conic Sections are defined as the 
Plane Sections of a Cone, and treated by the Method of Projections. 
By J. Stuart Jackson, M. A., late Fellow of Gonville and Caius 
College. Crown 8vo. ^. (id. 

A ? 



SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



Kelland and Tait.— an introduction to quater- 
nions. With numerous Examples. By P. Kslland, M.A., 
F.R.S., and P. G. Tait, M.A., Professors in the d^artment of 
Mathematics in the University of Edinburgh. Crown 8vo. 7j. 6^. 

Kempe.— HOW to draw a straight line, a Lecture 
on Linkages. ByA.B. Kempe, B.A. Illustrated. CrownSvo. Ij.6k 

Merriman.— ELEMENTS OF the method of least 

SQUARES. By Mansfield Merriman, Professor of Civil and 
Mechanical Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Penn., 
U.S.A. Crown 8vo. 7j. dd. 

Morgan.— A COLLECTION OF PROBLEMS AND EXAM- 
PLES IN MATHEMATICS. With Answers. By H. A. 
Morgan, M.A., Sadlerian and Mathematical Lecturer of Jesus 
Collie, Cambridge. Crown 8vo. cloth. 6^. 6^ 

Newton's Principia.— 4to. cloth. 31J. 6^. 

It is a sufficient guarantee of the reliability of this complete edition of 
Newtofis Principia that it has been printed for and under the care 
of Professor Sir William Thomson and Professor Blackburn^ of 
Glasgffio University, 

Parkinson.— A TREATISE ON OPTICS. By S. Parkin- 
son, D.D., F.R.S., Fellow and Tutor of St. John's College, 
Cambridge. Third Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown 8vo. 
cloth. loj. dd, 

Phear.— ELEMENTARY HYDROSTATICS. With Numerous 
Examples. By J. B. Phear, M.A., Fellow and late Assistant Tutor 
of Clare Coll. Cambridge. Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo. cloth. 5^. (id, 

Pirrie.— LESSONS ON RIGID DYNAMICS. By the Rev. G. 
PiRRiE, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Queen's College, Cambridge. 
Crown 8vo. 6j. 

Puckle.— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON CONIC SEC- 
TIONS AND ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY. With numerous 
Examples and Hints for their Solution. By G. Hale Puckle, 
M.A. Fouth Edition, enlarged. Crown 8vo. *js. td, 

Rayleigh. — THE THEORY OF SOUND. By Lord Rayleigh, 
F.R.S., formerly Fellow of Trinity Collie, Cambridge. 8vo. 
Vol. I. I2J. dd. ; Vol. II. 1 2 J. dd, [Vol. III. in preparation, 

Reuleaux.— THE KINEMATICS OF MACHINERY. Out- 
lines of a Theory of Machines. By Professor F. Reuleaux. 
Translated and edited by A. B. W. Kennedy, C.E., Professor of 
Civil and Mechanical Engineering, University College, London. 
With 450 Illustration*. Royal 8vo. 20J. 



MATHEMATICS. 



Routh. — Works by Edward John Routh, M.A., F.R.S., late 
Fellow and Assistant Tutor of St. Peter's College, Cambridge ; 
Examiner in the University of London : — 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON THE DYNAMICS OF 
THE SYSTEM OF RIGID BODIES. With numerous 
Examples. Third Edition, enlarged. 8vo. 2ij. 

STABILITY OF A GIVEN STATE OF MOTION, PARTI- 
CULARLY STEADY MOTION. The Adams' Prize Essay for 
1877. 8vo. %s, 6d, 

Tait and Steele — ^^dynamics of a particle. With 

numerous Examples. By Professor Tait and^r. Steele. Fourth 
Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. 12^. 

Thomson.— PAPERS ON ELECTROSTATICS AND MAG- 
NETISM. By Professor Sir William Thomson, F.R.S. 
8vo. i&f. 

Todhunter — Works by L Todhunter, M.A., F.R.S., of 
St. John's College, Cambridge : — 

**Mr, Todhunter is chiefly known to students of mathematics as the 
author of a series of admirable mathematical text-hooks^ which 
possess the rare qualities of being clear in style and absolutely free 
from mistakes i typographical or other" — Saturday Review. 

A TREATISE ON SPHERICAL TRIGONOMETRY. New 
Edition, enlarged. Crown Svo. cloth. 4?. 6d, 

PLANE CO-ORDINATE GEOMETRY, as applied to the Straight 
Line and the Conic Sections. With numerous Examples. New 
Edition. Crown Svo. *js. 6d, 

A TREATISE ON THE DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS. 
With numerous Examples. New Edition, Crown 8vo. lor. 6d, 

A TREATISE ON THE INTEGRAL CALCULUS AND ITS 
APPLICATIONS. With numerous Examples. New Edition, 
revised and enlarged. Crown 8vo. cloth. loj. 6d, 

EXAMPLES OF ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY OF THREE 
DIMENSIONS. New Edition, revised. Crown Svo. cloth, ^r. 

A TREATISE ON ANALYTICAL STATICS. With numerous 
Examples. New Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown Svo. 
cloth. I or. 6d, 

A HISTORY OF THE MATHEMATICAL THEORY OF 
PROBABILITY, from the Time of Pascal to that of Laplace. 
Svo. iSj. 

RESEARCHES IN THE CALCULUS OF VARIATIONS, 
Principally on the Theory of Discontinuous Solutions : An Essay 
to which the Adams' Prize was awarded in the University of 
Cambridge in 1871. Svo. 6s, 



SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



To6hMn\,^T— -continued. 
A HISTORY OF THE MATHEMATICAL THEORIES OF 
ATTRACTION, and the Figure of the Earth, from the time of 
Newton to that of Laplace. Two vols. 8vo. 2/^, 

** Probably no man in England is so qualified to do justice io the 
theme as Mr. Todhunter. To all mathematicians these velumes 
will be deeply^ interestinz, and to all succeeding investigators^ of the 
highest practical utUityr — Athenaeum. 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON LAPLACE'S, LAME'S, 
AND BESSEL'S FUNCTIONS. Crown 8vo. lOr. W. 

Wilson (W. P.)— A TREATISE ON DYNAMICS. By 
W. V. Wilson, M.A., Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge, 
and Professor of Mathematics in Queen's College, Belfast 8vo. 
gs. 6d. 

Wolstenholme.— MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS, on Sub- 
jects included in the First and Second Divisions of the Schedule 
of Subjects for the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos Examination. 
Devised and arranged by Joseph Wolstenholme, late Fellow 
of Christ's College, sometime Fellow of St John's College, and 
professor of MaUiematics in the Royal Indian Engineering. CoU^e. 
New Edition, greatly enlarged. 8vo. i8r. 

Young.— SIMPLE PRACTICAL METHODS OF CALCU- 
LATING STRAINS ON GIRDERS, ARCHES, AND 
TRUSSES. With a Supplementaiy Essay on Economy in suspen- 
sion Bridges. By E. W. Young, Associate of King's College, 
London, and Member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. 8va 
7^". 6d. 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 

Airy (G. B.)— POPULAR ASTRONOMY. With Illustrations. 
By Sir G. B. Airy, K.C.B., Astronomer Royal. New Edition. 
i8mo. cloth. 4?. 6d^. 

Bastian. — Works by H. Charlton Bastian, M.D., F.R.S., 
Professor of Pathological Anatomy in University College, London, 
&c. : — 

THE BEGINNINGS OF LIFE : Being some Account of the Nature, 
Modes of Origin, and Transformations of Lower Organisms. In 
Two Volumes. With upwards of lOo Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 28.r. 

^* It is a book that cannot be ignored^ and must inevitably lead to 
renewed discussions and repeated observations^ and through these to 
the establishment of truth,* — A. R. Wallace in Nature. 

EVOLUTION AND THE ORIGIN OF LIFE. Crown 8vo. 
dr. dd, 

** Abounds in information of interest to the student of biological 
science,**' -Daily News. 

Blake.— ASTRONOMICAL MYTHS. Based on Flammarion's 
**The Heavens." By John F. Blake. With numerous Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo. gs. 

Blanford (H. F.)--RUDIMENTS OF PHYSICAL GEO. 
GRAPHY FOR THE USE OF INDIAN SCHOOLS. By 
H. F. Blanford, F.G.S. With numerous ^Illustrations and 
Glossary of Technical Terms employed. New Edition. Globe 
8vo. 2s. 6d, 

Blanford (W. T.)— GEOLOGY AND ZOOLOGY OF 
ABYSSINIA. By W. T. Blanford. 8va 21s. 

Bosanquet.^AN elementary treatise on musical 

INTERVALS AND TEMPERAMENT. With an Account of 
an Enharmonic Harmonium exhibited in the Loan Collection of 
Scientific Instruments, South Kensington, 1876 ; also of an EnhSur- 
monic Organ exhibited to the Musical Association of London, 
May, 1875. Sy R' H. Bosanquet, Fellow of St John's College, 
Oxford. 8vo. 6s, 

Coal : ITS HISTORY AND ITS USES. By Professors Green, 
MiALL, , Thorpe, Rucker, and Marshall, of the Yorkshire 
College, Leeds. With Illustrations. 8vo. 12s. 6d, 

* * It furnishes a very comprehensive treatise on the whole subject of Coal 
from the geological^ chemical^ mechanical^ and industrial points of 
vieWi concluding with a chapter on the important topic known as 
the * Coal Question: "—Daily News. 



8 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE, 

Cooke (Josiah P., Jun.)— FIRST PRINCIPLES OF 
CHEMICAL PHILOSOPHY. By Josiah P. Cooke, Jun., 
Ervine Professor of Chemistry and Mineralogy in Harvard Collie. 
Third Edition, revised and corrected. Crown 8vo. V2s, 

Cooke (M. C.)— HANDBOOK OF BRITISH FUNGI, 
. with full descriptions of all the Species, and Illustrations of the 
Genera. By M. C. Cooke, M.A. Two vols, crown 8vo. 24^. 

" Will maintain its place as the standard English book^ on the 
subject of which it treats^ for many years to come,^^ — Standard. 

Dawkins,-— CAVE-HUNTING : Researches on the Evidence of 
Caves respecting the Early Inhabitants of Europe. By W. Boyd 
Dawkins, F.R.S., &c., Professor of Geology at Owens College, 
Manchester. With Coloured Plate apd Woodcuts. 8vo. 21s. 

** The mass of information he hcts brought together^ with the judicious 
use he has made of his materials y will be found to invest his book 
with much of new and sin^lar value" — Saturday Re^ew, 

Dawson (J. W.)— ACADIAN geology. The Geologic 
Structure, Organic Remains, and Mineral' Resources of Nova 
Scotia, New Branswick, and Prince Edward Island. By John 
William Dawson, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S., F.G.S., Principal and 
Vice-Chancellor of M*Gill College and University, Montreal, &c. 
With a Geological Map and numerous Illustrations. Third Edition, 
with Supplement 8vo. 21^. Supplement, separately, 2J,6</. 
** The book will doubtless find a place in the library, . not. only of 
the scientific geologist, but also of all who are desirous of the in' 
dustrial progress and commercial prosperity of the Acadian /tro- 
vinces." — Mining Journal. 

Fleischer.— A SYSTEM OF VOLUMETRIC ANALYSIS. 
By Dr. E. Fleischer. Translated from the Second German 
Edition by M. M. Pattison Muir, with Notes and Additions. 
Illustrated. Crowti 8vo. 'js, 6d. 

m 

Forbes,— THE TRANSIT OF VENUS. By George Forbes, 
B.A., Professor of Natural Philosophy in the Andersonian Univer- 
sity of Glasgow. With niraierous Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3^. 6d, 

Foster and Balfour.— elements OF embryology 

By Michael Foster, M.D., F.R.S., andF. M. Balfour, M.A., 
Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. With numerous Illustra- 
tions. Part I. Crown 8vo. p. 6d, 

Gal ton.- — Works by FRANCIS Galton, F.R.S. :— 
METEOROGRAPHICA, or Methods of , Mapping the Weather. 
Illustrated by upwards of 600 Printed Lithographic Diagrams. 410. gs. 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 



V O 



Galton — continued. 

HEREDITARY GENIUS : An Inquiry into its Laws and Con- 

sequences. Demy 8vo. I2s, 

The Times calls it ^^ a most able and most interesting book" 
ENGLISH MEN OF SCIENCE; THEIR NATURE AND 

NURTURE. 8vo. &f. 6d, 

** The book is certainly one of very great interest," — Nature. 

Geikie. — Works by Archibald Geikie, LL.D., F.R.S., 
Murchison Professor of Geology and Mineralogy at Edinburgh : — 
ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY. 
With numerous Illustrations. 'Fcap. 8vo. 4s, 6d, Questions, is, 6d. 
FIELD GEOLOGY. With Illustrations. CroWn 8vo. [Shortly, 
PRIMER OF GEOLOGY. Illustrated. i8mo. is. 
PRIMER OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY. Illustrated. i8mo. is, 

Gordon.— AN elementary book on heat. By J. E. 

H. Gordon, B.A., Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. 
Crown 8vo. 2s, 

Guillemin.— THE FORCES OF NATURE : A Popular Intro- 
duction to the Study of Physical Phenomena. By Am^d:6e 
Guillemin. Translated from the. French by Mrs. Norman 
LOCKYER ; and Edited, with Additions and Notes, by J. Norman 
Lockyer, F.R.S. Illustrated by Coloured Plates, and 455 Wood- 
cuts. Third and cheaper Edition. Royal 8vo. 2U. 
** Translator and Editor have done justice to their trust, 77ie 
text has all the force and flow of original writingy combining 
faithfulness to the author's meaning with purity and independence 
in regard to idiom ; while the historical precision and accuracy 
pervading the work throughout^ speak of the watchful editorial 
supervision which has been given to every scientific detail. Nothing 
can well exceed the clearness and delicacy of the illustrative wood' 
cuts. Altogether, the work may be said to have no parallel, either 
in point of fulness or attraction, as a popular manual of physical 
science,^* — Saturday Review. 

THE APPLICATIONS OF PHYSICAL FORCES, By A. 
Guillemin. Translated from the French by Mrs. Lockyer, and 
Edited with Notes and Additions by J. N. LoCKYER, F.R.S. 
With Coloured Plates and numerous Illustrations. Cheaper 
Edition. Imperial 8vo. cloth, extra gilt 36^. 
Also in Eighteen Monthly Parts, price is, each. Part I. in Noviember, 
1878. 

" A book which we can heartily recommend, both on accouni of the 
width and soundness of its contents, and also because of the excel- 
lence of its print, its illustratiofis, and external appearance,^* — 
Westminster Review. 



lo SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



Hanbury. — science papers : chiefly Pharmacological and 
Botanical. By Daniel Hanbury, F.R.S. Edited, with 
Memoir, by J. Ince, F.L.S., and Portrait engraved by C. H. 
Jeens. 8vo. I4r. 

Henslow. — THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION OF LIVING 
THINGS, and Application of the Principles of Evolution to 
Religion considered as Illustrative of the Wisdom and Benefi- 
cence of the Almighty. By the Rev. George Henslow, 
M.A., F.L.S. Crown 8vo. 6j. 

Hooker.— Works by Sir J. D. Hooker, K.C.S.I., C.B., 
F.R.S., M.D., D.C.L. :— 

THE STUDENTS FLORA OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS. 

Second Edition, revised and improved. Globe 8to. icw. bd. 

The object of this work is to supply students and Jidd-botamsts with a 
fuller account of the Plants of the British Islands than the manuals 
hitherto in use aim at giving, ** Certainly the fullest and most 
accurate manual of the kind that has yet appeared, Dr, Hooker 
has shown his characteristic industry and ability in the care and 
skill which he has thrown into the characters of the plants. These 
are to a great extent original^ and are really admirable for their 
comdinatioh of clearness, brevity, and completeness,^ — PaU Mall 
Gazette. 

PRIMER OF BOTANY. With Illustrations. i8mo. u. New 
Edition, revised and corrected. 

Hooker and Ball.— journal OF a TOUR INMAROCCO 

AND THE GREAT ATLAS. By Sir J. D. Hooker, K.C.S.I., 
C.B., F.R.S., &c., and John Ball, F.R.S. With Appendices, 
including a Sketch of tiie Geology of Marocco. By G. Maw, 
F.L.S., F.G.S. With Map and Illustrations. 8vo. 2is. 

Huxley and Martin.— a COURSE OF practical in- 

STRUCTION IN ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. By T. H. 
Huxley, LL.D., Sec. R.S., assisted by H. N. Martin, B.A., 
M.B., D.Sc, Fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge. QxGvm 8vo. 

" This is the most thoroughly valuable book to teachers and students 
0f biology which has ever appeared in the English tongue,"^ 
London Quarterly Review. 

Hiixley (Professor).— lay SERMONS, addresses, 

AND REVIEWS. By T. H. Huxley, LL.D., F.R.S. New 

and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo. 7j. 6d, 

Fottfteen Discourses on the following subjects: — (i) On the Advisable- 
ness of Improving Natural Knorwledge >^2) Emcatcipaiion— 
Black and White : — (3) A Liberal Education, and where to find 
it:—(^) ScientiticEducaiion:—(S) On the Educational Value of 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE. ii 



Huxley (Professor) — conUnued. 

the Natural History Sciences: — (6) On the Study of Zoology: — 
(7) On the Physical Basis of Life:— {%\ The Scientific Aspects of 
Positivism: — (9) On a Piece of Chalk: — (10) Geological Contemn 
poraneity and Persistent Types of Life: — (11) Geological Reform: — 
(12) The Origin of Species :'-(ii) Criticisms on t/te ** Origin of 
Species :^^ — (14) On Descartes* ^^ Discourse touching the Method of 
using On^s Reason rightly and of seeking Scientific Truth,** 

ESSAYS SELECTED FROM "LAY SERMONS, AD- 
DRESSES, AND REVIEWS." Second Edition. Crown 8vo. is, 

CRITIQUES AND ADDRESSES. 8vo. lar. 6d, 

Contents: — i. Administrative Nihilism. 2. The School Boards: 
what they can dOy and what they may do, 3. On Medical Edu^ 
cation, 4, Yeast, 5. On the Formation of Coal, 6. On Coral 
and Coral Reefs, 7. On the Methods and Results of Ethnology, 
8. On some Fixed Points in British Ethnology, 9. Palceontology 
and the Doctrine of Evolution, 10. Biogenesis and Abiogenesis, 
II. Mr, Darwin* s Critics, 12. The Genealogy of Animals, 
13. Bishop Berkeley on the Metaphysics of Sensation, 

LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY. With numerous 
Illustrations. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 4J. 6d, 

^* Pure gold throughout,** — Guardian. ** Unquestionably the clearest 
and most complete elementary treatise on this subject that we possess in 
any language,** — Westminster Review. 

AMERICAN ADDRESSES: with a Lecture on the Study o^ 
Biology. 8vo. 6j. 6d, 

PHYSIOGRAPHY: An Introduction to the Study of Nature. With 
Coloured Plates and numerous Woodcuts." "New Edition. Crown 
8vo. 7j. 6d^ 

jellet (John H., B.D.) — a TREATISE ON THE 
THEORY OF FRICTION. By John H. Jkllet, B.D., 
. Senior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin ; President of the Royal 
Irish Academy. 8vo. %s, 6d, 

Jones.— THE OWENS COLLEGE JUNIOR COURJSE OF 
PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY. By Francis Jones, Chemical 
Master in the Grammar School, Manchester. With Preface by 
Professor RpscoE. New Edition. i8mo. with Illustrations. 2s, 6d, 

Kingsley.— GLAUCUS : OR, THE WONDERS OF THE 
SHORE. By Charles Kingsley, Canon of Westminster. 
New Edition, with numerous Coloured Plates. Crown 8vo. 6s, 

Langdon.— THE application of electricity to 

RAILWAY WORKING. By W. E- Langdon, Member of the 
Society of telegraph Engineers* With numerous IlKaatrations. 
Extra fcap. Svo. 4s, M, ,. 



12 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE, 

Lockyer (J. N.) — Works by J. Norman Lockyer, F.R.S.— 
ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN ASTRONOMY. With nu- 
merous Illustrations. New Edition. i8mo. 5j. 6d, 
" TTte book is full J clear j sound, and worthy of attention, not only as 
a popular exposition, but as a scientific * Index,* ^ — Athenaeum. 
** The most fascinating of elementary books on the Sciences," — 
Nonconformist. 
THE SPECTROSCOPE AND ITS APPLICATIONS. By J. 
Norman Lockyer, F.R.S. With Coloured Plate and numerous 
Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 3^. 6d, 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO SOLAR PHYSICS. By J. Norman 
Lockyer, F.R.S. I. A Popular Account of Inquiries into the 
Physical Constitution of the Sun, with especial reference to Recent 
Spectroscopic Researches. II. Communications to the Royal 
Society of London and the French Academy of Sciences, with 
Notes. Illustrated by 7 Coloured Lithographic Plates and 175 
Woodcuts. Royal 8vo. cloth, extra gilt, price 3IJ. 6d. 
" The book may be taken as an authentic exposition of the present 
state of science in connection Tvith the important subject of spectro- 
scopic analysis. . . . Even the unscientific public may derive much 
infbrfnation from it.** — Daily News. 
. PRIMER OF ASTRONOMY. With Illustrations. i8mo. is. 

Lockyer and Seabroke.— STAR-GAZiNG : PAST AND 

PRESENT. An Introduction to Instrumental Astronomy. By 
^ , J' N. Lockyer, F.R.S. Expanded from Shorthand Notes of a 

Course of Royal Institution Lectures with tiie ajstdstance of G. M. 

Seabroke, F. R. A. S. With numerous Illustrations. Royal 8vo. 21 j. 

** A book of great interest and utility 'to the astronomical student,** 
' —'Athenaeum. 

Lubbock. — Works by Sir John Lubbock, M. P., F.R.S.,D.C.L.: 
THE ORIGIN AND METAMORPHOSES OF INSECTS. 
With Numerous Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 3J. 6</. 
' **As a summary of the pJienomena of insect metamorphoses his little 
book is of great value, and will be read with interest and profit 
by all students of natural history. The wJiole chapter on the 
origin of insects is most interesting and valuable. The Ulustra^ 
tions are numerate and good.** — Westminster Review. 
ON BRITISH WILD FLOWERS CONSIDERED IN RELA- 
TION TO INSECTS. With Numerous Illustrations. Second 
Edition. Crown 8vo. 41. 6d. 

Macxnillan (Rev. Hugh). — For other Works by the same 
Author, see Theological Catalogue. 
HOLIDAYS ON HIGH LANDS ; or, Rambles and Incidents in 
search of Alpine Plants. Globe 8vo. doth. 6s. 
*' One of the most charming books of its kind ever written.** — 
Literary Churchman. " Mr. Macmillan*s Rawing pictures of 
Scandinavian scenery.** — Saturday Review. 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 13 

Macmillan (Rev. lingh)—conHnued. 

FIRST FORMS OF VEGETATION. Second Edition, corrected 
and enlarged, with Coloured Frontispiece and numerous Illustra- 
tions. Globe 8vo. dr. 

The first edition of this book was published under the name of 
^^ Footnotes from the Pa^e of Nature; or. First Forms of Vegeta- 
tion. Probably the best popular guide to the study of mosses, 
lichens f and fungi ever toritten. Its practical value as a help to 
the student and collector cannot be exaggerated,^^ — Manchester 
Examiner. 

Mansfield (C. B.)— Works by the late C. B. Mansfield :— 

A THEORY OF SALTS. A Treatise on the Constitution of 
Bipolar (two-membered) Chemical Compounds. Crown 8vo. 14J, 

AERIAL NAVIGATION. The Problem, with Hints for its 
Solution. Edited by R. B. Mansfield. With a Preface by J. 
M. Ludlow. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. loj. dd, 

Mayer. — sound : a Series of Simple, Entertaining, and In- 
expensive Experiments in the Phenomena of Sound, for the Use of 
Students of every age. By A. M. Mayer, Professor of Physics 
in the Stevens Institute of Technology, &c. With numerous Illus- 
trations. Crown 8vo. 3J. dd, 

yi2cyt,V and Barnard. — light, a Series of Simple, Enter- 
taining, and Useful Experiments in the Phenomena of Light, for 
the use of Students of every age. By A. M. Mayer and C. 
Barnard. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 2j. dd, 

Miall.— STUDIES IN COMPARATIVE ANATOMY. No. i, 
The Skull of the Crocodile. A Manual for Students. iBy L. C. 
Miall, Professor of Biology in Yorkshire College. 8vo. 2j. dd. 
No. 2, The Anatomy of the Indian Elephant. By L. C. MlALL 
and F. Greenwood. With Plates. 5^. 

Miller.— THE ROMANCE OF ASTRONOMY. By R. Kalley 
Miller, M.A., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of St. Peter's Col- 
lege, Cambridge. Second Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown 
8vo. 4J. dd, 

Mivart (St. George). — Works by St. George Mivart,F.R.S. 

&c., Lecturer in Comparative Anatomy at St. Mary's Hospital: — 
ON THE GENESIS OF SPECIES. Crown 8vo. Second 
Edition, to which notes have been added in reference and reply to 
Darwin's "Descent of Man." With numerous Illustrations, pp. 

XV. 296. 9J. 

"/« no work in the English language has this great controversy 
been treated at once with the same broad atid vigorous grasp of 
factSy and the same liberal and candid temper,^^ — Saturday Review. 



U SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



Mivart (St. ^^OXg€)^conHnued. 
THE COMMON FROG. With Numerous Illustradons. Crown 
8vo. y, 6d, (Nature Series.) 

" // is an able monogram of the Frog^ and something mare. It 
throws valuable crossUghts orver wide portions of animated nature. 
Would that such works were more pUnHftUy — Quarterly Journal 
of Science. 

Moseley.— NOTES by a naturalist on the "chal- 
lenger," being an account of various observations made during 
the voyage of H. M.S. " Challenger" round the world in the years 
1872—76. By H. N. Moseley, M.A.. F.R.S., Member of the 
Scientific Staff of the "Challenger." With. Map, Coloured 
Plates, and Woodcuts. 8vo. 21J. 

Muir.— PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY FOR MEDICAL STU- 
DENTS. Specially arranged for the first M. B. Course. By 
M. M. Pattison Muir, F.R.S.E. Fcap. 8vo. \s, 6d, 

Murphy .— HABIT AND INTELLIGENCE: a Series of 
Essays on the Laws of Life and Mind. By Joseph John 
Murphy. Second Edition, thoroughly revised and mostly re- 
written. With Illustrations. 8vo. i6s. 

Nature.— A WEEKLY ILLUSTRATED JOURNAL OF 
SCIENCE. Published every Thursday. Price 6(1. Monthly 
Parts, 2 J. and 2s, 6d. ; Half-yearly Volumes, 15^. Cases for binding 
Vols. Is. 6d. 

" This able and well-edited Journal^ which posts up tltt science of 
the day promptly f and promises to be of signal service to students 

and savants Scarcely any expressions that we can employ 

would exa^erate our sense of the moral and theological value oj 
the work, — British Quarterly Review. 

Newcomb. — POPULAR ASTRONOMY. By Simon New- 
comb, LL.D., Professor U.S. Naval Observatory. With 112 
Engravings and Five Maps of the Stars. 8vo. i&r. 
** As affording a thoroughly rdiable foundation for more advanced 
reading. Professor Newconilfs * Popular Astronomy * is deserving 
of strong recommendation" — Nature. 

Oliver.— Works by Daniel Oliver, F.R-S., F.L.S., Professor of 
Botany in University College, London, and Keeper of the Herba- 
rium and Library of the Royal Gardens, Kew :— 
LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY BOTANY. With nearly Two 
Hundred Illustrations. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 4J. 6d. 
This book is designed to teach the elements of Botany on Professor 
Henslmu" s plan of selected Types and by the use of ScJiedules, The 
earlier cliapters, embracing the elements of Structural and Physio- 
logical Botany y introduce us to the methodical study of the Ordinal 
Typcs^ ^concluding chapters or/ entitled^ ^^ How to Dry 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE, 15 



OWw^V— continued. 

Plants " and ^^ How to Describe Plants, "^^ A valuable Glossary is 
appended to the volume. In the preparation oj this work free'use 
has been made of the manuscript mcUerials of the late Professor 
Henslow, 

FIRST BOOK OF INDIAN BOTANY. With numerous 
Illustrations. Extra fcap. Svo. 6;. 6d, 

*^ It contains a well-digested sum?nary of all essential knowledge 
pertaining to Indian Botany, -wrought out in ctccordance with the 
best principles of scientific arrangement, ** — Allen's Indian Mail. 

Pennington.— NOTES ON THE BARROWS AND BONE 
CAVES OF DERBYSHIRE. With an account of a Descent 
into Elden Hole. By RooKK Pennington, B.A., LL.B., 
F.G.S. Svo. 6s, 

Penrose (F. C.)— on a method of predicting by 

GRAPHICAL CONSTRUCTION, OCCULTATIONS OF 
STARS BY THE MOON, AND SOLAR ECLIPSES FOR 
ANY GIVEN PLACE. Together with more rigorous methods 
for the Accurate Calculation of Longitude. By F. C. Penrose, 
F.R.A.S. With Charts, Tables, &c. 4to. 12s, 

Perry.— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON STEAM. By 
John Perry, B.E., Professor of Engineering, Imperial College of 
Engineering, Yedo. With numerous Woodcuts, Numerical Ex- 
amples, and Exercises. iSmo. 4^. 6d, 

*^Mr, Perry has in this compact little volume brought together an 
immense amount of information, new told, regarding steam and 
its application, not the least of its merits being that it is suited to 
the capacities alike of the tyro in engineeting science or the better 
grade of artisan, " — Iron, 

Pickering.— ELEMENTS OF PHYSICAL MANIPULATION. 
By E. C. Pickering, Thayer Professor of Physics in the Massa- 
chusetts Institute of Technology. Part I., medium Svo. los, dd. 
Part II., \os, 6d, 

** When finished * Physical Manipulaiion* will no doubt be con- 
sidered the best and most compile text-book on the subject of 
which it treats.^* — Nature. 

Prestwich.— THE PAST AND FUTURE OF GEOLOGY. 
An Inaugural Lecture, by J. Prestwich, M.A., F.R,S., &c.. 
Professor of Geology, Oxford. Svo. 2s, 

Radcliffe.— PROTEUS : OR UNITY IN NATURE. By. C. 
B. Radcliffe, M.D., Author of "Vital Motion as a mode of 
Physical Motion. Second Edition. Svo. 7^. (>d. 



i6 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



Rendu.— THE THEORY OF THE GLACIERS OF SAVOY. 
By M. LE Chanoine Rendu. Translated by A. Wells, Q.C, 
late President of the Alpine Club. To which are added, the Original 
Memoir and Supplementary Articles by Professors Tait and Rus- 
KiN. Edited with Introductory remarks by George Forbes, B.A., 
Professor 'of Natural Philosophy in the Andersonian University; 
Glasgow. 8yo, yj. 6flf. 

Roscoe. — Works by Henry E. Roscoe, F.R.S., Professor of 
Chemistry in Owens College, Manchester : — 

JLESSONS IN ELEMENTARY CHEMISTRY, INORGANIC 
AND ORGANIC. With numerous Illustrations and Chromo- 
litho of the Solar Spectrum, and of the Alkalis and Alkidine 
Earths. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 4^. (>d, 

CHEMICAL PROBLEMS, adapted to the above by Professor 
Thorpe. Fifth Edition, with Key. 25, 

**fVe unhesUaiingly pronounce it the best of all our elementary 
treatises on Chemistry,*^ — Medical Times. 

PRIMER OF CHEMISTRY. Illustrated. l8mo. u. 

Roscoe and Schorlemmer,— a TREATISE ON CHE- 
MISTRY. By Professors Roscoe and Schorlemmer. 

Vol. I., The Non-metallic Elements. With numerous Illustrations 
and Portrait of Dalton. Medium 8vo. 21s. 

Vol. II., Metals. Part I. With Illustrations. 8vo. \%s. 

" Regarded as a treatise on the Non-metallie Elements^ there can be 
no doubt that this volume is incomparably the most satisfactory one 
of which we are in possession,** — Spectator. 

** // would be difficult to praise the work too highly. All the merits 
which we noticed in the first volume are conspicuous in the second. 
The arrangement is clear and scientific; the facts gained by modem 
research are fairly represented and judiciously selected ; and the 
style throughout is singularly lucid.^* — Lancet. 

[Metals, Part II. in the Press. 

Rumford (Count).— THE LIFE AND complete WORKS 
OF BENJAMIN THOMPSON, COUNT RUMFORD. With 
Notices of his Daughter. By George Ellis. With Portrait. 
Five Vols. 8vo. 4/. i\s. 6d. 

Schorlemmer.— A MANUAL OF THE CHEMISTRY OF 
THE CARBON COMPOUNDS OR ORGANIC CHEMISTRY. 
By C. Schorlemmer, F.R.S., Lecturer in Organic Chemistry in 
Owens College, Manchester. 8vo. 14J. 

**// appears to us to be as complete a manual of the metamorphoses of 
carbon as could be at present produced^ and tt must prove eminently 
useful to the cJumical student*' — Athenoeum. 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE. 17 



Shann.— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON HEAT, IN 
RELATION TO STEAM AND THE STEAM ENGINE. 
By G. Shann, M. A. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 4J. 6d, 

Smith.— HISTORIA FILICUM : An Exposition of the Nature, 
Number, and Organography of Ferns, and Review of the Prin- 
ciples upon which Genera are founded, and the Systems of Classifi- 
cation of the principal Authors, with a new General Arrangement, 
&c By J. Smith. A.L.S., ex-Curator of the Royal Botanic 
Garden, Kew. With Thirty Lithographic Plates by W. PI. Fitch, 
F.L.S. Crown 8vo. 12s, 6d, 

** No one anxious to work up a thorough knowledge 0/ ferns can 
afford to do without it,^^ — Gardener's Chronicle. 

South Kensington Science Lectures. — Vol. I.— Con- 
taining Lectures by Captain Abney, F.RS., Professor Stokes, 
Professor Kennedy, F. J. Bramwell, F.R.S., Professor G. 
Forbes, H. C. Sorby, F.R.S., J. T. Bottomley, F.R.S.E., 
S. H. Vines, B.Sc., and Professor Carey Foster. Crown 8vo. 
ds^ [Vol. II. nearly ready, 

SpOttiswOOde.— POLARIZATION OF LIGHT. By W. 
Spottiswoode, President of the Royal Society. With numerous 
Illustrations. Second Edition. Cr. 8vo. 3j'. 6i. (Nature Series.) 
The illustrations are exceedingly well adapted to assist in making 
the text comprehensible,^^ — Athenaeum. **^ clear y trustworthy 
manual. " — Standard. 



<( 



Stewart (B.) — Works by Balfour Stewart, F.R.S., Professor 
of Natural Philosophy in Owens College, Manchester : — 

LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY PHYSICS. With numerous 
Illustrations and Chromolithos of the Spectra of the Sun, Stars, 
and Nebulae. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 49. 6^. 
The Educational Times calls this the beau-id^al of a scientific text- 
booky clear J CLCCuraie^ and thorough.^* 

PRIMER OF PHYSICS. With Illustrations. New Edition, with 
Questions. i8mo. is. 

Stewart and Tait.— the unseen universe: or, 

Physical Speculations on a Future State. By Balfour Stewart, 

F.R.S., and P. G. Tait, M. A. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo. 6j. 

** The book is one which well deserves the attention ofthoughtjul ana 

religious readers. . . . It is a perfectly sober inquiry y on scientific 

grounds, into the possibilities of a future existence," — Guardian. 

Tait— LECTURES ON SOME RECENT ADVANCES IN 
PHYSICAL SCIENCE. By P. G. Tait, M.A., Professor ot 
Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh. Second edition, 
revised and enlarged, with the Lecture oh Force delivered before 
the British Association. Crown 8vo. 9^. 

B 



i8 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



Tanner.—FIRST PRINCIPLES OF AGRICULTURE. By 
Henry Tanner, F.C.S., Professor of Agricultural Science, 
University College, Aberystwith, Examiner in the Principles of 
Agriculture under the Government Department of Science. i8mo. 
IJ. 

Taylor.— SOUND and MUSIC : A Non-Mathematical Trea 
tise on the Physical Constitution of Musical Sounds and Harmony 
including the Chief Acoustical Discoveries of Professor Helm 
holtz. By Sedley Taylor, M.A., late Fellow of Trinity Col 
ledge, Cambridge. Large crown 8vo. Sj. td, 

** In no previous scientific treatise do we remember so exhaustive and 
sj richly illustrated a description of forms of THbraiion and ot 
wave-motion in fluids!^— Musical Standard. 

Thomson. — Works by SiR Wyville Thomson, K.C.B., F.R.S. 
THE DEPTHS OF THE SEA : An Account of the General 
Results of the Dredging Cruises of H.M.SS. "Porcupine" and 
"Lightning" during the Summers of 1868-69 and 70, under the 
scientific direction of Dr. Carpenter, F.R.S., J. Gwyn Jefifrejrs, 
F.R.S., and Sir Wyville Thomson, F.R.S. With nearly 100 
Illustrations and 8 coloured Maps and Plans. Second EiUtion. 
Royal 8vo. cloth, gilt. 3IJ. 6^. 

The Athenzeum says: " The book is full of interesting matter^ and 
is written by a master of the art of popular exposiiion. It is 
excellently illustrated^ both coloured maps and looodcuts possessing 
high merit, T7iose who have already become interested in drawing 
operations will of course make a point 0/ reading this work; those 
who wish to be pleasantly introduced to the subject^ and rightly 
to appreciate the news which artives from time to titne from the 
* Challenger^* should not fail to seek instruction from it,** 

THE VOYAGE OF THE " CHALLENGER."— THE ATLAN- 
TIC. A Preliminary account of the Exploring Vo3rages of H.M.S. 
" Challenger," during the year 1873 and the early part of 1876. 
With numerous Illustrations, Coloured Maps & Charts, & Portrait 
of the Author, engraved!byC. H. Jeens. 2 Vols. Medium 8vo. 42^. 
The Times ^ays : — " // is right that the public should have some 
authoritative account of the general results of the expedition, and 
that as many of the ascertained data as may be accepted with con- 
fidence should speedily find their place in the general body of 
scientific knaivledge. No one can be more competent than the 
accomplished scientific chief of the expedition to satisfy the public in 
this respect, . . . T/ie paper, printing, and especially the numerous 
illustrations, are of the highest quality, . . . We have rarely, if 
ever, seen more beautiful specimens of wood engraving than abound 
in this work, , , , Sir Wyville Thomsor^s style ts particularly 
attractive ; he is easy and graceful, but vigorous and exceedingly 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE, 19 



Thomson — continued. 

happy in the choice of language, and throughout the work there arc 
touches which show that science has not banished sentiment fro /n 
his bo^om,** 

Thudichum and Duprg a TREATISE ON THE 

ORIGIN, NATURE, AND VARIETIES OF WINE. 
Being a Complete Manual of Viticulture and CEnology. By J. L. 
W. Thudichum, M.D., and August Dupi^fi, Ph.D., Lecturer on 
Chemistry at Westminster Hospital. Medium 8vo. doth gilt. 25^. 

*^A treatise almost unique for its usefulness either to the wine-grower, 
the vendor, or the consumer of wine. The analyses of wine are 
the most complete we have yet seen, exhibiting at a glance the 
constitueftt principles oj nearly all the wines known in this country," 
— Wine Trade Review. 

Wallace (A. R.) — Works by Alfred Russel Wallace. 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL 
SELECTION. A Series of Essays. New Edition, with 
Corrections and Additions. Crown 8vo. Zs, 6d, 

Dr, Hooker, in his address to the British Association, spoke thus 
of the author: ^^Of Mr, Wallace s and his many co^ributions 
to philosophical biology it is not easy to speak without enthu- 
siasm; for, putting aside their great merits, he^ throughout his 
writings, ivith a modesty as rare as I believe it to be uncon- 
scious, forgets his own unquestioned claim to the honour of 
having originated independently of Mr, Darwin, the theories 
which he so ably defends,'*^ The Saturday Review says: **He 
lias combined an abundance of fresh aftd original facts- with a 
liveliftess and sagacity of reasoning which are not often displayed 
so effectively on so smalt a scale,^* 

THE GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF ANIMALS, 
with a study of the Relations of Living and Extinct Faunas as 
Elucidating the Past Changes of the Earth's Surface. 2 vols. 8vo. 
with Maps, and numerous Illustrations by Zwecker, 425-. 

The Times says: ^^ Altogether it is a wonderful and fascinating 
story, whatever objections may be taken to theories founded upon 
it, Mr, Wallace has not attempted to add to its interest by any 
adornments of style; he has given a simple and clear statement of 
intrinsically interesting facts, and what he considers to be legiti- 
nrnte inductions from them. Naturalists ought to be grateful to 
him for having undertaken so toilsome a task. The work, indeed, 
is a credit to all concerned — the author, the publishers, the artist — 
unfortunately now no more — of the attractive illustrations— last 
but by no means leasts Mr, Stanford's map-designer," 



20 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 

— ' 

Wallace (A. R.)— continued. 

TROPICAL NATURE : with other Essays. 8vo. 12s. 

" Ncwhere amid the many descriptions of the tropics that have been 
given is to be found a summary of the past history and actual 
phenomena of the tropics which gives that which is distinctive of 
the phcues of nature in them more clearly^ shorUy^ and impres- 
sively," — Saturday Review. 

Warington. — the week of creation; or, the 

COSMOGONY OF GENESIS CONSIDERED IN ITS 
relation to modern SCIENCE. By George War- 
ington, Author of " The Historic Character of the Pentateuch 
Vindicated." Crown 8vo. 4f. 6d. 

Wilson. — RELIGIO CHEMICI. By the late George Wilson, 
M.D., F.R.S.E., Regius Professor of Technology in the University 
of Edinburgh. With a Vignette beautifully engraved after a 
design by Sir Noel Paton. Crown 8vo. %s. 6d. 

"A more fascinating" volume,'* the Spectator says, "has seldom 
fallen into our hands'' 

Wilson (Daniel.)— CALIBAN : a Critique on Shakespeare's 
"Tanpest" and "Midsummer Night's Dream." By Daniel 
Wilson, LL.D., Professor of History and English Literature in 
University College, Toronto. 8vo, lOf. 6d. 

" The whole volume is most rich in the eloquence of thought and 
imagination as well as of words. It is a choice contribution at 
once to science, theology, rdigion, and liieratureJ'* — British 
Quarterly Review. 

Wright.— METALS AND THEIR CHIEF INDUSTRIAL 
APPLICATIONS. By C. Alder Wright, D.Sc, &c.. Lec- 
turer on Chemistry in St. Mary's Hospital SchooL Extra fcap. 
8vo. 3J. 6d. 

Wurtz.— A HISTORY OF CHEMICAL THEORY, from the 

Age of Lavoisier down to the present time. By Ad. Wurtz. 

Translated by Henry Watts, F.R.S. Crown 8vo. dr. 

** The discourse, as a resum^ of chemical theory and research, unites 

singular luminousness and grasp* A few judicious notes are added 

by the translator."— Tall Mall Gazette. " The treatment of the 

subject is admirable, and the translator has evidently done his duty 

most efficiently'' — W estminster Review. 



MENTAL AND MORAL PHILOSOPHY, ETC, 21 



WORKS ON MENTAL AND MORAL 
PHILOSOPHY, AND ALLIED SUBJECTS. 

Aristotle.— AN INTRODUCTION TO ARISTOTLE'S 
RHETORIC. With Analysis, Notes, and Appendices. By E. 
M. Cope, Trinity College, Cambridge. 8vo. 14^. 

ARISTOTLE ON FALLACIES; OR, THE SOPHISTICI 
ELENCHI. With a Translation and Notes by Edward Poste, 
M.A., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 8vo. &". (yd. 

Birks. — ^Works by the Rev. T. R. Birks, Professor of Moral Philo- 
sophy, Cambridge : — 
FIRST PRINCIPLES OF MORAL SCIENCE ; or, a Firs 

Course of Lectures delivered in the University of Cambridge. 

Crown 8vo. %s. 6d. 

This work treats of three topics all preliminary to the direct exposi- 
tion of Moral Philosophy. These are the Certainty and Dignity 
of Moral Science, its Spiritual Geography, or relation to other 
main subjects of human thought, and its Formative Principles, or 
some elementary truths on whuh its whole development must 
depend. 

MODERN UTILITARIANISM; or, The Systems #f Paley, 
Bentham, and Mill, Examined and Compared. Crown Svo. dr. dd, 

MODERN PHYSICAL FATALISM, AND THE DOCTRINE 
OF EVOLUTION ; including an Examination of Herbert Spen- 
cer's First Principles. Crown Svo. dr. 

Boole. — AN INVESTIGATION OF THE LAWS OF 
THOUGHT, ON WHICH ARE FOUNDED THE 
MATHEMATICAL THEORIES OF LOGIC AND PRO- 
BABILITIES. By George Boole, LL.D., Professor of 
Mathematics in the Queen's University, Ireland, &c. Svo. l\s, 

Butler.— LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF ANfclENT 
PHILOSOPHY. By W. Archer Butler, late Professor of 
Moral Philosophy in the University of Dublin. Edited from the 
Author's MSS., with Notes, by William Hepworth Thomp- 
son, M.A., Master of Trinity College, and Regius Professor of 
Greek in the University of Cambridge. New and Cheaper Edition, 
revised by the Editor. Svo. izs. 

Caird.— A critical account of the philosophy 

OF KANT. With an Historical Introduction. By E. Caird, 
M.A., Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Glasgow. 
Svo. i&r. 



22 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE, 

Calderwood. — Works by the Rev. Henry Caldkrwood, M. A., 
LL.D., Professor of Moral Philosophy m the University of Edin- 
burgh : — 

PHILOSOPHY OF THE INFINITE : A Treatise on Man's 
Knowledge of the Infinite Being, in answer to Sir W. Hamilton 
and Dr. Mansel. Cheaper Edition. 8vo. 7^. dd, 
**A book of great ability .... written in a clear siyliy and may 

be easily understood by even those who are not versed in such 

discussions^^ — British Quarterly Review. 

A HANDBOOK OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY. New Edition. 
Crown 8vo. ds, 

**ItiSf we feel convinced f the best handbook on tJu subject, intellectually 
and morally f and does infinite credit to its autlior, " — Standard. 
**A compact and useful work, going- aver a great deal of ground 
in a manner adapted to suggest and facUitaie further study. • . . 
His book will be an assistance to many students outside his own 
University of Edinlmrgh, — Guardian. 

THE RELATIONS OF MIND AND BRAIN. [Nearly ready. 

Fiske.— OUTLINES OF COSMIC PHILOSOPHY, BASED 
ON THE DOCTRINE OF EVOLUTION, WITH CRITI- 
CISMS ON THE POSITIVE PHILOSOPHY. By John 
FiSKE, M.A., LL.B., formerly Lecturer on Philosophy at 
Harvard University. 2 vols. 8vo. 25^. 

" Tht work constitutes a very elective encyclopcedia of the evolution- 
ary philosophy, and is well worth the study of all who wish to. see 
at once the entire scope and purport of the scientific dogmatism of 
the dav.^^ — Saturday Review. 

Herbert.— THE realistic assumptions of modern 

SCIENCE EXAMINED. By T. M. Herbert, M.A., late 
Professor of Philosophy, &c., in the Lancashire Independent 
College, Manchester. 8vo. I4f. 

Jardine. — THE ELEMENTS OF THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 
COGNITION. By Robert Jardine, B.D., D.Sc, Principal of 
the General Assembly's College, Calcutta, and Fellow of the Uni- 
versity of Calcutta. Crown 8vo. 6j. dd, 

Jevons. — Works by W. Stanley Jevons, LL.D., M.A., F.R.S., 
Professor of Political Economy, University College, London. 

THE PRINCIPLES OF SCIENCE. A Treatise on Logic and 
Scientific Method. New and Cheaper Edition, revised. Crown 
8vo. I2J. td, 

"No one in future can be said to have any true" knowledge of what 
has been done in the way of logical and scuntific method in 
England ivithout > having carefully studied ^^ Professor yevons' 
book'' — Spectator. 



MENTAL AND MORAL PHILOSOPHY, ETC, 23 

J e von S — continued, 

THE SUBSTITUTION OF SIMILARS, the True Principle of 
Reasoning. Derived from a Modification of Aristotle's Dictum. 
Fcap. 8vo. 2J. dd, 

ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN LOGIC, DEDUCTIVE AND 
INDUCTIVE. With Questions, Examples, and Vocabulary of 
Logical Terms. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 3^. 6d, 

PRIMER OF LOGIC. New Edition. i8mo. u. 

MacCOlL— THE GREEK SCEPTICS, from Pyrrho to Sextus. 
An Essay which obtained the Hare Prize in the year 1868. By 
Norman Maccoll, B.A;, Scholar of Downing College, Cam- 
bridge. Crown 8vo. 3^. 6d, 

M'Cosh. — Works by James M'Cosh, LL.D., President of Princeton 

College, New Jersey, U.S. 

^^ He certainly shows himself skilful in that application of logic to 
psychology, in that inductive science of the human mind 7vhich is 
the. fine side of English philosophy. His philosophy as a whole is 
worthy of attention,''* — Revue de Deux Mondes. 

THE METHOD OF THE DIVINE GOVERNMENT, Physical 
and Moral. Tenth Edition. 8vo. icxr. 6d. 
^^This work is distinguished from other similar ones by its being 
based upon a thorxmgh study of physical science, and an accurate 
knowledge of its present condition, and by its entering in a 
deeper and more unfettered manner than its predecessors upon the dis- 
cussion of the appropriate psychological, et^iical, and theological ques- 
tions. The author keeps aloof at once from the ^ priori idealism and 
dreaminess of German speculation since Schelling, and from the 
onesidedness and narrowness of the empiricism and positivism 
which have so prevailed in England,** — Dr. Ulrici, in "Zeitschrift 
fiir Philosophie." 

THE INTUITIONS OF THE MIND. A New Edition. 8vo. 

cloth. I Of. (>d. 

•' The undertaking to adjust the claims of the sensational and in- 
tuitional philosophies, and of the ^ posteriori andk priori methods, 
is accomplished in this work with a great amount of success." — 
Westminster Review. "/ vctlue it for its large acquaintance 
with English Philosophy, which has not led him to neglect the 
qreat German works. I admire the moderation and clearness, as 
well as comprehensiveness, of the author's Tnews** — Dr. Dorner, of 
Berlin. 

AN EXAMINATION OF MR. J. S. MILUS PHILOSOPHY: 
Being a Defence ol Fundamental Truth. Second edition, with 
additions. lor. dd, 

^^Such a work greatly needed to be done, and the author was the man 
to do it. This volume is important, not merely in reference to ih 



24 SCIENTIFIC CA TALOGUE, ' 



Hi'Zo^ti— continued, 

» 

views of Mr, Mill^ but of the whole school of writers^ past and 
present ^ British and Continental, he so ably represents," -^fiinceton 
Review. 

THE LAWS OF DISCURSIVE THOUGHT: Being a Text- 

book of Formal Logic. Crown 8vo. $s, 

** The amount of summarized information which it contains is very 
great; and it is the only work on the very important subject with 
which it deals. Never wets such a work so much needed as in 
the present day," — London Quarterly Review. 

CHRISTIANITY AND POSITIVISM : A Series of Lectures to 
the Times on Natural Theology and Apologetics. Crown 8vo, 
7j. (id, 

THE SCOTTISH PHILOSOPHY FROM HUTCHESON TO 
HAMILTON, Biographictl, Critical, Expository. Royal 8vo. i6f. 

Masson.— RECENT BRITISH PHILOSOPHY: A Review 
with Criticisms ; including some Comments on Mr. Mill's Answer 
to Sir William Hamilton. By David Masson, M.A., Professor 
of Rhetoric and English Literature in the University of E^dinborgh. 
Third Edition, with an Additional Chapter. Crown 8vo. ds, 

** We can noivhere point to a work which gives so clear an exposi" 
tion of the course of philosophical speculation in Britain during 
the past century, or which indicates so instructively the mutual in^ 
fluences of philosophic and scientific thought," — ^Fortnightly Review. 

Maudsley. — Works by H. Maudsley, M.D., Professor of Medical 
Jurisprudence in University College, London. 

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF MIND ; being the First Part of a Third 
Edition, Revised, Enlarged, and in great part Rewritten, of "The 
Physiology and Pathology of Mind. Crown 8vo. los, 6d, 

THE PATHOLOGY OF MIND. [In the Press, 

BODY AND MIND : an Inquiry into their Connexion and Mutual 
Influence, specially 'with reference to Mental Disorders. An 
Enlarged and Revised edition. To which are added, Psychological 
Essays. Crown 8vo. 6j. dd, 

Maurice. — ^Works by the Rev. Frederick Denison Maurice, 
M.A., Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Cam- 
bridge. (For other Works by the same Author, see Theological 
Catalogue.) 

SOCIAL MORALITY. Twenty-one Lectures delivered in the 
University of Cambridge. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo. 
loj". dd. 



AfENTAL AND AfORAL[PmLOSOPHY, ETC, 25 

Maurice — continued. 

" Whilst readins^ it we are charmed by the freedom from exclusweness 
and prejudice, the large, charity, the loftiness of thought, the eager- 
ness to recognize and appreciate whatever there is of real worth 
extant in the world, which animates it from one end to the other. 
We gain new thoughts and new ways of viewing things, even more, 
perhaps, from being brought for a time under the influence of so 
noble and spiritual a mind, — Athenaeum. 

THE CONSCIENCE : Lectures on Casuistry, delivered in the Uni- 
versity of Cambridge. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo. 5J. 

The Saturday Review says: ^*We rise from them with detestation 
of all that is selfish and mean, and with a living impression that 
there is such a thing as ^odness after all,** 

MORAL AND METAPHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. Vol. L 
Ancient Philosophy from the First to the Tlurteenth Centuries ; 
Vol. II. the Fourteenth Century and the French Revolution, with 
a glimpse into the Nineteenth Century. New Edition and 
Preface. 2 Vols. 8vo. 25^. 

Morgan.— ANCIENT society : or Researches m the Lines of 
Hirnian Progress, from Savagery, through Barbarism to Civilisation. 
By Lewis H. J^Iohgan, Member of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 8vo. idr. 

Murphy,— THE SCIENTIFIC BASES OF FAITH. By 
Joseph John Murphy, Author of " Habit and Intelligence." 
8vo. 14J. 

** The book is not without substantial value; the writer continues the 
work of the best apologists of the last century, it may be with less 
force and clearness, but still with commendable perstmsiveness and 
tact; and with an intelligent feeling for the changed conditions 0/ 
the problem, " — Academy. 

Paradoxical Philosophy. — a Sequel to "The Unseen Uni- 
verse." Crown 8vo. 7^. 6d, 

Picton,— THE MYSTERY OF MATTER AND OTHER 
ESSAYS. By J. Allanson Picton, Author of " New Theories 
and the Old Faith." Cheaper issue with New Preface. Crown 
8vo. 6s, 

Contents :— 7>5<? Mystery of Matter — The Philosophy of Igno- 
rance — The Antithesis of Faith and Sight — The Essential Nature 
of Religion — Christian Pantheism, 



26 SCIENTIFIC CA TALOGUE. \ *' 

Sidgwick.— THE METHODS OF AthICS. By HsNET 
SiDGWiCK, M.A., Prselector in Moral and Political Philosophy in 
Trinity College, Cambridge. Second Edition, revised throughout 
with important additions. 8vo. I4r. 

A SUPPLEMENT to the First Edition, containmg all the important 
additions and alterations in the Second. Svo. 2^. 

^* This excellent and very welcome volume, .... Leaving U metC' 
physicians any further discussion thai may he needed reipecting the 
already over-discussed problem of the origin of the mitral faculty^ he 
takes it for granted as readily cu the geometrician takes space for 
grantedy or the physicist the existence of matter. But he takes little 
else for granted^ and defining ethics as * the science of conduct ^^ be 
carefully examineSynot the various ethical systems that have been 
propounded by Aristotle and AristotUs followers dowmvardsy but 
the principles upon whichy so far as they confine themselves to the 
strict province ofethicsy they are based.^ — ^Athenaeum., 

Thornton.— OLD-FASHIONED ETHICS, AND COMMON- 
SENSE METAPHYSICS, with some of their Applications. Bv 
William Thomas Thornton, Author of "A Treatise on Labour. ' 
Svo. los, 6d, 

The present volume aeals with problems which are agitating the 
miftds of all thoughtjul men. The folUmnng are the Contents : — 
/. Ante- Utilitarianism, II, History s Scientific Pretensions, III, 
David Hume as a Metaphysician, IV, Huxleyism, V, Recent 
Phcue of Scientific Atheism, VL Limits of Demonstrable Theism, 

Thring (E., M. A.)— THOUGHTS ON LIFE-SCIENCE. 
By Edward Thring, M.A. (Benjamin Place), Head Master ol 
Uppingham SchooL New Edition, enlai^ed and revised. Crown 
Svo. *is, 6d, 

Venn. — ^THE LOGIC OF CHANCE : An Essay"on the Founda- 
tions suid Province of the Theory of Probability, with especial 
reterence to its logical bearings, and its application to Moral and 
Social Science. By John Venn, M.A., Fellow and Lecturer of 
Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Second Edition,' re- 
written and greatly enlarged. Crown Svo. lOr. 6d, 
" One of the most thoughtful and philosophical treatises on any sub- 
ject connected with logic and evidence which hcu been producfd in 
this or any other country for many years,*^ — Mill's Logic, vol. ii. 
p. 77. Seventh Edition. 



SCIENCE PRIMERS. 27 



SCIENCE PRIMERS FOR ELEMENTARY 

SCHOOLS. 

Under the joint Editorship of Professors Huxley, Roscoe, and 

Balfour Stewart. 

Chemistry — By H. E. Roscoe, F.R.S., Professor of Chemistry 
in Owens College, Manchester. With numerous Illustrations. 
i8mo. IS, New Edition. With Questions. 

Physics.— By Balfour Stewart, F.R.S., Professor of 
Natural Philosophy in Owens College, Manchester. With numer- 
ous Illustrations. i8ino. is. New Edition. With Questions. 

Physical Geography .— By Archibald Geikie, F.R.S., 
Murchison Professor of Geology and Mineralogy at Edinburgh. 
With numerous Illustrations. New Edition with Questions. 
i8mo. IJ". 

Geology — By Professor Geikie, F.R.S. With numerous Illus- 
trations. New Edition. i8mo. cloth, is. 

Physiology — By Michael Foster, M.D., F.R.S. With 
numerous Illustrations. New Edition. i8mo. is. 

Astronomy.— By J. Norman Lockyer, F.R.S. With numerous 
Illustrations. New Edition. i8mo. is. 

Botany — By Sir J. D. Hooker, K.C.S.I., C.B., F.R.S. With 
numerous Illustrations. New Edition. i8mo. is. 

Logic — ^By Professor Stanley/ Jevons, F.R.S. New Edition. 
i8mo. IS, 

Political Economy.— By Professor Stanley Jevons, F.R.S. 
i8mo. is. 

In preparation : — 

INTRODUCTORY. By Professor Huxley. &c. &c. 

ELEMENTARY SCIENCE CLASS-BOOKS. 

Astronomy.— By the Astronomer Royal. ' POPULAR AS- 
TRONOMY. With Illustrations. By Sir G. B. Airy, K.C.B., 
Astronomer Royal. New Edition. i8mo. 4J. 6d, 

Astronomy — ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN ASTRONOMY. 
With Coloured Diagram of the Spectra of the Sun, Stars, and 
Nebulae, and numerous Illustrations. By J. Norman Lockyer, 
F.R.S. New Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Ss. 6d. 



28 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 

Elementary Science Class-books — continued, 

QUESTIONS ON LOCKYER'S ELEMENTARY LESSONS 
IN ASTRONOMY. For the Use of Schools. By John 
Forbes Robertson. i8mo, cloth limp, is, 6d, 

Physiology.— LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY. 
With numerous Illustrations. By T. H. Huxley, F.R.S., Pro- 
fessor of Natural History in the Royal School of Mines. New 
Edition. Fcap. Svo. 4s, 6d. 

QUESTIONS ON HUXLEY'S PHYSIOLOGY FOR 
SCHOOLS. By T. Alcock, M.D. i8mo. is, 6d. 

Botany — LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY BOTANY. By D. 
Oliver, F.R.S., F.L.S., Professor of Botany in University 
College, London. With nearly Two Himdred Illustrations. New 
Edition. Fcap. Svo. 4?. (>d. 

Chemistry.— LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY CHEMISTRY, 
INORGANIC AND ORGANIC. By Henry E. Roscoe, 
F.R.S., Professor of Chemistry in Owens College, Manchester. 
With numerous Illustrations and Chromo-Litho of the Solar 
Spectrum, and of the Alkalies and Alkaline Earths. New Edition. 
Fcap. Svo. 4f. 6d, 

A SERIES OF CHEMICAL [.PROBLEMS,^ prepared with 
Special Reference to the above, ~ by T. E. Thorpe, Ph.D., 
Professor of Chemistry in the Yorkshire College of Science, Leeds. 
Adapted for the preparation of Students for the Government, 
Science, and Society of Arts Examinations. With a Preface by 
Professor RoscoE. Fifth Edition, with Key. iSmo. aj. 

Political Economy ^political ECONOMY FOR BE- 
GINNERS. By MiLLiCENT G. Fawcett. New Edition. 
iSmo. 2s. 6d, 

Logic — ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN LOGIC ; Deductive and 
Inductive, with copious Questions and Examples, and a Vocabulary 
of Logical Terms. By W. Stanley Jevons, M. A., Professor of 
Political Economy in University College, London. New Edition. 
Fcap. Svo. 3J. 6d. 

Physics — LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY PHYSICS. By 
Balfour Stewart, F.R.S., Professor of Natural Philosophy in 
Owens College, Manchester. With numerous Illustrations and 
Chromo-Litho of the Spectra of the Sun, Stars, [and Nebulse. New 
Edition. Fcap. Svo. 45. 6d, 

Practical Chemistry — the OWENS COLLEGE JUNIOR 
COURSE OF PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY. By Francis 
Jones, Chemical Master in the Grammar School, Manchester. 
With Preface by Professor RoscoE, and Illustrations. New 
Edition. iSmo. 2s, 6d, 



SCIENCE CLASS-BOOKS. 29 



Elementary Science Class-books — cofiHnued. 

Anatomy — LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY ANATOMY. By 
St. George Mivart, F.R.S., Lecturer in Comparative Anatomy 
at St. Mary's Hospital. With upwards of 400 Illustrations. Fcap. 
8vo. 6s, od. 

Mechanics — an elementary treatise. By a. b. 

W. Kennedy, C.E., Professor of Applied Mechanics in University 
College, London. With Illustrations. [In preparation. 

Steam — an elementary treatise. By John Perry, 
Professor of Engineering, Imperial College of Engineering, Yedo. 
With numerous Woodcuts and Numerical Examples and Exercises. 
xSmo. 4f. 6d, 

Physical Geography. — elementary lessons in 

PHYSICAL GEOGKAPHY. By A. Geikie, F.R.S., Murchi- 
son Professor of Geology, &c., Edinburgh. With numerous 
Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo. 4J. 6d. 

QUESTIONS ON THE SAME. is. ed. 

Geography.— CLASS-BOOK OF GEOGRAPHY. By C. B. 
Clarke, M.A.. F.R.G.S. Fcap. 8vo. 2s, 6d. 

Natural Philosophy— natural PHILOSOPHY FOR 

BEGINNERS. By I. Todhunter, M.A., F.R.S. Part L 
The Properties of Solid and Fluid Bodies. i8mo. 3J. 6d, Part 
II. Sound, Light, and Heat. i8mo. y. 6d, 

Sound.— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE. By W. H. Stone, 
M.D., F.R.S. With Illustrations. i8mo. [/n the Press. 

Others in Preparation, 

MANUALS FOR STUDENTS. 

Crown 8vo. 

Dyer and Vines — the structure OF PLANTS. By 

Professor Thiselton Dyer, F.R.S., assisted by Sydney 
Vines, B.Sc, Fellow and Lecturer of Christ's College, Cambridge. 
With numerous Illustrations, [In preparation, 

Fawcett — a manual of political economy. By 

Professor Fawcett, M.P. New Edition, revised and enlarged. 
Crown 8vo. I2J. 6^. 

Fleischer — a system of volumetric analysis. 

Translated, with Notes and Additions, from the second German 
Edition, by M. M. Pattiron Muir, F.R.S.E. With Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo. *js, 6d, 



30 SCIENTIFIC CATALOGUE. 



Manuals for Students — continued. 

Flower (W. H.)— an HJTTRODUCTION TO THE OSTE- 
OLOGY OF THE MAMMALIA. Being the Substance of the 
Course of Lectures delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons of 
England in 1870. By Professor W. H. Flower, F.R.S., 
F.R.C.S. With numerous Illustrations. New Editipn, enlarged. 
Crown 8vo. lar. 6flf. • 

Foster and Balfour the elements OF EMBRY- 
OLOGY. By Michael Foster, M.D., F.R.S., and F. M. 
Balfour, M.A. Part I. crown 8vo. yj- (nI. 

Foster and JLangley.— a COURSE OF ELEMENTARY 

PRACTICAL PHYSIOLOGY. By Michael Foster, M.D., 
F.R.S., and J. N. Langley, B.A. New Edition. Crown 8vo. 6j. 

Hooker (Dr.)— the students flora of the British 

ISLANDS. By Sir J. D, Hooker, K.C.S.L, C.B., F.R.S., 
M,D., D.C.L. New Edition, revised. Globe 8vo. loj. dd, 
Huxley — PHYSIOGRAPHY. An Introduction to the Study of 
Nature. By Professor Huxley, F.R.S. With numerous 
Illustrations, and Coloured Plates. New Edition. Crown 8vo. 

Huxley and Martin a COURSE OF PRACTICAL IN- 
STRUCTION IN ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY. By Professor 
Huxley, F.R.S., assisted by H. N. Martin, M.B., D.Sc. New 
Edition, revised. Crown 8yo. 6j. 

Huxley and Parker.— elementary BIOLOGY. PAkT 

II. By Professor Huxley, F.R.S., assisted by — Parker. 
With Illustrations. [In preparatiofi, 

Jevons — THE PRINCIPLES OF SCIENCE. A Treatise on 
Logic and Scientific Method. By Professor W. Stanley Jevons, 
LL.D., F.R.S., New and Revised Edition. Crown 8vo. 12s, 6d, 

Oliver (Professor) FIRST BOOK OF INDIAN BOTANY. 

By Professor Daniel Oliver, F.R.S. , F.L.S., Keeper of the 
Herbarium and Library of the Royal Gardens, Kew, With 
numerous Illustrations. Extra fcap. 8vo. 6s. 6d, . 

Parker and Bettany the MORPHOLOGY OF THE 

SKULL. By Professor Parker and G. T. Bettany. Illus- 
trated. Crown 8vo. loj. 6d, 

Tait— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON HEAT. By Pro- 
fessor Tait, F.R.S.E. Illustrated. [In the Press, 

Thomson — ZOOLOGY. ' By Sir C. Wyville Thomson, 
F.R.S. Illustrated. [In preparation. 

Tylor and Lankester ANTHROPOLOGY. By E. B. 

Tylor, M.A., F.lt.S., and Professor E. Ray Lankester, M. A., 
F. R. S . Illustrated. [In preparation. 

Other volumes of these Manuals will follow. 



N ATURE SERIES. 



THE SPECTROSCOPE AND ITS APPLICATIONS. 

By J. N. LO.CKYER, F.R.S, With Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown 
8vo.. 3f. fid, 

THE ORIGIN AND METAMORPHOSES OF IN- 

SECTS. By Sir JOHN LUBBOCK, M.P-i F.R.S. With Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo. 3^. 6</. Second Edition, 

THE TRANSIT OF VENUS. By G. Forbes, B.A., 

Profess<»' of Natural Philosophy in the Andersonian University, Glasgow. 
With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 3^ . 6</. 

THE COMMON FROG. By St. George Mivart, 

F.R.S. Illustrated. Crown Svo. 3^. td. 

POLARISATION OF LIGHT. By W. Spottiswoode, 

LL.D., Preddent of the Royal Society. Illustrated. Second Edition. Crown 
Svo. 3^. 6tif. 

ON BRITISH WILD FLOWERS CONSIDERED IN 

relation to insects. By SiR JOHN LUBBOCK, M.P., F.R.S. 
lUnstrated. Second Ediiimt. Crown Svo. ^f . 6d. 

THE SCIENCE OF WEIGHING AND MEASURING. 

By H. W. CHISHOLM, Warden of the Standards. Illustrated. Crown Svo. 

HOW TO DRAW A STRAIGHT LINE : A Lecture on 

Linkages. By A. B. KEMPE, B.A. Illustrated. Crown Svo. xs. 6d. 

LIGHT : A Series of Simple, Entertaining and Useful 

Experiments in the Phenomena of Light for the Use of Students of every Age. 
By ALFRED M. MAYER and CHARLES BARNARD. With Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d, 

SOUND : A Series of Simple, Entertaining and Inex- 
pensive Experiments in the Phenomena of Sound, for the Use of Students of 
every Age. By A. M. MAYER, Professor of Physics in the Stevens Institute 
of Technology, &c. With numerous Illustrations. Crown Svo. 3^ . 6d. 

(Others to follow,) 



MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. 



Published every Thursday, {trice 6d,j Monthly Parts 2a and 
2s. 6d., Half-Yearly Volumes, 15^. 

NATURE: 

AN ILLUSTRATED fOLRNAL OF SCIENCE. 



k' 



Nature expounds in a popular and yet authentic manner, 
the Grand Results of Scientific Research, discussing 
the most recent scientific discoveries, and pointing out 
the bearing of Science upon civilintion and progress, and 
its claims to a more general recognition, as well as to a 
higher place in the educational system of the country.. 

It contains original articles on all subjects within the 
domain of Science; Reviews setting forth the nature and 
value of recent Scientific Works ; Correspondence Columns, 
forming a medium of Scientific discussion and of intercom- 
munication among the most distinguished men of Science ; 
Serial Columns, giving the gist of the most important 
papers appearing in Scientific Journals, both Home and 
Foreign ; Transactions of the principal Scientific Societies 
and Academies of the World, Notes, &c. 

In Schools where Science is included in the regular 
course of studies, this paper will be most acceptable, as 
it tells what is doing in Science all over the world, is 
popular without lowering the standard of Science, and by 
it a vast amount of information is brought within a small 
compass, and students are directed to the best sources for 
what they need. The various questions connected with 
Science teaching in schools are also fully discussed, and the 
best methods of teaching are indicated. 



/ 



/ 



I-' 

. i
