The Writings of Clement of Alexandria, Vol. 2 (Clement of Alexandria (William Wilson, trans.), 1867)
====================================================================================================
Clement of Alexandria, Vol. 2 (Stromata II-VIII, etc.). Completes the 2-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

J- 

y's?’ 

» i n n A D 

LlaK/Ais 

Tcrcr.'o 

. yv ^r»v^ 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2011 with funding from 
University of Toronto 

http://www.archive.org/details/writingsofclemen02clem 

ANTE-NICENE 

CHRISTIAN LIBRARY: 

TRANSLATIONS OF 

THE WRITINGS OF THE FATHERS 

DOWN TO A.D. 325 - 

EDITED BY THE 

REV. ALEXANDER ROBERTS, D.D., 

AND 

JAMES DONALDSON, LL.D. 

VOL. XII. 

CLEMENT OE ALEXANDRIA. 

VOL. II. 

EDINBURGH: 

T. & T. CLARK, 38, GEORGE STREET. 

MDCCCLXIX. 

MURRAY AND GIBB, EDINBURGH, 
PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE 

THE WRITINGS 

OF 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. 

TRANSLATED BY 

THE REV. WILLIAM WILSON, M.A., 

MUSSELBURGH. 

VOLUME II. 

EDINBURGH : 

T. & T. CLARK, 38, GEORGE STREET. 

LONDON : HAMILTON & CO. DUBLIN : JOHN ROBERTSON & CO. 

MDCCCLXIX. 

NOV - 7 1944 

\ 21 %% 

CONTENTS. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

BOOK II. 

CHAP. PAGE 

1. Introductory, ...... 1 

2. The Knowledge of God can be attained only through Faith, 3 

3. Faith not a product of Nature, .... 6 

4. Faith the foundation of all Knowledge, ... 8 

5. He proves by several examples that the Greeks drew from 

the Sacred Writers, ..... 12 

6. The Excellence and Utility of Faith, ... 16 

7. The Utility of Fear. Objections Answered, . . 20 

8. The Vagaries of Basilidcs and Valentinus as to Fear being 

the Cause of Things, ..... 22 

9. The Connection of the Christian Virtues, ... 26 

10. To what the Philosopher applies himself, ... 29 

11. The Knowledge which comes through Faith the Surest of 

All, 30 

12. Twofold Faith, ...... 33 

13. On First and Second Repentance, . . . . 35 - 

14. How a Thing may be Involuntary, . ... . 37., 

15. On the different kinds of Voluntary Actions, and the Sins 

thence proceeding, ..... 38 

16. How we are to explain the passages of Scripture which 

ascribe to God Human Affections, ... 43 

17. On the various kinds of Knowledge, ... 45 

18. The Mosaic Law the fountain of all Ethics, and the source 

from which the Greeks drew theirs, ... 47 

19. The true Gnostic is an imitator of God, especially in Benefi- 

cence, . . ..... 57 

20. The true Gnostic exercises Patience and Self-restraint, . 60 

21. Opinions of various Philosophers on the Chief Good, . 71 

22. Plato’s Opinion, that the Chief Good consists in assimilation 

to God, and its agreement with Scripture, . . 74 

23. On Marriage, ...... 78 

BOOK III. 

1. Basilidis Sententiam de Continentia et Nuptiis refutat, . 84 

2. Carpocratis et Epiphanis Sententiam de Feminarum Com- 

munitate refutat, ..... 86 

3. Quatenus Plato aliique e veteribus prseiverint Marcionitis 

aliisque Hsereticis, qui a Nuptiis ideo abstinent quia 
Creaturam malam existimant et nasci Homines in 
Poenam opinantur, ..... 89 

4. Quibus prsetextibus utantur Hseretici ad omnis generis 

licentiam et libidinem exercendam, ... 95 

VI 

CONTENTS . 

CHAP. PAGE 

5. Duo genera Haereticorum notat: prius illorum qui omnia 

omnibus licere pronuntiant, quos refutat, . . 102 

6. Secundum genus Efereticorum aggreditur, illorum scilicet 

qui ex impia de deo omnium conditore Sententia, Con- 
tinentiam exercent, ..... 105 

7. Qua in re Christianorum Continentia earn quam sibi vindi- 

cant Philosophi antecellat, . . . .110 

8. Loca S. Scripturae ab Haereticis in vituperium Matrimonii 

adducta explicat ; et primo verba Apostoli Rom. vi. 14, 
ab Haereticorum perversa interpretatione vindicat, . 112 

9. Dictum Christi ad Salomen exponit, quod tanquam in vitu- 

perium Nuptiarum prolatum Haeretici allegabant, . 113 

10. Verba Christi Matt, xviii. 20, mystice exponit, . . 116 

11. Legis et Christi mandatum de non Concupiscendo exponit, . 117 

12. Verba Apostoli 1 Cor. vii. 5, 39, 40, aliaque S. Seripturae 

loca eodem spectantia explicat, . . . .121 

13. Julii Cassiani Haeretici verbis respondet ; item loco quern ex 

Evangelio Apocrypho idem adduxerat, . . . 128 

14. 2 Cor. xi. 3, et Eph. iv. 24, exponit, . . . 129 

15. 1 Cor. vii. 1 ; Luc. xiv. 26 ; Isa. lvi. 2, 3, explicat, . 130 

16. Jer. xx. 14 ; Job xiv. 3 ; Ps. 1. 5 ; 1 Cor. ix. 27, exponit, . 132 

17. Qui Nuptias et Generationem malas asserunt, ii et dei Crea- 

tionem et ipsam evangelii Dispensationem vituperant, . 133 

18. Duas extremas Opiniones esse vitandas : primam illorum qui 

Creatoris odio a Nuptiis abstinent ; alteram illorum qui 
hinc occasion em arripiunt nefariis libidinibus indulgendi, 135 

BOOK IV. 

1. Order of Contents, ...... 139 

2. The meaning of the name Stromata [Miscellanies], . 140 

3. The true Excellence of Man, .... 142 

4. The Praises of Martyrdom, ..... 145 

5. On Contempt for Pain, Poverty, and other external things, 148 

6. Some points in the Beatitudes, .... 150 

7. The Blessedness of the Martyr, .... 158 

8. Women as well as Men, Slaves as well as Freemen, Candi- 

dates for the Martyr’s Crown, . . . .165 

9. Christ’s Sayings respecting Martyrdom, . . . 170 

10. Those who offered themselves for Martyrdom reproved, . 173 

11. The objection, Why do you suffer if God cares for you, 

answered, ...... 174 

12. Basilides’ idea of Martyrdom refuted, . . .175 

13. Valentinian’s Vagaries about the Abolition of Death refuted, 179 

14. The Love of AH, even of our Enemies, . . . 182 

15. On avoiding Offence, ..... 183 

16. Passages of Scripture respecting the Constancy, Patience, 

and Love of the Martyrs, . . . .184 

17. Passages from Clement’s Epistle to the Corinthians on 

Martyrdom, ...... 187 

18. On Love, and the repressing of our Desires, . . 190 

19. Women as well as Men capable of Perfection, . . 193 

20. A Good Wife, . . . . . 196 

CONTENTS. vii 

CHAP. PAGE 

21. Description of the Perfect Man, or Gnostic, . . 199 

22. The true Gnostic does Good, not from fear of Punishment 

or hope of Reward, but only for the sake of Good itself, 202 

23. The same subject continued, .... 207 

24. The reason and end of Divine Punishments, . . 210 

25. True Perfection consists in the Knowledge and Love of God, 212 

26. How the Perfect Man treats the Body and the Things of the 

World, ...... 215 

BOOK V. 

1. On Faith, ....... 220 

2. On Hope, ....... 228 

3. The objects of Faith and Hope perceived by the Mind alone, 229 

4. Divine Things wrapped up in Figures both in the Sacred and 

in Heathen Writers, ..... 232 

5. On the Symbols of Pythagoras, .... 236 

6. The Mystic Meaning of the Tabernacle and its Furniture, . 240 

7. The Egyptian Symbols and Enigmas of Sacred Things, . 245 

- 8. The use of the Symbolic Style by Poets and Philosophers, . 247 

9. Reasons for veiling the Truth in Symbols, . . . 254 

10. The opinion of the Apostles on veiling the Mysteries of the 

Faith, ....... 257 

11. Abstraction from Material Things necessary in order to attain 

to the true Knowledge of God, .... 261 

12. God cannot be embraced in Words or by the Mind, . . 267 

13. The Knowledge of God a Divine Gift, according to the 

Philosophers, ...... 270 

14. Greek Plagiarisms from the Hebrews, . . . 274 

BOOK VI. 

1. Plan, ....... 302 

2. The subject of Plagiarisms resumed. The Greeks plagiarized 

from one another, ..... 304 

3. Plagiarism by the Greeks of the Miracles related in the 

Sacred Books of the Hebrews, . . . .319 

4. The Greeks drew many of their Philosophical Tenets from 

the Egyptian and Indian Gymnosophists, . . 323 

5. The Greeks had some Knowledge of the true God, . . 326 

6. The Gospel was preached to Jews and Gentiles in Hades, . 328 

7. What true Philosophy is, and whence so called, . . 335 

8. Philosophy is Knowledge given by God, . . . 339 

9. The Gnostic free of all Perturbations of the Soul, . . 344 

10. The Gnostic avails himself of the help of all Human Know- 

ledge, . . . . . . .349 

11. The Mystical Meanings in the proportions of Numbers, Geo- 

metrical Ratios, and Music, . . . .352 

12. Human Nature possesses an adaptation for Perfection ; the 

Gnostic alone attains it, . . . . . 359 

13. Degrees of Glory in Heaven corresponding with the Dignities 

of the Church below, . . . . 365 

14. Degrees of Glory in Heaven, .... 366 

vm 

CONTENTS . 

CHAP. PAGE 

15. Different Degrees of Knowledge, . . . .371 

16. Gnostic Exposition of the Decalogue, . . . 383 

17. Philosophy conveys only an imperfect Knowledge of God, . 393 

18. The use of Philosophy to the Gnostic, . . . 401 

BOOK VII. 

1. The Gnostic a true Worshipper of God, and unjustly calum- 

niated by Unbelievers as an Atheist, . . . 406 

2. The Son the Ruler and Saviour of All, . . . 409 

3. The Gnostic aims at the nearest Likeness possible to God 

and His Son, ...... 414 

4. The Heathens made Gods like themselves, whence springs 

all Superstition, ...... 421 

5. The Holy Soul a more excellent Temple than any Edifice 

built by Man, ...... 424 

6. Prayers and Praise from a Pure Mind, ceaselessly offered, 

far better than Sacrifices, .... 426 

7. What sort of Prayer the Gnostic employs, and how it is 

heard by God, ...... 431 

8. The Gnostic so addicted to Truth as not to need to use an 

Oath, 442 

9. Those who teach others, ought to excel in Virtues, . 444 

10. Steps to Perfection, ...... 446 

11. Description of the Gnostic’s Life, .... 449 

12. The true Gnostic is Beneficent, Continent, and despises 

Worldly Things, ...... 455 

13. Description of the Gnostic continued, . . . 466 

14. Description of the Gnostic furnished by an Exposition of 

1 Cor. vi. 1, etc., ...... 468 

15. The objection to join the Church on account of the diver- 

sity of Heresies answered, . . . .472 

16. Scripture the Criterion by which Truth and Heresy are dis- 

tinguished, . . . . . .476 

17. The Tradition of the Church prior to that of the Heresies, . 485 

18. The Distinction between Clean and Unclean Animals in the 

Law symbolical of the Distinction between the Church, 

and Jews, and Heretics, ..... 488 

BOOK VIII. 

1. The object of Philosophical and Theological Inquiry — the 

Discovery of Truth, . . . . .490 

2. The necessity of Perspicuous Definition, . . . 491 

3. Demonstration defined, ..... 492 

4. To prevent Ambiguity, we must begin with clear Definition, 496 

5. Application of Demonstration to Sceptical Suspense of Judg- 

ment, ....... 500 

6. Definitions, Genera, and Species, .... 502 

7. On the Causes of Doubt or Assent, .... 505 

8. The Method of classifying Things and Names, . . 506 

9. On the different kinds of Causes, .... 508 

Indexes — I ndex of Texts, ..... 515 

Index of Subjects, ..... 525 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

BOOK II. 

CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

S Scripture has called the Greeks pilferers of the 
Barbarian 1 philosophy, it will next have to be 
considered how this may be briefly demonstrated. 
For we shall not only show that they have imi- 
tated and copied the marvels recorded in our books ; but 
we shall prove, besides, that they have plagiarized and 
falsified (our writings being, as we have shown, older) the 
chief dogmas they hold, both on faith and knowledge and 
science, and hope and love, and also on repentance and 
temperance and the fear of God, — a whole swarm, verily, 
of the virtues of truth. 

Whatever the explication necessary on the point in hand 
shall demand, shall be embraced, and especially what is 
occult in the Barbarian philosophy, the department of symbol 
and enigma ; which those who have subjected the teaching of 
the ancients to systematic philosophic study have affected, 
as being in the highest degree serviceable, nay, absolutely 
necessary to the knowledge of truth. In addition, it will 
in my opinion form an appropriate sequel to defend those 
tenets, on account of which the Greeks assail us, making use 
of a few scriptures, if perchance the Jew also may listen and 
be able quietly to turn from what he has believed to Him on 
1 Referring in particular to the Jews. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

A 

2 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

whom he has not believed. The ingenuous among the philo- 
sophers will then with propriety be taken up in a friendly 
exposure both of their life and of the discovery of new 
dogmas, not in the way of our avenging ourselves on our 
detractors (for that is far from being the case with those who 
have learned to bless those who curse, even though they 
needlessly discharge on us words of blasphemy), but with a 
view to their conversion ; if by any means these adepts in 
wisdom may feel ashamed, being brought to their senses by 
barbarian demonstration ; so as to be able, although late, to 
see clearly of what sort are the intellectual acquisitions for 
which they make pilgrimages over the seas. Those they 
have stolen are to be pointed out, that we may thereby pull 
down their conceit ; and of those on the discovery of which 
through investigation they plume themselves, the refutation 
will be furnished. By consequence, also we must treat of 
what is called the curriculum of study — how far it is service- 
able ; 1 and of astrology, and mathematics, and magic, and 
sorcery. For all the Greeks boast of these as the highest 
sciences. u He who reproves boldly is a peacemaker .” 2 We 
have often said already that we have neither practised nor do 
we study the expressing ourselves in pure Greek; for this 
suits those who seduce the multitude from the truth. But 
true philosophic demonstration will contribute to the profit 
not of the listeners’ tongues, but of their minds. And, in my 
opinion, he who is solicitous about truth ought not to frame 
his language with artfulness and care, but only to try to 
express his meaning as he best can. For those who are par- 
ticular about words, and devote their time to them, miss the 
things. It is a feat fit for the gardener to pluck without 
injury the rose that is growing among the thorns; and for 
the craftsman to find out the pearl buried in the oyster’s flesh. 
And they say that fowls have flesh of the most agreeable 
quality, when, through not being supplied with abundance of 
food, they pick their sustenance with difficulty, scraping with 
their feet. If any one, then, speculating on what is similar, 

1 The text reads cixpmro ; ; Sylburg prefers the reading svxpmro;. 

2 Prov. x. 10, Scptuagint. 

Book ii.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

o 

O 

wants to arrive 1 at the truth [that is] in the numerous Greek 
plausibilities, like the real face beneath masks, he will hunt it 
out with much pains. For the power that appeared in the 
vision to Hermas said, “ Whatever may be revealed to you, 
shall be revealed .” 2 

CHAPTER II. 

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD CAN BE ATTAINED ONLY 
THROUGH FAITH. 

“ Be not elated on account of thy wisdom,” say the Pro- 
verbs. “In all thy ways acknowledge her, that she may 
direct thy ways, and that thy foot may not stumble.” By 
these remarks he means to show that our deeds ought to 
be conformable to reason, and to manifest further that we 
ought to select and possess what is useful out of all culture. 
Now the ways of wisdom are various that lead right to the 
way of truth. Fai th is the., way. “Thy foot shall not 
stumble” is said with reference to some who seem to oppose 
the one divine administration of Providence. Whence it is 
added, “Be not wise in thine own eyes,” according to the 
impious ideas which revolt against the administration of God. 
“ But fear God,” who alone is powerful. Whence it follows 
as a consequence that we are not to oppose God. The sequel 
especially teaches clearly, that “ the fear of God is departure 
from evil ; ” for it is said, “ and depart from all evil.” Such 
is the discipline of wisdom (“ for whom the Lord loveth He 
chastens” 3 ), causing pain in order to produce understanding, 
and restoring to peace and immortality. Accordingly, the 
Barbarian philosophy, which we follow, ' is in reality perfect 
and true. And so it is said in the book of Wisdom : “ For 
He hath given me the unerring knowledge of things that 
exist, to know the constitution of the world,” and so forth, 
down to “ and the virtues of roots.” Among all these he 

1 ^li’hyfKvSsvca, suggested by Sylb. as more suitable than the oiu’ao,-/}- 
Ss’jcci of the text. 

3 Hermas — close of third vision. 3 Prov. iii. 5, 6, 7, 12, 23. 

4 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

comprehends natural science, which treats of all the pheno- 
mena in the world of sense. And in continuation, he alludes 
also to intellectual objects in what he subjoins: “And what 
is hidden or manifest I know; for Wisdom, the artificer 
of all things, taught me ,” 1 You have, in brief, the professed 
aim of our philosophy ; and the learning of these branches, 
when pursued with right course of conduct, leads through 
Wisdom, the artificer of all things, to the Ruler of all, — a 
Being difficult to grasp and apprehend, ever receding and 
withdrawing from him who pursues. But He who is far off 
has — oh ineffable marvel ! — come very near. “ I am a God 
that draws near,” says the Lord. He is in essence remote ; 
“ for how is it that what is begotten can have approached the 
Unbegotten? ” But He is very near in virtue of that power 
which holds all things in its embrace. “ Shall one do aught 
in secret, and I see him not ?” 2 For the power of God is 
always present, in contact with us, in the exercise of inspec- 
tion, of beneficence, of instruction. Whence Moses, per- 
suaded that God is not to be known by human wisdom, said, 
“ Show me Thy glory ; ” 3 and into the thick darkness where 
God’s voice was, pressed to enter — that is, into the inaccessible 
and invisible ideas respecting Existence. For God is not in 
darkness or in place, but above both space and time, and 
qualities of objects. Wherefore neither is He at any time 
in a part, either as containing or as contained, either by limi- 
tation or by section. u For what house will ye build to me? ” 
saith the Lord . 4 Nay, He has not even built one for Him- 
self, since He cannot be contained. And though heaven be 
called His throne, not even thus is He contained, but He rests 
delimited in the creation. 

o 

It is clear, then, that the truth has been hidden from us ; 
and if that has been already shown by one example, we shall 
establish it a little after by several more. How entirely 
worthy of approbation are they who are both willing to learn, 
and able, according to Solomon, “ to know wisdom and in- 
struction, and to perceive the words of wisdonr, to receive 

1 Wisd. vii. 17, 20, 21, 22. 2 Jer. xxiii. 23, 24. 

3 Ex. xxx. 13. 4 Isa. lxvi. 1. 

Book il] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

5 

knotty words, and to perceive true righteousness,” there being 
another [righteousness as well], not according to the truth, 
taught by the Greek laws, and by the rest of the philoso- 
phers. “And to direct judgments,” it is said — not those of the 
bench, but he means that we must preserve sound and free of 
error the judicial faculty which is within us — “ That I may 
give subtlety to the simple, to the young man sense and under- 
standing.” 1 “For the wise man,” who has been persuaded 
to obey the commandments, “ having heard these things, will 
become wiser” by knowledge; and “the intelligent man 
will acquire rule, and will understand a parable and a dark 
word, the sayings and enigmas of the wise.” 2 For it is not 
spurious words which those inspired by God and those who 
are gained over by them adduce, nor is it snares in which the 
most of the sophists entangle the young, spending their time 
on nought true. But those who possess the Holy Spirit 
“ search the deep things of God,” 3 — that is, grasp the secret 
that is in the prophecies. “ To impart of holy things to the 
dogs” is forbidden, so long as they remain beasts. For never 
ought those who are envious and perturbed, and still infidel 
in conduct, shameless in barking at investigation, to dip in 
the divine and clear stream of the living water. “ Let not 
the waters of thy fountain overflow, and let thy waters spread 
over thine own streets.” 4 For it is not many who under- 
stand such things as they fall in with ; or know them even 
after learning them, though they think they do, according to 
the worthy Heraclitus. Does not even he seem to thee to 
censure those who believe not? “Now my just one shall live 
by faith,” 0 the prophet said. And another prophet also says, 
“[Except ye believe, neither shall ye understand.” G For how 
ever could the soul admit the transcendental contemplation of 
such themes, while unbelief respecting what was to be learned 
struggled within ? But faith, which the Greeks disparage, 
deeming it futile and barbarous, is a voluntary preconception, 7 
the assent of piety — “ the subject of things hoped for, the 

1 svvoixv, not evuoixu, as in the text. 2 Prov. i. 2-6. 

3 1 Cor. ii. 10. 4 Prov. v. 16. 5 Hab. ii. 4. 

6 Isa. vii. 9. 7 Or anticipation, 

6 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

evidence of things not seen,” according to the divine apostle. 
“For hereby,” pre-eminently, “the elders obtained a good 
report. But without faith it is impossible to please God .” 1 
Others have defined faith to be a uniting assent to an unseen 
object, as certainly the proof of an unknown thing is an 
evident assent. If then it be choice, being desirous of some- 
thing, the desire is in this instance intellectual. And since 
choice is the bemnning of action, faith is discovered to be the 
beginning of action, being the foundation of rational choice 
in the case of any one who exhibits to himself the previous 
demonstration through faith. Voluntarily to follow what is 
useful, is the first principle of understanding. Unswerving 
choice, then, gives considerable momentum in the direction of 
knowledge. The exercise of faith directly becomes know- 
ledge, reposing on a sure foundation. Knowledge, accord- 
ingly, is defined by the sons of the philosophers as a habit, 
which cannot be overthrown by reason. Is there any other 
true condition such as this, except piety, of which alone the 
Word is teacher ? 2 I think not. Theophrastus says that 
sensation is the root of faith. For from it the rudimentary 
principles extend to the reason that is in us, and the under- 
standing. He who believeth then the divine Scriptures with 
sure judgment, receives in the voice of God, who bestowed 
the Scripture, a demonstration that cannot be impugned. 
Faith, then, is not established by demonstration. “Blessed 
therefore those who, not having seen, yet have believed .” 3 
The Siren’s songs exhibiting a power above human, fasci- 
nated those that came near, conciliating them, almost against 
their will, to the reception of what was said. 

CHAPTER III. 

FAITH NOT A PRODUCT OF NATURE. 

Now the followers of Basilides regard faith as natural, as 

1 Heb. xi. 1, 2, G. 

2 Adopting Lowtli’s conjecture of supplying before (hoc-fit i'u;. 

3 John xx. 29. 

Book it.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

7 

they also refer it to choice, [representing it] as finding ideas 
by intellectual comprehension without demonstration ; while 
the followers of Valentinus assign faith to us, the simple, but 
will have it that knowledge springs up in their own selves 
(who are saved by nature) through the advantage of a germ 
of superior excellence, saying that it is as far removed from 
faith as 1 the spiritual is from the animal. Further, the 
followers of Basilides say that faith as well as choice is 
proper according to every interval ; and that in consequence 
of the supramundane selection mundane faith accompanies 
all nature, and that the free gift of faith is conformable to 
the hope of each. Faith, then, is no longer the direct result 
of free choice, if it is a natural advantage. 

Nor will he who has not believed, not being the author 
[of his unbelief], meet with a due recompense ; and he that 
has believed is not the cause [of his belief]. And the 
entire peculiarity and difference of belief and unbelief will 
not fall under either praise or censure, if we reflect rightly, 
since there attaches to it the antecedent natural necessity 
proceeding from the Almighty. And if we are pulled like 
inanimate things by the puppet-strings of natural powers, 
willingness 2 and unwillingness, and impulse, which is the 
antecedent of both, are mere redundancies. And for my 
part, I am utterly incapable of conceiving such an animal as 
has its appetencies, which are moved by external causes, under 
the dominion of necessity. And what place is there, any 
longer for the repentance of him who was once an un- 
believer, through Avhich comes forgiveness of sins? So that 
neither is baptism rational, nor the blessed seal , 3 nor the Son, 
nor the Father. But God, as I think, turns out to be the 
distribution to men of natural powers, which has not as 
the foundation of salvation voluntary faith. 

1 The text reads % ; but Sylb. suggests y, which we have adopted. 

2 ko.1 to t/tovtjio'j is supplied as required by the sense. The text has 
d.x.ovtnov only, for which Lowth proposes to read sx.ov<nov. 

3 Either baptism or the imposition of hands after baptism. 

8 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book ii. 

CHAPTER IV. 

FAITH THE FOUNDATION OF ALL KNOWLEDGE. 

But we, who have heard by the Scriptures that self-deter- 
mining choice and refusal have been given by the Lord to 
men, rest in the infallible criterion of faith, manifesting 
a willing spirit, since we have chosen life and believe God 
through His voice. And he who has believed the Word 
knows the matter to be true ; for the Word is truth. But he 
who has disbelieved Him that speaks, has disbelieved God. 

u By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by 
the word of God, so that what is seen was not made of 
things which appear,” says the apostle. “ By faith Abel 
offered to God a fuller sacrifice than Cain, by which he re- 
ceived testimony that he was righteous, God giving testi- 
mony to him respecting his gifts ; and by it he, being dead, 
yet speaketli,” and so forth, down to u than enjoy the 
pleasures of sin for a season .” 1 Faith having, therefore, 
justified these before the law, made them heirs of the divine 
promise. Why then should I review and adduce any further 
testimonies of faith from the history in our hands ? u For 
the time would fail me were I to tell of Gideon, Barak, 
Samson, Jephtha, David, and Samuel, and the prophets,” 
and what follows . 2 Now, inasmuch as there are four things 
in which the truth resides — Sensation, Understanding, Know- 
ledge, Opinion, — intellectual apprehension is first in the order 
of nature ; but in our case, and in relation to ourselves, 
Sensation is first, and of Sensation and Understanding the 
essence of Knowledge is formed ; and evidence is common to 
Understanding and Sensation. Well, Sensation is the ladder 
to Knowledge; while Faith, advancing over the pathway of 
the objects of sense, leaves Opinion behind, and speeds to 
things free of deception, and reposes in the truth. 

Should one say that Knowledge is founded on demonstration 
by a process of reasoning, let him hear that first principles are 

1 Heb. xi. 3, 4, 25. 

2 Heb. xi. 32. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

9 

incapable of demonstration ; for they are known neither by art 
nor sagacity. For the latter is conversant about objects that 
are susceptible of change, while the former is practical solely, 
and not theoretical . 1 Hence it is thought that the first cause 
of the universe can be apprehended by faith alone. For all 
knowledge is capable of being taught ; and what is capable 
of being taught is founded on what is known before. But 
the first cause of the universe was not previously known to 
the Greeks; neither, accordingly, to Thales, who came to 
the conclusion that water was the first cause ; nor to the 
other natural philosophers who succeeded him, since it was 
Anaxagoras who was the first who assigned to Mind the 
supremacy over material things. But not even he preserved 
the dignity suited to the efficient cause, describing as he did 
certain silly vortices, together with the inertia and even fool- 
ishness of Mind. Wherefore also the Word says, “ Call no 
man master on earth .” 2 , For knowledge is a state of mind 
that results from demonstration ; butt faith is a grace which 
from what is indemonstrable conducts to what is universal and 
simple, what is neither with matter, nor matter, nor under 
matter. But those who believe not, as to be expected, drag 
all down from heaven, and the region of the invisible, to earth, 
“ absolutely grasping with their hands rocks and oaks,” accord- 
ing to Plato. For, clinging to all such things, they asseverate 
that that alone exists which can be touched and handled, 
defining body and essence to be identical : disputing against 
themselves, they very piously defend the existence of certain in- 
tellectual and bodiless forms descending somewhere from above 
from the invisible world, vehemently maintaining that there is 
a true essence. “Lo, I make new things,” saith the Word, 
“ which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered 
into the heart of man.” ° Wit h a new eye, a new ear, a new 
heart, whatever can be seen and heard is to be apprehended, 
by the faith and understanding of the disciples of the Lord, 
who speak, hear, and act spirituallyC' For there is genuine 
coin, and other that is spurious ; which no less deceives 

1 Instead of y,ovovovxh Petavius and Lowth read oy#/, as above. 

2 Matt, xxiii. 9. 3 Isa. lxiv. 4, 19 ; 1 Cor. ii. 9. 

10 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

unprofessionals, that it does not the money-changers ; who 
know through having learned how to separate and distinguish 
what has a false stamp from what is genuine. So the money- 
changer only says to the unprofessional man that the coin is 
counterfeit. But the reason why, only the banker’s appren- 
tice, and he that is trained to this department, learns. 

Now Aristotle says that the judgment which follows know- 
ledge is in truth faith. Accordingly, faith is something 
superior to knowledge, and is its criterion. Conjecture, 
which is only a feeble supposition, counterfeits faith ; as the 
flatterer counterfeits a friend, and the wolf the dog. And 
as the workman sees that by learning certain things he be- 
comes an artificer, and the helmsman by being instructed in 
the art will be able to steer ; he does not regard the mere 
wishing to become excellent and good enough, but he must 
learn it by the exercise of obedience. But to obey the 
Word, whom we call Instructor, is to believe Him, going 
against Him in nothing. For how can we take up a position 
of hostility to God ? Knowledge, accordingly, is charac- 
terized by faith ; and faith, by a kind of divine mutual and 
reciprocal correspondence, becomes characterized by know- 
ledge.. 

Epicurus, too, who very greatly preferred pleasure to truth, 
supposes faith to be a preconception of the mind ; and de- 
fines preconception to be a grasping at something evident, 
and at the clear understanding of the thing ; and asserts 
that, without preconception, no one can either inquire, or 
doubt, or judge, or even argue. How can one, without a 
preconceived idea of what he is aiming after, learn about 
that which is the subject of his investigation ? He, again, 
who has learned, has already turned his preconception 1 into 
comprehension. And if he who learns, learns not without 
a preconceived idea which takes in what is expressed, that 
man has ears to hear the truth. And happy is the man that 
speaks to the ears of those who hear ; as happy certainly also 
is he who is a child of obedience. Now to hear is to under- 
stand. If, then, faith is nothing else than a preconception of 

1 Trots! TTpo^Yj^tu. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

11 

the mind in regard to what is the subject of discourse, and 
obedience is so called, and understanding and persuasion ; no 
one shall learn aught without faith, since no one [learns 
aught] without preconception. Consequently there is a more 
ample demonstration of the complete truth of what was spoken 
by the prophet, “ Unless ye believe, neither will ye under- 
stand.” Paraphrasing this oracle, Heraclitus of Ephesus 
says, 11 If a man hope not, he will not find that which is not 
hoped for, seeing it is inscrutable and inaccessible.” Plato 
the philosopher, also, in The Lcncs , says, “ that he who would 
be blessed and happy, must be straight from the beginning 
a partaker of the truth, so as to live true for as long a period 
as possible ; for he is a man of faith. But the unbeliever 
is one to whom voluntary falsehood is agreeable ; and the 
man to whom involuntary falsehood is agreeable is senseless; 1 
neither of which is desirable. For he who is devoid of friend- 
liness, is faithless and ignorant.” And does he not enigmati- 
cally say in Enthydemus , that this is u the regal wisdom?” In 
The Statesman he says expressly, u So that the knowledge of 
the true king is kingly ; and he who possesses it, whether a 
prince or private person, shall by all means, in consequence 
of this act, be rightly styled royal.” Now those who have 
believed in Christ both are and are called Chrestoi (good), 2 
as those who are cared for by the true king are kingly. For 
as the wise are wise by their wisdom, and those observant of 
law are so by the law ; so also those who belong to Christ 
the King are kings, and those that are Christ’s Christians. 
Then, in continuation, he adds clearly, u What is right will 
turn out to be lawful, law being in its nature right reason, 
and not found in writings or elsewhere.” And the stranger 
of Elea pronounces the kingly and statesmanlike man iC a 
living laic.” Such is he who fulfils the law, u doing the will of 
the Father,” 3 inscribed on a lofty pillar, and set as an example 
of divine virtue to all who possess the power of seeing. The 

1 ov 'Com is here interpolated into the text, not being found in Plato. 

2 Xpioro ; and xpr,a-6; are very frequently compared in the patristic > 
authors. 

3 Matt. xxi. 81. 

12 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

Greeks are acquainted with the staves of the Ephori at 
Lacedaemon, inscribed with the law on wood. But my law, 
as was said above, is both royal and living ; and it is right 
reason. “ Law, which is king of all — of mortals and im- 
mortals,” as the Boeotian Pindar sings. For Speusippus , 1 in 
the first book against Cl^ophon, seems to write like Plato on 
this wise: “For if royalty be a good thing, and the wise 
man the only king and ruler, the law, which is right reason, 
is good ; ” 2 which is the case. The Stoics teach what is in 
conformity with this, assigning kinghood, priesthood, prophecy, 
legislation, riches, true beauty, noble birth, freedom, to the 
wise man alone. But that he is exceedingly difficult to find, 
is confessed even by them. 

CHAPTER V. 

HE PROVES BY SEVERAL EXAMPLES THAT THE GREEKS 
DREW PROM THE SACRED WRITERS. 

Accordingly all those above mentioned dogmas appear to 
have been transmitted from Moses the great to the Greeks. 
That all things belong to the wise man, is taught in these 
words: “And because God hath showed me mercy, I have all 
things .” 3 And that he is beloved of God, God intimates when 
He says, “The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God 
of Jacob .” 4 For the first is found to have been expressly 
called “friend ;” 5 and the second is shown to have received 
a new name, signifying “he that sees God ;” 6 while Isaac, 
God in a figure selected for Himself as a consecrated sacrifice, 
to be a type to us of the economy of salvation. 

Now among the Greeks, Minos the king of nine years’ reign, 

1 Plato’s sister’s son and successor. 2 a -z wo ah;. 

3 The words of Jacob to Esau slightly changed from the Septuagint : 

“ For God hath showed mercy to me, and I have all things ” — on fasr,os 
/ns 6 &eo; kocI sari pot 'ttoiutcc (Gen. xxxiii. 11). 

4 Ex. iii. 16. 5 Jas. ii. 23. 

c So the name Israel is explained, Stromata i. p. 331, Potter ; vol. i. 

p. 369 of translation of Clement in Ante-Niccne Library. 

Book ii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

13 

and familiar friend of Zeus, is celebrated in song ; they having 
heard how once God conversed with Moses, “ as one speaking 
with his friend.” 1 Moses, then, was a sage, king, legislator. 
But our Saviour surpasses all human nature. He is so lovely, 
as to be alone loved by us, Avliose hearts are set on the true 
beauty, for “ He was the true light.” 2 He is shown to be a 
King, as such hailed by unsophisticated children and by the 
unbelieving and ignorant Jews, and heralded by the prophets. 
So rich is He, that He despised the whole earth, and the 
gold above and beneath it, with all glory, when given to 
Him by the adversary. What need is there to say that He 
is the only High Priest, who alone possesses the know- 
ledge of the worship of God? 3 He is Melchizedek, “King 
of peace,” 4 the most fit of all to head the race of men. A 
legislator too, inasmuch as He gave the law by the mouth 
of the prophets, enjoining and teaching most distinctly what 
things are to be done, and what not. Who of nobler lineage 
than He whose only Father is God ? Come, then, let us pro- 
duce Plato assenting to those very dogmas. The wise man he 
calls rich in the Phcedrus , when he says, “ O dear Pan, and 
whatever other gods are here, grant me to become fair within ; 
and whatever external things I have, let them be agreeable to 
what is within. I would reckon the wise man rich.”* And 
the Athenian stranger, 6 finding fault with those who think 
that those who have many possessions are rich, speaks thus : 
“For the very rich to be also good is impossible — those, I 
mean, whom the multitude count rich. Those they call rich, 
who, among a few men, are owners of the possessions worth 
most money; which any bad man may possess.” “ The whole 
world of wealth belongs to the believer,” 7 Solomon says, “ but 
not a penny to the unbeliever.” Much more, then, is the 
scripture to be believed which says, “ It is easier for a camel 
to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man ” 8 to 

1 Ex. xxxiii. 11. 2 John i. 9. 

3 The Stoics defined piety as <! the knowledge of the worship of God.” 

4 Heb. vii. 2. 5 Socrates in the Phcedrus, near the end. 

6 Introduced by Plato in The Laics, conversing with Socrates. 

7 Taken likely from some apocryphal writing. 8 Matt. xix. 24. 

14 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

lead a philosophic life. But, on the other hand, it blesses 
“the poor;” 1 as Plato understood when he said, “It is not 
the diminishing of one’s resources, but the augmenting of 
insatiableness, that is to be considered poverty ; for it is not 
slender means that ever constitutes poverty, but insatiableness, 
from which the good man being free, will also be rich.” And 
in Alcibiades he calls vice a servile thing, and virtue the attri- 
bute of freemen. “ Take away from you the heavy yoke, and 
take up the easy one,” 2 says the Scripture; as also the poets 
call [vice] a slavish yoke. And the expression, “ Ye have 
sold yourselves to your sins,” agrees with what is said above : 
“ Every one, then, who committeth sin is a slave ; and the 
slave abideth not in the house for ever. But if the Son shall 
make you free, then shall ye be free, and the truth shall make 
you free.” 3 

And again, that the wise man is beautiful, the Athenian 
stranger asserts, in the same way as if one were to affirm that 
certain persons were just, even should they happen to be ugly 
in their persons. And in speaking thus with respect to eminent 
rectitude of character, no one who should assert them to be 
on this account beautiful would be thought to speak extrava- 
gantly. And “ His appearance was inferior to all the sons of 
men,” 4 prophecy predicted. 

Plato, moreover, has called the wise man a king, in The 
Statesman. The remark is quoted above. 

These points being demonstrated, let us recur again to our 
discourse on faith. Well, with the fullest demonstration, 
Plato proves, that there is need of faith everywhere, cele- 
brating j>eace at the same time : “ For no man will ever be 
trusty and sound in seditions without entire virtue. There 
are numbers of mercenaries full of fight, and willing to die in 
war ; but, with a very few exceptions, the most of them are 
desperadoes and villains, insolent and senseless.” If these 
observations are right, “ every legislator who is even of slight 
use, will, in making his laws, have an eye to the greatest 
virtue. Such is fidelity,” 5 which we need at all times, both in 

1 Matt. v. 3. 2 Matt. xi. 28-30. 

3 Jolm viii. 32-36. 4 Isa. liii. 3. 5 xta-irr,;. 

Book ii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

15 

peace and in war, and in all the rest of our life, for it appears 
to embrace the other virtues. “But the best thing is neither 
war nor sedition, for the necessity of these is to be deprecated. 
But peace with one another and kindly feeling are what is 
best.” From these remarks the greatest prayer evidently is 
to have peace, according to Plato. And faith is the greatest 
mother of the virtues. Accordingly it is rightly said in 
Solomon, “Wisdom is in the mouth of the faithful.” 1 Since 
also Xenocrates, in his book on “ Intelligence,” says “ that 
wisdom is the knowledge of first causes and of intellectual 
essence.” He considers intelligence as twofold, practical 
and theoretical, which latter is human wisdom. Consequently 
wisdom is intelligence, but all intelligence is not wisdom. 
And it has been shown, that the knowledge of the first cause 
of the universe is of faith, but is not demonstration. For it 
were strange that the followers of the Samian Pythagoras, 
rejecting demonstrations of subjects of question, should re- 
gard the bard ipse dixit 2 as ground of belief; and that this 
expression alone sufficed for the confirmation of what they 
heard, while those devoted to the contemplation of the truth, 
presuming to disbelieve the trustworthy Teacher, God the 
only Saviour, should demand of Him tests of His utterances. 
But He says, “ Pie that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” 
And who is he % Let Epicharmus say : 

“ Mind sees, mind hears ; all besides is deaf and blind.” 3 

Rating some as unbelievers, Heraclitus says, “ Not know- 
ing how to hear or to speak ; ” aided doubtless by Solomon, 
who says, “ If thou lovest to hear, thou shalt comprehend ; 
and if thou incline thine ear, thou shalt be wise.” 4 

1 Ecclus. xv. 10. 

2 Laertius, in opposition to the general account, ascribes the cele- 
brated ciutos sCpu to Pythagoras Zacynthus. Suidas, who with the most 
ascribes it to the Samian Pythagoras, says that it meant “ God has said,” 
as he professed to have received his doctrines from God. 

3 This famous line of Epicharmus the comic poet is quoted by Ter- 
tullian (de Amnia ), by Plutarch, by Jamblichus, and Porphyry. 

4 Ecclus. vi. 34. 

16 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

CHAPTER VI. 

THE EXCELLENCE AND UTILITY OF FAITH. 

“Lord, who hath believed our report ?” 1 Isaiah says. For 
“ faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,” 
saitli the apostle. “ How then shall they call on Him in whom 
they have not believed? And how shall they believe on Him 
whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear with- 
out a preacher? And how shall they preach except they be 
sent? As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of those 
that publish glad tidings of good things ! ” 2 You see how he 
brings faith by hearing, and the preaching of the apostles, up 
to the word of the Lord, and to the Son of God. We do not 
yet understand the word of the Lord to be demonstration. 

As, then, playing at ball not only depends on one throw- 
ing the ball skilfully, but it requires besides one to catch it 
dexterously, that the game may be gone through according 
to the rules for ball ; so also is it the case that teaching is 
reliable when faith on the part of those who hear, being, so 
to speak, a sort of natural art, contributes to the process of 
learning. So also the earth co-operates, through its produc- 
tive power, being fit for the sowing of the seed. For there is 
no good of the very best instruction without the exercise of the 
receptive faculty on the part of the learner, not even of pro- 
phecy, when there is the absence of docility' on the part of 
those who hear. For dry twigs, being ready to receive the 
power of fire, are kindled with great ease ; and the far- 
famed stone 8 attracts steel through affinity, as the tear of the 
Succinum drags to itself twigs, and amber sets chaff in motion. 
And the substances attracted obey them, attracted by a subtle 
spirit, not as a cause, but as a concurring cause. 

There being then a twofold species of vice — that charac- 
terized by craft and stealth, and that which leads and drives 
with violence — the divine Word cries, calling all together ; 
knowing perfectly well those that will not obey ; notwith- 
1 Isa. iiii. 1 . 2 Rom. x. 17, 14, 15. 5 Loadstone. 

Book ii.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

17 

standing then since to obey or not is in our own power, pro- 
vided we have not the excuse of ignorance to adduce. He 
makes a just call, and demands of each according to his 
strength. For some are able as well as willing, having 
reached this point through practice and being purified; while 
others, if they are not yet able, already have the will. Now 
to wfill is the act of the soul, but to do is not without the 
body. Nor are actions estimated by their issue alone ; but 
they are judged also according to the element of free choice 
in each, — if he chose easily, if he repented of his sins, if he 
reflected on his failures and repented (/ lereyvco ), which is (fiera 
ravra eyvco) “ afterwards knew.” For repentance is a tardy 
knowledge, and primitive innocence is knowledge. Repent- 
ance, then, is an effect of faith. For unless a man believe 
that to which he was addicted to be sin, he will not abandon 
it ; and if he do not believe punishment to be impending over 
the transgressor, and salvation to be the portion of him who 
lives according to the commandments, he will not reform. 

Hope, too, is based on faith. Accordingly the followers 
of Basilides define faith to be, the assent of the soul to any of 
those things, that do not affect the senses through not being 
present. And hope is the expectation of the possession of 
good. Necessarily, then, is expectation founded on faith. 
Now he is faithful who keeps inviolably w T hat is entrusted to 
him ; and w r e are entrusted with the utterances respecting 
God and the divine words, the commands along with the 
execution of the injunctions. This is the faithful servant, 
who is praised by the Lord. And when it is said, “ God is 
faithful,” it is intimated that He is worthy to be believed 
when declaring aught. Now His Word declares ; and 
“God” Himself is “faithful .” 1 How, then, if to believe 
is to suppose, do the philosophers think that what proceeds 
from themselves is sure? For the voluntary assent to a 
preceding demonstration is not supposition, but it is assent 
to something sure. Who is more powerful than God ? 
Now unbelief is the feeble negative supposition of one op- 
posed to Him ; as incredulity is a condition which admits 

1 1 Cor. i. 9, ix. 13. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

B 

18 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ir. 

faith with difficulty. Faith is the voluntary supposition and 
anticipation of pre-comprehension. Expectation is an opinion 
about the future, and expectation about other things is opinion 
about uncertainty. Confidence is a strong judgment about 
a thing. Wherefore we believe Him in whom we have con- 
fidence unto divine glory and salvation. And we confide in 
Him, who is God alone, whom we know, that those things 
nobly promised to us, and for this end benevolently created 
and bestowed by Him on us, will not fail. 

Benevolence is the wishing of good things to another for 
his sake. For He needs nothing; and the beneficence and 
benignity which flow from the Lord terminate in us, being 
divine benevolence, and benevolence resulting in beneficence. 
And if to Abraham on his believing it was counted for 
righteousness ; and if we are the seed of Abraham, then we 
must also believe through hearing. For we are Israelites, 
who are convinced not by signs, but by hearing. Wherefore 
it is said, “ Rejoice, O barren, that barest not ; break forth 
and cry, thou that didst not travail with child : for more are 
the children of the desolate than of her who hath an hus- 
band.” 1 “ Thou hast lived for the fence of the people, thy 

children were blessed in the tents of their fathers .” 2 And if 
the same mansions are promised by prophecy to us and to the 
patriarchs, the God of both the covenants is shown to be one. 
Accordingly it is added more clearly, 11 Thou hast inherited 
the covenant of Israel ,” 3 speaking to those called from among 
the nations, that were once barren, being formerly destitute of 
this husband, who is the Word, — desolate formerly, — of the 
bridegroom. “ Now the just shall live by faith,” 4 which is 
according to the covenant and the commandments ; since 
these, which are two in name and time, given in accordance 
with the [divine] economy — being in power one — the old 
and the new, are dispensed through the Son by one God. As 
the apostle also says in the Epistle to the Romans, “For 
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to 
faith,” teaching the one salvation which from prophecy to the 
Gospel is perfected by one and the same Lord. a This 

1 Isa. liv. 1. 2 Not in Script. 3 Where? 4 Rom. i. 17, etc. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

19 

charge/’ he says, “ I commit to thee, son Timothy, according 
to the prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by 
them mightest war the good warfare ; holding faith, and a 
good conscience ; which some having put away, concerning 
faith have made shipwreck,” 1 because they defiled by unbe- 
lief the conscience that comes from God. Accordingly, faitii 
may not, any more, with reason, be disparaged in an offhand 
way, as simple and vulgar, appertaining to anybody. For, if 
it were a mere human habit, as the Greeks supposed, it would 
have been extinguished. But if it grow, and there be no 
place where it is not ; then I affirm, that faith, whether 
founded in love, or in fear, as its disparagers assert, is some- 
thing divine; which is neither rent asunder by other mundane 
friendship, nor dissolved by the presence of fear. For love, 
on account of its friendly alliance with faith, makes men be- 
lievers ; and faith, which is the foundation of love, in its turn 
introduces the doing of good ; since also fear, the posdagogue 
of the law, is believed to be fear by those, by whom it is be- 
lieved. For, if its existence is shown in its working, it is yet 
believed when about to do and threatening, and when not work- 
ing and present; and being believed to exist, it does not itself 
generate faith, but is by faith tested and proved trustworthy. 
Such a change, then, from unbelief to faith — and to trust in 
hope and fear, is divine. And, in truth, faith is discovered, 
by us, to be the first movement towards salvation ; after which 
fear, and hope, and repentance, advancing in company with 
temperance and patience, lead us to love and knowledge. 
Rightly, therefore, the Apostle Barnabas says, “From the 
portion I have received I have done my diligence to send 
by little and little to you ; that along with your faith you 
may also have perfect knowledge. Fear and patience are 
then helpers of your faith ; and our allies are long-suffering 
and temperance. These, then,” he says, “ in what respects 
the Lord, continuing in purity, there rejoice along with them, 
wisdom, understanding, intelligence, knowledge.” The fore- 
mentioned virtues being, then, the elements of knowledge ; 
the result is that faith is more elementary, beinsr as necessary 

1 1 Tim. i. 18, 19. 

20 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ir. 

to the Gnostic , 1 as respiration to him that lives in this world 
is to life. And as without the four elements it is not possible 
to live, so neither can knowledge be attained without faith. 
It is then the support of truth. 

CHAPTEK VII. 

THE UTILITY OP FEAR. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 

Those, who denounce fear, assail the law ; and if the law, 
plainly also God, who gave the law. For these three elements 
are of necessity presented in the subject on hand : the ruler, 
his administration, and the ruled. If, then, according to 
hypothesis, they abolish the law ; then, by necessary conse- 
quence, each one who is led by lust, courting pleasure, must 
neglect what is right and despise the Deity, and fearlessly 
indulge in impiety and injustice together, having dashed 
away from the truth. 

Yea, say they, fear is an irrational aberration , 2 and per- 
turbation of mind. What sayest thou ? And how can this 
definition be any longer maintained, seeing the command- 
ment is given me by the Word ? But the commandment 
forbids, hanging fear over the head of those who have in- 
curred 3 admonition for their discipline. 

Fear is not then irrational. It is therefore rational. How 
could it be otherwise, exhorting as it does, Thou shall not 
kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery , Thou shall not steal, 
Thou shalt not bear false ivitness ? But if they will quibble 
about the names, let the ' philosophers term the fear of the 
law, cautious fear, (evXdfieia,) which is a shunning (e/c/cAwt?) 
agreeable to reason. Such Critolaus of Phasela not inaptly 
called fighters about names ( ovoyaToydyoi ). The command- 
ment, then, has already appeared fair and lovely even in the 
highest degree, when conceived under a change of name. 

1 The man of perfect knowledge. 

2 Instead of sx.x'Ktatg, it has been proposed to read sz’hvct;, a term 
applied by the Stoics to fear ; but we have 'UtCKiaig immediately after. 

3 According to the correction and translation of Lowth, who reads tZv 
ovTug sTrihe^oinivuy instead of rov ov~ag, etc., of the text. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

21 

Cautious fear ( ev\a(3eia ) is therefore shown to be reason- 
able, being the shunning of what hurts ; from which arises 
repentance for previous sins. “For the fear of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom ; good understanding is to all that 
do it.” 1 He calls vrisdom a doing, which is the fear of the 
Lord paving the way for wisdom. But if the law produces 
fear, the knowledge of the law is the beginning of wisdom ; 
and a man is not wise without law. Therefore those who 
reject the law are unwise ; and in consequence they are 
reckoned godless ( 'adeou ). Now instruction is the beginning 
of wisdom. “ But the ungodly despise wisdom and instruc- 
tion,” 2 saitli the Scripture. 

Let us see what terrors the law announces. If it is the 
things which hold an intermediate place between virtue and 
vice, such as poverty, disease, obscurity, and humble birth, 
and the like, these things civil laws hold forth, and are 
praised for so doing. And those of the Peripatetic school, 
who introduce three kinds of good things, and think that 
their opposites are evil, this opinion suits. But the law 
given to us enjoins us to shun what are in reality bad 
things — adultery, uncleanness, paederasty, ignorance, wicked- 
ness, soul-disease, death (not that which severs the soul from 
the body, but that which severs the soul from truth). For 
these are vices in reality, and the workings that proceed 
from them are dreadful and terrible. “ For not unjustly,” 
say the divine oracles, “ are the nets spread for birds ; for 
they who are accomplices in blood treasure up evils to them- 
selves.” 3 How, then, is the law still said to be not good by 
certain heresies that clamorously appeal to the apostle, who 
says, “For by the law is the knowledge of sin ? ” 4 To whom 
we say, The law did not cause, but showed sin. For, enjoining 
what is to be done, it reprehended what ought not to be done. 
And it is the part of the good to teach what is salutary, and 
to point out what is deleterious ; and to counsel the practice 

1 Ps. cxi. 10. 2 Prov. i. 7. 

3 Prov. i. 17, 18, “ Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any 

bird, and they lay wait for their own blood.” 

4 Rom. iii. 20. 

22 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

of the one, and to command to sliun the other. Now the 
apostle, whom they do not comprehend, said that by the law 
the knowledge of sin was manifested, not that from it it derived 
its existence. And how can the law be not good, which trains, 
which is given as the instructor (7ratSay&)yo9) to Christ, 1 that 
being corrected by fear, in the way of discipline, in order to 
the attainment of the perfection which is by Christ? “I 
will not,” it is said, u the death of the sinner, as his repent- 
ance.” 2 Now the commandment works repentance ; inasmuch 
as it deters 3 from what ought not to be done, and enjoins 
good deeds. By ignorance he means, in my opinion, death. 
u And he that is near the Lord is full of stripes.” 4 Plainly, 
he, that draws near to knowledge, has the benefit of perils, 
fears, troubles, afflictions, by reason of his desire for the 
truth. u For the son who is instructed turns out wise, and 
an intelligent son is saved from burning. And an intelligent 
son will receive the commandments.” 5 * And Barnabas the 
apostle having said, a Woe to those who are wise in their 
own conceits, clever in their own eyes,” G added, “ Let us 
become spiritual, a perfect temple to God ; let us, as far as 
in us lies, practise the fear of God, and strive to keep His 
commands, that we may rejoice in His judgments.” Whence 
u the fear of God ” is divinely said to be the beginning of 
wisdom. 7 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE VAGARIES OF BASILIDES AND VALENTINUS AS TO 
FEAR BEING THE CAUSE OF THINGS. 

Here the followers of Basilides, interpreting this expres- 
sion, say, u that the Prince, 8 having heard the speech of 

1 Gal. iii. 24. 2 Ezek. xxxiii. 11, xviii. 23, 32. 

3 Adopting the conjecture which, by a change from the accusative to 

the nominative, refers “ deters,” and enjoins to the commandment in- 
stead of to repentance, according to the teaching of the text. 

4 Judith viii. 27. 5 Prov. x. 4, 5, 8. c Isa. v. 21. 7 Prov. i. 7. 

s Yiz. of the angels, who according to them was Jehovah, the God of 

the Jews. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

23 

the Spirit, who was being ministered to, was struck with 
amazement both with the voice and the vision, having had 
glad tidings beyond his hopes announced to him ; and that 
his amazement was called fear, which became the origin of 
wisdom, which, distinguishes classes, and discriminates, and 
perfects, and restores. For not the world alone, but also the 
election, He that is over all has set apart and sent forth.” 

And Valentinus appears also in an epistle to have adopted 
such views. For he writes in these very words: “And as 1 
terror fell on the angels at this creature, because he uttered 
things greater than proceeded from his formation, by reason 
of the being in him who had invisibly communicated a germ of 
the supernal essence, and who spoke with free utterance ; so 
also among the tribes of men in the world, the works of men 
became terrors to those who made them, — as, for example, 
images and statues. And the hands of all fashion things to 
bear the name of God : for Adam formed into the name of 
man inspired the dread attaching to the pre-existent man, as 
having his being in him ; and they were terror-stricken, and 
speedily marred the work.” 

But there being but one First Cause, as will be shown 
afterwards, these men will be shown to be inventors of 
chatterings and chirpings. But since God deemed it ad- 
vantageous, that from the law and the prophets, men should 
receive a preparatory discipline by the Lord, the fear of 
the Lord was called the beginning of wisdom, being given 
by the Lord, through Moses, to the disobedient and hard 
of heart. For those whom reason convinces not, fear 
tames; which also the Instructing Word, foreseeing from 
the first, and purifying by each of these methods, adapted 
the instrument suitably for piety. Consternation is, then, 
fear at a strange apparition, or at an unlooked-for re- 
presentation — such as, for example, a message; while fear 
is an excessive wonderment on account of something which 
arises or is. They do not then perceive that they re- 
present by means of amazement the God who is highest 
and is extolled by them, as subject to perturbation and an- 
1 Instead of ug vripi'^oBo; of the text, we read with Grabe ug iripet (pofiog. 

24 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

tecedent to amazement as having been in ignorance. If 
indeed ignorance preceded amazement ; and if this amaze- 
ment and fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, is the 
fear of God, then in all likelihood ignorance as cause pre- 
ceded both the wisdom of God and all creative work, and not 
only these, but restoration and even election itself. Whether, 
then, was it ignorance of what was good or what was evil ? 

Well, if of good, why does it cease through amazement? 
And minister and preaching and baptism are [in that case] 
superfluous- to them. And if of evil, how can what is bad be 
the cause of what is best? For had not ignorance preceded, 
the minister would not have come down, nor would have 
amazement seized on “ the Prince,” as they say ; nor would 
he have attained to a beginning of wisdom from fear, in order 
to discrimination between the elect and those that are mundane. 
And if the fear of the pre-existent man made the angels con- 
spire against their own handiwork, under the idea that an 
invisible germ of the supernal essence was lodged within that 
creation, or through unfounded suspicion excited envy, which 
is incredible, the angels became murderers of the creature 
which had been entrusted to them, as a child might be, they 
being thus convicted of the grossest ignorance. Or suppose 
they were influenced by being involved in foreknowledge. 
But they would not have conspired against what they fore- 
knew in the assault they made ; nor would they have been 
terror-struck at their own work, in consequence of foreknow- 
ledge, on their perceiving the supernal germ. Or, finalfv, 
suppose, trusting to their knowledge, they dared (but this 
also were impossible for them), on learning the excellence 
that is in the Pleroma, to conspire against man. Further- 
more also they laid hands on that which was according to 
the image, in which also is the archetype, and which, along 
with the knowledge that remains, is indestructible. 

To these, then, and certain others, especially the Marcion- 
ites, the Scripture cries, though they listen not, u He that 
heareth me shall rest with confidence in peace, and shall be 
tranquil, fearless of all evil .” 1 

1 Prov. i. 33. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

25 

What, then, will they have the law to be % They will not 
call it evil, but just ; distinguishing what is good from what is 
just. But the Lord, when He enjoins us to dread evil, does 
not exchange one evil for another, but abolishes what is 
opposite by its opposite. Now evil is the opposite of good, as 
what is just is of what is unjust. If, then, that absence of 
fear, which the fear of the Lord produces, is called the be- 
ginning of what is good, 1 fear is a good thing. And the fear 
which proceeds from the law is not only just, but good, as it 
takes away evil. But introducing absence of fear by means 
of fear, it does not produce apathy by means of mental per- 
turbation, but moderation of feeling by discipline. When, 
then, we hear, “ Honour the Lord, and be strong : but fear not 
another besides Him,” 2 we understand it to be meant fearing 
to sin, and following the commandments given by God, which 
is the honour that cometh from God. For the fear of God 
is A eo? [in Greek]. But if fear is perturbation of mind, as 
some will have it that fear is perturbation of mind, yet all 
fear is not pertui'bation. Superstition is indeed perturbation 
of mind ; being the fear of demons, that produce and are 
subject to the excitement of passion. On the other hand, 
consequently, the fear of God, w T ho is not subject to pertur- 
bation, is free of perturbation. For it is not God, but falling 
away from God, that the man is terrified for. And he who fears 
this — that is, falling into evils — fears and dreads those evils. 
And he who fears a fall, wishes himself to be free of corrup- 
tion and perturbation. “ The wise man, fearing, avoids evil : 
but the foolish, trusting, mixes himself with it,” says the 
Scripture ; and again it says, “ In the fear of the Lord is the 
hope of strength.” 3 

1 The text reads kukoiv. Lowth conjectures the change, which we 
have adopted, /.ahuv. 

2 Prov. vii. 2. 

3 Prov. xiv. 1G, 26. 

26 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

CHAPTER IX. 

THE CONNECTION OF THE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. 

Such a fear, accordingly, leads to repentance and hope. 
Now hope is the expectation of good things, or an expectation 
sanguine of absent good; and favourable circumstances are 
assumed in order to good hope, which we have learned leads on 
to love. Now love turns out to be consent in what pertains to 
reason, life, and manners, or in brief, fellowship in life, or it is 
the intensity of friendship and of affection, with right reason, 
in the enjoyment of associates. And an associate (eTatpo?) is 
another self ; 1 just as we call those, brethren, who are rege- 
nerated by the same word. And akin to love is hospitality, 
being a congenial art devoted to the treatment of strangers. 
And those are strangers, to whom the things of the world 
are strange. For we regard as worldly those, who hope in 
the earth and carnal lusts. a Be not conformed, ” says the 
apostle, “ to this world : but be ye transformed in the renewal 
of the mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and accept- 
able, and perfect will of God.” 3 

Hospitality, therefore, is occupied in what is useful for 
strangers ; and guests (ir rl^evoi) are strangers ( 'gevoi ) ; and 
friends are guests ; and brethren are friends. u Dear brother,” 3 
says Homer. 

Philanthropy, in order to which also, is natural affection, 
being a loving treatment of men, and natural affection, which 
is a congenial habit exercised in the love of friends or domestics, 
follow in the train of love. And if the real man within us 
is the spiritual, philanthropy is brotherly love to those who 
participate, in the same spirit. Natural affection, on the other 
hand, is the preservation of good-will, or of affection ; and 
affection is its perfect demonstration ; i and to be beloved 
is to please in behaviour, by drawing and attracting. And 
persons are brought to sameness by consent, which is the 

1 hspos !y<y, alter ego, deriving hctlpop from hepo;. 

2 Rom. xii. 2. 3 (piKt Kcarlyunrs, Iliad, book v. 359. 

4 cIttgoI'i; has been conjectured in place of ci-TrdosAt:. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

27 

knowledge of the good things that are enjoyed in common. 
For community of sentiment ( ofioyvcc/iocrvvT 7) is harmony of 
opinions (av/i(f)covia jvco/jlwv). “ Let your love be without 
dissimulation,” it is said ; “ and abhorring what is evil, let us 
become attached to what is good, to brotherly love,” and so 
on, down to “ If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, living 
peaceably with all men.” Then “ be not overcome of evil,” 
it is said, “ but overcome evil with good.” 1 And the same 
apostle owns that he bears witness to the Jews, “ that they 
have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For, 
being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and seeking to establish 
their own, they have not submitted themselves to the right- 
eousness of God.” 2 For they did not know and do the will 
of the law ; but what they supposed, that they thought the 
law wished. And they did not believe the law as prophesying, 
but the bare word ; and they followed through fear, not 
through disposition and faith. “For Christ is the end of 
the law for righteousness,” 3 who was prophesied by the law 
to every one that believeth. Whence it was said to them 
by Moses, “ I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are 
not a people ; and I will anger you by a foolish nation, that 
is, by one that has become disposed to obedience.” 4 And 
by Isaiah it is said, “ I was found of them that sought 
me not ; I was made manifest to them that inquired not 
after me,” 5 — manifestly previous to the coining of the 
Lord ; after which to Israel, the things prophesied, are 
now appropriately spoken : “ I have stretched out my hands 
all the day long to a disobedient and gainsaying people.” 
Do you see the cause of the calling from among the 
nations, clearly declared, by the prophet, to be the dis- 
obedience and gainsaying of the people? Then the good- 
ness of God is shown also in their case. For the apostle 
says, “But through their transgression salvation is come to 
the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy,” G and to willing- 
ness to repent. And the Shepherd, speaking plainly of those 

1 Rom. xii. 9, 10, 18, 21. 2 Rom. x. 2, 3. 

3 Rom. x. 4. 4 Rom. x. 19 ; Deut. xxxii. 21. 

5 Isa. lxv. 1 , 2 ; Rom. x. 20, 21. 6 Rom. xi. 11. 

28 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

who had fallen asleep, recognises certain righteous among 
Gentiles and Jews, not only before the appearance of Christ, 
but before the law, in virtue of acceptance before God, — 
as Abel, as Noah, as any other righteous man. He says 
accordingly, “ that the apostles and teachers, who had preached 
the name of the Son of God, and had fallen asleep, in 
power and by faith, preached to those that had fallen asleep 
before.” Then he subjoins : “ And they gave them the 
seal of preaching. They descended, therefore, with them 
into the water, and again ascended. But these descended 
alive, and again ascended alive. But those, who had fallen 
asleep before, descended dead, but ascended alive. By these, 
therefore, they were made alive, and knew the name of the 
Son of God. Wherefore also they ascended with them, 
and fitted into the structure of the tower, and unhewn were 
built up together : they fell asleep in righteousness and in 
great purity, but wanted only this seal.” 1 “For when the 
Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things of 
the law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves,” 2 
according to the apostle. 

As, then, the virtues follow one another, why need I say 
what has been demonstrated already, that faith hopes through 
repentance, and fear through faith ; and patience and practice 
in these along with learning terminate in love, which is per- 
fected by knowledge ? But that is necessarily to be noticed, 
that the Divine alone is to be regarded as naturally wise. 
Therefore also wisdom, which has taught the truth, is the power 
of God ; and in it the perfection of knowledge is embraced. 
The philosopher loves and likes the truth, being now con- 
sidered as a friend, on account of his love, from his being a 
true servant. ' The bemnnina; of knowledge is wondering at 
objects, as Plato says in his Thecctetus ; and Matthew ex- 
horting in the Traditions, says, “ Wonder at what is before 
you ; ” laying this down first as the foundation of further 
knowledge. So also in the Gospel to the Hebrews it is 
written, “ He that wonders shall reign, and he that has 
reigned shall rest.” It is impossible, therefore, for an ignorant 
1 Hernias. 2 Rom. ii. 14. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

29 

man, while he remains ignorant, to philosophize, not having 
apprehended the idea of wisdom ; since philosophy is an effort 
to grasp that which truly is, and the studies that conduce 
thereto. And it is not the rendering of one 1 accomplished 
in good habits of conduct, but the knowing how we are to 
use and act and labour, according as one is assimilated to 
God. I mean God the Saviour, by serving the God of the 
universe through the High Priest, the Word, by whom what 
is in truth good and right is beheld. Piety is conduct suit- 
able and corresponding to God. 

CHAPTER X. 

TO WHAT THE PHILOSOPHER APPLIES HIMSELF. 

These three things, therefore, our philosopher attaches him- 
self to : first, speculation; second, the performance of the pre- 
cepts ; third, the forming of good men ; — which, concurring, 
form the Gnostic. Whichever of these is wanting, the ele- 
ments of knowledge limp. Whence the Scripture divinely 
says, “ And the Lord spake to Moses, saying, Speak to the 
children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, I am the Lord 
your God. According to the customs of the land of Egypt, 
in which ye have dwelt, ye shall not do ; and according to the 
customs of Canaan, into which I bring you, ye shall not do ; 
and in their usages ye shall not walk. Ye shall perform my 
judgments, and keep my precepts, and walk in them : I am the 
Lord your God. And ye shall keep all my commandments, 
and do them. He that doeth them shall live in them. I am 
the Lord your God.” 2 Whether, then, Egypt and the land 
of Canaan be the symbol of the world and of deceit, or of 
sufferings and afflictions ; the oracle shows us what must be 
abstained from, and what, being divine and not worldly, must 
be observed. And when it is said, “ The man that doeth 
them shall live in them,” 3 it declares both the correction 

1 This clause is hopelessly corrupt : the text is utterly unintelligible, 
and the emendation of Sylburgius is adopted in the translation. 

2 Lev. xviii. 1-5. 3 Gal. iii. 12. 

30 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

of the Hebrews themselves, and the training and advance- 
ment of us who are nigh : 1 it declares at once their life and 
ours. F or u those who were dead in sins are quickened 
together with Christ ,” 2 by our covenant. For Scripture, by 
the frequent reiteration of the expression, “ I am the Lord 
your God,” shames in such a way as most powerfully to 
dissuade, by teaching us to follow God who gave the com- 
mandments, and gently admonishes us to seek God and 
endeavour to know Him as far as possible ; which is the 
highest speculation, that which scans the greatest mysteries, 
the real knowledge, that which becomes irrefragable by rea- 
son. This alone is the knowledge of wisdom, from which 
rectitude of conduct is never disjoined. 

CHAPTER XT. 

THE KNOWLEDGE WHTCH COMES THROUGH FAITH THE 
SUREST OF ALL. 

But the knowledge of those who think themselves wise, 
whether the barbarian sects or the philosophers among the 
Greeks, according to the apostle, u puffeth up.” 3 But that 
knowledge, which is the scientific demonstration of what is de- 
livered according to the true philosophy, is founded on faith. 
Now, we may say that it is that process of reason which, 
from what is admitted, procures faith in what is disputed. 
Now, faith being twofold — the faith of knowledge and that 
of opinion — nothing prevents us from calling demonstration 
twofold, the one resting on knowledge, the other on opinion ; 
since also knowledge and foreknowledge are designated as two- 
fold, that which is essentially accurate, that which is defective. 
And is not the demonstration, which we possess, that alone 
which is true, as being supplied out of the divine Scriptures, 
the sacred writings, and out of the u God-taught wisdom,” 
according to the apostle ? Learning, then, is also obedience 

1 “ Them that are far off, and them that arc nigh” (Eph. ii. 13). 

2 Eph. ii. 5. 3 1 Cor. viii. 1. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

31 

to the commandments, which is faith in God. And faith 
is a power of God, being the strength of the truth. For 
example, it is said, “ If ye have faith as a grain of mustard, 
ye shall remove the mountain.” 1 And again, “ Accord- 
ing to thy faith let it be to thee .” 2 And one is cured, re- 
ceiving healing by faith ; and the dead is raised up in 
consequence of the power of one believing that he would be 
raised. The demonstration, however, which rests on opinion 
is human, and is the result of rhetorical arguments or 
dialectic syllogisms. For the highest demonstration, to 
which we have alluded, produces intelligent faith by the 
adducing and opening up of the 'Scriptures to the souls of 
those who desire to learn ; the result of which is knowledge 
(gnosis). For if what is adduced in order to prove the point 
at issue is assumed to be true, as being divine and prophetic, 
manifestly the conclusion arrived at by inference from it 
will consequently be inferred truly ; and the legitimate result 
of the demonstration will be knowledge. When, then, the 
memorial of the celestial and divine food w r as commanded 
to be consecrated in the golden pot, it was said, “ The omer 
was the tenth of the three measures.” 3 For in ourselves, 
by the three measures are indicated three criteria; sensa- 
tion of objects of sense, speech, — of spoken names and words, 
and the mind, — of intellectual objects. The Gnostic, there- 
fore, will abstain from -errors in speech, and thought, and 
sensation, and action, having heard “ that he that looks so 
as to lust hath committed adultery ; ” 4 and reflecting that 
“blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God ;” 5 and 
knowing this, “ that not what enters into the mouth de- 
fileth, but that it is what cometh forth by the mouth that 
defileth the man. For out of the heart proceed thoughts.” G 
This, as I think, is the true and just measure according to 
God, by which things capable of measurement are measured, 
the decad which is comprehensive of man ; which summarily 
the three above-mentioned measures pointed out. There are 

1 Matt. xvii. 20. 2 Matt. ix. 29. 

3 Ex. xvi. 36, Septuagint ; “ the tenth part of an eplmh,” A.V. 

4 Matt. v. 28. 3 Matt. v. 8. 6 Matt. xv. 11, 19. 

32 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

body and soul, the five senses, speech, the power of reproduc- 
tion — the intellectual or the spiritual faculty, or whatever 
you choose to call it. And we must, in a word, ascending 
above all the others, stop at the mind ; as also certainly in 
the universe overleaping the nine divisions, the first consist- 
ing of the four elements put in one place for equal inter- 
change ; and then the seven wandering stars and the one 
that wanders not, the ninth, to the perfect number, which is 
above the nine , 1 and the tenth division, we must reach to 
the knowledge of God, to speak briefly, desiring the Maker 
after the creation. Wherefore the tithes both of the ephah 
and of the sacrifices were presented to God ; and the paschal 
feast began with the tenth day, being the transition from all 
trouble, and from all objects of sense. 

The Gnostic is therefore fixed by faith ; but the man who 
thinks himself wise touches not what pertains to the truth, 
moved as he is by unstable and wavering impulses. It is 
therefore reasonably written, “ Cain went forth from the face 
of God, and dwelt in the land of Naid, over against Eden.” 
Now Naid is interpreted commotion , and Eden delight ; and 
Faith, and Knowledge, and Peace are delight, from which he 
that has disobeyed is cast out. But he that is wise in his own 
eyes will not so much as listen to the beginning of the divine 
commandments ; but, as if his own teacher, throwing off the 
reins, plunges voluntarily into a billowy commotion, sinking 
down to mortal and created things from the uncreated know- 
ledge, holding various opinions at various times. u Those 
who have no guidance fall like leaves .” 2 

Reason, the governing principle, remaining unmoved and 
guiding the soul, is called its pilot. For access to the Im- 
mutable is obtained by a truly immutable means. Thus 
Abraham was stationed before the Lord, and approaching 
spoke . 3 And to Moses it is said, u But do thou stand there 

1 The text here reads 6iorj, arising in all probability from the tran- 
scriber mistaking the numeral 6 for the above. 

2 Prov. xi. 14, Septuagint; “Where no counsel is, the people fall,” 
A.Y. 

3 Gen. xviii. 22, 23. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

33 

with me.” 1 And the followers of Simon wish to be assimi- 
lated in manners to the standing form which they adore. 
Faith, therefore, and the knowledge of the truth, render 
the soul, which makes them its choice, always uniform and 
equable. For congenial to the man of falsehood is shifting, 
and change, and turning away, as to the Gnostic are calmness, 
and rest, and peace. As, then, philosophy has been brought 
into evil repute by pride and self-conceit, so also gnosis by 
false gnosis called by the same name ; of which the apostle 
writing says, u O Timothy, keep that which is committed 
to thy trust, avoiding the profane and vain babblings and 
oppositions of science (gnosis) falsely so called ; which some 
professing, have erred concerning the faith.” 2 

Convicted by this utterance, the heretics reject the Epistles 
to Timothy. Well, then, if the Lord is the truth, and wis- 
dom, and power of God, as in truth He is, it is shown that 
the real Gnostic is he that knows Him, and His Father by 
Him. For his sentiments are the same with him who said, 
u The lips of the righteous know high things .” 3 

CHAPTER XII. 

TWOFOLD FAITIT. 

Faitii as also Time being double, we shall find virtues in 
pairs both dwelling together. For memory is related to past 
time, hope to future. We believe that what is past did, and 
that what is future will take place. And, on the other hand, 
we love, persuaded by faith that the past was as it was, and by 
hope expecting the future. For in everything love attends the 
Gnostic, who knows one God. u And, behold, all things which 
He created were very good .” 4 He both knows and admires. 
Godliness adds length of life ; and the fear of the Lord adds 
days. As, then, the days are a portion of life in its progress, 
so also fear is the beginning of love, becoming by develop- 

. 1 Ex. xxxiv. 2. 2 1 Tim. vi. 20, 21. 

3 Prov. x. 21, Septuagint ; “ feed many,” A.Y. 

4 Gen. i. 31. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

C 

34 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

ment faith, then love. But it is not as I fear and hate a 
wild beast (since fear is twofold) that I fear the father, whom 
I fear and love at once. Again, fearing lest I be punished, 
I love myself in assuming fear. He who fears to offend his 
father, loves himself. Blessed then is he who is found 
possessed of faith, being, as he is, composed of love and fear. 
And faith is power in order to salvation, and strength to 
eternal life. Again, prophecy is foreknowledge ; and know- 
ledge the understanding of prophecy ; being the knowledge of 
those things known before by the Lord who reveals all things. 

The knowledge, then, of those things which have been 
predicted shows a threefold result, — either one that has 
happened long ago, or exists now, or about to be. Then the 
extremes 1 either of what is accomplished or of what is hoped 
for fall under faith ; and the present action furnishes per- 
suasive arguments for the confirmation of both the extremes. 
Bor if, prophecy being one, one part is accomplishing and 
another is fulfilled ; hence the truth, both what is hoped for 
and what is past is confirmed. For it was first present ; then 
it became past to us ; so that the belief of what is past is the 
apprehension of a past event, and the hope which is future 
the apprehension of a future event. 

And not only the Platonists, but the Stoics, say that assent 
is in our own power. All opinion then, and judgment, and 
supposition, and knowledge, by which we live and have per- 
petual intercourse with the human race, is an assent ; which is 
nothing else than faith. And unbelief being defection from 
faith, shows both assent and faith to be possessed of pow r er ; 
for non-existence cannot be called privation. And if you 
consider the truth, you will find man naturally misled so as 
to give assent to what is false, though possessing the resources 
necessary for belief in the truth. “ The virtue, then, that 
encloses the church in its grasp,” as the Shepherd says , 2 “ is 
Faith, by which the elect of God are saved ; and that which 
acts the man is Self-restraint. And these are followed by 
Simplicity, Knowledge, Innocence, Decorum, Love,” and all 

1 i.e. Past and Future, between which lies the Present. 

2 Pastor of Hennas , book i. Vision iii. chap. viii. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

35 

these are the daughters of Faith. And again, “Faith leads 
the way, fear upbuilds, and love perfects.” Accordingly he 1 
says, the Lord is to be feared in order to edification, but not 
the devil to destruction. And again, the works of the Lord 
— that is, His commandments — are to be loved and done ; but 
the works of the devil are to be dreaded and not done. For 
the fear of God trains and restores to love ; but the fear of 
the works of the devil has hatred dwelling along with it. The 
same also says “that repentance is high intelligence. For he 
that repents of what he did, no longer does or says as he did. 

. But by torturing himself for his sins, he benefits his soul. 
Forgiveness of sins is therefore different from repentance ; 
but both show what is in our power.” 

CHAPTER XIII. 

ON FIRST AND SECOND REPENTANCE. 

PIe, then, who has received the forgiveness of sins ought to 
sin no more. For, in addition to the first and only repentance 
from sins (this is from the previous sins in the first and heathen 
life — I mean that in ignorance), there is forthwith proposed to 
those who have been called, the repentance which cleanses the 
seat of the soul from transgressions, that faith may be estab- 
lished. And the Lord, knowing the heart, and foreknowing 
the future, foresaw both the fickleness of man and the craft 
and subtlety of the devil from the first, from the beginning ; 
how that, envying man for the forgiveness of sins, he would 
present to the servants of God certain causes of sins ; skil- 
fully working mischief, that they might fall together with 
himself. Accordingly, being very merciful, He has vouch- 
safed, in the case of those who, though in faith, fall into any 
transgression, a second repentance; so that should any one 
be tempted after his calling, overcome by force and fraud, he 
may receive still a repentance not to be repented of. “ For 
if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge 

1 See Pastor of Hermas, book ii. Commandt. iv. cli. ii., for the sense of 
this passage. 

36 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

of the truth, there l'emaineth no more a sacrifice for sins, but 
a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indigna- 
tion, which shall devour the adversaries.” 1 But continual and 
successive repentings for sins differ nothing from the case of 
those who have not believed at all, except only in their con- 
sciousness that they do sin. And I know not which of the two 
is worst, whether the case of a man who sins knowingly, or of 
one who, after having repented of his sins, transgresses again. 
For in the process of proof sin appears on each side, — the sin 
which in its commission is condemned by the worker of the 
iniquity, and that of the man who, foreseeing what is about 
to be done, yet puts his hand to it as a wickedness. And he 
who perchance gratifies himself in anger and pleasure, grati- 
fies himself in he knows what; and he who, repenting of 
that in which he gratified himself, by rushing again into 
pleasure, is near neighbour to him who has sinned wilfully at 
first. For one, who does again that of which he has repented, 
and condemning what he does, performs it willingly. 

He, then, who from among the Gentiles and from that old 
life has betaken himself to faith, has obtained forgiveness of 
sins once. But he who has sinned after this, on his repentance, 
though he obtain pardon, ought to fear, as one no longer washed 
to the forgiveness of sins. For not only must the idols which 
he formerly held as gods, but the works also of his former 
life, be abandoned by him who has been “born again, not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh,” 2 but in the Spirit; which 
consists in repenting by not giving way to the same fault. 
For frequent repentance and readiness to change easily from 
want of training, is the practice of sin again. The frequent 
asking of forgiveness, then, for those things in which we often 
transgress, is the semblance of repentance, not repentance 
itself. “ But the righteousness of the blameless cuts straight 
paths,” 3 says the Scripture. And again, “The righteousness 
of the innocent will make his way right.” 4 Nay, “as a 
father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear 
Him.” 5 David writes, “ They who sow,” then, “ in tears, shall 

1 Heb. x. 26, 27. 2 John i. 13. 3 Prov. xi. 5. 

4 Prov. xiii. 6. 6 Ps. ciii. 13. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

37 

reap in joy ; ” 1 those, namely, who confess in penitence. “For 
blessed are all those that fear the Lord.” 2 You see the cor- 
responding blessing in the gospel. “Fear not,” it is said, 
“ when a man is enriched, and when the glory of his house is 
increased : because when he dieth he shall leave all, and his 
glory shall not descend after him.” 3 “ But I in Thy mercy 

will enter into Thy house. I will worship toward Thy holy 
temple, in Thy fear : Lord, lead me in Thy righteousness.” 4 
Appetite is then the movement of the mind to or from some- 
thing. 5 Passion is an excessive appetite exceeding the mea- 
sures of x’eason, or appetite unbridled and disobedient to the 
word. Passions, then, are a perturbation of the soul contrary 
to nature, in disobedience. to reason. But revolt and dis- 
traction and disobedience are in our own power, as obedience 
is in our power. Wherefore voluntary actions are judged. 
But should one examine each one of the passions, he will find 
them irrational impulses. 

CHAPTER XI Y. 

HOW A THING MAY BE INVOLUNTARY. 

What is involuntary is not matter for judgment. But this 
is twofold, — what is done in ignorance, and what is done 
through necessity. For how will you judge concerning those 
who are said to sin in involuntary modes % For either one 
knew not himself, as Cleomenes and Athamas, who were mad ; 
or the thing which he does, as ^Eschylus, who divulged the 
mysteries on the stage, who, being tried in the Areopagus, was 
absolved on his showing that he had not been initiated. Or 
one knows not what is done, as he who has let off his an- 
tagonist, and slain his domestic instead of his enemy ; or that 
by which it is done, as he who, in exercising with spears 
having buttons on them, has killed some one in consequence 

1 Ps. cxxvi. 5. 2 Ps. cxxviii. 1. 

3 Ps. xlLx. 16, 17. < Ps. v. 7, 8. 

5 Adopting the emendation, oppivi ptsv ovv (popa,. 

33 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ir. 

of the spear throwing off the button ; or knows not the 
manner how, as he who has killed his antagonist in the 
stadium, for it was not for his death but for victory that he 
contended ; or knows not the reason why it is done, as the 
physician gave a salutary antidote and killed, for it was not 
for this purpose that he gave it, but to save. The law 
at that time punished him who had killed involuntarily, as 
e.g. him who was subject involuntarily to gonorrhoea, but not 4~ 
equally with him who did so voluntarily. Although he also 
shall be punished as for a voluntary action, if one transfer the 
affection to the truth. For, in reality, he that cannot contain 
the generative word is to be punished ; for this is an irrational 
passion of the soul approaching garrulity. “The faithful man 
chooses to conceal things in his spirit.” 1 Things, then, that 
depend on choice are subjects for judgment. “For the Lord 
searcheth the hearts and reins.” 2 “ And he that looketh so 

as to lust” 3 is judged. Wherefore it is said, “Thou shalt 
not lust.” 4 And “ this people honoureth me with their lips,” 
it is said, “but their heart is far from me.” 5 For God 
has respect to the very thought, since Lot’s wife, who had 
merely voluntarily turned towards worldly wickedness, He 
left a senseless mass, rendering her a pillar of salt, and fixed 
her so that she advanced no further, not as a stupid aiid 
useless image, but to season and salt him who has the power 
of spiritual perception. 

CHAPTEE XY. 

ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF VOLUNTARY ACTIONS, AND 
THE SINS THENCE PROCEEDING. 

What is voluntary is either what is by desire, or what is by 
choice, or what is of intention. Closely allied to each other 
are these things — sin, mistake, crime. It is sin, for example, 
to live luxuriously and licentiously ; a misfortune, to wound 

1 Prov. xi. 13. 2 Ps. vii. 9. 3 Matt. v. 28. 

4 Ex. xx. 17. 5 Isa. xxix. 13 ; Matt. xv. 8 ; Mark vii. 6. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

39 

one’s friend in ignorance, taking him for an enemy; and 
crime, to violate graves or commit sacrilege. Sinning arises 
from being unable to determine what ought to be done, or 
being unable to do it; as doubtless one falls into a ditch 
either through not knowing, or through inability to leap across 
through feebleness of body. But application to the training 
of ourselves, and subjection to the commandments, is in our 
own power; with which if we will have nothing to do, by 
abandoning ourselves wholly to lust, we shall sin, nay rather, 
wrong our own soul. For the noted Laius says in the 
tragedy : 

“ None of these things of which you admonish me have escaped me ; 

But notwithstanding that I am in my senses, Nature compels me 

i.e. his abandoning himself to passion. Medea, too, herself 
cries on the stage : 

“ And I am aware what evils I am to perpetrate, 

But passion is stronger than my resolutions.” 1 

Further, not even Ajax is silent; but, when about to kill 
himself, cries : 

“ No pain gnaws the soul of a free man like dishonour. 

Thus do I suffer ; and the deep stain of calamity 

Ever stirs me from the depths, agitated 

By the bitter stings of rage.” 2 

Anger made these the subjects of tragedy, and lust made 
ten thousand others — Phaedra, Anthia, Eriphyle, 

“ Who took the precious gold for her dear husband.” 

For another play represents Thrasonides of the comic drama 
as saying : 

“ A -worthless wench made me her slave.” 

Mistake is a sin contrary to calculation ; and voluntary 

1 Medea , v. 1078. 

2 These lines, which are not found in the Ajax of Sophocles, have been 
amended by various hands. Instead of avpityopol act, we have ventured to 
read cvpityopci;, — jcjjTuV av/x<f>opsig being a Sophoclean phrase, and ovfttyo- 
povaroe. being unsuitable. 

40 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

sin is crime (uZikIo) ; and crime is voluntary wickedness. Sin, 
then, is on my part voluntary. Wherefore says the apostle, 
u Sin shall not have dominion over you ; for ye are not under 
the law, hut under grace .” 1 Addressing those who have 
believed, he says, “ For by His stripes we were healed .” 2 
Mistake is the involuntary action -of another towards me, 
while a crime (aZucia) alone is voluntary, whether my act or 
another’s. These differences of sins are alluded to by the 
Psalmist, when he calls those blessed whose iniquities (avofu'a<;) 
God hath blotted out, and whose sins (afiapTiaC) He hath 
covered. Others He does not impute, and the rest He for- 
gives. For it is written, “ Blessed are they whose iniquities are 
forgiven, whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom 
the Lord will not impute sin, and in whose mouth there is no 
fraud .” 3 This blessedness came on those who had been chosen 
by God through Jesus Christ our Lord. For “ love hides 
the multitude of sins .” 4 And they are blotted out by Him 
“ who desireth the repentance rather than the death of a 
sinner .” 5 And those are not reckoned that are not the 
effect of choice ; “ for he who has lusted has already com- 
mitted adultery,” 6 it is said. And the illuminating Word 
forgives sins : “ And in that time, saith the Lord, they 
shall seek for the iniquity of Israel, and it shall not exist ; 
and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found .” 7 
“For who is like me? and who shall stand before my 
face ? ” 8 You see the one God declared good, rendering 
according to desert, and forgiving sins. John, too, mani- 
festly teaches the differences of sins, in his larger epistle, 
in these words : “ If any man see his brother sin a sin that is 
not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life : for 
these that sin not unto death,” he says. For “ there is a sin 
unto death : I do not say that one is to pray for it. All 
unrighteousness is sin ; and there is a sin not unto death.” 9 

1 Rom. iv. 7, 8. 2 1 Pet. ii. 24. 

3 Ps. xxxii. 1, 2 ; Rom. iv. 7, 8. 4 1 Pet. iv. 8. 

3 Ezek. xxxiii. 11. 6 Matt. v. 28. 

7 Jer. iv. 20. 8 Jer. xlix. 19. 

0 1 John v. 1G, 17. 

Book ii.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

41 

David, too, and Moses before David, show the knowledge of 
the three precepts in the following words: “Blessed is the man 
who walks not in the counsel of the ungodly as the fishes 
go down to the depths in darkness ; for those which have not 
scales, which Moses prohibits touching, feed at the bottom of 
the sea. “Nor standeth in the way of sinners,” as those who, 
while appearing to fear the Lord, commit sin, like the sow, 
for when hungry it cries, and when full knows not its owner. 
“ Nor sitteth in the chair of pestilences,” as birds ready for 
prey. And Moses enjoined not to eat the sow, nor the eagle, 
nor the hawk, nor the raven, nor any fish without scales. 
So far Barnabas . 1 And I heard one skilled in such matters 
say that “the counsel of the ungodly” was the heathen, and 
“the way of sinners” the Jewish persuasion, and explain 
“ the chair of pestilence ” of heresies. And another said, with 
more propriety, that the first blessing was assigned to those 
who had not followed wicked sentiments which revolt from 
God ; the second to those who do not remain in the wide and 
broad road, whether they be those who have been brought 
up in the law, or Gentiles who have repented. And “the 
chair of pestilences” will be the theatres and tribunals, or 
rather the compliance with wicked and deadly powers, and 
complicity with their deeds. “ But his delight is in the law 
of the Lord .” 2 Peter in his Preaching called the Lord, Law 
and Logos. The legislator seems to teach differently the 
interpretation of the three forms of sin — understanding by 
the mute fishes sins of word, for there are times in which 
silence is better than speech , for silence has a safe recompense ; 
sins of deed, by the rapacious and carnivorous birds. The 
sow delights in dirt and dung ; and we ought not to have 
“ a conscience ” that is “ defiled.” 3 : 

Justly, therefore, the prophet says, “ The ungodly are not 
so : but as the chaff which the wind driveth away from the 
face of the earth. Wherefore the ungodlv shall not stand 
in the judgment ” i (being already condemned, for “ he that 
believeth not is condemned already”'’), “nor sinners in the 

1 Ps. i. 1 (quoted from Barnabas, with some additions and omissions). 

2 Ps. i. 2. 3 1 Cor. viii. 7. 4 Ps. i. 4, 5. 5 John iii. 8. 

42 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book n. 

counsel of the righteous,” ’ inasmuch as they are already con- 
demned, so as not to he united to those that have lived with- 
out stumbling. “ For the Lord knoweth the way of the 
righteous ; and the way of the ungodly shall perish.” 1 

Again, the Lord clearly shows sins and transgressions to be 
in our own power, by prescribing modes of cure corresponding 
to the maladies ; showing His wish that we should be cor- 
rected by the shepherds, in Ezekiel ; blaming, I am of opinion, 
some of them for not keeping the commandments. “ That 
which was enfeebled ye have not strengthened,” and so forth, 
down to, “ and there was none to search out or turn away.” 2 

For “great is the joy before the Father when one sinner 
is saved,” 3 saith the Lord. So Abraham was much to be 
praised, because “ he walked as the Lord spake to him.” 
Drawing from this instance, one of the wise men among the 
Greeks uttered the maxim, “Follow God.” 4 “The godly,” 
says Esaias, “ framed wise counsels.” 5 Now counsel is seek- 
ing for the right way of acting in present circumstances, and 
good counsel is wisdom in our counsels. And what ? Does 
not God, after the pardon bestowed on Cain, suitably not 
long after introduce Enoch, who had repented? 6 showing that 
it is the nature of repentance to produce pardon ; but pardon 
does not consist in remission, but in remedy. An instance 
of the same is the making of the calf by the people before 
Aaron. Thence one of the wise men among the Greeks 
uttered the maxim, “ Pardon is better than punishment ;” as 
also, “ Become surety, and mischief is at hand,” is derived 
from the utterance of Solomon which says, “ My son, if thou 
become surety for thy friend, thou wilt give thine hand to 
thy enemy ; for a man’s own lips are a strong snare to him, 
and he is taken in the words of his own mouth.” 7 And the 

1 Ps. i. 5, 6. 2 Ezek. xxxiv. 4-6. 

3 These words are not in Scripture, but the substance of them is con- 

tained in Luke xv. 7, 10. 

4 One of the precepts of the seven wise men. 5 Isa. xxxii. 8, Sept. 

6 Philo explains Enoch’s translation allegorically, as denoting reforma- 

tion or repentance. 

7 Prov. vi. 1, 2. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

43 

saying, u Know thyself,” has been taken rather more mysti- 
cally from this, “ Thou hast seen thy brother, thou hast seen 
thy God.” 1 Thus also, u Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself ; ” for it is 
said, “ On these commandments the law and the prophets 
hang and are suspended .” 2 With these also agree the 
following : u These things have I spoken to you, that my 
joy might be fulfilled : and this is my commandment, That 
ye love one another, as I have loved you .” 3 “ For the Lord 

is merciful and pitiful; and gracious 4 is the Lord to all.” 5 
“ Know thyself ” is more clearly and often expressed by Moses, 
when he enjoins, u Take heed to thyself.” 0 u By alms then, 
and acts of faith, sins are purged.” 7 “ And by the fear of 

the Lord each one departs from evil.” 8 u And the fear of 
the Lord is instruction and wisdom.” 9 

CHAPTER XVI. 

HOW WE ARE TO EXPLAIN THE PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE 
WHICH ASCRIBE TO GOD HUMAN AFFECTIONS. 

Here again arise the cavillers, who say that joy and pain are 
passions of the soul : for they define joy as a rational elevation 
and exultation, as rejoicing on account of what is good ; and 
pity as pain for one who suffers undeservedly ; and that such 
affections are moods and passions of the soul. But we, as 
would appear, do not cease in such matters to understand 
the Scriptures carnally ; and starting from our own affec- 
tions, interpret the will of the impassible Deity similarly to 
our perturbations ; and as we are capable of hearing ; so, 

1 Quoted as if in Scripture, but not found there. The allusion may 
be, as is conjectured, to what God said to Moses respecting him and 
Aaron, to whom he was to be as God ; or to Jacob saying to Esau, “ I 
have seen thy face as it were the face of God.” 

2 Luke x. 27, etc. 3 John xv. 11, 12. 

4 -/cp'/idrii instead of yoiaro; which is in the text. 5 Ps. cii. 8, cx. 4. 

c Ex. x. 28, xxxiv. 12 ; Deut. iv. 9. 7 Prob. Ecclus. iii. 29. 

8 Prov. iii. 7. 9 Ecclus. i. 27. 

44 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ir. 

supposing the same to be the case with the Omnipotent, 
err impiously. For the Divine Being cannot be declared 
as it exists : but as we who are fettered in the flesh were 
able to listen, so the prophets spake to us ; the Lord savingly 
accommodating Himself to the weakness of men. Since, 
then, it is the will of God that he, who is obedient to the 
commands and repents of his sins should be saved, and we 
rejoice on account of our salvation, the Lord, speaking by 
the prophets, appropriated our joy to Himself ; as speaking 
lovingly in the Gospel He says, u I was hungry, and ye gave 
me to eat : I was thirsty, and ye gave me to drink. For 
inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these, ye did it 
to me.” 1 As, then, He is nourished, though not personally, 
by the nourishing of one whom He wishes nourished ; so 
He rejoices, without suffering change, by reason of him who 
has repented being in joy, as He wished. And since God 
pities richly, being good, and giving commands by the law 
and the prophets, and more nearly still by the appearance 
of his Son, saving and pitying, as was said, those who have 
found mercy ; and properly the greater pities the less ; and 
a man cannot be greater than man, being by nature man ; 
but God in everything is greater than man ; if, then, the 
greater pities the less, it is God alone that will pity us. For 
a man is made to communicate by righteousness, and bestows 
what he received from God, in consequence of his natural 
benevolence and relation, and the commands which he obeys. 
But God has no natural relation to us, as the authors of the 
heresies will have it ; neither on the supposition of His 
having made us of nothing, nor on that of having formed us 
from matter ; since the former did not exist at all, and the 
latter is totally distinct from God, unless we shall dare to say 
that we are a part of Him, and of the same essence as God. 
And I know not how one, who knows God, can bear to hear 
this when he looks to our life, and sees in what evils we are 
involved. For thus it would turn out, which it were impiety 
to utter, that God sinned in [certain] portions, if the portions 
are parts of the whole and complementary of the whole ; and 

1 Matt. xxv. 35, 40. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

45 

if not complementary, neither can they be parts. But God 
being by nature rich in pity, in consequence of His own good- 
ness, cares for us, though neither portions of Himself, nor 
by nature His children. And this is the greatest proof of 
the goodness of God : that such being our relation to Him, 
and being by nature wholly estranged, He nevertheless cares 
for us. For the affection in animals to their progeny is 
natural, and the friendship of kindred minds is the result of 
intimacy. But the mercy of God is rich toward us, who are 
in no respect related to Him ; I say either in our essence or 
nature, or in the peculiar energy of our essence, but only in 
our being the work of His will. And him who willingly, 
with discipline and teaching, accepts the knowledge of the 
truth, He calls to adoption, which is the greatest advancement 
of all. “ Transgressions catch a man ; and in the cords of 
his own sins each one is bound.” 1 And God is without blame. 
And in reality, a blessed is the man who feareth alway through 
piety.” 2 

CHAPTER XVII. 

ON THE VARIOUS KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE. 

As, then, Knowledge (eiruTTruirj) is an intellectual state, from 
which results the act of knowing, and becomes apprehension 
irrefragable by reason ; so also ignorance is a receding im- 
pression, which can be dislodged by reason. And that which 
is overthrown as well as that which is elaborated by reason, 
is in our power. Akin to Knowledge is experience , cognition 
(d'S?j<7i?), Comprehension ( avvecns ), perception, and Science. 
Cognition is the knowledge of universals by species ; 

and Experience is comprehensive knowledge, which investi- 
gates the nature of each thing. Perception (vorjcrcs) is the 
knowledge of intellectual objects ; and Comprehension (crvve- 
o-£?) is the knowledge of what is compared, or a comparison 
that cannot be annulled, or the faculty of comparing the 
1 Prov. v. 22. 2 Prov. xxviii. 14. 

46 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

objects with which Judgment and Knowledge are occupied, 
both of one and each and all that goes to make up one reason. 
And Science (yvoocn?) is the knowledge of the thing in itself, 
or the knowledge which harmonizes with what takes place. 
Truth is the knowledge of the true ; and the mental habit of 
truth is the knowledge of the things which are true. Now 
knowledge is constituted by the reason, and cannot be over- 
thrown by another reason . 1 What we do not, we do not 
either from not being able, or not being willing — or both. 
Accordingly we don’t fly, since w r e neither can nor wish ; w T e 
do not swim at present, for example, since we can indeed, 
but do not choose ; and we are not as the Lord, since we 
wish, but cannot be : u for no disciple is above his master, 
and it is sufficient if we be as the master :” 2 not in essence 
(for it is impossible for that, which is by adoption, to be 
equal in substance to that, which is by nature) ; but [we are 
as Him] only in our 3 having been made immortal, and our 
being conversant with the contemplation of realities, and 
beholding the Father through what belongs to Him. 

Therefore volition takes the precedence of all ; for the 
intellectual powers are ministers of the Will. “ Will,” it is 
said, “ and thou shalt be able .” 4 And in the Gnostic, Will, 
Judgment, and Exertion are identical. For if the determi- 
nations are the same, the opinions and judgments will be the 
same too ; so that both his words, and life, and conduct, 
are conformable to rule. te And a right heart seeketh know- 
ledge, and heareth it.” u God taught me wisdom, and I 
knew the knowledge of the holy.” 5 

1 bjTo.vOoC' yvZiaiv 7ro7^v7rpocyf^oi/sl appears in the text, which, with 
great probability, is supposed to be a marginal note which got into the 
text, the indicative being substituted for the imper. 

2 Matt. x. 24, 25 ; Luke vi. 40. 

3 Adopting Sylburgius 5 conjecture of tm 5s for to 5s. 

4 Perhaps in allusion to the leper’s words to Christ, “ If Thou wilt, 
Thou canst make me clean ” (Mark i. 40). 

5 Prov. xxx. 3. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

47 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE MOSAIC LAW THE FOUNTAIN OF ALL ETHICS, AND THE 
SOURCE FROM WHICH THE GREEKS DREW THEIRS. 

It is then clear also that all the other virtues, delineated in 
Moses, supplied the Greeks with the rudiments of the ■whole 
department of morals. I mean valour, and temperance, 
and wisdom, and justice, and endurance, and patience, and 
decorum, and self-restraint ; and in addition to these, piety. 

But it is clear to every one that piety, which teaches 
to worship and honour, is the highest and oldest cause ; 
and the law itself exhibits justice, and teaches wisdom, by 
abstinence from sensible images, and by inviting to the 
Maker and Father of the universe. And from this senti- 
ment, as from a fountain, all intelligencee increases. “For 
the sacrifices of the wicked are abomination to the Lord ; 
but the prayers of the upright are acceptable before Him,” 1 
since “ righteousness is more acceptable before God than 
sacrifice.” Such also as the following we find in Isaiah : 
“ To what purpose to me is the multitude of your sacrifices ? 
saith the Lord;” and the whole section. 2 “Break every 
bond of wickedness ; for this is the sacrifice that is accept- 
able to the Lord, a contrite heart that seeks its Maker.” 3 
“Deceitful balances are abomination before God; but a 
just balance is acceptable to Him.” 4 Thence Pythagoras 
exhorts “ not to step over the balance ; ” and the profes- 
sion of heresies is called deceitful righteousness ; and “ the 
tongue of the unjust shall be destroyed, but the mouth of 
the righteous droppeth wisdom.” 0 “For they call the wise 
and prudent worthless.” 6 But it were tedious to adduce 
testimonies respecting these virtues, since the whole Scrip- 
ture celebrates them. Since, then, they define manliness 

1 Prov. xv. 8. 2 Isa. i. 11, etc. 3 Isa. lviii. 6. 

4 Prov. xi. 1. 5 Prov. x. 31. 

6 Prov. xvi. 21, misquoted, or the text is corrupt ; “ The wise in heart 

shall he called prudent,” A.V. 

48 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

to be knowledge 1 of tilings formidable, and not formid- 
able, and what is intermediate ; and temperance to be a 
state of mind which by choosing and avoiding preserves the 
judgments of wisdom; and conjoined with manliness is 
patience, which is called endurance, the knowledge of what 
is bearable and what is unbearable ; and magnanimity is the 
knowledge which rises superior to circumstances. With 
temperance also is conjoined caution, which is avoidance in 
accoi’dance with reason. And observance of the command- 
ments, which is the innoxious keeping of them, is the attain- 
ment of a secure life. And there is no endurance without 
manliness, nor the exercise of self-restraint without temper- 
ance. And these virtues follow one another ; and with whom 
are the sequences of the virtues, with him is also salvation, 
which is the keeping of the state of well-being. Rightly, 
therefore, in treating of these virtues, we shall inquire into 
them all ; for he that has one virtue gnostically, by reason of 
their accompanying each other, has them all. Self-restraint 
is that quality which does not overstep what appears in ac- 
cordance with right reason. He exercises self-restraint, who 
curbs the impulses that are contrary to right reason, or curbs 
himself so as not to indulge in desires contrary to right 
reason. Temperance, too, is not without manliness; since 
from the commandments spring both wisdom, which follows 
God who enjoins, and that which imitates the divine cha- 
racter, namely righteousness ; in virtue of which, in the 
exercise of self-restraint, we address ourselves in purity to 
piety and the course of conduct thence resulting, in con- 
formity with God ; being assimilated to the Lord as far as 
is possible for us beings mortal in nature. And this is 
being just and holy with wisdom; for the Divinity needs 
nothing and suffers nothing; whence it is not, strictly 
speaking, capable of self-restraint, for it is never subjected 
to perturbation, over which to exercise control ; while our 
nature, being capable of perturbation, needs self-constraint, 
by which disciplining itself to the need of little, it endeavours 

1 For the use of knowledge in this connection, Philo, Sextus Em- 
piricus, and Zeno are quoted. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

49 

to approximate in character to the divine nature. For the 
good man, standing as the boundary between an immortal 
and a mortal nature, has few needs ; having wants in con- 
sequence of his body, and his birth itself, but taught by 
rational self-control to want few things. 

What reason is there in the law’s prohibiting a man from 
“ wearing woman’s clothing ?” 1 Is it not that it would have us 
to be manly, and to be effeminate neither in person and actions, 
nor in thought and word? For it would have the man, that 
devotes himself to the truth, to be masculine both in acts of 
endurance and patience, in life, conduct, word, and discipline 
by night and by day ; even if the necessity were to occur, of 
witnessing by the shedding of his blood. Again, it is said, 
“ If any one who has newly built a house, and has not pre- 
viously inhabited it ; or cultivated a newly-planted vine, and 
not yet partaken of the fruit ; or betrothed a virgin, and not 
yet married her;” 2 — such the humane law orders to be re- 
lieved from military service : from military reasons in the first 
place, lest, bent on their desires, they turn out sluggish in 
war ; for it is those who are untrammelled by passion that 
boldly encounter perils ; and from motives of humanity, 
since, in view of the uncertainties of war, the law reckoned 
it not right that one should not enjoy his own labours, and 
another should, without bestowing pains, receive what be- 
longed to those who had laboured. The law seems also to 
point out manliness of soul, by enacting that he who had 
planted should reap the fruit, and he that built should 
inhabit, and he that had betrothed should marry : for it 
is not vain hopes which it provides for those who labour; 
according to the gnostic word: “For the hope of a good 
man dead or living does not perish ,” 3 says Wisdom; “I 
love them that love me ; and they who seek me shall 
find peace ,” 4 and so forth. What then ? Did not the 
women of the Miaianities, by their beauty, seduce from 

1 Deut. xxxi. 5. 

2 “These words are more tike Philo Judseus, i. 740, than those of 
Moses, Deut. xx. 5-7 .” — Potter. 

3 Prov. x. 7. 4 Prov. xi. 7, viii. 17. 

D 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

50 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book it. 

wisdom into impiety, through licentiousness, the Hebrews 
when making war against them ? For, having seduced them 
from a grave mode of life, and by their beauty ensnared 
them in wanton delights, they made them insane upon idol 
sacrifices and strange women ; and overcome by women and 
by pleasure at once, they revolted from God, and revolted 
from the law. And the whole people was within a little 
of falling under the power of the enemy through female 
stratagem, until, when they were in peril, fear by its admoni- 
tions pulled them back. Then the survivors, valiantly under- 
taking the struggle for piety, got the upper hand of their 
foes. “The beginning, then, of wisdom is piety, and the 
knowledge of holy things is understanding ; and to know 
the law is the characteristic of a good understanding .” 1 
Those, then, who suppose the law to be productive of agi- 
tating fear, are neither good at understanding the law, nor 
have they in reality comprehended it ; for “ the fear of the 
Lord causes life, but he who errs shall be afflicted with 
pangs which knowledge views not .” 2 Accordingly, Bar- 
nabas says mystically, “May God who rule's the universe 
vouchsafe also to you wisdom, and understanding, and 
science, and knowledge of His statutes, and patience. Be 
therefore God-taught, seeking what the Lord seeks from 
you, that He may find you in the day of judgment lying in 
wait for these things.” “ Children of love and peace,” he 
called them gnostically. 

Respecting imparting and communicating, though much 
might be said, let it suffice to remark that the law prohibits 
a brother from taking usury : designating as a brother 
not only him who is born of the same parents, but also 
one of the same race and sentiments, and a participator 
in the same word ; deeming it right not to take usury 
for money, but with open hands and heart to bestow on 
those who need. For God, the author and the dispenser of 
such grace, takes as suitable usury the most precious things 
to be found among men — mildness, gentleness, magnanimity, 
reputation, renown. Do you not regard this command as 
1 Prov. ix. 30. 2 Prov. xix. 23. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

51 

marked by philanthropy ? As also the following, “ To pay 
the wages of the poor daily,” teaches to discharge without 
delay the wages due for service ; for, as I think, the alacrity 
of the poor with reference to the future is paralyzed when he 
has suffered want. Further, it is said, u Let not the creditor 
enter the debtor’s house to take the pledge with violence.” But 
let the former ask it to be brought out, and let not the latter, 
if he have it, hesitate . 1 And in the harvest the owners are 
prohibited from appropriating what falls from the handfuls ; 
as also in reaping [the law] enjoins a part to be left unreaped; 
signally thereby training those who possess to sharing and 
to large-heartedness, by foregoing of their own to those who 
are in want, and thus providing means of subsistence for the 
poor . 2 You see how the law proclaims at once the righteous- 
ness and the goodness of God, who dispenses food to all 
ungrudgingly. And in the vintage it prohibited the grape- 
gatherers from going back again on what had been left, and 
from gathering the fallen grapes; and the same injunctions 
are given to the olive-gatherers.* Besides, the tithes of the 
fruits and of the flocks taught both piety towards the 
Deity, and not covetously to grasp everything, but to com- 
municate gifts of kindness to one’s neighbours. For it 
was from these, I reckon, and from the first-fruits that the 
priests were maintained. We now therefore understand 
that we are instructed in piety, and in liberality, and in 
justice, and in humanity by the law. For does it not com- 
mand the land to be left fallow in the seventh year, and 
bids the poor fearlessly use the fruits that grow by divine 
agency, nature cultivating the ground for behoof of all and 
sundry ? 4 How, then, can it be maintained that the law is 
not humane, and the teacher of righteousness? Again, in 
the fiftieth year, it ordered the same things to be performed as 
in the seventh ; besides restoring to each one liis own land, 
if from any circumstance he had parted with it in the mean- 

1 Deut. xxiv. 10, 11. 

2 Lev. xix. 9, xxiii. 22 ; Deut. xxiv. 19. 

3 Lev. xix. 10 ; Deut. xxiv. 20, 21. 

4 Ex. xxiii. 10, 11 ; Lev. xxv. 2-7. 

52 

TEE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ir. 

time ; setting bounds to the desires of those who covet posses- 
sion, by measuring the period of enjoyment, and choosing that 
those who have paid the penalty of protracted penury should 
not suffer a life-long punishment. “ But alms and acts, of 
faith are -royal guards, and blessing is on the head of him who 
bestows ; and he who pities the poor shall be blessed.” 1 For 
he shows love to one like himself, because of his love to the 
Creator of the human race. The above-mentioned particulars 
have other explanations more natural, both respecting rest and 
the recovery of the inheritance ; but they are not discussed 
at present. 

Now love is conceived in many ways, in the form of 
meekness, of mildness, of patience, of liberality, of freedom 
from envy, of absence of hatred, of forgetfulness of injuries. 
In all it is incapable of being divided or distinguished : its 
nature is to communicate. Again, it is said, “ If you see the 
beast of your relatives, or friends, or, in general, of anybody 
you know, wandering in the wilderness, take it back and re- 
store it ; 2 and if the owner be far away, keep it among your 
own till he return, and restoi’e it.” It teaches a natural com- 
munication, that what is found is to be regarded as a deposit, 
and that we are not to bear malice to an enemy. “ The com- 
mand of the Lord being a fountain of life ” truly, u causeth 
to turn away from the snare of death.” 3 And what ? Does 
it not command us u to love strangers not only as friends and 
relatives, but as ourselves, both in body and soul?” 4 Nay 
more, it honoured the nations, and bears no grudge 5 against 
those who have done ill. Accordingly it is expressly said, 
11 Thou slialt not abhor an Egyptian, for thou wast a so- 
journer in Egypt;” 6 designating by the term Egyptian either 
one of that race, or any one in the world. And enemies, 

1 Prov. xx. 28, xi. 26, xiv. 21. 

2 Quoted from Philo, with slight alterations, giving the sense of Ex. 
xxiii. 4, Deut. xxii. 12, 3. 

3 p r0 v. xiv. 27. * Deut. xxi. 10. 

5 fcvnatavovripsl (equivalent to fivyiaix.ux.i7 in the passage of Philo from 

which Clement is quoting) has been substituted by Sylb. for fuaoarov/ipsi. 

fi Deut. xxiii. 7. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

53 

although drawn up before the walls attempting to take the 
city, are not to be regarded as enemies till they are by the 
voice of the herald summoned to peace . 1 

Further, it forbids intercourse with a female captive so as 
to dishonour her. “ But allow her,” it says, ‘ ; thirty days to 
mourn according to her wish, and changing her clothes, asso- 
ciate with her as vour lawful wife.”* For it regards it not 

w O 

right that intercourse should take place either in wantonness 
or for hire like harlots, but only for the birth of children. 
Do you see humanity combined with continence ? The master 
who has fallen in love with his captive maid it does not allow 
to gratify* his pleasure, but puts a check on his lust by speci- 
f}*ing an interval of time: and further, it cuts off the cap- 
tive’s hair, in order to shame disgraceful love: for if it is reason 

' O 

that induces him to marrv. he will cleave to her even after 
she has become disfigured. Then if one, after satiating his 
lust, does not care to consort any longer with the captive, it 
ordains that it shall not be lawful to sell her, or to have her 
any longer as a servant, but desires her to be freed and released 
from service, lest on the introduction of another wife she bear 
any of the intolerable miseries caused through jealousy. 

AVhat more ? The Lord enjoins to ease and raise up 
the beasts of enemies when labouring beneath their bur- 
dens ; remotely teaching us not to indulge in joy at our 
neighbour’s ills, or exult over our enemies ; in order to teach 
those who are trained in these things to pray for their 
enemies. For He does not allow us either to crrieve at 
our neighbour’s good, or to reap joy at our neighbour’s ill. 
And if you find any enemy’s beast straying, you are to 
pass over the incentives of difference, and take it back and 
restore it. For oblivion of injuries is followed by good- 
ness, and the latter by dissolution of enmity. From this 
we are fitted for agreement, and this conducts to felicity. 
And should you suppose one habitually hostile, and dis- 
cover him to be unreasonablv mistaken either through lust 
or anger, turn him to goodness. Does the law then which 
conducts to Christ appear humane and mild ? And does not 
1 Deut. xx. 10. 2 Deut. xxi. 10. 

54 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

the same God, good, while characterized by righteousness 
from the beginning to the end, employ each kind suitably in 
order to salvation ? u Be merciful,” says the Lord, “ that 
you may receive mercy ; forgive, that you may be forgiven. 
As ye do, so shall it be done to you ; as ye give, so shall it 
be given to you; as ye judge, so shall ye be judged; as 
ve show kindness, so shall kindness be shown to vou : with 
what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again .” 1 
Furthermore, [the law] prohibits those, who are in servi- 
tude for their subsistence, to be branded with disgrace ; 
and to those, who have been reduced to slavery through 
money borrowed, it gives a complete release in the seventh 
year. Further, it prohibits suppliants from being given up 
to punishment. True above all, then, is that oracle. “ As 
gold and silver are tried in the furnace, so the Lord chooseth 
men’s hearts. The merciful man is long-suffering • and i n 
every one who shows solicitude there is wisdom. For on a 
wise man solicitude will fall ; and exercising thought, he will 
seek life ; and he who seeketh God shall find knowledge with 
righteousness. And they who have sought Him rightly have 
found peace .” 2 And Pythagoras seems to me, to have de- 
rived his mildness towards irrational creatures from the law. 
For instance, he interdicted the immediate use of the young 
in the flocks of sheep, and goats, and herds of cattle, on 
the instant of their birth ; not even on the pretext of sacri- 
fice allowing it, both on account of the young ones and of 
the mothers ; training man to gentleness by what is beneath 
him, by means of the irrational creatures. “ Resign accord- 
ingly,” he says, “the young one to its dam for even the first 
seven days.” For if nothing takes place without a cause, 
and milk comes in a shower to animals in parturition for the 
sustenance of the progeny, he that tears that, which has been 
brought forth, away from the supply of the milk, dishonours 
nature. Let the Greeks, then, feel ashamed, and whoever 
else inveighs against the law; since it shows mildness in 
the case of the irrational creatures, while they expose the off- 
spring of men ; though long ago and prophetically, the law, in 
1 Matt. v. vi. vii. ; Luke vi. 2 Prov. xix. 11, xiv. 23, xvii. 12. 

Book ii.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

55 

the above-mentioned commandment, threw a check in the way 
of their cruelty. For if it prohibits the progeny of the irra- 
tional creatures to be separated from the dam before sucking, 
much more in the case of men does it provide beforehand a 
cure for cruelty and savageness of disposition ; so that even 
if they despise nature, they may not despise teaching. For 
they are permitted to satiate themselves with kids and lambs, 
and perhaps there might be some excuse for separating the 
progeny from its dam. But what cause is there for the 
exposure of a child? For the man who did not desire to 
beget children had no right to marry at first ; certainly not 
to have become, through licentious indulgence, the murderer 
of his children. Again, the humane law forbids slaying the 
offspring and the dam together on the same day. Thence 
also the Romans, in the case of a pregnant woman being con- 
demned to death, do not allow her to undergo punishment till 
she is delivered. The law, too, expressly prohibits the slaying 
of such animals as are pregnant till they have brought forth, 
remotely restraining the proneness of man to do wrong to 
man. Thus also it has extended its clemency to the irrational 
creatures ; that from the exercise of humanity in the case of 
creatures of different species, we might practise among those 
of the same species a large abundance of it. Those, too, 
that kick the bellies of certain animals before parturition, 
in order to feast on flesh mixed with milk, make the womb 
created for the birth of the foetus its grave, though the law 
expressly commands, “ But neither shalt thou seethe a lamb 
in its mother’s milk .” 1 For the nourishment of the living 
animal, it is meant, may not become sauce for that which has 
been deprived of life; and that, which is the cause of life, may 
not co-operate in the consumption of the body. And the 
same law commands u not to muzzle the ox which treadeth 
out the corn : for the labourer must be reckoned worthy of 
his food .” 2 

And it prohibits an ox and ass to be yoked in the plough 
together ; 3 pointing perhaps to the want of agreement 
in the case of the animals ; and at the same time teacli- 
1 Deut. xiv. 21. 2 Deut. xxv. 4 ; 1 Tim. v. 18. 3 Deut. xxii. 10. 

56 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

ing not to wrong any one belonging to another race, and 
bring him under the yoke, when there is no other oause to 
allege than difference of race, which is no cause at all, being 
neither wickedness nor the effect of wickedness. To me the 
allegory also seems to signify that the husbandry of the Word 
is not to be assigned equally to the clean and the unclean, 
the believer and the unbeliever ; for the ox is clean, but the 
ass has been reckoned among the unclean animals*. But the 
benignant Word, abounding in humanity, teaches that neither 
is it right to cut down cultivated trees, or to cut down the 
grain before the harvest, for mischief’s sake ; nor that culti- 
vated fruit is to be destroyed at all — either the fruit of the 
soil or that of the soul : for it does not permit the enemy’s 
country to be laid waste. 

Further, husbandmen derived advantage from the law in 
such things. For it orders newly planted trees to be nourished 
three years in succession, and the superfluous growths to be 
cut off, to prevent them being loaded and pressed down ; and 
to prevent their strength being exhausted from want, by the 
nutriment being frittered away, enjoins tilling and digging 
round them, so that [the tree] may not, by sending out 
suckers, hinder its growth. And it does not allow imperfect 
fruit to be plucked from immature trees, but after three 
years, in the fourth year ; dedicating the first-fruits to God 
after the tree has attained maturity. 

This type of husbandry may serve as a mode of instruc- 
tion, teaching that we must cut the growths of sins, and the 
useless weeds of the mind that spring up round the vital 
fruit, till the shoot of faith is perfected and becomes strong. 
For in the fourth year, since there is need of time to him 
that is being solidly instructed, the four virtues are conse- 
crated to God, the third alone being already joined to the 
fourth, 1 the person of the Lord. And a sacrifice of praise 
is above holocausts : il for He,” it is said, “ giveth strength 
to get power.” 2 And if your affairs are in the sunshine of 

1 So Clement seems to designate the human nature of Christ, — as 
being a quartum quid in addition to the three persons of the Godhead. 

2 Deut. viii. 18. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

57 

prosperity, get ancl keep strength, and acquire power in 
knowledge. For by these instances it is shown that both 
good things and gifts are supplied by God ; and that we, 
becoming ministers of the divine grace, ought to sow the 
benefits of God, and make those who approach us noble and 
good ; so that, as far as' possible, the temperate man may 
make others continent, he that is manly may make them 
noble, he that is wise may make them intelligent, and the 
just may make them just. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

THE TRUE GNOSTIC IS AN IMITATOR OE GOD, ESPECIALLY 

IN BENEFICENCE. 

He is the Gnostic, who is after the image and likeness of 
God, who imitates God as far as possible, deficient in none 
of the things which contribute to the likeness as far as com- 
patible, practising self-restraint and endurance, living right- 
eously, reigning over the passions, bestowing of what he has 
as far as possible, and doing good both by word and deed. 
“ He is the greatest,” it is said, “ in the kingdom who shall do 
and teach;” 1 imitating God in conferring like benefits. For 
God’s gifts are for the common good. “ Whoever shall attempt 
to do aught with presumption, provokes God,” 2 it is said. 
For haughtiness is a vice of the soul, of which, as of other 
sins, He commands us to repent ; by adjusting our lives 
from their state of derangement to the change for the better 
in these three things — mouth, heart, hands. These are signs 
— the hands of action, the heart of volition, the mouth of 
speech. Beautifully, therefore, has this oracle been spoken 
with respect to penitents : “ Thou hast chosen God this day 
to be thy God ; and God hath chosen thee this day to be His 
people.” 3 For him who hastes to serve the self-existent One, 
being a suppliant, 4 God adopts to Himself ; and though he 
be only one in number, he is honoured equally with the 
people. For being a part of the people, he becomes comple- 

1 Matt. v. 19. 2 Num. xv. 30. 3 Dent. xxvi. 17, 18. 

4 IAtyiv has been adopted from Philo, instead of oixiTyv of the text. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

58 

[Book ii. 

mentary of it, being restored from what he was ; and the 
whole is named from a part. 

But nobility is itself exhibited in choosing and practising 
what is best. For what benefit to Adam was such a nobilitv 
as he had ? No mortal was his father ; for he himself 
was father of men that are born. What is base he readily 
chose, following his wife, and neglected what is true and 
good ; on which account he exchanged his immortal life for 
a mortal life, but not for ever. And Noah, whose origin 
was not the same as Adam’s, was saved by divine care. For 
he took and consecrated himself to God. And Abraham, 
who had children by three wives, not for the indulgence of 
pleasure, but in the hope, as I think, of multiplying the race 
at the first, was succeeded by one alone, who was heir of his 
father’s blessings, while the rest were separated from the 
family ; and of the twins who sprang from him, the younger 
having won his father’s favour and received his prayers, 
became heir, and the elder served him. For it is the greatest 
boon to a bad man not to be master of himself. 

And this arrangement was prophetical and typical. And that 
all things belong to the wise, Scripture clearly indicates when 
it is said, u Because God hath had mercy on me, I have all 
things .” 1 For it teaches that we are to desire one thing, by 
which are all things, and what is promised is assigned to the 
worthy. Accordingly, the good man who has become heir of 
the kingdom, it registers also as fellow-citizen, through divine 
wisdom, with the righteous of the olden time, who under 
the law and before the law lived accoi’ding to law, whose 
deeds have become laws to us ; and again, teaching that 
the wise man is king, introduces people of a different race, 
saying to him, “ Thou art a king before God among us ; ” 2 
those who were governed obeying the good man of their own 
accord, from admiration of his virtue. 

Now Plato the philosopher, defining the end of happi- 
ness, says that it is likeness to God as far as possible ; 
whether concurring Avith the precept of the law (for great 
natures that are free of passions somehoAV hit the mark re- 
1 Gen. xxxiii. 11. 2 Gen. xxxiii. G. 

Book ii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

59 

specting the truth, as the Pythagorean Philo says in relating 
the history of Moses), or whether instructed by certain oracles 
of the time, thirsting as he always was for instruction. For 
the law says, “ Walk after the Lord your God, and keep my 
commandments.” 1 For the law calls assimilation following ; 
and such a following to the utmost of its power assimilates. 
“ Be,” says the Lord, “ merciful and pitiful, as your heavenly 
Father is pitiful.” 2 Thence also the Stoics have laid down 
the doctrine, that living agreeably to nature is the end, fitly 
altering the name of God into nature ; since also nature 
extends to plants, to seeds, to trees, and to stones. It is 
therefore plainly said, “Bad men do not understand the law, 
but they who love the law fortify themselves with a wall.” :! 
“For the wisdom of the clever knows its ways; but the folly 
of the foolish is in error .” 4 “ For on whom will I look, but 
on him who is mild and gentle, and trembleth at my words?” 
says the prophecy. 

We ai'e taught that there are three kinds of friendship: and 
that of these the first and the best is that which results from 
virtue, for the love that is founded on reason is firm ; that 
the second and intermediate is by way of recompense, and is 
social, liberal, and useful for life ; for the friendship which is 
the result of favour is mutual. And the third and last ice 
assert to be that which is founded on intimacy ; others, again, 
that it is that variable and changeable form which rests on 
pleasure. And Hippodamus the Pythagorean seems to me 
to describe friendships most admirably : “ That founded on 
knowledge of the gods, that founded on the gifts of men, 
and that on the pleasures of animals.” There is the friend- 
ship of a philosopher, — that of a man and that of an animal. 
For the image of God is really the man who does good, in 
which also he gets good : as the pilot at once saves, and is 
saved. Wherefore, when one obtains his request, he does 
not say to the giver, Thou hast given well, but, Thou hast 
received well. So he receives who gives, and he gives who 
receives. “ But the righteous pity and show' mercy .” 5 “ But 

1 Deut. xiii. 4. 2 Luke vi. 36. 3 Prov. xxviii. 4, 5. 

4 Prov. xiv. 8. 6 Prov. xxi. 26. 

60 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book ii. 

the mild shall be inhabitants of the earth, and the innocent 
shall be left in it. But the transgressors shall be extirpated 
from it .” 1 And Homer seems to me to have said propheti- 
cally of the faithful, u Give to thy friend.” And an enemy 
must be aided, that he may not continue an enemy. For by 
help good feeling is compacted, and enmity dissolved. u But 
if there be present readiness of mind, according to what a 
man hath it is acceptable, and not according to what he hath 
not ; for it is not that there be ease to others, but tribulation 
to you, but of equality at the present time,” and so forth . 2 
“ He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor ; his right- 
eousness endureth for ever,” the Scripture says .' 1 For con- 
formity with the image and likeness is not meant of the body 
(for it were wrong for what is mortal to be made like what 
is immortal), but in mind and reason, on which fitly the Lord 
impresses the seal of likeness, both in respect of doing good 
and of exercising rule. For governments are directed not by 
corporeal qualities, but by judgments of the mind. For by 
the counsels of holy men states are managed well, and the 
household also. 

CHAPTER XX. 

THE TRUE GNOSTIC EXERCISES PATIENCE AND 
SELF-RESTRAINT. 

Endurance also itself forces its way to the divine likeness, 
reaping as its fruit impassibility through patience, if what is re- 
lated of Ananias be kept in mind ; who belonged to a number, 
of whom Daniel the prophet, filled with divine faith, was one. 
Daniel dwelt at Babylon, as Lot at Sodom, and Abraham, who 
a little after became the friend of God, in the land of Chaldea. 
The king of the Babylonians let Daniel down into a pit full 
of wild beasts ; the King of all, the faithful Lord, took him 
up unharmed. Such patience will the Gnostic, as a Gnostic, 
possess. He will bless when under trial, like the noble Job; 
1 Prov. ii. 21, 22. 2 2 Cor. viii. 12, 15. 3 Ps. cxii. 9. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

61 

like Jonas, when swallowed up by the whale, he will pray, 
and faith will restore him to prophesy to the Ninevites ; and 
though shut up with lions, he will tame the wild beasts ; 
though cast into the fire, he will be besprinkled with dew, 
but not consumed. He will give his testimony by night ; he 
will testify by day ; by word, by life, by conduct, he will 
testify. Dwelling with the Lord , 1 he will continue his 
familiar friend, sharing the same hearth according to the 
Spirit ; pure in the flesh, pure in heart, sanctified in word. 

“ The world,” it is said, “ is crucified to him, and he to the 
world.” He, bearing about the cross of the Saviour, will 
follow the Lord’s footsteps, as God, having become holy of 
holies. 

The divine law, then, ■while keeping in mind all virtue, 
trains man especially to self-restraint, laying this as the 
foundation of the virtues ; and disciplines us beforehand to 
the attainment of self-restraint by forbidding us to partake 
of such things as are by nature fat, as the breed of swine, \ 
which is full-fleshed. For such a use is assigned to epicures. 

It is accordingly said that one of the philosophers, giving the 
etymology of u? (sow), said that it was Bus, as being fit only 
for slaughter (Bucrtv) and killing ; for life was given to this 
animal for no other purpose than that it might swell in flesh. ' 
Similarly, repressing our desires, it forbade partaking of fishes 
which have neither fins nor scales ; for these surpass other 
fishes in fleshiness and fatness. From this it was, in my 
opinion, that the mysteries not only prohibited touching cer- 
tain animals, but also withdrew certain parts of those slain 
in sacrifice, for reasons which are known to the initiated. 
If, then, we are to exercise control over the belly, and what 
is below the belly, it is clear that we have of old heard from 
the Lord that we are to check lust by the law. 

And this will be completely effected, if we unfeignedly 
condemn what is the fuel of lust : I mean pleasure. Now 
they say that the idea of it is a gentle and bland excitement, 
accompanied with some sensation. Enthralled by this, Mene- 
laus, they say, after the capture of Troy, having rushed to 
1 Substituting uu for \v ™ K vply after avvoiKog. 

62 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

put Helen to death, as having been the cause of such cala- 
mities, was nevertheless not able to effect it, being subdued 
by her beauty, which made him think of pleasure. Whence 
the tragedians, jeering, exclaimed insultingly against him : 

“ But thou, when on her breast thou lookedst, thy sword 
Didst cast away, and with a kiss the traitress, 

Ever-beauteous wretch, 1 thou didst embrace.” 

And again : 

“Was the sword then by beauty blunted ?” 

And I agree with Antisthenes when he says, “ Could I 
catch Aphrodite, I would shoot her ; for she has destroyed 
many of our beautiful and good women.” And he says that 
“Love 2 is a vice of nature, and the wretches who fall under 
its power call the disease a deity.” For in these words it is 
shown that stupid people are overcome from ignorance of 
pleasure, to which we ought to give no admittance, even 
though it be called a god, that is, though it be given by 
God for the necessity of procreation. And Xenophon, ex- 
pressly calling pleasure a vice, says : “Wretch, what good 
dost thou know, or what honourable aim hast thou ? which 
dost not even wait for the appetite for sweet things, eating 
before being hungry, drinking before being thirsty ; and that 
thou mayest eat pleasantly, seeking out fine cooks ; and that 
thou mayest drink pleasantly, procuring costly wines; and in 
summer runnest about seeking snow ; and that thou mayest 
sleep pleasantly, not only providest soft beds, but also sup- 
ports 3 to the couches.” Whence, as Aristo said, “against 
the whole tetrachord of pleasure, pain, fear, and lust, there 
is need of much exercise and struggle.” 

“ For it is these, it is these that go through our bowels, 

And throw into disorder men’s hearts.” 

“ For the minds of those even who are deemed grave, pleasure 

] m, Eurip. Andromache , 627. 2 "E pa;, Cupid. 

3 Or, “ carpets.” Xenoph. Memorabilia , book ii. : The Words of 
Virtue to Vice. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

63 

makes waxen,” according to Plato ; since “ each pleasure 
and pain nails to the body the soul” of the man, that does 
not sever and crucify himself from the passions. “ He that 
loses his life,” says the Lord, “shall save it;” either giving 
it up by exposing it to danger for the Lord’s sake, as He did 
for us, or loosing it from fellowship with its habitual life. 
For if you would loose, and withdraw, and separate (for this 
is what the cross means) your soul from the delight and 
pleasure that is in this life, you will possess it, found and 
resting in the looked -for hope. And this would be the 
exercise of death, if we would be content with those de- 
sires which are measured according to nature alone, which 
do not pass the limit of those which are in accordance 
with nature — by going to excess, or going against nature — 
in which the possibility of sinning arises. “We must there- 
fore put on the panoply of God, that we may be able to 
stand against the wiles of the devil; since the weapons of 
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the 
pulling down of strongholds, casting down reasonings, and 
every lofty thing which exalteth itself against the knowledge 
of God, and bringing every thought into captivity unto the 
obedience of Christ,” 1 says the divine apostle. There is need 
of a man who shall use in a praiseworthy and discriminating 
manner the things from which passions take their rise, as 
riches and poverty, honour and dishonour, health and sick- 
ness, life and death, toil and pleasure. For, in order that we 
may treat things, that are different, indifferently, there is need 
of a great difference in us, as having been previously afflicted 
with much feebleness, and in the distortion of a bad training; 
and nurture ignorantly indulged ourselves. The simple word, 
then, of our philosophy declares the passions to be impres- 
sions on the soul that is soft and yielding, and, as it were, the 
signatures of the spiritual powers with whom we have to 
struggle. For it is the business, in my opinion, of the mali-A^ 
ficent powers to endeavour to produce somewhat of their own 
constitution in everything, so as to overcome and make their 
own those who have renounced them. And it follows, as 

1 Eph. vi. 11. 

64 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

might be expected, that some are worsted ; but in the case 
of those who engage in the contest with more athletic energy, 
the powers mentioned above, after carrying on the conflict 
in all forms, and advancing even as far as the crown wading 
in gore, decline the battle, and admire the victors. 

For of objects that are moved, some are moved by impulse and 
appearance, as animals ; and some by transposition, as inani- 
mate objects. And of things without life, plants, they say, are 
moved by transposition in order to growth, if we will concede 
to them that plants are without life. To stones, then, belongs 
a permanent state. Plants have a nature ; and the irrational 
animals possess impulse and perception, and likewise the two 
characteristics already specified . 1 But the reasoning faculty, 
being peculiar to the human soul, ought not to be impelled 
similarly with the irrational animals, but ought to discrimi- 
nate appearances, and not to be carried away by them. The 
powers, then, of which we have spoken hold out beautiful 
sights, and honours, and adulteries, and pleasures, and such 
like alluring phantasies before facile spirits ; as those who 
drive away cattle hold out branches to them. Then, having 
beguiled those incapable of distinguishing the true from the 
false pleasure, and the fading and meretricious from the holy 
beauty, they lead them into slavery. And each deceit, by 
pressing constantly on the spirit, impresses its image on it ; 
and the soul unwittingly carries about the image of the 
passion, which takes its rise from the bait and our consent. 

The adherents of Basilides are in the habit of calling the 
passions appendages : saying that these are in essence certain 
spirits attached to the rational soul, through some original per- 
turbation and confusion ; and that, again, other bastard and 
heterogeneous natures of spirits grow on to them, like that of 
the wolf, the ape, the lion, the goat, whose properties show- 
ing themselves around the soul, they say, assimilate the lusts 
of the soul to the likeness of the animals. For they imitate 
the actions of those whose properties they bear. And not 
only are they associated with the impulses and perceptions of 
the irrational animals, but they affect 2 the motions and the 
1 i.e. Permanent state and nature. . 2 Or, vie with. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

65 

beauties of plants, on account of their bearing also the pro- 
perties of plants attached to them. They have also the pro- 
perties of a particular state, as the hardness of steel. -But 
against this dogma we shall argue subsequently, when we 
treat of the soul. At present this only needs to be pointed 
out, that man, according to Basilides, preserves the appear- 
ance of a wooden horse, according to the poetic myth, em- 
bracing as he does in one body a host of such different spirits. 
Accordingly, Basilides’ son himself, Isidorus, in his book, About 
the Soul attached to us, while agreeing in the dogma, as if con- 
demning himself, writes in these words : “For if I persuade 
any one that the soul is undivided, and that the passions of 
the wicked are occasioned by the violence of the appendages, 
the worthless among men will have no slight pretence for 
saying, ( I was compelled, I was carried away, I did it against 
my will, I acted unwillingly though he himself led the de- 
sire of evil things, and did not fight against the assaults of the 
appendages. But we must, by acquiring superiority in the 
rational part, show ourselves masters of the inferior creation 
in us.” For he too lays down the hypothesis of two souls in 
us, like the Pythagoreans, at whom we shall glance afterwards. 

Valentinus too, in a letter to certain people, writes in 
these very words respecting the appendages : “ There is one 
good, by whose presence 1 is the manifestation, which is by 
the Son, and by Him alone can the heart become pure, by 
the expulsion of every evil spirit from the heart: for the 
multitude of spirits dwelling in it do not suffer it to be 
pure ; but each of them performs his own deeds, insulting it 
oft with unseemly lusts. And the heart seems to be treated 
somewhat like a caravanserai. For the latter has holes and 
ruts made in it, and is often filled with dung ; men living 
filthily in it, and taking no care for the place as belong- 
ing to others. So fares it with the heart as Ions as there is 
no thought taken for it, being unclean, and the abode of 
many demons. But when the alone good Father visits it, 
it is sanctified, and gleams with light. And he who possesses 
such a heart is so blessed, that “ he shall see God .” 2 

1 Kcc.pcu<n'a substituted by Grabe for vuppr,a!cp. 2 Matt. vii. 7. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. E 

66 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book ii. 

What, then, let them tell us, is the cause of such a soul not 
being cared for from the beginning ? Either that it is not 
worthy (and somehow a care for it comes to it as from repent- 
ance), or it is a saved nature, as he would have it; and this, of 
necessity, from the beginning, being cared for by reason of its 
affinity, afforded no entrance to the impure spirits, unless by 
being forced and found feeble. For were he to grant that on 
repentance it preferred what was better, he will say this un- 
willingly, being what the truth we hold teaches; namely, that 
salvation is from a change due to obedience, but not from 
nature. For as the exhalations which arise from the earth, 
and from marshes, gather into mists and cloudy masses ; so 
the vapours of fleshly lusts bring on the soul an evil condition, 
scattering about the idols of pleasure before the soul. Ac- 
cordingly they spread darkness over the light of intelligence, 
the spirit attracting the exhalations that arise from lust, and 
thickening the masses of the passions by persistency in 
pleasures. Gold is not taken from the earth in the lump, 
but is purified by smelting ; then, when made pure, it is called 
gold, the earth being purified. For “Ask, and it shall be 
given yon,” 1 it is said to those who are able of themselves to 
choose what is best. And how we say that the powers of 
the devil, and the unclean spirits, sow’ into the sinner’s soul, 
requires no more words from me, on adducing as a w’itness 
the apostolic Barnabas (and he was one of the seventy, and 
a fellow-worker of Paul), who speaks in these words : 
“ Before we believed in God, the dwelling-place of our heart 
was unstable, truly a temple built with hands. For it was 
full of idolatry, and was a house of demons, through doing 
what w r as opposed to God.” 2 

He says, then, that sinners exercise activities appropriate 
to demons ; but he does not say that the spirits themselves 
dwell in the soul of the unbeliever. Wherefore he also 
adds, “ See that the temple of the Lord be gloriously built. 
Learn, having received remission of sins ; and having set 
our hope on the Name, let us become new’, created again from 
the beginning.” For what he says is not that demons are 
1 Matt. vii. 7. 2 Barnabas, Epist. chap. xvi. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

67 

driven out of us, but that the sins which like them we commit 
before believing are remitted. Rightly thus he puts in op- 
position what follows : u Wherefore God truly dwells in our 
home. He dwells in us. How ? The word of His faith, 
the calling of His promise, the wisdom of His statutes, the 
commandments of His communication, [dwell in us].” 

“ I know that I have come upon a heresy ; and its 
chief was wont to say that he fought with pleasure by plea- 
sure, this worthy Gnostic advancing on pleasure in feigned 
combat, for he said he was a Gnostic ; since he said it was 
no great thing for a man that had not tried pleasure to 
abstain from it, but for one who had mixed in it not to be 
overcome [was something] ; and that therefore by means of 
it he trained himself in it. The wretched man knew not 
that he was deceiving himself by the artfulness of voluptu- 
ousness. To this opinion, then, manifestly Aristippus the 
Cyrenian adhered — that of the sophist who boasted of the 'N 
truth. Accordingly, when reproached for continually co- 
habiting with the Corinthian courtezan, he said, u I possess 
Lais, and am not possessed by her.” 

Such also are those who say that they follow Nicolaus, ' 
quoting an adage of the man, which they pervert, “ that the 
flesh must be abused.” But the worthy man showed that it 
was necessary to check pleasures and lusts, and by such train- 
ing to waste away the impulses and propensities of the flesh. 

But they, abandoning themselves to pleasure like goats, as 
if insulting the body, lead a life of self-indulgence ; not 
knowing that the body is wasted, being by nature subject to 
dissolution ; while their soul is buried in the mire of vice ; 
following as they do the teaching of pleasure itself, not of 
the apostolic man. For in what do they differ from Sar- 
danapalus, whose life is shown in the epigram : 

“ I Lave wliat I ate — wliat I enjoyed wantonly ; 

And the pleasures I felt in love. But those 
Many objects of happiness are left, 

For I too am dust, who ruled great Ninus.” 

* 

For the feeling of pleasure is not at all a necessity, but 

68 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

the accompaniment of certain natural needs — hunger, thirst, 
\ cold, marriage. If, then, it were possible to drink without 
it, or take food, or beget children, no other need of it could 
be shown. For pleasure is neither a function, nor a state, 
nor any part of us ; but has been introduced into life as an 
auxiliary, as they say salt was to season food. But when it 
casts off restraint and rules the house, it generates first con- 
cupiscence, which is an irrational propension and impulse 
towards that which gratifies it ; and it induced Epicurus to 
lay down pleasure as the aim of the philosopher. Accord- 
ingly he deifies a sound condition of body, and the certain 
hope respecting it. For what else is luxury than the volup- 
tuous gluttony and the superfluous abundance of those who 
are abandoned to self-indulgence ? Diogenes writes signifi- 
cantly in a tragedy : 

“ Who to the pleasures of effeminate 
And filthy luxury attached in heart, 

Wish not to undergo the slightest toil.” 

And what follows, expressed indeed in foul language, but in 
a manner worthy of the voluptuaries. 

Wherefore the divine law appears to me necessarily to 
menace with fear, that, by caution and attention, the philo- 
sopher may acquire and retain absence of anxiety, continuing 
without fall and without sin in all things. For peace and 
freedom are not otherwise won, than by ceaseless and unyield- 
ing struggles with our lusts. For these stout and Olympic 
antagonists are keener than wasps, so to speak ; and Pleasure 
especially, not by day only, but by night, is in dreams with 
witchcraft ensnaringly plotting and biting. Plow, then, can 
the Greeks any more be right in running down the law, 
when they themselves teach that Pleasure is the slave of 
fear ? Socrates accordingly bids “ people guard against 
enticements to eat when they are not hungry, and to drink 
when not thirsty, and the glances and kisses of the fair, as 
fitted to inject a deadlier poison than that of scorpions and 
spiders.” And Antisthenes chose rather “ to be demented 
than delighted .” And the Theban Crates says : 

Book ii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

69 

“ Master these, exulting in the disposition of the soul, 
Vanquished neither hy gold nor by languishing love, 

Nor are they any longer attendants to the wanton.” 

And at length infers : 

“ Those, unenslaved and unbended by servile Pleasure, 

Love the immortal kingdom and freedom.” 

He writes expressly, in other words, “that the stop 1 to the 
unbridled propensity to amorousness is hunger or a halter.” 

And the comic poets attest, while they depreciate the teach- 
ing of Zeno the Stoic, to be to the following effect : 

“ For he philosophizes a vain philosophy : 

He teaches to want food, and gets pupils 

One loaf, and for seasoning a dried fig, and to drink water.” 

All these, then, are not ashamed clearly to confess the advan- 
tage which accrues from caution. And the wisdom which is 
true and not contrary to reason, trusting not in mere words 
and oracular utterances, but in invulnerable armour of de- 
fence and energetic mysteries, and devoting itself to divine 
commands, and exercise, and practice, receives a divine power 
according to its inspiration from the Word. 

Already, then, the aegis of the poetic Jove is described as 

“ Dreadful, crowned all around by Terror, 

And on it Strife and Prowess, and chilling Rout ; 

On it, too, the Gorgon’s head, dread monster, 

Terrible, dire, the sign of iEgis-bearing Jove.” 2 

But to those, who ai'e able rightly to understand salvation, 
I know not what will appear dearer than the gravity of the 
Law, and Reverence, which is its daughter. For when one 
is said to pitch too high, as also the Lord says, with refer- 
ence to certain ; so that some of those whose desires are 
towards Him may not sing out of pitch and tune, I do not 
understand it as pitching too high in reality, but only as 
spoken with reference to such as will not take up the divine 
yoke. For to those, who are unstrung and feeble, what is 

1 x.a.Tc'.'rci.vGft.ot, (in Theodoret), for which the text reads x.oLru.v’ha.a^cc. 

2 Iliad , v. 739. 

70 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book ii. 

medium seems too high ; and to those, who are unrighteous, 
what befalls them seems severe justice. For those, who, on 
account of the favour they entertain for sins, are prone to 
pardon, suppose truth to be harshness, and severity to be 
savageness, and him who does not sin with them, and is not 
dragged with them, to be pitiless. Tragedy writes therefore 
well of Pluto : 

“And to what sort of a deity wilt thou come, 1 dost thou ask, 

Who knows neither clemency nor favour, 

But loves bare justice alone.” 

For although you are not yet able to do the things enjoined 
by the Law, yet, considering that the noblest examples are set 
before us in it, we are able to nourish and increase the love 
of liberty ; and so we shall profit more eagerly as far as we 
can, inviting some things, imitating some things, and fearing 
others. For thus the righteous of the olden time, who lived 
according to the law, “ were not from a storied oak, or from 
a rock;” because they wished to philosophize truly, took and 
devoted themselves entirely to God, and were classified under 
faith. Zeno said well of the Indians, that he would rather 
have seen one Indian roasted, than have learned the whole of 
the arguments about bearing pain. But we have exhibited 
before our eyes every day abundant sources of martyrs that 
are burnt, impaled, beheaded. All these the fear inspired by 
the law, — leading as a paedagogue to Christ, trained so as to 
manifest their piety by their blood. “God stood in the congre- 
gation of the gods ; He judgeth in the midst of the gods.” 2 
Who are they? Those that are superior to Pleasure, who rise 
above the passions, who know what they do — the Gnostics, 
who are greater than the world. “ I said, Ye are gods ; and 
all sons of the Highest.” 3 To whom speaks the Lord? To 
those who reject as far as possible all that is of man. And 
the apostle says, “ For ye are not any longer in the flesh, but 

1 After this comes a; loaru, which yields no meaning, and has been 
variously amended, but not satisfactorily. Most likely some words have 
dropped out of the text. 

2 Ps. lxxxii. 1. 

Ps. lxxxii. 6. 

Book ii.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

71 

in the Spirit .” 1 And again he says, “Though in the flesh, 
we do not war after the flesh .” 2 “For flesh and blood can- 
not inherit the kingdom of God, neither doth corruption 
inherit incorruption .” 3 “Lo, ye shall die like men,” the 
Spirit has said, confuting us. 

We must then exercise ourselves in taking care about 
those things which fall under the power of the passions, 
fleeing like those who are truly philosophers such articles 
of food as excite lust, and dissolute licentiousness in cham- 
bering and luxury ; and the sensations that tend to luxury, 
which are a solid reward to others, must no longer be so to 
us. For God’s greatest gift is self-restraint. For He Him- 
self has said, “ I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee,” 4 
as having judged thee worthy according to the true election. 
Thus, then, while v 7 e attempt piously to advance, we shall 
have put on us the mild yoke of the Lord from faith to faith, 
one charioteer driving each of us onward to salvation, that the 
meet fruit of beatitude may be won. “ Exercise is” accord- 
ing to Hippocrates of Cos, “ not only the health of the body , 
but of the soul — fearlessness of labours — a ravenous appetite 
for food.” 

CHAPTER XXL 

OPINIONS OF VARIOUS PHILOSOPHERS ON THE CHIEF GOOD. 

Epicurus, in placing happiness in not being hungry, or 
thirsty, or cold, uttered that godlike word, saying impiously 
that he would fight in these points even with Father Jove;, 
teaching, as if it were the case of pigs that live in filth and 
not that of rational philosophers, that happiness was victory. 
For of those that are ruled by pleasure are the Cyrenaics and 
Epicurus ; for these expressly said that to live pleasantly was 
the chief end, and that pleasure was the only perfect good. 
Epicurus also says that the removal of pain is pleasure ; and 

1 Rom. viii. 9. 2 1 Cor. x. 3. 

3 1 Cor. xv. 30. 4 Heb. xiii. 5. 

72 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

says that that is to be preferred, which first attracts from 
itself to itself, being, that is, wholly in motion. Dinomachus 
and Callipho said that the chief end was for one to do what 
he could for the attainment and enjoyment of pleasure; and 
Hieronymus the Peripatetic said the great end w T as to live 
unmolested, and that the only final good was happiness; and 
Diodorus likewise, who belonged to the same sect, pronounces 
the end to be to live undisturbed and well. Epicurus in- 
deed, and the Cyrenaics, say that pleasure is the first duty ; 
for it is for the sake of pleasure, they say, that virtue was 
introduced, and produced pleasure. According to the fol- 
lowers of Calliplion, virtue was introduced for the sake of 
pleasure, but that subsequently, on seeing its own beauty, it 
made itself equally prized with the first principle, that is, 
pleasure. 

But the Aristotelians lay it down, that to live in ac- 
cordance with virtue is the end, but that neither happi- 
ness nor the end is reached by every one who has virtue. 
For the wise man, vexed and involved in involuntary mis- 
chances, and wishing gladly on these accounts to flee from 
life, is neither fortunate nor happy. For virtue needs time ; 
for that is not acquired in one day which exists [only] in 
the perfect man ; since, as they say, a child is never happy. 
But human life is a perfect time, and therefore happiness 
is completed by the three kinds of good things. Neither, 
then, the poor, nor the mean, nor even the diseased, nor 
the slave, can be one of them. 

Again, on the other hand, Zeno the Stoic thinks the end 
to be living according to virtue; and Cleanthes, living agree- 
ably to nature in the right exercise of reason, which he held to 
consist of the selection of things according to nature. And 
Antipatrus, his friend, supposes the end to consist in choosing 
continually and unswervingly the things which are according 
to nature, and rejecting those contrary to nature. Arche- 
damus, on the other hand, explained the end to be such, that 
in selecting the greatest and chief things according to na- 
ture, it was impossible to overstep it. In addition to these, 
Pansetius pronounced the end to be, to live according to 

Book ii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

73 

the means given to us by nature. And finally, Posidonius 
said that it was to live engaged in contemplating the truth 
and order of the universe, and forming himself as he best 
can, in nothing influenced by the irrational part of his 
soul. And some of the later Stoics defined the great end 
to consist in living agreeably to the constitution of man. 
Why should I mention Aristo ? He said that the end was 
indifference; but what is indifferent simply abandons the 
indifferent. Shall I bring forward the opinions of Herillus ? 
Herillus states the end to be to live according to science. 
For some think that, the more recent disciples of the Aca- 
demy define the end to be, the steady abstraction of the mind 
to its own impressions. F urther, Lycus the Peripatetic used 
to say that the final end was the true joy of the soul ; as 
Leucimus, that it was the joy it had in what was good. 
Critolaus, also a Peripatetic, said that it was the perfection 
of a life flowing rightly according to nature, referring to the 
perfection accomplished by the three kinds according to tra- 
dition. 

We must, however, not rest satisfied with these, but en- 
deavour as we best can to adduce the doctrines laid down on 
the point by the naturalists ; for they say that Anaxagoras 
of Clazomenae affirmed contemplation and the freedom flow- 
ing from it to be the end of life ; Heraclitus the Ephesian, 
complacency. The Pontic Heraclides relates, that Pytha- 
goras taught that the knowledge of the perfection of the 
numbers 1 was happiness of the soul. The Abderites also 
teach the existence of an end. Democritus, in his work 
On the Chief End , said it was cheerfulness, which he also 
called well-being, and often exclaims, “For delight and its 
absence are the boundary of those who have reached full 
age Hecatseus, that it was sufficiency to one’s self ; Apollo- 
dotus of Cyzicum, that it was delectation ; as Nausiphanes, 
that it was undauntedness , 2 for he said that it was this that 

1 The text has dpsrZv, virtues, for which, in accordance with Pytha- 
goras’ well-known opinion, clpAy.av has been substituted from Theodoret. 

2 For of the text, Heinsius reads which 

corresponds to the other term ascribed to Democritus — ■i6et(A^in». 

74 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

was called by Democritus imperturbability. In addition to 
these still, Diotimus declared the end to be perfection of 
what is good, which he said was termed well-being. Again, 
Antisthenes, that it was humility. And those called Anni- 
cereans, of the Cyrenaic succession, laid down no definite 
end for the whole of life ; but said that to each action be- 
longed, as its proper end, the pleasure accruing from the 
action. These Cvrenaics reject Epicurus’ definition of plea- 
sure, that is the removal of pain, calling that the condition 
of a dead man; because we rejoice not only on account of 
pleasures, but companionships and distinctions ; while Epi- 
curus thinks that all joy of the soul arises from previous 
sensations of the flesh. Metrodorus, in his book On the 
Source of Happiness in Ourselves being greater than that 
vjhich arises from Objects , says : What else is the good of 
the soul but the sound state of the flesh, and the sure hope 
of its continuance 1 

CHAPTER XXII. 

plato’s opinion, that the chief good consists in 

ASSIMILATION TO GOD, AND ITS AGREEMENT WITH 

SCRIPTURE. 

Further, Plato the philosopher says that the end is two- 
fold: that which is communicable, and exists first in the ideal 
forms themselves, which he also calls “ the good and that 
which partakes of it, and receives its likeness from it, as is 
the case in the men who appropriate virtue and true philo- 
sophy. Wherefore also Cleanthes, in the second book, On 
Pleasure , says that Socrates everywhere teaches that the just 
man and the happy are one and the same, and execrated the 
first man who separated the just from the useful, as having 
done an impious thing. For those are in truth impious who 
separate the useful from that which is right ' according to 
the law. Plato himself says that happiness (evhaifxovia) is 
to possess rightly the daemon, and that the ruling faculty of 

Book ii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

7 -3 

the soul is called the daemon ; and he terms happiness ( evSai - 
fxovla ) the most perfect and complete good. Sometimes he 
calls it a consistent and harmonious life, sometimes the 
highest perfection in accordance with virtue ; and this he 
places in the knowledge of the Good, and in likeness to 
God, demonstrating likeness to be justice and holiness with 
wisdom. For is it not thus that some of our writers have 
understood that man straightway on his creation received 
what is “ according to the image,” but that what is according 
“to the likeness” he will receive afterwards on his perfection”? 
Now Plato, teaching that the virtuous man shall have this 
likeness accompanied with humility, explains the following : 
“ He that humbleth himself shall be exalted .” 1 He says, ac- 
cordingly, in The Laics : 11 God indeed, as the ancient saying 
has it, occupying the beginning, the middle, and the end of 
all things, goes straight through while He goes round the 
circumference. And He is always attended by Justice, the 
avenger of those who revolt from the divine law.” You see 
how he connects fear with the divine law. He adds, there- 
fore : “ To which he, who would be happy, cleaving, will 
follow lowly and beautified.” Then, connecting what follows 
these words, and admonishing by fear, he adds : “ What 
conduct, then, is dear and conformable to God? That 
which is characterized by one word of old date : Like will he 
dear to like , as to what is in proportion : hut things out of 
proportion are neither dear to one another, nor to those which 
are in proportion. And that therefore he that would be dear 
to God, must, to the best of his power, become such as He is. 
And in virtue of the same reason, our self-controlling man is 
dear to God. But he that has no self-control is unlike and 
diverse.” In saying that it was an ancient dogma, he indi- 
cates the teaching which had come to him from the law. 
And having in the Theatcetus admitted that evils make the 
circuit of mortal nature and of this spot, he adds : u Where- 
fore we must try to flee hence as soon as possible. For flight 
is likeness to God as far as possible. And likeness is to 
become holy and just with wisdom.” Speusippus, the nephew 

1 Luke xiv. 11. 

76 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

of Plato, says that happiness is a perfect state in those who 
conduct themselves in accordance with nature, or the state of 
the good : for which condition all men have a desire, but the 
good only attain to quietude; consequently the virtues are the 
authors of happiness. And Xenocrates the Chalcedonian 
defines happiness to he the possession of virtue, strictly so 
called, and of the power subservient to it. Then he clearly 
says, that the seat in which it resides is the soul ; that by 
which it is effected* the virtues ; and that of these as parts 
are formed praiseworthy actions, good habits and dispositions, 
and motions, and relations ; and that corporeal and external 
objects are not without these. For Polemo, the disciple of 
Xenocrates, seems of the opinion that happiness is sufficiency 
of all good things, or of the most and greatest. He lays 
down the doctrine, then, that happiness never exists without 
virtue ; and that virtue, apart from corporeal and external 
objects, is sufficient for happiness. Let these things be so. 
The contradictions to the opinions specified shall be adduced 
in due time. But on us it is incumbent to reach the un- 
accomplished end, obeying the commands — that is, God — and 
living according to them, irreproachably and intelligently, 
through knowledge of the divine will ; and assimilation as 
far as possible in accordance with right reason is the end, 
and restoration to perfect adoption by the Son, which ever 
glorifies the Father by the great High Priest who has deigned 
to call us brethren and fellow-heirs. And the apostle, suc- 
cinctly describing the end, writes in the Epistle to the Romans: 
“But now, being made free from sin, and become servants 
to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end ever- 
lasting life.” 1 And viewing the hope as twofold — that which 
is expected, and that which has been received — he now 
teaches the end to be the restitution of the hope. “For 
patience,” he says, “ worketh experience, and experience 
hope : and hope maketh not ashamed ; because the love of 
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit that is 
given to us.” 2 On account of which love and the restoration 
to hope, he says, in another place, “ which rest is laid up for 
1 Rom. vi. 22. 2 Rom. v. 4, 5. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

77 

us .” 1 You will find in Ezekiel the like, as follows : “The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die. And the man who shall be 
righteous, and shall do judgment and justice, who has not 
eaten on the mountains, nor lifted his eyes to the idols of the 
house of Israel, and hath not defiled his neighbour’s wife, 
and hath not approached to a woman in the time of her un- 
cleanness (for lie does not wish the seed of man to be dis- 
honoured), and will not injure a man; will restore the debtor’s 
pledge, and will not take usury ; will turn away his hand 
from wrong ; will do true judgment between a man and his 
neighbour ; will walk in my ordinances, and keep my com- 
mandments, so as to do the truth ; he is righteous, he shall 
surely live, saitli Adonai the Lord .” 2 Isaiah too, in exhorting 
him that hath not believed to gravity of life, and the Gnostic 
to attention, proving that man’s virtue and God’s are not the 
same, speaks thus : “ Seek the Lord, and on finding Him call 
on Him. And when He shall draw near to you, let the 
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his ways ; 
and let him return to the Lord, and he shall obtain mercy,” 
down to “and your thoughts from my thoughts .” 3 “We,” 
then, according to the noble apostle, “ wait for the hope of 
righteousness by faith. For in Christ neither circumcision 
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which worketh 
by love .” 4 “ And we desire that every one of you show the 
same diligence to the full assurance of hope,” down to “made 
an high priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek .” 5 
Similarly with Paul “ the All-virtuous Wisdom” says, “ He 
that heareth me shall dwell trusting in hope .” 6 For the 
restoration of hope is called by the same term “ hope.” To 
the expression “ will dwell” it has most beautifully added 
“trusting,” showing that such an one has obtained rest, 
having received the hope for which he hoped. Wherefore 
also it is added, “ and shall be quiet, without fear of any 
evil.” And openly and expressly the apostle, in the first 
Epistle to the Corinthians, says, “ Be ye followers of me, as 

1 Probably Heb. iv. 8, 9. 
3 Isa. lv. 6, 7, 9. 

5 Hob. vi. 11-20. 

2 Ezek. xviii. 4-9. 
4 Gal. v. 5, 6. 

6 Prov. i. 33. 

78 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ir. 

also I am of Christ,” 1 in order that that may take place. If 
ye are of me, and I am of Christ, then ye are imitators of 
Christ, and Christ of God. Assimilation to God , then, so 
that as far as possible a man becomes righteous and holy with 
wisdom, he lays down as the aim of faith, and the end to 
be that restitution of the promise which is effected by faith. 
From these doctrines gush the fountains, which we specified 
above, of those who have dogmatized about u the end.” But 
of these enough. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

ON MARRIAGE. 

Since pleasure and lust seem to fall under marriage, it must 
also be treated of. Marriage is the first conjunction of man 
and woman for the procreation of legitimate children. Ac- 
cordingly Menander the comic poet says : 

“ For the begetting of legitimate children, 

I give thee my daughter.” 

We ask if we ought to marry; which is one of the points, which 
are said to be relative. For some must marry, and a man 
must be in some condition, and he must marry some one in 
some condition. For every one is not to marry, nor always. 
But there is a time in which it is suitable, and a person for 
■whom it is suitable, and an age up to which it is suitable. 
Neither ought every one to take a wife, nor is it every woman 
one is to take, nor always, nor in every way, nor inconside- 
rately. But only he who is in certain circumstances, and 
such an one and at such time as is requisite, and for the sake 
of children, and one who is in every respect similar, and who 
does not by force or compulsion love the husband who loves 
her. Hence Abraham, regarding his wife as a sister, says, 
11 She is my sister by my father, but not by my mother ; and 
she became my Avife,” 2 teaching us that children of the same 
1 1 Cor. xi. 1. 2 Gcu. xx. 12. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

79 

mothers ought not to enter into matrimony. Let us briefly 
follow the history. Plato ranks marriage among outward 
good things, providing for the perpetuity of our race, and 
handing down as a torch a certain perpetuity to children’s 
children. Democritus repudiates marriage and the pro- 
creation of children, on account of the many annoyances 
thence arising, and abstractions from more necessary things. 
Epicurus agrees, and those who place good in pleasure, and 
in the absence of trouble and pain. According to the opinion 
of the Stoics, marriage and the rearing of children are a 
thing indifferent ; and according to the Peripatetics, a good. 
In a word, these, following out their dogmas in words, be- 
came enslaved to pleasures ; some using concubines, some 
mistresses, and the most youths. And that wise quaternion 
in the garden with a mistress, honoured pleasure by their 
acts. Those, then, will not escape the curse of yoking an 
ass with an ox, who, judging certain things not to suit them, 
command others to do them, or the reverse. This Scripture 
has briefly showed, when it says, “ What thou liatest, thou 
shalt not do to another.” 1 

But they who approve of marriage say, Nature has adapted 
us for marriage, as is evident from the structure of our bodies, 
which are male and female. And they constantly proclaim 
that command, “Increase and replenish .” 2 And though this 
is the case, yet it seems to them shameful that man, created 
by God, should be more licentious than the irrational crea- 
tures, which do not mix with many licentiously, but with 
one of the same species, such as pigeons and ringdoves, and 
creatures like them. Furthermore, they say, “ The childless 
man fails in the perfection which is according to nature, not 
having substituted his proper successor in his place. For he 
is perfect that has produced from himself his like, or rather, 
when he sees that he has produced the same ; that is, when 
that which is begotten attains to the same nature with him 
who begat.” Therefore we must by all means marry, both 
for our country’s sake, for the succession of children, and as 
far as we are concerned, the perfection of the world ; since 
1 Tob. iv. 16. * Gen. i. 28. 

80 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book ii. 

the poets also pity a marriage half-perfect and childless, but 
pronounce the fruitful one happy. But it is the diseases of 
the body that principally show marriage to be necessary. 
For a wife’s care and the assiduity of her constancy appear 
to exceed the endurance of all other relations and friends, as 
much as to excel them in sympathy ; and most of all, she 
takes kindly to patient watching. And in truth, according 
to Scripture, she is a needful help . 1 The comic poet then, 
Menander, while running down marriage, and yet alleging 
on the other side its advantages, replies to one who had said : 

“ I am averse to the thing, 

For yon take it awkwardly.” 

Then he adds : 

“ You see the hardships and the things which annoy you in it. 

But you do not look on the advantages.” 

And so forth. 

Now marriage is a help in the case of those advanced in 
years, by furnishing a spouse to take care of one, and by 
rearing children of her to nourish one’s old age. 

“ For to a man after death his children bring renown, 

Just as corks bear the net, 

Saving the fishing-line from the deep,” 2 

according to the tragic poet Sophocles. 

Legislators, moreover, do not allow those who are unmarried 
to discharge the highest magisterial offices. For instance, 
the legislator of the Spartans imposed a fine not on bachelor- 
hood only, but on monogamy , 3 and late marriage, and single 
life. And the renowned Plato orders the man who has not 
married to pay a wife’s maintenance into the public treasury, 
and to give to the magistrates a suitable sum of money as 

1 Gen. ii. 18. 

2 The corrections of Stanley on these lines have been adopted. They 
occur in the Clioepli of fiEschylus, 503, but may have been found in 
Sophocles, as the tragic poets borrowed from one another. 

s i.e. not entering into a second marriage after a wife’s death. But 
instead of p.o'joyay.iov some read x.u-/.oyuyJov — bad marriage. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

81 

expenses. For if they shall not beget children, not having 
married, they produce, as far as in them lies, a scarcity of 
men, and dissolve states and the world that is composed of 
them, impiously doing away with divine generation. It is 
also unmanly and weak to shun living with a wife and 
children. For of that of which the loss is an evil, the pos- 
session is by all means a good ; and this is the case with the 
rest of things. But the loss of children is, they say, among 
the chiefest evils : the possession of children is consequently 
a good thing; and if it be so, so also is marriage. It is 
said : 

“ Without a father there never could be a child, 

And without a mother conception of a child could not be. 
Marriage makes a father, as a husband a mother.” 

Accordingly Homer makes a thing to be earnestly prayed 
for : 

A husband and a house 

yet not simply, but along with good agreement. For the 
marriage of other people is an agreement for indulgence ; 
but that of philosophers leads to that agreement which is in 
accordance with reason, bidding wives adorn themselves not 
in outward appearance, but in character ; and enjoining 
husbands not to treat their wedded wives as mistresses, 
making corporeal wantonness their aim ; but to take ad- 
vantage of marriage for help in the whole of life, and for 
the best self-restraint. 

Far more excellent, in my opinion, than the seeds of wheat 
and barley that are sown at appropriate seasons, is man that 
is sown, for whom all things grow ; and those seeds temperate 
husbandmen ever sow. Every foul and polluting practice 
must therefore be purged away from marriage ; that the 
intercourse of the irrational animals may not be cast in our 
teeth, as more accordant with nature than human conjunction 
in procreation. Some of these, it must be granted, desist at 
the time in which they are directed, leaving creation to the 
working of Providence. 

By the tragedians, Polyxena, though being murdered, is 

CLEM. — VOL. II. . p 

82 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. [Book ir. 

described nevertheless as having, when dying, taken great 
care to fall decently, — 

“ Concealing what ought to he hid from the eyes of men.” 

Marriage to her was a calamity. To be subjected, then, to 
the passions, and to yield to them, is the extremes! slavery; as 
to keep them in subjection is the only liberty. The divine 
Scripture accordingly says, that those who have transgressed 
the commandments are sold to strangers, that is, to sins alien 
to nature, till they return and repent. Marriage, then, as a 
sacred image, must be kept pure from those things which 
defile it. We are to rise from our slumbers with the Lord, 
and retire to sleep with thanksgiving and prayer, — 

“ Both when you sleep, and when the holy light comes,” 

confessing the Lord in our whole life ; possessing piety in 
the soul, and extending self-control to the body. For it is 
pleasing to God to lead decorum from the tongue to our 
actions. Filthy speech is the way to effrontery ; and the 
end of both is filthy conduct. 

Now that the Scripture counsels marriage, and allows no 
release from the union, is expressly contained in the law, 
u Thou shalt not put away thy wife, except for the cause of 
fornication ; ” and it regards as fornication, the marriage of 
those separated while the other is alive. Not to deck and 
adorn herself beyond what is becoming, renders a wife free 
of calumnious suspicion, while she devotes herself assiduously 
to prayers and supplications ; avoiding frequent departures 
from the house, and shutting herself up as far as possible 
from the view of all not related to her, and deeming house- 
keeping of more consequence than impertinent trifling. a He 
that taketh a woman that has been put away,” it is said, “ com- 
mitteth adultery ; and if one puts away his wife, he makes 
her an adulteress,” 1 that is, compels her to commit adultery. 
And not only is he who puts her away guilty of this, but he 
who takes her, by giving to the woman the opportunity of 
sinning ; for did he not take her, she would return to her 

1 Matt. v. 32, xix. 9. 

Book ii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

83 

husband. What, then, is the law ? In order to check the 
impetuosity of the passions, it commands the adulteress to be 
put to death, on being convicted of this ; and if of priestly 
family, to be committed to the flames . 1 And the adulterer 
also is stoned to death, but not in the same place, that not 
even their death may be in common. And the law is not at 
variance with the gospel, but agrees with it. How should 
it be otherwise, one Lord being the author of both? She 
who has committed fornication liveth in sin, and is dead to 
the commandments ; but she who has repented, being as it 
were born again by the change in her life, has a regeneration 
of life; the old harlot being dead, and she who has been regene- 
rated by repentance having come back again to life. The 
Spirit testifies to what has been said by Ezekiel, declaring, 
“ I desire not the death of the sinner, but that he should 
turn .” 2 Now they are stoned to death; as through hai’dness 
of heart dead to the law which they believed not. But in 
the case of a priestess the punishment is increased, because 
u to whom much is given, from him shall more be required .” 3 

Let us conclude this second book of the Stromata at this 
point, on account of the length and number of the chapters. 

1 Lev. xx. 10 ; Deut. xxii. 22 ; Lev. xxix. 9. 

2 Ezek. xxxiii. 11. 3 Luke xii. 48. 

\ 

BOOK III* 

CAPUT I. 

BASILIDIS SENTENTIAM DE CONTINENTIA ET NUPTIIS 

KEFUTAT. 

C Valentiniani quidem, qui desuper ex divinis emis- 
sionibus deduxere conjugationes, acceptum habent 
matrimonium : Basilidis autem sectatores, “ Cum 
interrogassent, inquiunt, apostoli, mini sit melius 
uxorem non ducere, dicunt respondisse Dominum : ‘ Non 
omnes capiunt verbum hoc. Sunt enim eunuchi alii a nativi- 
tate, alii vero a necessitate.’ ” 1 Hoc dictum autem sic inter- 
pretan tur : “ Quidam ex quo nati sunt, naturaliter feminam 
aversantur, qui quidem hoc naturali utentes temperamento, 
recte faciunt, si uxorem non ducant. Hi, inquiunt, eunuchi 
sunt ex nativitate. Qui autem sunt a necessitate, ii sunt 
theatrici exercitatores, qui, glorias studio retracti, se continent. 
Quinetiam qui casu aliquo excisi sunt, eunuchi facti sunt per 
necessitatem. Qui itaque eunuchi hunt per necessitatem, non 
hunt eunuchi secundum logon, seu rationem. Qui autem 
regni sempiterni gratia seipsos castrarunt, id ad declinandas, 
inquiunt, conjugii molestias fecerunt, quod procurandae rei 
familiaris onus ac sollicitudinem timerent. Et illud : ‘ Melius 
est nubere quam uri ,’ 2 dicentem Apostolum aiunt velle : Ne 
animam tuam in ignem injicias, noctu et interdiu resistens, et 
timens ne a continentia excidas. Nam cum in resistendo occu- 
pata fuerit anima, a spe est divisa” — “Patientcr igitur sustine,” 

* After much consideration, the Editors have deemed it best to give 
the whole of this Book in Latin. 

1 Matt. xix. 11, 12. 2 1 Cor. vii. 9. 

8t 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

85 

inquit his verbis Isidorus in Moralibus , u contentiosam mulie- 
rem, ne a Dei gratia avellaris ; et cum ignem in semine ex- 
creveris, cum bona ores conscientia. Quando autem, inquit, 
tua gratiarum actio delapsa fuerit in petitionem, et deinceps 
steteris, ut tamen labi ac titubare non desinas, due uxorem. 
Sin est aliquis juvenis, vel pauper, vel infirmus, et non ei libet 
logo, seu rationi, convenienter uxorem ducere, is a fratre ne 
discedat ; dicat : Ingressus sum in sancta, nihil possum pati. 
Quod si eum suspicio aliqua subeat, dicat : Frater, impone 
mihi manum, ne peccem ; et confestim turn in mente, turn in 
corpore opem experietur. Yelit modo quod bonum est per- 
licere, et assequetur. Nonnunquam autem ore tenus dicimus : 
Nolumus peccarc ; animus autem noster propendet in pec- 
catum. Qui est ejusmodi, propter metum, quod vult, non 
facit, ne ei constituatur supplicium. At hominum generi 
quaedam necessaria sunt ac naturalia duntaxat. Quod indu- 
mentis egeat, necessarium simul est et naturale : est autem 
venerea voluptas naturalis, sed non necessaria.” Has voces 
adduxi ad reprehendendos Basilidianos, qui non recte vivunt, 
ut qui vel peccandi potestatem habeant propter perfectionem, 
vel omnino quidem natura salvi futuri sint, etsi nunc peccent, 
quod naturae dignitate sunt electi. Neque vero primi dog- 
matum architecti eorumdem perpetrandorum potestatem illis 
faciunt. Ne ergo Christi nomen suspicientes, et iis, qui sunt 
in gentibus intemperantissimi, incontinentius viventes, nomini 
maledictum inurant. u Qui enim sunt ejusmodi, pseuda- 
postoli, operarii dolosi,” usque ad illud : u Quorum finis erit 
secundum opera eorum.” 1 Est ergo continentia, corporis de- 
spicientia secundum confessionem in Deum ; non solum enim 
in rebus venereis, sed etiam in aliis, quae anima perperam 
conc.upiscit, non contenta necessariis, versatur continentia. 
I Est autem et in lingua, et in acquirendo, et in utendo, et in 
concupiscendo continentia. Non docet autem ea solummodo 
esse temperantes, siquidem praebet nobis temperantiam, ut 
quse sit divina potestas et gratia. Dicendum est ergo, quid- 
nam nostris videatur de eo, quod est propositum. Nos quidem 
f castitatem, et eos, quibus hoc a Deo datum est, beatos dicimus : 

1 2 Cor. xi. 13, 15. 

86 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

TBook hi. 

monogamiam autem, et quae consistit in uno solum matri- 
monio, honestatem admiramur ; dicentes tamen oportere 
aliorum misereri, et u alterum alterius onera portare,” 1 ne 
u quis, cum ” recte u stare videatur,” 2 ipse quoque “ cadat.” 
De secundis autem nuptiis : “ Si uraris,” inquit Apostolus, 
u jungere matrimonio.” 3 

CAPUT II. 

CARPOCRATIS ET EPIPHANIS SENTENTIAM DE FEMINARUM 
COMMUNITATE EEFUTAT. 

Qui autem a Carpocrate descendunt et Epiphane, censent 
oportere uxores esse communes ; a quibus contra nomen 
Christi maximum emanavit probrum. Hie autem Epiphanes, 
cujus etiam scripta feruntur, filius erat Carpocratis, et matris 
Alexandria; nomine, ex patre quidem Alexandrinus, ex matre 
vero Ceplialleneus. Yixit autem solum septemdecim annos, et 
Samae, quae est urbs Cephalleniae, ut deus est honore affectus. 
Quo in loco templum ex ingentibus lapidibus, altaria, delubra, 
museum, sedificatum est et consecratum ; et cum est nova 
luna, convenientes Cephallenei, diem natalem, quo in deos 
relatus est Epiphanes, sacrificant, libantque, et convivantur, 
et hjmnos canunt. A patre autem didicit et orbem discipli- 
narum et Platonis philosophiam. Fuit autem princeps mona- 
diem 4 cognitionis. A quo etiam profluxit hseresis eorum, 
qui nunc sunt, Carpocratianorum. Is ergo dicit in libro De 
justitia, Justitiam Dei esse quamdam cum mqualitate coin- 
munionem. ACquale quidem certe coelum undequaque exten- 
sum totam terram cingit. Et nox ex aequo Stellas omnes 
ostendit ; et diei auctorem et lucis patrem, solem, Deus ex 
alto aequalem effudit omnibus, qui possunt videre (illi autem 
omnes communiter respiciunt), quoniam non discernit divitem 
vel pauperem vel populi principem, insipientes et sapientes, 
feminas et masculos, liberos, servos. Sed neque secus facit 
in brutis. Cum autem omnibus animantibus aeque ipsum 

1 Gal. vi. 2. 2 1 Cor. x. 12. 

3 1 Cor. vii. 9. 4 Vid. Irenseum, lib. i. c. 2, p. 51. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

87 

Book iii.] 

communem effuderit, bonis et malis justitiam suam confirmat, 
cum nemo possit plus habere, neque auferre a proximo, ut 
ipse illius lucem habeat duplicatam. Sol facit omnibus 
animantibus communia exoriri nutrimenta, communi justitia 
ex aequo data omnibus : et ad ea, quae sunt hujusmodi, 
similiter se habet genus bourn, ut boves ; et suum, ut sues ; 
et ovium, ut oves ; et reliqua omnia. Justitia enim in iis 
apparet esse communitas. Deinde per communitatem omnia 
similiter secundum sua genera seminantur, et commune nutri- 
mentum editur liumi pascentibus jumentis omnibus, et omni- 
bus ex aequo ; ut quod nulla lege circumscriptum sit, sed 
ejus, qui donat, jubentis suppeditatione, convenienter justeque 
adsit omnibus. Sed neque generationi posita est lex, esset 
enim jamdiu abolita : ex aequo autem seminant et generant, 
habentia innatam a justitia communionem : ex aequo commu- 
niter omnibus oculum ad videndum, creator et pater omnium, 
sua justitia legem ferens, praebuit, non discernens feminam a 
masculo, non id quod est rationis particeps, ab experte rationis, 
et, ut semel dicam, nullum a nullo ; sed aequalitate et com- 
munitate visum similiter dividens, uno jussu omnibus est 
largitus. Leges autem, inquit, liominum, cum ignorationem 
castigare non possent, contra leges facere docuerunt : legum 
enim proprietas dissecuit divinae legis communionem et arrodit; 
non intelligens dictum Apostoli dicentis : ‘ Per legem pec- 
catum cognovi.’ Et meum et tuum dicit subiisse per leges, 
ut quae non amplius communiter fruantur (sunt enim com- 
munia), neque terra, neque possessionibus, sed neque matri- 
monio. Fecit enim vites communiter omnibus, quae neque 
passerem, neque furem abnegant ; et frumentum similiter, et 
alios fructus. Violata autem communio et aequalitas, genuit 
furem pecorum et fructuum. Cum ergo Deus communiter 
omnia fecisset homini, et feminam cum masculo communiter 
conjunxisset, et omnia similiter animantia conglutinasset, 
pronuntiavit justitiam, communionem cum aequalitate. Qui 
autem sic nati sunt, communionem, quae eorum conciliat 
generationem, abnegaverunt. Et dicit, si unam ducens 
liabeat, cum omnium possint esse participes, sicut reliqua fecit 
animantia.” IJcec cum his verbis dixisset, subjungit rursus 

88 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

liis verbis : “ Intensam enim et vehementiorem ingeneravit 
masculis cupiditatem ad generum perpetuitatem, quam nec 
lex, nec mos, nec aliquid aliud potest abolere : est enim Dei 
decretum.” Et quomodo amplius hie in nostra examinetur 
oratione, cum legem et Evangelium per lisec aperte destruat? 
Ilia enim dicit : u Non moecliaberis.” 1 Hoc autem dicit : 
“ Quicunque respicit ad concupiscentiam, jam moecliatus est .” 2 
Illud enim : u Non concupisces,” 3 quod a lege dicitur, ostendit 
unum esse Deum, qui prsedicatur per legem et proplietas et 
Evangelium. Dicit enim : u Non concupisces uxorem proximi 
tui.” Proximus autem non est Judseus Judgeo : frater enim 
est et eumdem liabet Spiritum ; restat ergo, ut propinquum 
dicat eum qui est alterius gentis. Quomodo autem non pro- 
pinquus, qui aptus est esse Spiritus particeps ? Non solum 
enim Hebrasorum, sed etiam gentium pater est Abraham. Si 
autem quae est adulterata, et qui in earn fornicatus est, capite 
punitur : 4 clarum est utique praeceptum, quod dicit : “ Non 
concupisces uxorem propinqui tui,” loqui de gentibus : ut 
cum quis secundum legem et ab uxore proximi et a sorore 
abstinuerit, aperte audiat a Domino : u Ego autem dico, non 
concupisces.” Additio autem hujus particular, “ ego,” majo- 
rem prsecepti vim ostendit. Quod autem cum Deo bellum 
gerat Oarpocrates, et Epiphanes etiam in eo, qui vulgo jac- 
tatur, libro JDe justitia, patet ex eo quod subjungit bis verbis : 
“ Hinc ut qui ridiculum dixerit, legislatoris hoc verbum audi- 
endum est : ‘ Non concupisces : ’ usque ad id, quod magis 
ridicule dicit : ‘ Res proximi tui.’ Ipse enim, qui dedit 
cupiditatem, ut quae contineret generationem, jubet earn 
auferre, cum a nullo earn auferat animali. Illud autem : 
‘ Uxorem proximi tui,’ quo communionem cogit ad proprie- 
tatem, dixit adhuc magis ridicule.” Et haec quidem dogmata 
constituunt egregii Carpocratiani. Hos dicunt et aliquos 
alios similium malorum aeinulatores, ad coenas convenientes 
(neque enim dixerim “ agapen ” eorum congressionem) viros 
simul et mulieres, postquam cibis venerem excitantibus se 
expleverint, lumine amoto, quod eorum fornicatoriam banc 
justitiam pudore afficiebat, aversa lucerna, coire quomodo 
1 Ex. xx. 13. 2 Matt. v. 28. 3 Ex. xx. 17. 1 Dcut. xxii. 22. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

S9 

velint, et cum quibus velint : meditatos autem in ejusmodi 
“ agape'"’ communionem, interdiu jam, a quibus velint mulieri- 
bus exigere Carpocratese (divinse enim nefas est dicere) legis 
obedientiam. Has leges, ut sentio, ferre opportuit Carpo- 
cratem canum et suum et hircorum libidinibus. Milii autem 
videtur, Platonem quoque male intellexisse, in Republica 
dicentem, oportere esse communes omnium uxores : ut qui 
diceret eas quidem, qum nondum nupserant, esse communes 
eorum, qui essent petituri, quemadmodum theatrum quoque 
est commune spectatorum ; esse autem unamquamque unius- 
cujusque qui prseoccupasset, et non amplius communem esse 
earn quae nupsisset. Xanthus autem in iis, quae scribuntur 
Magica : c: Coeunt autem,” inquit, “ magi cum matribus et 
filiabus : et fas esse aiunt coire cum sororibus, et communes 
esse uxores, non vi et clam, sed utrisque consentientibus, cum 
velit alter ducere uxorem alterius He his et similibus 
haeresibus existimo Judam prophetice dixisse in epistola : 
“Similiter quidem hi quoque somniantes ” (non enim vigilantes 
ad veritatem se applicant), usque ad illucl : “ Et os eorum 
loquitur superba.” 1 

CAPUT III. 

QUATENUS PLATO ALIIQUE E VETERIBUS PEiEIVERINT 
MAECIONITIS ALIISQUE H^RETICIS, QUI A NUPTIIS 
IDEO ABSTINENT QUIA CREATURAM MALAM EXISTI- 
MANT ET NASCI HOMINES IN PCENAM OPINANTUR. 

Jam vero si et ipse Plato et Pythngorei, sicut etiam postea 
Marcionitae, malam existiinarunt esse generationem, longe 
abfuit, ut communes ipse poneret uxores. Sed Marcionitae 
quidem dicunt malam esse naturam, ex mala materia, et a 
I justo factam opifice ac Creatore. Qua quidem ratione no- 
I lentes implere mundum, qui factus est a Creatore, volunt 
abstinere a nuptiis, resistentes suo Creatori, et contendentes 
ad bonum, qui vocavit : sed non ad eum, qui, ut dicunt, 
Deus est diversis moribus praeditus. Unde cum nihil hie 

1 Jude 8-17. 

90 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

velint relinquere proprium, non sunt ex destinato ani mi p ro- 
posito continentes, sed propter odium conceptum adve rsum 
eum, qui creavit, nolentes iis uti, qute ab ipso sunt create. 
Sed hi quidem, qui propter impium, quod cum Deo gerunt, 
bellum, emoti sunt ab iis cogitationibus, quae sunt secundum 
naturam, Dei longanimitatem contemnentes et benignitatem, 
etsi nolunt uxorem ducere, cibis tamen utuntur creatis, et 
aerem respirant Creatoris, ut qui et ejus sint opera, et in iis, 
quse sunt ejus, permaneant, et inauditam ac novam quamdam, 
ut aiunt, annuntiatam audiunt cognitionem, etiamsi hoc quo- 
que nomine mundi Domino deberent agere gratias, quod hie 
acceperint Evangelium. Sed adversus eos quidem, cum de 
principiis tractabimus, accuratissime disseremus. Philosophi 
autem, quorum mentionem fecimus, a quibus cum malam 
esse generationem impie didicissent Marcionitre, tanquam suo 
dogmate gloriantur, non earn volunt esse natura malam, sed 
anima, quse veritatem divulgavit. Animam enim, quam esse 
divinam fatentur, in hunc munduin deducunt, tanquam in 
locum supplicii. Oportet autem animas in corpus immissas 
expiari ex eorum sententia. Non convenit autem amplius 
hoc dogma Marcionistis, sed iis, qui censent in corpora in- 
trudi, et iis alligari, et quasi ex vase in vas aliud transfundi 
animas. Adversus quos fuerit aliud dicendi tempus, quando 
de anima tractabimus. Yidetur itaque Heraclitus maledictis 
insequi generationem : “ Quoniam autem,” inquit, “ nati 
volunt vivere, et mortes habere, vel potius quiescere ; filios 
quoque relinquunt, ut mortes fiant.” Clarum est autem cum 
eo convenire Empedoclem quoque dicentem : 

Deflevi et luxi, insolituin cernens miser orbem. 

Et amplius : 

Mortua nam ex vivis fecit, species commutans. 

Et rursus : 

Hei mihi ! quam infelix hominum genus atque miseUum ! 

Litibus cx quantis prognati et planctibus estis ? 

Dicit autem Sibylla quoque : 

Mortales homines, caro qui tantum, et nihil estis ; 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

91 

Similiter atque poeta, qui scribit : 

Haud homine infelix tellus mage quidquam alit alma. 

Quin etiam Theognis malam ostendit esse generationem, 
dicens hoc modo : 

Optima non nasci res est mortalibus segris, 

Nec nitidi solis luce micante frui, 

Extemplo aut natum portas invadere Ditis. 

His autem consequentia scribit quoque Euripides, poeta 
tragicus : 

Nam nos decebat convenire publice, et 
Deflere natum, quod tot ingreditur mala : 

Ast mortuum, cuique jam quies data est, 

Efferi'e lsetis gratulationibus. 

Et rursus similia sic dicit : 

Quis novit, an vivere quidem siet mori, 

Siet mori autem vivere ? 

Idem quod hi, videtur Herodotus quoque inducere dicentem 
Solonem : a O Croese, quivis homo nihil est aliud quam 
calamitas.” Jam vero ejus de Cleobide et Bitone fabula 
plane nihil aliud vult, quam vituperare generationem, laudare 
autem mortem. 

Et qualis folii, est hominum generatio talis , ait Homerus. 
Plato autem in Cratglo, Orpheo tribuit eum sermonem, quo 
anima puniri in corpore dicitur : “ Nempe corpus hoc aniinse 
crgxa" monumentum , u quidam esse tradunt : quasi ipsa 
prsesenti in tempore sit sepulta ; atque etiam quia anima per 
corpus ari/jialvei ,” signijicat , u quaecunque significare potest : 
ideo arjfxa jure vocari. Videatur mihi prseterea Orpheus 
nomen hoc ob id potissimum imposuisse, quod anima in cor- 
pore hoc delictorum luat poenas.” Operse pretium est autem 
meminisse etiam eorum, qum dicit Philolaus. Sic enim dicit 
hie Pytiiagoreus : 11 Testantur autem veteres quoque theo- 
logi et vates, ad luenda supplicia animam conjunctain esse 
corpori, et in eo tanquam in monumento esse sepultam.” 
Quin etiam Pindarus de iis, qute sunt in Eleusine, mysteriis 
loquens, infert : u Beatus, qui cum ilia sub terra viderit com- 

92 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

mania, novit quidem vitas finem, novit autem datum Jovis 
imperium/’ Et Plato similiter in Phcedone non veretur hoc 
modo scribere : a Porro autem hi, qui nobis hsec constitue- 
runt mysteria, non aliquid aliud,” usque ad : “ Et cum diis 
habitatione.” Quid vero, cum dicit : “ Quandiu corpus ha- 
buerimus, et anima nostra cum ejusmodi malo admista fuerit, 
illud, quod desideramus, nunquam satis assequemur?” annon 
significat generationem esse causam maximorum malorum ? 
.Jam vero in Phcedone quoque testatur: “ Evenit enim, ut 
qui x’ecte philosophantur, non animadvertantur ab aliis in 
nullam rem aliam suum studium conferre, quam ut emori- 
antur, et sint mortui.” Et rursus : “ Ergo liic quoque 
philosophi anima corpus maxime vilipendit, et ab eo fugit, 
ipsa autem secum seorsim esse quasrit.” Nunquid autem 
consentit cum divino Apostolo, qui dicit : “ Infelix ego homo, 
quis me liberabit a corpore mortis hujus ?” 1 nisi forte eorum 
consensionem, qui trahuntur in vitium, “ corpus mortis ” 
dicit tropice. Atque coitum quoque, qui est principium 
generationis, vel ante Marcionem videtur Plato aversari in 
primo De republica: ubi cum laudasset senectutem, sub- 
jungit : “ Yelim scias, quod quo magis me deficiunt alios,” 
nempe corporis, “ voluptates, eo magis confabulandi cupiditas, 
et voluptas, quam ex ea re capio, augetur.” Et cum rei 
venerese injecta csset mentio : u Bona verba quoeso,” inquit : 
“ ego vero lubenter isthinc, tan quam ab insano aliquo et 
agresti domino, effugi.” Rursus in Phcedone , vituperans 
generationem, dicit : “ Quoe ergo de his in arcanis dicitur, 
hose est oratio, quod nos homines sumus in custodia aliqua.” 
Et rursus : “ Qui autem pie pros casteris vixisse inveniuntur, 
hi sunt, qui ex his terrenis locis, tanquam e carcere, soluti 
atque liberati, ad puram in altioribus locis habitationem 
transcendunt.” Sed tamen quamvis ita se habeat, recto a 
Deo mundum administrari existimat ; unde dicit: “Non 
oportet autem seipsum solvere, nec effugere.” Et ut paucis 
dicam, non dedit Marcioni occasionem, ut malam existimaret 
materiam, cum ipse pie de mundo hoec dixerit : “ Ab eo 
enim, qui ipsum construxit, habet omnia bona : a priori 

1 Rom. vii. 24. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

93 

autem deformitate incommoda et injusta omnia, quae intra 
coelum nascuntur, mundus ipse sustinet, et animantibus 
inserit.” Adhuc autem subjungit manifestius : u Cujus 
quidem defectus est corporea teinperatura, priscee naturae 
comes ; nam quiddam valde deforme erat, et ordinis ex- 
pers, priusquam prsesenti ornatu decoraretur.” Nihilominus 
autem in Legibns quoque defiet humanum genus, sic 
dicens : u Dii autem hominum genus laboribus naturae pres- 
sum miserati, remissiones ipsis statuerunt laborum, solem- 
nium videlicit festorum vicissitudines.” Et in Epinomide 
persequitur etiam causas, cur sint hominum miserti, et sic 
dicit : u Ab initio ipsum esse genitum, est grave cuili- 
bet animanti : primum quidem, quod eorum constitutionis 
sint participes, quae in utero gestantur; deinde ipsum 
nasci, et praeterea nutriri et erudiri, per innumerabiles 
labores universa fiunt, ut omnes dicimus.” Quid vero ? 
annon Heraclitus generationem quoque dicit esse mortem ? 
Pythagoras autem similiter atque Socrates in Gorgia, cum 
dicit : “ Mors est, quaecunque experrecti videmus : quaecun- 
que autem dormientes, somnus.” Sed de his quidem satis. 
Quando autem tractabimus de principiis, tunc et has repug- 
nantias, quas et innuunt philosoplii, et suis dogmatibus de- 
cernuntMarcionistae, considerabimus. Caeterum satis dilucide 
ostensas esse existimo, externorum alienorumque dogmatum 
occasiones Marcionem ingrate et indocte accepisse a Platone. 
Nobis autem procedat sermo de continentia. Dicebamus 
autem Graecos adversus liberorum generationem multa dixisse, 
incommoda, quae comitari earn solent, respicientes : quae cum 
impie excepissent Marcionitae, impie fuisse ingratos in Crea- 
torem. Dicit enim tragoedia : 

Non nascier prsestat homines, quam nascier. 

Dein filios acei’bis cum doloribus 
Enitor, ast enixa, si stolidi sient, 

Afflictor, intuendo quod servo malos, 

Bonosque perdo. Si bonos servo, tamen 

Mihi misellum cor timore liquitur. 

Quid hie boni ergo est ? unicam annon sufficit 
Effundere animam, nisi crucieris amplius? 

94 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book nr. 

Et aclinic similiter : 

Vetus stat mihi persuasio, 

Plantare filios numquam hominem oportuit, 

Dum cemit ad quot gignimus natos mala. 

In his autem, quae deinceps sequuntur, malorum quoque 
causam evidenter reducit ad principia, sic dicens : 

0 ! miser natus, malisque obnoxius 
Editus, homo, es, vitse tuseque miseriam 
Hinc inchoasti : coepit sether omnibus 
Spiramen unde alens tradere mortaJibus ; 

Mortalis segre ne feras mortalia. 

Rursus autem his similia tradit : 

Mortalium. omnium beatus non fuit 
Quisquam, molestia et nemo carens fuit. 

Et deinde rursus : 

Heu ! quanta, quotque hominibus eveniunt mala, 

Quam varia, quorum terminus nullus datur. 

Et adhuc similiter : 

Nemo beatus semper est mortalium. 

Hac itaque ratione dicunt etiam Pythagoreos abstinere a 
rebus venereis. Mihi autem contra videntur uxores quidem 
ducere, ut liberos suscipiant, velle autem a venerea voluptate 
se continere post susceptos liberos. Proinde mystice uti 
fabis prohibent, non quod sit legumen datum excitans, et 
concoctu difficile, et somnia efficiat turbulenta ; neque quod 
hominis capiti sit similis, ut vult ille versiculus : 

Idem est namque fabam atque caput corrodere patris ; 

sed potius quod faboe, si comedantur, stei’iles efficiant mu- 
lieres. Theophrastus quidem certe in quinto libro De causis 
plantarum, fabarum siliquas, si ponantur ad radices arborum 
quae nuper sunt plantatae, refert plantas exsiccare. Quin- 
etiam gallinse domesticas, quae eas assidue comedunt, efficiun- 
tur steriles. 

Book iii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

95 

'CAPUT IY. 

QUIBTJS PEjETEXTIBUS UTANTUE H.EEETICI AD OMNIS 
GENEEIS LICENTIAM ET LIBIDINEM EXEECENDAM. 

Ex iis autem, qui ab h ceres i ducuntur, Marcionis quidem 
Poutici fecimus mentionem, qui propter certamen, quod 
adversus Creatorem suscepit, mundanarum rerum usum 
recusat. Ei autem continentiae causa est, si modo est ea 
dicenda continentia, ipse Creator, cui se adversari existimans 
gigas iste cum Deo pugnans, est invitus continens, dum in 
creationem et Dei opus invehitur. Quod si usurpent vocem 
Domini, qui dicit Philippo : “ Sine mortuos sepelire mortuos 
suos, tu autem sequere me 1 at illud considerent, quod 
similem carnis formationem fert quoque Philippus, non 
habens cadaver pollutum. Quomodo ergo cum carnem 
haberet, non habuit cadaver ? Quoniam surrexit ex monu- 
mento, Domino ejus vitia morte afficiente, vixit autem 
Christo. Meminimus autem nefarice quoque ex Carpo- 
cratis sententia mulierum communionis. Cum autem de 
dicto Nicolai loqueremur, illud prsetermisimus : Cum for- 
mosam, aiunt, haberet uxorem, et post Servatoris assump- 
tionem ei fuisset ab apostolis exprobrata zelotypia, in medium 
adducta muliere, permisit cui vellet earn nubere. Aiunt 
enim hanc actionem illi voci consentaneam, qua3 dicit, quod 
u carne abuti oporteat.” Proinde ejus factum et dictum 
absolute et inconsiderate sequentes, qui ejus hseresim per- 
sequuntur, impudenter effuseque fornicantur. Ego autem 
audio Nicolaum' quidem nulla unquam alia, quam ea, quce ei 
nupserat, uxore usum esse ; et ex illius liberis, filias quidem 
consenuisse virgines, filium autem permansisse incorruptum. 
Quse cum ita se habeant, vitii erat depulsio atque expur- 
gatio, in medium apostolorum circumactio uxoris, cujus clice- 
batur laborare zelotypia : et continentia a voluptatibus, quse 
magno studio parari solent, docebat illud, “ abuti carne,” hoc 
est, exercere carnem. Neque enim, ut existimo, volebant, 
1 Matt. viii. 22 ; Luke ix. 60. 

96 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book nr. 

convcnienter Domini praecepto, “ duobus dominis servire,” 1 
voluptati et Deo. Dicunt itaque Matthiam quoque sic 
docuisse : “ Oum carne quidem pugnare, et ea uti, nihil ei 
impudicum largiendo ad voluptatem ; augere autem animam 
per fidem et cognitionem.” Sunt autem, qui etiam publicam 
venerem pronuntiant mysticam communionem ; et sic ipsurn 
nomen contumelia afficiunt. Sicut enim operari eum dici- 
mus, turn qui malum aliquod facit, turn etiam qui bonum, 
idem nomen utrique tribuentes ; haud aliter 11 communio ” 
usurpari solet ; nam bona quidem est in communicatione 
turn pecuniae, turn nutrimenti et vestitus : illi autem quam- 
libet veneream conjunctionem impie vocaverunt u commu- 
nionem.” Dicunt itaque ex iis quemdam, cum ad nostram 
virginem vultu formosam accessisset, dixisse : Scriptum est : 
u Da omni te petenti 2 illam autem lioneste admodum 
respondisse, ut quae non intelligeret hominis petulantiam : 
At tu matrem conveni de matrimonio. O impietatem! etiam 
voces Domini ementiuntur isti intemperantise communica- 
tores, fratresque libidinis, non solum probrum philosophise, 
sed etiam totius vitae ; qui veritatem, quantum in eis situm 
est, adulterant ac corrumpunt, vel potius defodiunt; homines 
infelicissimi carnalem concubitus communionem consecrant, 
et banc ipsos putant ad regnum Dei perducere. Ad lupan- 
aria ergo deducit liaec communio, et cum eis communica- 
verint sues et liirci, maximaque apud illos in spe fuerint 
meretrices, quae in prostibulis praesto sunt, et volentes omnes 
admittunt. “Vos autem non sic Christum didicistis, siqui- 
dem ipsum audiistis, et in eo docti estis, quemadmodum est 
veritas in Christo Jesu, ut deponatis quae sunt secundum 
veterem conversationem, veterem hominem, qui corrumpitur 
secundum desideria deceptionis. Renovamini autem spiritu 
mentis vestrae, et induatis novum hominem, qui creatus est 
secundum Deum in j ustitia et sanctitate veritatis,” 3 ad Dei 
similitudinem. u Efficimini ergo Dei imitatores, ut filii di- 
lecti, et ambulate in dilectione, sicut Christus quoque dilexit 
nos, et tradidit seipsum pro nobis oblationem et hostiam Deo 

1 Matt. vi. 24 ; Luke xvii. 13. 2 Matt. v. 42 ; Luke vi. 30. 

3 Eph. iv. 20-24. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

97 

Book nr.] 

in odorem suavitatis. Fornicatio autem, efc omnis immun- 
clitia, vel avaritia, ne nominetur quidem in vobis, sicut decet 
sanctos, et turpitudo, et stultiloquium.” 1 Etenim docens 
Apostolus meditari vel ipsa voce esse castos, scribit : “ Hoc 
enim scitote, quod omnis fornicator,” et csetera, usque ad 
illud : “ Maois autem arguite.” 2 Effluxit autem eis domna 
ex quodam apocrypho libro. Atque adeo afferam dictionem, 
quse mater eorum intemperantise et origo est : et sive ipsi 
hujus libri scriptores se fateantur, en eorum vecordiam, licet 
Deo eum falso ascribant libidinis intemperantia ducti : sive 
ab aliis, eos perverse audientes, hoc prseclarum dogma acce- 
perint, sic porro se habent ejus verba: “Unura erant omnia: 
postquam autem ejus unitati visum est non esse solam, exiit 
ab eo inspiratio, et cum ea iniit communionem, et fecit 
dilectum. Exhinc autem egressa est ab ipso inspiratio, cum 
qua cum communionem iniisset, fecit potestates, quse nec 
possunt videri nec audiri,” usque ad illud, “ unamquamque 
in nomine proprio.” Si enim hi quoque, sicut Yalentiniani, 
spiritales posuissent communiones, suscepisset forte aliquis 
eorum opinionem : carnalis autem libidinis communionem ad 
sanctam inducere prophetiam, est ejus qui desperat salutem. 
Talia etiam statuunt Prodici quoque asseclse, qui seipsos 
falso nomine vocant Gnosticos : seipsos quidem dicentes esse 
natura filios primi Dei ; ea vero nobilitate et libertate abu- 
tentes, vivunt ut volunt ; volunt autem libidinose ; se nulla 
re teneri arbitrati, ut “ domini sabbati,” et qui sint quovis 
genere superiores, filii regales. Begi autem, inquiunt, lex 
scripta non est. Primum quidem, quod non faciant omnia 
quse volunt : multa enim eos prohibebunt, etsi cupiant et 
conentur. Quinetiam quse faciunt, non faciunt ut reges, 
sed ut mastigise : clanculum enim committunt adulteria, 
timentes ne deprehendantur, et vitantes ne condemnentur, 
et metuentes ne supplicio afficiantur. Quomodo etiam res 
est libera, intemperantia et turpis sermo? “Omnis enim, 
qui peccat, est servus,” inquit Apostolus. 3 Sed quomodo 
vitam ex Deo instituit, qui seipsum prsebuit dedititium 
cuivis concupiscentise ? cum dixerit Dominus : “ Ego autem 
1 Eph. v. 1-4. 2 Eph. v. 5-11. 3 Rom. vi. 16. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. G 

98 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

dico : Ne concupiscas.” Vultne autem aliquis sua sponte 
peccare, et decernere adulteria esse committenda, voluptati- 
busque et deliciis se explendum, et aliorum violanda matri- 
monia, cum aliorum etiam, qui inviti peccant, misereamur ? 
Quod si in externum mundum venerint, qui in alieno non 
fuerint fideles, verum non habebunt. Afficit autem hospes 
aliquis cives contumelia, et eis injuriam facit ; et non potius 
ut peregrinus, utens necessariis, vivit, cives non offendens? 
Quomodo autem, cum eadem faciant, ac ii, quos gentes odio 
habent, quod legibus obtemperare nolint, nempe iniqui, et 
incontinentes, et avari, et adulteri, dicunt se solos Deum 
nosse % Oporteret enim eos, cum in alienis adsunt, recte 
vivere, ut revera regiam indolem ostenderent. Jam vero et 
humanos legislatores, et divinam legem habent sibi infensam, 
cum inique et prseter leges vivere instituerint. Is certe, 
qui scortatorem 11 confodit,” a Deo pius esse ostenditur in 
Numeris. “ Et si dixerimus,” inquit Joannes in epistola, 
“ quod societatem habemus cum eo,” nempe Deo, “ et in 
tenebris ambulamus, mentimur, et veritatem non facimus. 
Si autem in luce ambulamus, sicut et ipse est in luce, socie- 
tatem habemus cum ipso, et sanguis Jesu filii ejus emundat 
nos a peccato.” 1 Quomodo ergo sunt hi hujus mundi homi- 
nibus meliores, qui hsec faciunt, et vel pessimis hujus mundi 
sunt similes ? sunt enim, ut arbitror, similes natura, qui sunt 
factis similes. Quibus autem se esse censent nobilitate 
superiores,^ eos debent etiam superare moribus, ut vitent ne 
includantur in carcere. Revera enim, ut dixit Dominus : 
u Nisi abundaverit justitia vestra plus quam scribarum et 
Pharisseorum, non intrabitis in regnum Dei .” 2 De absti- 
nentia autem a cibis ostenditur a Daniele . 3 Ut sernel autem 
dicam, de obedientia dicit psallens David : 11 In quo diriget 
junior viam suam ? ” 4 Et statim audit : <£ In custodiendo 
sermones tuos in toto corde.” Et dicit Jeremias : “ Haec 
autem dicit Dominus : Per vias gentium ne ambulaveritis.” 5 
Hinc moti aliqui alii, pusilli et nullius pretii, dicunt forma- 
tum fuisse hominem a diversis potestatibus : et quae sunt 

1 Num. xxv. 8; 1 John i. 6. 7. 2 Matt. v. 20. 3 Dan. i. 

4 Ps. cxviii. 9. 5 Jer. x. 2. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

99 

quiclem usque ad uinbilicum esse artis divinioris ; quse autem 
subter, minoris ; qua de causa coitum quoque appetere. 
Non animadvertunt autem, quod superiores quoque partes 
nutrimentum appetunt, et quibusdam libidinantur. Adver- 
santur autem Christo quoque, qui dixit Pharisseis, eumdem 
Deum et “ internum ” nostrum et t( externum ” fecisse homi- 
nem. 1 Quinetiam appetitio non est corporis, etsi fiat per 
corpus. Quidam alii, quos etiam vocamus Antitactas, hoc 
est “ adversaries ” et repugnantes, dicunt quod Deus quidem 
universorum noster est natura pater, et omnia qusecunque 
fecit, bona suut ; unus autem quispiam ex iis, qui ab ipso 
facti sunt, seminatis zizaniis, malorum naturam generavit : 
quibus etiam nos omnes implicavit, ut nos efficeret Patri 
adversarios. Quare nos etiam ipsi huic adversamur ad 
Patrem ulciscendum, contra secundi voluntatem facientes. 
Quoniam ergo hie dixit: “Non moechaberis nos, inquiunt, 
moechamur, ut ejus mandatum dissolvamus. Quibus respon- 
derimus quoque, quod pseudoprophetas, et eos qui veritatem 
simulant, ex operibus cognosci accepimus : si male audiunt 
autem vestra opera, quomodo adhuc dicetis vos veritatem 
tenere ? Aut enim nullum est malum, et non est utique 
dignus reprehensione is, quern vos insimulatis, ut qui Deo sit 
adversatus,. neque fuit alicujus mali effector; una enim cum 
malo arbor quoque interimitur : aut si est malum ac con- 
sists, dicant nobis, quid dicunt esse ea, quse data sunt, prse- 
cepta, de justitia, de continentia, de tolerantia, de patientia, 
et iis, quse sunt hujusmodi, bona an mala? et si fuerit 
quidem malum prseceptum, quod plurima prohibet facere 
turpia, adversus seipsum legem feret vitium, ut seipsum dis- 
solvat, quod quidem non potest fieri ; sin autem bonum, cum 
bonis adversentur prseceptis, se bono adversari, et mala facere 
confitentur. Jam vero ipse quoque Servator, cui soli cen- 
sent esse parendum, odio habere, et maledictis insequi pro- 
hibuit : et, “ Cum adversario,” inquit, “ vadens, ejus amicus 
conare discedere.” 2 Aut ergo Christi quoque negabunt 
suasionem, adversantes adversario : aut, si sint amici, contra 
eum certamen suscipere nolunt. Quid vero? an nescitis, 
1 Luke xi. 40. 2 Matt. v. 25 ; Luke xii. 58. 

100 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book nr. 

viri egregii (loquor enim tanquam praesentibus), quocl cum 
prseceptis, quae se recie habent, pugnantes, proprise saluti 
resistitis ? Non enim ea, quae sunt utiliter edicta, sed vos 
ipsos evertitis. Et Dominus : “Lueeant” quidem, inquit, 
“ bona vestra opera 1 vos autem libidines et intemperan- 
tias vestras manifestas redditis. . Et alioqui si vultis legisla- 
toris praecepta dissolvere, quanam de causa, illud quidem : 
“ Non moechaberis et hoc : “ Stuprum puero non inferes,” 
et quaecunque ad continentiam conferunt, dissolvere con- 
amini, propter vestram intemperantiam : non dissolvitis 
autem, quae ab ipso fit, hiemem, ut media adhuc liieme 
aestatem faciatis : neque terram navigabilem, mare autem 
pedibus pervium, facitis, ut qui historias composuerunt, 
barbarum Xerxem dicunt voluisse facere ? Cur vero non 
omnibus praeceptis repugnatis? Nam cum ille dicat; “Cres- 
cite et multiplicamini ,” 2 oporteret vos, qui adversamini, nullo 
modo uti coitu. Et cum dixit : “ Dedi vobis omnia ad ves- 
cendum ” 3 et fruendum, vos nullo frui oportuit. Quinetiam 
eo dicente : “ Oculum pro oculo,” 4 oportuit vos decerta- 
tionem contraria non rependere decertatione. Et cum 
furem jusserit reddere “ quadruplum ,” 5 oportuit vos furi 
aliquid etiam addere. Rursus vero similiter, cum praecepto : 
u Diliges Deum tuum ex toto corde tuo,” c repugnetis, opor- 
tuit nec universorum quidem Deum diligere. Et rursus, 
cum dixerit : “ Non facies sculptile neque fusile ,” 7 conse- 
quens erat ut etiam sculptilia adoraretis. Quomodo ergo 
non impie facitis, qui Creatori quidem, ut dicitis, resistitis ; 
quae sunt autem meretricibus et adulteris similia, sectamini ? 
Quomodo autem non sentitis vos eum majorem facere, quern 
pro imbecillo habetis ; si quidem id fit, quod hie vult ; non 
autem illud, quod voluit bonus? contra enim ostenditur 
quodam modo a vobis ipsis, imbecillum esse, quern vestrum 
patrem dicitis. Recensent etiam ex quibusdam locis pro- 
pheticis decerptas dictiones, et male consarcinatas, quae alle- 
gorice dicta sunt tanquam recto ductu et citra figuram dicta 

1 Matt. v. 1G. 2 Gen. i. 28. ix. 1. 3 Gen. i. 29, ix. 2, 3. 

4 Ex. xxi. 24. 5 Ex. xxii. 1. 0 Dcut. vi. 5. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

101 

sumentes. Dicunt enim scriptum esse : “ Deo restiterunt, 
et salvi facti sunt 1 illi autem “ Deo impudenti ” addunt ; 
et hoc eloquium tanquam consilium pr®ceptum accipiunt : 
et hoc ad salutem conferre existimant, quod Creatori resis- 
tant. At “impudenti” quidem “Deo,” non est scriptum. 
Si autem sic quoque habeat, eum, qui vocatus est diabolus, 
intelligite impudentem: yel quod hominem calumniis impetat, 
vel quod accuset peccatores, vel quod sit apostata. Populus 
ergo, de quo hoc dictum est, cum castigaretur propter sua 
peccata, ®gre ferentes et gementes, his verbis, quae dicta 
sunt, murmurabant, quod alise quidem gentes cum inique se 
gerant non puniantur, ipsi autem in singulis A T exentur ; adeo 
ut Jeremias quoque dixerit : “ Cur via impiorum pros- 
pei'atur?” 2 quod simile est ei, quod prius allatum est ex 
Malachia : “ Deo restiterunt, et salvi facti sunt.” Nam pro- 
phetse divinitus inspirati, non solum qu® a Deo audierint, se 
loqui profitentur ; sed et ipsi etiam solent ea, qu® vulgo 
jactantur a populo, exceptionis modo, edicere, et tanquam 
qu®stiones ab hominibus motas referre : cujusmodi est illud 
dictum, cujus mentio jam facta est. Nunquid autem ad hos 
verba sua dirigens, scribit Apostolus in Epistola ad Romanos : 
“ Et non sicut blasphemamur, et sicut dicunt aliqui nos 
dicere : Faciamus mala, ut eveniant bona, quorum justa est 
damnatio?” 3 Ii sunt, qui inter legendum tono vocis per- 
vertunt Scripturas ad proprias voluptates, et quorumdam 
accentuum et punctorum transpositione, qu® prudenter et 
utiliter pr®cepta sunt, ad suas trahunt delicias. “ Qui irri- 
tatis Deum sermonibus vestris,” inquit Malachias, “ et dicitis, 
in quonam eum irritavimus? Dum vos dicitis: Quicunque 
facit malum, bonus est coram Domino, et ipse in eis com- 
placuit ; et ubi est Deus justiti® ?” 4 

1 Mai. iii. 15. 2 Jer. xii. 1. 3 Rom. iii. 8. 4 Mai. ii. 17. 

102 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

CAPUT V. 

DUO GENERA ILERETICORUM NOTAT : PRIUS ILLORUM QUI 
OMNIA OMNIBUS LICERE PRONUNTIANT, QUOS REFUTAT. 

Ne ergo hunc locum ungue amplius fcdicantes, pluriura 
absurdarum haeresium meminerimus ; nec rursus dum in 
singulis adversus unamquamque dicere necesse • habemus, 
propterea pudore afficiamur, et nimis prolixos hos faciamus 
commentaries, age in duo dividentes omnes haereses, eis re- 
spondeamus. Aut eniin docent indiscrete vivere : aut modum 
excedentes, per impietatem et odium profitentur continen- 
tiam. Prius autem tractandum est de prima parte. Quod 
si quodlibet vitae genus licet eligere, turn earn scilicet etiam 
licet, quae est continens : et si electus tute poterit quodlibet 
vitae genus sectari, manifestum est earn, quae temperanter et 
secundum virtutem agitur, longe tutissimam esse. Nam 
cum “ domino sabbati,” etiamsi intemperanter vivat, nulla 
ratio reddenda sit, multo magis qui vitam moderate et 
temperate instituit, nulli erit rationi reddendae obnoxius. 
“ Omnia enim licent, sed non omnia expediunt,” 1 ait Apos- 
tolus. Quod si omnia licent, videlicet moderatum quoque 
esse et temperantem. Quemadmodum ergo is est laudandus, 
qui libertate sua usus est ad vivendum ex virtute : ita multo 
magis qui dedit nobis liberam nostri potestatem, et concessit 
vivere ut vellemus, est venerandus et adorandus, quod non 
permiserit, ut nostra electio et vitatio cuiquam necessario 
serviret. Si est autem uterque aeque securus, et qui incon- 
tinentiam, et qui continentiam elegerit, non est tamen ex 
aequo honestum et decorum. Qui enim impegit in volup- 
tates, gratificatur corpori : temperans autem animam corporis 
dominam liberat a perturbationibus. Et si dicant nos u voca- 
tos fuisse in libertatem, solummodo ne praebeamus libertatem, 
in occasionem carni,” 2 ex sententia Apostoli. Si autem cupi- 
ditati est obsequendum, et quae probrosa est et turpis vita 
tanquam indifferens est eligenda, ut ipsi dicunt ; aut cupidi- 
1 1 Cor. vi. 13, x. 23. 2 Gal. v. 13. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

103 

tatibus est omnino parendum, et si hoc ita est, facienda sunt 
quaevis impudicissima et maxime nefaria, eos sequendo, qui 
nobis persuadent : aut sunt aliquae declinandse cupiditates, 
et non est amplius vivendum indifferenter, neque est impu- 
denter serviendum vilissimis et abjectissimis nostris partibus, 
ventri et pudendis, dum cupiditate ducti nostro blandimur 
cadaveri. Nutritur enini et vivificatur cupiditas, dum ei 
voluptates ministrantnr : quemadmodum rursus si impediatur 
et interturbetur, flaccescit. Quomodo autem fieri potest, ut 
qui victus est a voluptatibus corporis, Domino assimiletur, 
aut Dei habeat cognitionem % Omnis enim voluptatis prin- 
cipium est cupiditas : cupiditas autem est molestia et sollici- 
tudo, quae propter egestatem aliquid appetit. Quare nihil 
aliud mihi videutur, qui hanc vitae rationem suscipiunt, quam 
quod dicitur, 

Ultra ignominiam sentire dolores ; 

ut qui malum a se accersitum, nunc et in posterum eligant. 
Si ergo “ omnia licerent,” nec timendum esset ne a spe exci- 
deremus propter malas actiones, esset fortasse eis aliquis prse- 
textus, cur male viverent et miserabiliter. Quoniam autem 
vita beata nobis ostensa est per praecepta, quam oportet omnes 
sequentes, nec aliquid eorum, quae dicta sunt, perperam in- 
telligentes, nec eorum, quae convenit, aliquid, etsi sit vel 
minimum, contemnentes, sequi quo logos ducit ; quia, si ab 
eo aberraverimus, in malum immortale incidamus necesse 
est ; si divinam autem Scripturam secuti fuerimus, per quam 
ingrediuntur, qui crediderunt, ut Domino, quoad fieri potest, 
assimilentur, non est vivendum indifferenter, sed pro viribus 
mundos esse oportet a voluptatibus et cupiditatibus, curaque 
est gerenda animae, qua apud solum Deum perseverandum 
est. Mens enim, quae est munda et ab omni vitio libera, est 
quodammodo apta ad potestatem Dei suscipiendam, cum 
divina in ea assurgat imago : “ Et quicunque habet hanc 
spem in Domino, seipsum,” inquit, u munclum castumque 
facit, quatenus ille est castus.” 1 Ut ii autem accipiant Dei 
cognitionem, qui adhuc ducuntur ab affectibus, minime potest 

1 John iii. 3. 

104 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

fieri : ergo nee ut finem assequantur, cum nullam habeant 
Dei cognitionem. Et earn quidem, qui hunc finem non 
assequitur, accusare videtur Dei ignoratio; ut Deus aufem 
ignoretur, efficit vitae institutio. Omnino enim fieri non 
potest, ut quis simul sit et scientia praeditus, et blandiri cor- 
pori non erubescat. Neque enim potest unquam convenire, 
quod voluptas sit bonum, cum eo, quod bonum sit solum 
pulclirum et bonestum : vel etiam cum eo, quod solus sit 
pulcher Dominus, et solus bonus Deus, et solus amabilis. 
“ In Christo autem circumcisi estis, circumcisione non manu 
facta, in exspoliatione corporis carnis, in circumcisione 
Christi. 1 Si ergo cum Christo consurrexistis, quae sursum 
sunt quaerite, quae sursum sunt sapite, non quae sunt super 
terram. Mortui enim estis, et vita vestra absconsa est cum 
Christo in Deo;” non autem ea, quam exercent, fornicatio. 
“ Mortificate ergo membra, quae sunt super terram, forni- 
cationem, immunditiam, passionem, desiderium, propter quae 
venit ira Dei. Deponant ergo ipsi quoque iram, indigna- 
tionem, vitium, maledictum, turpem sermonem ex ore suo, 
exuentes veterem hominem cum concupiscentiis, et induentes 
novum, qui renovatur in agnitionem, ad imaginem ejus, qui 
creavit ipsum.” 2 Vitae enim institutio aperte eos arguit, qui 
mandata novere : qualis enim sermo, talis est vita. Arbor 
autem cognoscitur ex fructibus, non ex floribus et foliis ac 
ramis. Cognitio ergo est ex fructu et vitae institutione, non 
ex sermone et flore. Non enim nudum sermonem dicimus 
esse cognitionem, sed quamdam divinam scientiam, et lucem 
illam, quae innata animse ex praeceptorum obedientia, omnia, 
quae per generationem oriuntur, manifesta facit, et hominem 
instruit, ut seipsum cognoscat, et qua ratione compos fieri 
possit, edocet. Quod enim oculus est in corpore, hoc est in 
mente cognitio. Neque dicant libertatem, qua quis voluptati 
servit, sicut ii, qui bilem dicunt dulcem. Nos enim didi- 
cimus libertatem, qua Dominus noster nos liberat a volup- 
tatibus, et a cupiditatibus, et aliis perturbationibus solvens. 
“ Qui dicit : Novi Dominum, et mandata ejus non servat, 
mendax est, et in eo veritas non est,” 3 ait Joannes. 

1 Col. ii. 11. 2 Col. iii. 4, 10. 3 1 John ii. 4. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

105 

CAPUT VI. 

SECUNDUM GENUS H^ERETICORUM AGGREDITUE, ILLORUM 
SCILICET QUI EX IMPIA DE DEO OMNIUM CONDITORE 
SENTENTIA, CONTINENTIAM EXERCENT. 

Adversus autem alterum germs hsereticorum, qui speciose 
per continentiam impie se gerunt, turn in creaturam, turn in 
sanctum Opificem, qui est solus Deus omnipotens ; et dicunt 
non esse admittendum matrimonium et liberorum procrea- 
tionem, nec in mundum esse inducendos alios infelices futuros, 
nec suppeditandum morti nutrimentum, lisec sunt opponenda : 
prinium quidem illud Joannis : “ Et nunc antichristi multi 
facti sunt, unde scirnus quod novissima hora est. Ex nobis 
exierunt, sed non erant ex nobis. Nam si fuissent ex nobis, 
permansissent utique nobiscum 1 Deinde sunt etiam ever- 
tendi, et dissolvenda, quae ab eis afferuntur, hoc modo : 
u Salomae interroganti, quousque vigebit mors,” non quasi 
vita esset mala, et mala creatura, “Dominus, Quoad usque, 
inquit, vos mulieres paritis,” sod quasi naturalem docens eon- 
sequentiam : ortum enim ornnino sequitur interitus. Yult 
ergo lex quidem nos a deliciis omnique probro et dedecore 
educere. Et hie est ejus finis, ut nos ab injustitia ad justi- 
tiam deducamur, honesta eligendo matrimonia, et liberorum 
procreationem, bonamque vitte institutionem. Dominus autem 
“ non venit ad solvendam legem, sed ad implendam : ” 2 ad 
implendam autem, non ut cui aliquid deesset, sed quod legis 
prophetise per ejus adventum completae fuerint. Nam recta 
vitae institutio, iis etiam, qui juste vixerunt ante legem, per 
logon praedieabatur. Yulgus ergo hominum, quod non novit 
continentiam, corpore vitam degit, sed non spiritu : sine 
spiritu autem corpus nihil aliud est quam terra et einis. .Tam 
adulterium judieat Dominus ex eogitatione. Quid enim ? 
annon licet etiam continenter uti matrimonio, et non conari 
dissolvere, quod “ conjunxit Deus ? ” 3 Talia enim docent 
conjugii divisores, propter quod nomen probris ac rnaledictis 
1 1 John ii. 18, 19. 2 Matt. v. 17. 3 Matt. xix. 6 ; Mark x. 9. 

106 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book nr. 

appetitur inter gentes. Sceleratum autem dicentes isti esse 
coitum, qui ipsi quoque suam essentiam ex coitu accepere, 
quomodo non fuerint scelerati ? Eorum autem, qui sunt 
sanctificati, sanctum quoque, ut puto, semen est. Ac nobis 
quidem debet esse sanctificatus, non solum spiritus, sed et 
mores, et vita, et corpus. Nam quanam ratione dicit Paulus 
apostolus esse “ sanctificatam mulierem a viro,” aut 11 virum 
a muliere ? ” 1 Quid est autem, quod Dominus quoque dixit 
iis, qui interrogabant de divortio : “An liceat uxorem dimittere, 
cum Moyses id permiserit ? ” “ Ad duritiam cordis vestri, 

inquit, Moyses haec scripsit. Yos autem non legistis, quod 
.protoplasto Deus dixit : 1 Eritis duo in carne una ? Quare 
qui dimittit uxorem, praeterquam fornicationis causa, facit 
earn moechari . 2 Sed post resurrectionem, inquit, nec uxorem 
ducunt, nec nubunt.’ ” 3 Etenim de ventre et cibis dictum est : 
“ Escae ventri, et venter escis ; Deus autem et ilium et has 
destruet ; ” 4 hos impetens, qui instar caprorum et hircorum 
sibi vivendum esse censent, ne secure ac sine terrore comessent 
et coirent. Si resurrectionem itaque receperint, ut ipsi dicunt, 
et ideo matrimonium infirmant et abrogant ; nec comedant, 
nec bibant : “destrui” enim “ventrem et cibos,” dicit Apos- 
tolus in resurrectione. Quomodo ergo esuriunt, et sitiunt, et 
carnis patiuntur affectiones, et alia, quae non patietur, qui per 
Christum accepit perfectam, quae speratur, resurrectionem ? 
Quin etiam ii, qui colunt idola, a cibis et venere abstinent. 
“ Non est ” autem, inquit, “ regnum Dei cibus est potus .” 5 
Certe magis quoque curse est, qui angelos colunt et daemones, 
simul a vino et animatis et rebus abstinere venereis. Quem- 
admodum autem humilitas est mansuetudo, non autem 
afflictio corporis : ita etiam continentia est animae virtus, quae 
non est in manifesto, sed in occulto. Sunt autem etiam, qui 
matrimonium aperte dicunt fornicationem, et decernunt id 
traditum esse a diabolo. Dicunt autem gloriosi isti jactatores 
se imitari Dominum, qui neque uxorem duxit, neque in 
mundo aliquid possedit ; se magis quam alii Evangelium 

1 1 Cor. vii. 14. 2 Matt. xix. 3 ; Mark x. 2. 

3 Mutt. xxii. 30 ; Mark xii. 23 ; Lake xx. 35. 

4 1 Cor. vi. 13. r ‘ Rom. xiv. 17. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

107 

intellexisse gloriantes. Eis autem dicit Scriptura : “ Deus 
superbis resistit, humilibus autem dat gratiam.” 1 Deinde 
nesciunt causam cur Dominus uxorem non duxerit. Primum 
quidem, propriam sponsam liabuit Ecclesiam : deinde vero, 
nec homo erat communis, ut opus haberet etiam adjutore 
aliquo secundum carnem ; neque erat ei necesse procreare 
filios, qui manet in aeternum, et natus est solus Dei Filius. 
Hie ipse autem Dominus dicit: “Quod .Deus conjunxit, 
homo ne separet.” 2 Et rursus : “ Sicut autem erat in diebus 
Noe, erant nubentes, et nuptui dantes, aedificantes, et plan- 
tantes ; et sicut erat in diebus Lot, ita erit adventus Filii 
hominis .” 3 Et quod hoc non dicit ad gentes, ostendit, cum 
subjungit : “ Num cum venerit Filius hominis, inveniet fidem 
in terra ?” 4 Et rursus: “Vse praegnantibus et lactantibus 
in illis diebus.” 5 Quanquam liaec quoque dicuntur allegorice. 
Propterea nec “ temp ora ” praefiniit, “quae Pater posuit in 
sua potestate ,” 6 ut permaneret mundus per generationes. 
Iliad autem : “ Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc : sunt enim 
eunuchi, qui sic nati sunt ; et sunt eunuchi, qui castrati sunt 
ab hominibus ; et sunt eunuchi, qui seipsos castrarunt propter 
regnum coelorum. Qui potest capere, capiat : ” 7 nesciunt 
quod, postquam de divortio esset locutus, cum quidam rogas- 
sent : “ Si sic sit causa uxoris, non expedit homini uxorem 
ducere ; ” tunc dixit Dominus : “Non omnes capiunt verbum 
hoc, sed quibus datum est.” 8 Hoc enim qui rogabant, vole- 
bant ex eo scire, an uxore damnata et ejecta propter fornica- 
tionem, concedat aliam ducere. Aiunt autem athletas quoque 
non paucos abstinere a venere, propter exercitationem corporis 
continentes : quemadmodum Crotoniatem Astylum, et Cri- 
sonem Himerasum. Quinetiam Amoebeus citharoedus, cum 
recenter matrimonio junctus esset, a sponsa abstinuit : et 
Cyrenseus Aristoteles amantem Laidem solus despexit. Cum 
meretrici itaque jurasset, se earn esse in patriam abducturum, 
si sibi adversus decertantes adversaries in aliquibus opem tulis- 

1 Jas. iv. 6 ; 1 Pet. v. 5. 2 Matt. xix. 6 ; Mark x. 9. 

3 Matt. xxiv. 37 ; Luke xvii. 28. 4 Luke xviii. 8. 

5 Matt. xxiv. 19 ; Mark xiii. 17 ; Luke xxi. 23. 

6 Acts i. 7. 7 Matt. xix. 11, 12. 8 Matt. xix. 10, 11. 

108 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book. hi. 

set, postquam id perfecisset, lepide a se dictum jusjurandum 
exsequens, cum curasset imaginem ejus quam simillimam 
depingi, earn Cyrente statuit, ut scribit Istei’ in libro De 
proprietate certaminum. Quare nec castitas e st bonum, nis i 
fiat propter delectionem DeiT Jam de iis, qui matrimonium 
abhorrent, dicit beatus Paulus : “ In novissimis diebus defi- 
cient quidam a fide, attendentes spiritibus erroris, et doctrinis 
daemoniorum, prolnbentium nubere, abstinere a cibis.” 1 Et 
rursus dicit : “ Nemo vos seducat in voluntaria humilitatis 
religione, et parcimonia corporis .” 2 Idem autem ilia quo- 
que scribit: “Alligatus es uxori? ne quaeras solutionein. 
Solutus es ab uxore ? ne quaeras uxorem .” 3 Et rursus : 
“ Unusquisque autem suam uxorem liabeat, ne tentet vos 
Satanas .” 4 Quid vero ? non etiam justi veteres creaturam 
cum gratiarum actione participabant ? Aliqui autem etiam 
liberos susceperunt, continenter versati in matrimonio. Et 
Elia? quidem corvi alimentum afferebant, panes et carnes. 
Quinetiam Samuel propheta annum, quern ex iis, quse come- 
disset, reliquerat, allatum, dedit edendum Sauli. Hi autem, 
qui se eos dicunt vitae institutis excellere, cum illorum ac- 
tionibus ne poterunt quidem conferri. ££ Qui” itaque “non 
comedit, comedentem ne spernat. Qui autem comedit, eum' 
qui non comedit non judicet : Deus enim ipsum accepit .” 5 
Quin etiam Dominus de seipso dicens : “Venit,” inquit, 
££ Joannes, nec comedens, nec bibens, et dicunt: Dasmonium. 
habet ; venit Filius hominis comedens et bibens, et dicunt : 
Ecce homo vorax et vini potor, amicus publicanorum, et 
peccator .” 6 An etiam reprobant apostolos ? Petrus enim et 
Philippus filios procrearunt : Philippus autem filias quoque 
suas viris locavit. Et Paulus quidem certe non veretur 
in quadam epistola suam appellare ££ conjugem,” quam non 
circumferebat, quod non magno ei esset opus ministerio. 

: 

Dicit itaque in quadam epistola : “ Non habemus potestatem 
sororem uxorem circumducendi, sicut et reliqui apostoli?”* 
Sed hi quidem, ut erat consentaneum, ministerio, quod divelli 

1 1 Tim. iv. 1, 3. 

4 1 Cor. vii. 2, 5. 

7 1 Cor. ix. 5. 

2 Col. ii. 18, 23 
5 Rom. xiv. 3. 

3 1 Cor. vii. 27. 

6 Matt. xi. 18, 19. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

109 

non poterat, prtedicationi scilicet, attendentes, non ut uxoi’es, 
sed ut sorores circumducebant mulieres, quse una ministraturae 
essent apud mulieres quae domos custodiebant : per quas etiam 
in gynaeceum, absque ulla reprehensione malave suspicione, 
ingredi posset doctrina Domini. Scimus enim quaecunque 
de feminis diaconis in altera ad Timotheum praestantissimus 
docet Paulus. Atqui hie ipse exclamavit : “ Non est regnum 
Dei esca et potus : ” neque vero abstinentia a vino et carni- 
bus ; “ sed justitia, et pax, et gaudium in Spiritu sancto.” 1 
Quis eorum, ovilla pelle indutus, zona pellicea accinctus, 
circuit ut Elias ? Quis cilicium induit, caetera nudus, et dis- 
calceatus, ut Isaias vel subligaculum tantuni liabet lineum, 
ut Jeremias ? Joannis autem vitae institutum gnosticum quis 
imitabitur ? Sed sic quoque viventes, gratias Creatori age- 
bant beati prophetae. Carpocratis autem justitia, et eorum, 
qui aeque atque ipse.impudicam prosequuntur conununionem, 
hoc modo dissolvitur ; simul enim ac. dixerit : “ Te petenti 
des;” subjungit : <£ Et eum, qui velit mutuo accipere, lie 
averseris ; ” 2 banc docens communionem, non autem illam 
incestam et impudicam. Quomodo autem fuerit is qui petit 
et accipit, et is qui mutuatur, si nullus sit qui liabeat et det 
mutuo ? Quid vero ? quando dicit Dominus : u Esurivi, et 
me pavistis ; sitii, et potum mihi dedistis ; liospes eram, et 
me collegistis ; nudus, et me vestiistis ; ” 3 deinde subjungit : 
“ Quatenus fecistis uni horum minimorum, milii fecistis.” 4 
Nunquid easdem quoque tulit leges in Veteri Testamento? 
“ Qui dat mendico, foeneratur Deo.” 5 Et : “ Ne abstinueris 
a benefaciendo egeno,” 0 inquit. Et rursus : “Eleemosynse 
et tides ne te deficiant,” 7 inquit. u Paupertas” autem “ virum 
humiliat, ditant autem manus virorum .” 8 Subjungit autem : 
“ Qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad usuram, fit acceptus.” 
Et : “ Pretium redemptionis. anima, proprise judicantur 
divitise.” 9 Annon aperte indicat, quod sicut mundus com- 
ponitur ex contrariis, nempe ex calido et frigido, liumido et 
sicco, ita etiam ex iis qui dant, et ex iis qui accipiunt ? Et 

1 Rom. xiv. 17. 2 Matt. v. 42. 3 Matt. xxv. 35, 36. 

4 Matt. xxv. 40. 5 Prov. xix. 17. 6 Prov. iii. 27. 

7 Prov. iii. 3. 8 Prov. x. 4. 9 Prov. xiii. 8. 

110 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

rursus cum dixit : u Si vis perfectus esse, vende quae habes, 
et da pauperibus,” refellit eum qui gloriabatur quod u omnia 
a juventute praecepta servaverat ; ” non enim impleverat 
illud : u Diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum : ” 1 tunc autem 
cum a Domino perficeretur, docebatur communicare et imper- 
tiri per charitatem. Honeste ergo non prohibuit esse divitem, 
sed esse divitem in juste et inexplebiliter. u Possessio (enim,) 
quae cum iniquitate acceleratur, minor redditur .” 2 “ Sunt 

(enim,) qui seminantes multiplicant, et qui colligentes minus 
habent .” 3 De quibus scriptum est : 11 Dispersit, dedit pau- 
peribus, justitia ejus manet in saeculum saeculi .” 4 Qui enim 
u seminat et plura colligit,” is est, qui per terrenam et tem- 
poralem communicationem ac distributionem, coelestia acquirit 
et aeterna. Est autem alius, qui nemini impertit, et incassum 
u thesauros in terra colligit, ubi aerugo et tinea destruunt.” 5 
De quo scriptum est : a Qui colligit mercedes, colligit in sac- 
cum perforatum .” 6 Hujus “ agrum” Dominus in Evangelio 
dicet “ fuisse fertilem : ” 7 deinde cum vellet fructus reponere, 
et esset “ majora horrea aedificaturus,” sibi dixisse per proso- 
popoeiam : a Habes bona multa reposita tibi in multos annos, 
ede, bibe, laetare : Stulte ergo, inquit, hac nocte animam tuam 
a te repetunt ; quae ergo parasti, cujus erunt ? ” 

CAPUT VII. 

QUA IN RE CHRISTIAN ORUM CONTINENTIA EAM QUAM SIBI 
VINDICANT PHILOSOPHI ANTECELLAT. 

Humana ergo continentia, ea, inquam, quae est ex sententia 
philosophorum Graecorum, profitetur pugnare cum cupidi- 
tate, et in factis ei non inservire ; quae est autem ex nostra 
sententia continentia, non concupiscere ; non ut quis con- 
cupiscens se fortiter gerat, sed ut etiam a concupiscendo se 
contineat. Non potest autem ea aliter comparari conti- 

1 Matt. xix. 16 ; Mark x. 17 ; Luke xviii. 18. 2 Prov. xiii. 11. 

3 Prov. xi. 23. 4 Ps. cxi. 9. 6 Matt. vi. 19. 

6 Ha"", i. 6. 7 Luke xii. 16-20. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. Ill 

nentia, nisi gratia Dei^ Et ideo dixit : u Petite, et dabitur 
vobis.” 1 Hanc gratiam Moyses quoque accepit, qui indigo 
corpore erat indutus, ut quadraginta diebus neque esuriret, 
neque sitiret. Quemadmodum autem melius est sanum esse, 
quam segrotantem disserere de sanitate : ita lucem esse, 
quam loqui de luce ; et quse est ex veritate continentia, ea 
quse docetur a philosophis. Non enim ubi est lux, illic 
tenebrse : ubi autem sola insidet cupiditas, etiamsi quiescat 
a corporea operatione, at memoria cum eo, quod non est 
prsesens, congreditur. Generatim autem nobis procedat 
oratio de matrimonio, nutrimento, et aliis, ut nihil faciamus 
ex cupiditate, velimus autem ea sola, quse sunt necessaria. 
Non sumus ^enim. filii. cupiditatiSv.secLvolunt' atis ; et eum, qui 
uxorem duxit propter liberorum procreationem, exercere opor- 
tet continentiam, ut ne suam quidem concupiscat uxorem, 
quam debet diligere, honesta et moderata voluntate operam 
dans liberis. Non enim “ earn is curam gerere ad concu- 
piscentias ” didicimus ; “ honeste autem tanquam in die,” 
Christo, et Dominica lucida vitse institutione, “ ambulantes, 
non in comessationibus et ebrietatibus, non in cubilibus et 
impudicitiis, non in litibus et contentionibus.” 2 Verum- 
enimvero non oportet considerare continentiam in uno solum 
genere, nempe in rebus venereis, sed etiam in quibuscunque 
aliis, quse luxuriosa concupiscit anima, non contenta neces- 
sariis, sed sollicita de deliciis. Continentia est pecuniam 
despicere ; voluptatem, possessionem, spectaculum magno et 
excelso animo contemnere ; os continere, ratione quse sunt 
mala vincere. Jam vero angeli quoque quidam, cum fuis- 
sent incontinentes, victi cupiditate, hue e coelo deciderunt. 
Valentinus autem in Epistola ad Agathopodem : u Cum 
omnia, inquit, sustinuisset, erat continens, divinitatem sibi 
comparavit Jesus ; edebat et bibebat peculiari modo, non 
reddens cibos ; tanta ei inerat vis continentise, ut etiam 
nutrimentum in eo non interierit, quoniam ipse non habuit 
interitum.” Nos ergo propter dilectionem in Dominum, et 
propter ipsum honestum, amplectimur continentiam, tern- 
plum Spiritus sanctificantes. Honestum enim est, “ propter 
1 Matt. vii. 7. ’ 2 Rom. xiii. 12, 18, 14. 

112 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

regnum coelorum seipsum castrare ” 1 ab omni cupiditate, et 
<c emundare conscientiam a mortuis operibus, ad serviendum 
Deo viventi.” 2 Qui autem propter odium adversus carnem 
susceptum a conjugal! conjunctione, et eorum qui conveniunt 
ciborum participatione, liberari desiderant, indocti sunt et 
impii, et absque ration e continentes, sicut alise gentes plurimae. 
Brachmanes quidem certe neque animatum comedunt, neque 
vinum bibunt ; sed aliqui quidem ex iis quotidie sicut nos 
cibum capiunt ; nonnulli autem ex iis tertio quoque die, ut ait 
Alexander Polyhistor in Indicis; mortem autem contemnunt, 
et vivere nihili faciunt ; credunt enim esse regenerationem : 
aliqui autem colunt Heculemet Panem. Qui autem ex Indis 
vocantur Xe/ivoi, hoc est, venerandi, nudi totam vitam tran- 
sigunt : ii veritatem exercent, et futura prsedicunt, et colunt 
quamdam pyramidem, sub qua existimant alicujus dei ossa 
reposita. Neque vero Gymnosophistse, nec qui dicuntur 
^e/ivoi, utuntur mulieribus, hoc enim p raster naturam et 
iniquum esse existimant ; qua de causa seipsos castos conser- 
vant. Virgin es autem sunt etiam mulieres, quae dicuntur 
Sefival, hoc est, venerandce. Videntur autem observare coeles- 
tia, et per eorum significationem quaedam futura praedicere. 

CAPUT VIII. 

LOCA S. SCRIPTURE AB HiERETICIS IN VITUPERIUM MATRI- 
MONII ADDUCTA EXPLICAT ; ET PRIMO VERBA APOS- 
TOLI ROM. VI. 14, AB HiERETICORUM PERVERSA 
INTERPRETATIONS VINDICAT. 

Quoniam autem qui introducunt indifferentiam, paucas 
quasdam Scripturas dctorquentes, titillanti suae voluptati eas 
suffragan existimant ; turn praecipue illam quoque : u Pec- 
catum enim vestri non dominabitur ; non estis enim sub lege, 
sed sub gratia ;” 3 et aliquas alias hujusmodi, quarum post haec 
non est rationi consentaneum ut faciam mentionem (non enim 
navem instruo piraticam), age paucis eorum argumentum 
1 Matt. xix. 12. 2 Ileb. ix! 14. 3 Rom. vi. 14. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

113 

perfringamus. Ipse enim egregius Apostolus in verbis, quae 
prsedictse dictioni subjungit, intentati criminis afferet solu- 
tionem : u Quid ergo ? peccabimus, quia non sumus sub 
lege, sed sub gratia ? Absit .” 1 Adeo divine et prophetice e 
vestigio dissolvit artem voluptatis sophisticam. Non intelli- 
gunt ergo, ut videtur, quod. “ omnes nos oportet manifestari 
ante tribunal Christi, ut referat unusquisque per corpus ea 
quae fecit, sive bonum, sive malum 2 ut qme per corpus 
fecit aliquis, recipiat. “ Quare si quis est in Christo, nova 
creatura est,” nec amplius peccatis dedita : “ Yetera prsete- 
rierunt,” vitam antiquam exuimus : u Ecce enim nova facta 
sunt ,” 3 castitas ex fornicatione, et continentia ex inconti- 
nentia, justitia ex injustitia. “ Quae est enim participatio 
justitiae et injustitise ? aut quse luci cum tenebris societas? 
quae est autem conventio Christo cum Belial ? quae pars est 
fideli cum infideli ? quse est autem consensio templo Dei cum 
idolis ? 4 Has ergo habentes promissiones, mundemus nos 
ipsos ab omni inquinamento carnis et spiritus, perficientes 
sanctitatem in timore Dei .” 5 

CAPUT IX. 

DICTUM CHRISTI AD SALOMEN EXPONIT, QUOD TANQUAM 
IN VITUPERIUM NUPTIARUM PROLATUM HiERETICI 
ALLEGABANT. 

Qui auterp Dei creaturse resistunt per speciosam illam con- 
tinentiam, ilia quoque dicunt, quae ad Salomen dicta sunt, 
quorum prius meminimus : habentur autem, ut existimo, in 
Evangelio secundum JEgyptios. Aiunt enim ipsum dixisse 
Servatorem : u Yeni ad dissolvendum opera feminse;” 
feminse quidem, cupiditatis ; opera autem generationem et 
interitum. Quid ergo dixerint ? Desiit haec administratio ? 
Non dixerint : manet enim mundus in eadem ceconomia. 
Sed non falsum dixit Dominus ; revera enim opera dissolvit 

1 Rom. vi. 15. 2 2 Cor. v. 10. 3 2 Cor. v. 16, 17. 

4 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15, 16. 5 2 Cor. vii. 1. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

II 

11-1 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

cupiditatis, avaritiam, contentionem, glorise cupiditatem, 
mulierum insanum amorem, paedicatum, ingluviem, luxum 
et profusionem, et quae sunt his similia. Horum autem 
ortus, est animae interitus : siquidem “ delictis mortui ” effici- 
mur . 1 Ea vero femina est intemperantia. Ortum autem et 
interitum creaturarum propter ipsorum naturas fieri necesse 
est, usque ad perfectam distinctionem et restitutionem elec- 
tionis, per quam, quae etiam sunt mundo permistse et confusse 
substantiae, proprietati suae restitnuntur. Unde merito cum 
de consummatione Logos locutus fuerat, ait Salome : “ Quo- 
usque morientur homines ? ” Hominem autem vocat Scrip- 
tura dupliciter : et eum, qui apparet, et animam ; et eum 
rursus, qui servatur, et eum qui non. Mors autem animae 
dicitur peccatum. Quare caute et considerate respondet 
Dominus: “ Quoadusque pepererint mulieres, 5 ’ hoc est quan- 
diu operabuntur cupiditates. “ Et ideo quemadmodum per 
unum hominem peccatum ingressum est in mundum, per 
peccatum quoque mors ad omnes homines pervasit, quatenus 
omnes peccaverunt ; et regnavit mors ab Adam usque ad 
Moysen,” 2 inquit Apostolus : naturali autem divinse (econo- 
mise necessitate mors sequitur generationem : et corporis et 
animse conjunctionem consequitur eorum dissolutio. Si est 
autem propter doctrinam et agnitionem generatio, restitu- 
tionis causa erit dissolutio. Quomodo autem existimatur 
mulier causa mortis, propterea quod pariat : ita etiam 
dicetur dux vitae propter eamdem causam. Proinde quse 
prior inchoavit transgressionem, Vita est appellata , 3 propter 
causam successionis : et eorum, qui generantur, et qui pec- 
cant, tarn justorum quam injustomm, mater est, unoquoque 
nostrum seipsum justificante, vel contra inobedientem con- 
stituente. Unde non ego quidem arbitror Apostolum abhor- 
rere vitam, quae est in carne, cum dicit : u Sed in omni 
fiducia, ut semper, nunc quoque Christus magnificabitur in 
corpore meo, sive per vitam, sive per mortem. Milii enim 
vivere Christus et mori lucrum. Si autem vivere in carne, 
et hoc quoque mihi fructus operis, quid eligain nescio, et 
coarctor ex duobus, cupiens resolvi, et esse cum Christo : 

1 Eph. ii. 5. 2 Rom. v. 12-14. 3 Gen. iii. 20. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

115 

multo enim melius : manere autem in carne, est magis 
necessarium propter vos.” 1 Per lime enim, ut puto, aperte 
ostendit, exitus quidem e corpore perfectionem, esse in Dei 
dilectionem : ejus autem pnesentise in carne, ex grato animo 
profectam tolerantiam, propter eos, qui salute indigent. Quid 
vero? non etiam ea, quae deinceps sequuntur, ex iis, quaa 
dicta sunt ad Salomen, subjungunt ii, qui quidvis potius 
quam quae est ex veritate, evangelicam regulam sunt secuti % 
Cum ea enim dixisset : “ Recte ergo feci, quae non peperi 
scilicet, quod generatio non esset ut oportet assumpta ; exci- 
pit Dominus, dicens : “ Omni lierba vescere, ea autem, quae 
habet amaritudinem, ne vescaris.” Per liaec enim significat, 
esse in nostra potestate, et non esse necessarium ex prohibi- 
tione praecepti, vel continentiam, vel etiam matrimonium; et 
quod matrimonium creationi aliquid affert auxilii, praeterea 
explicans. Ne quis ergo eum deliquisse existimet, qui 
secundum Logon matrimonium inierit, nisi existimet amaram 
esse filiorum educationem : contra tamen, permultis videtur 
esse molestissimum liberis carere. Neque ainara cuiquam 
videatur liberorum procreatio, eo quod negotiis implicatos a 
divinis abstrahat. Est enim, qui vitam solitariam facile ferre 
non valens, expetit matrimonium : quandoquidem res grata, 
qua quis temperanter fruitur, et innoxia : et unusquisque 
nostrum eatenus sui dominus est, ut eligat, an velit liberos 
procreare. Intelligo autem, quod aliqui quidem, qui prse- 
textu matrimonii difficultatum ab eo abstinuerunt, non con- 
venienter sanctse coenitioni ad inhumanitatem et odium 
hominum defluxerunt, et perit apud ipsos charitas; alii autem 
matrimonio ligati, et luxui ac voluptatibus dediti, lege quo- 
dammodo eos comitante, f uerunt, ut ait Proplieta, “ assimi- 
lati jumentis.” 2 

1 Phil. i. 20-24. 2 Ps. xlviii. 21. 

116 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

CAPUT X. 

VERBA CHRTSTI MATT. XVIII. 20, MYSTICE EXPONIT. 

Quinam sunt autem illi “ duo et tres, qui congregantur in 
nomine Domini, in” quorum “ medio ” est Dominus ? 1 annon 
virum et mulierem et filium tres dicit, quoniam mulier cum 
yiro per Deum conjungitur? Quod si accinctus quis esse 
velit et expeditus, non volens procreare liberos, propter earn, 
quae est in procreandis liberis, molestiam et occupationem, 
u maneat,” inquit Apostolus, absque uxore u ut ego .” 2 Qui- 
dam vero effatum Domini exponunt, ac si dixisset, cum plu- 
ribus quidem esse Creatorem ac praesidem generations Deum; 
cum uno autem, nempe electo, Servatorem, qui alterius, boni 
scilicet, Dei Filius sit. Hoc autem non ita habet : sed est 
quidem etiam cum iis, qui honeste ac moderate in matri- 
.monio versati sunt, et liberos susceperunt, Deus per Filium: 
est autem etiam cum eo, qui secundum logon, seu rationem, 
fuit continens, idem Deus. Fuerint autem aliter quoque 
tres quidem, ira, cupiditas, et ratio : caro autem at anima et 
spiritus, alia ratione. Forte autem et vocationem et elec- 
tionem secundam, et tertium genus, quod in primo honore 
collocatur, innuit trias prius dicta : cum quibus est, quae 
omnia considerat, Dei potestas, absque divisione cadens in 
divisionem. Qui ergo animae naturalibus, ita ut . oportet, 
utitur operationibus, desiderat quidem ea, quae sunt conve- 
nientia, odio autem habet ea, quae lsedunt, sicut jubent 
mandata : “ Benedices ” enim, inquit, “ benedicenti, et male- 
dices maledicenti.” Quando autem his, ira scilicet et cupi- 
ditate, superior factus, et creaturae amore vere affectus 
propter eum, qui est Deus et effector omnium, gnostice vitam 
instituerit, et Salvatori similis evadens, facilem temperantiae 
habitum acquisiverit, et cognitionem, fidem, ac dilectionem 
conjunxerit, simplici hac in parte judicio utens, et vere spiri- 
talis factus, nec earum, quae ex ira et cupiditate procedunt, 
cogitationum omnino capax, ad Domini imaginem ab ipso 
1 Matt, xviii. 20. 2 1 Cor. vii. 7. 

Book, hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

117 

artifice efficitur homo perfectus, is sane dignus jam est, qui 
frater a Domino nominetur, is simul est amicus et filius. Sic 
ergo “ duo et tres ” in eodem “ congregantur,” nempe in 
homine gnostico. Poterit etiam multorum quoque concordia 
ex tribus sestimata, cum quibus est Dominus, significare unam 
Ecclesiam, unum liominem, genus unum. Annon cum uno 
quidem Judteo erat Dominus, cum legem tulit : at prophe- 
tans, et Jeremiam mittens Babyloncm, quinetiam eos qui 
erant ex gentibus vocans per prophetiam, congregavit duos 
populos : tertius autem est unus, qui ex duobus “ creatur in 
novum hominem, quo inambulat et inhabitat ” in ipsa Eccle- 
sia? Et lex simul et prophetm, una cum Evangelio, in 
nomine Christi congregantur in unam cognitionem. Qui 
ergo propter odium uxorem non ducunt, vel propter concu- 
piscentiam carne indifferenter abutuntur, non sunt in numero 
illorum qui servantur, cum quibus est Dominus. 

CAPUT XI. 

LEGIS ET CHRISTI MANDATUM DE NON CONCUPISCENDO 

EXPONIT. 

His sic ostensis, age Scripturas, quae adversantur sophistis 
hsereticis, jam adducamus, et regulam continentim secundum 
logon seu rationem observandam declaremus. Qui vero intel- 
ligit, quie Scriptura cuique hoeresi contraria sit, earn tempes- 
tive adhibendo refutabit eos, qui dogmata mandatis contraria 
fingunt. Atque ut ab alto rem repetamus, lex quidem, 
sicut prius diximus, illud, “ Non concupisces uxorem proximi 
tui,” 1 prius exclamavit ante conjunctam Domini in Novo 
Testamento vocem, qum dicit ex sua ipsius persona : “ Audi- 
vistis legem praecipientem : Non mcechaberis. Ego autem 
dico : Non concupisces.” 2 Quod enim vellet lex viros 
uti moderate uxoribus, et propter solam liberorum suscep- 
tionem, ex eo clarum est, quod prohibet quidem eum, 
qui non habet uxorem, statim cum u captiva ” habere con- 
suetudinem. 3 Quod si semel desideraverit, ei, cum tonsa 
fuerit capillos, permittere ut lugeat triginta diebus. Si 

1 Ex. xx. 17. 2 Matt. v. 27, 28. 3 Dent. xxi. 11, 12, 13. 

• 118 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

autem ne sic quidem emarcescat cupiditas, tunc liberis operam 
dare, cum quae dominatur impulsio, probata sit pne finite 
tempore consentanea rationi appetitio. Unde nullum ex 
veteribus ex Scriptura ostenderis, qui cum prasgnante rem 
liabuerit : sed postquam gestavit uterum, et postquam edit um 
fetum a lacte depulit, rursus a viris cognitas fuisse uxores. 
Jam hunc scopum et institutum invenies servantem Moysis 
patrem, cum triennium post Aaronem editum intermisisset, 
genuisse Moysem. Et rursus Levitica tribus, servans banc 
naturae legem a Deo traditam, aliis numero minor ingressa 
est in terram promissam. Non enim facile multiplicatur 
genus, cum viri quidem seminant, legitimo juncti matrimonio; 
exspectant autem non solum uteri gestationem, sed etiam a 
lacte depulsionem. Unde merito Moyses, quoque Judreos 
paulatim provehens ad continentiam, cum a tribus diebus ” 1 
deinceps consequentibus a venerea voluptate abstinuissent, 
jussit audire verba Dei. “ Nos ergo Dei templa sumus, sicut 
dixit propbeta : Inbabitabo in eis, et inambulabo, et ero eorum 
Deus, et ipsi erunt meus populus,” si ex praeceptis vitam in- 
stituamus, sive singuli nostrum, sive tota simul Ecclesia. 
“Quare egredimini e medio ipsorum, et separamini, dicit Do- 
minus, et immundum ne tangatis; et ego vos suscipiam, et 
ero vobis in patrem, et vos eritis mibi in filios et filias, dicit 
Dominus omnipotens /’ 2 Non ab iis, qui uxores duxerunt, ut 
aiunt, sed a gentibus, quae adbuc vivebant in fornicatione, 
prseterea autem a prius quoque dictis bseresibus, ut immundis 
et impiis, propbetice nos jubet separari. Unde etiam Paulus 
quoque verba dirigens ad eos, qui erant iis, qui dicti sunt, 
similes : u Has ergo promissiones babete, inquit, dilecti : 
mundemus corda nostra ab omni inquinamento carnis et 
spiritus, perficientes sanctitatem in timore DeU Zelo enim 
vos zelo Dei ; despondi enim vos uni viro, virginem castam 
exbibere Cbristo .” 4 Et Ecclesia quidem alii non jungitur 
matrimonio, cum sponsum liabeat : sed unusquisque nos- 
trum babet potestatem ducendi, quameunque velit, legitimam 
uxorem, in primis, inquam, nuptiis. “ Yereor autem, ne 

i Ex. xix. 20. 2 2 Cor. vi. 16, 17, 18. 

3 2 Cor. vii. 1. 4 2 Cor. xi. 2. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

119 

sicut serpens seduxit Evam in astutia, corrumpantur sensus 
vestri a simplicitate, quae in Christo est,” 1 pie admoclum 
et doctoris instar dixit Apostolus. Quocirca admirabilis 
quoque Petrus : “ Charissimi, inquit, obsecro vos tanquam 
advenas et peregrinos, abstinete vos a carnalibus desideriis, 
quae militant adversus animam, conversationem vestram inter 
gentes habentes bonam : quoniam sic est voluntas Dei, ut 
bene facientes obmutescere faciatis imprudentium hominum 
ignorantiam ; quasi liberi, et non quasi velamen habentes 
malitiae libertatem, sed ut servi Dei.” 2 Similiter etiam scribit 
Paulus in Epistola ad Romanos : u Qui mortui snmus pec- 
cato, quomodo adhuc vivemus in ipso? Quoniam vetus homo 
noster simul est crucifixus, ut destruatur corpus peccati,” ° 
usque ad illud : “ Neque exhibete membra vestra, arma injus- 
titise peccato.” 4 Atque adeo cum in hunc locum devenerim, 
videor mihi non esse praetermissurus, quin notem, quod eum- 
dem Deum per legem et prophetas et Evangelium praedicet 
Apostolus. Illud enim : “ Non concupisces,” quod scriptum 
est in Evangelio, legi attribuit in Epistola ad Romanos, sciens 
esse ununa eum, qui praedicavit per legem et prophetas, Pa- 
trem, et qui per ipsum est annuntiatus. Dicit enim : “ Quid 
dicemus? Lex estne peccatum? Absit. Sed peccatum non 
cognovi, nisi per legem. Concupiscentiam enim non cog- 
novissein, nisi lex diceret : Non concupisces.” 5 Quod si ii, 
qui sunt diversae sententiae, repugnantes, existiment Paulum 
verba sua dirigentem adversus Creatorem, dixisse ea, quae 
deinceps sequuntur : u Novi enim, quod non habitat in me, 
hoc est, in carne mea, bonum;” 6 legant ea, quae prius dicta 
sunt ; et ea, quae consequuntur. Prius enim dixit : “ Sed 
inhabitans in me peccatum;” propter quod consentaneum 
erat dicere illud : “ Non habitat in carne mea bonum .” 7 
Consequenter subjunxit : “ Si autem quod nolo, hoc ego 
facio, non utique ego id operor, sed quod inhabitat in me 
peccatum : ” quod “ repugn ans,” inquit, “ legi ” Dei et u men- 
tis meae, captivat me in lege peccati, quae est in membris 

1 2 Cor. xi. 3. 2 1 Pet. ii. 11, 12, 15, 16. 3 Rom. vi. 2, 6. 

4 Rom. vi. 13. 5 Rom. vii. 7. c Rom. vii. 18. 

7 Rom. vii. 17. 

120 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

meis. Miser ego homo, quis me liberabit de corpore mortis 
hujus ? ” 1 Et rursus (nunquam enim quovis modo juvando 
defatigatur) non veretur veluti concludere : “ Lex enim 
spiritus liberavit me a lege peccati et mortis:” quoniam 
“ per Filium Deus condemnavit peccatum in came, ut jus- 
tificatio legis impleatur in nobis, qui non secundum carnem 
ambulamus, sed secundum spiritum .” 2 Prseter haec adhuc 
declarans ea, quae prins dicta sunt, exclamat : “ Corpus qui- 
dem mortuum propter peccatum : ” significans id non esse 
templura, sed sepulcrum animce. Quando enim sanctifi- 
catum fuerit Deo, u Spiritus ejus,” infert, “ qui suscitavit 
Jesum a mortuis, habitat in vobis : qui vivificabit etiam 
mortalia vestra corpora, per ejus Spiritum, qui habitat in 
vobis.” 3 Rursus itaque voluptarios increpans, ilia adjicit : 
“ Prudentia enim carnis, mors ; quoniam qui ex carne vivunt, 
ea, quse sunt carnis, cogitant; et prudentia carnis est cum 
Deo gerere inimicitias; legi enim Dei non subjicitur. Qui 
autem sunt in carne,” non ut quidam decernunt, “ Deo pla- 
cere non possunt,” sed ut prius diximus. Deinde ut eos dis- 
tinguat, dicit Ecclesise : “Vos autem non estis in carne, sed 
in spiritu, si quidem spiritus Dei habitat in vobis. Si quis 
autem spiritum Christi non habet, is non est ejus. Si autem 
Christus in vobis, corpus quidem est mortuum per peccatum, 
spiritus autem vivus per justitiam. Debitores itaque sumus, 
fratres, non carni, ut secundum carnem vivamus. Si enim 
secundum carnem vivitis, estis morituri : si vero spiritu facta 
carnis mortificaveritis, vivetis. Quicunque enim spiritu Dei 
aguntur, ii sunt filii Dei.” Et adversus nobilitatem et ad- 
versus libertatem, quse exsecrabiliter ab iis, qui sunt diversae 
sententiae, introducitur, qui de libidine gloriantur, subjungit 
dicens : “ Non enim accepistis spiritum servitutis rursus in 
timorem, sed accepistis spiritum adoptionis filiorum, in quo 
clamamus, Abba Pater ; ” 4 hoc est, ad hoc accepimus, ut cog- 
noscamus eum, quern oramus, qui est vere Pater, qui rerum 
omnium solus est Pater, qui ad salutem erudit et castigat ut 
pater, et timorem minatur. 

1 Rom. vii. 20, 23, 24. 2 Rom. viii. 2, 3, 4. 

3 Rom. viii. 10, 11. 4 Rom. viii. 5, G, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

121 

v CAPUT XII. 

VERBA APOSTOLI 1 COR. VII. 5, 39, 40, ALIAQUE S. SCRIP- 
TURES LOCA EODEM SPECTANTIA EXPLICAT. 

Quod autem “ ex consensu ad tempus orationi vacat ” 
conjugiura, doctrina est continentise. Adjecit eniin illud 
quidem, “ ex consensu,” ne quis dissolveret matrimonium ; 
“ ad tempus autem ,” 1 ne, dum ex necessitate exercet con- 
tinentiam is, qui uxorem duxerit, labatur in peccatum, et 
dum suo conjugio parcit, alienum concupiscat. Qua ratione 
eum, qui se indecore gerere existimat, quod virginem alat, 
recte earn dicit esse nuptum daturum. Yerum unusquisque, 
tarn is qui castitatem delegit, quam is qui propter liberorum 
procreationem seipsum conjunxit matrimonio, in suo pro- 
posito firmiter debet perseverare, nec in deterius deflectere. 
Si enim vitse suss institutum augere ac intendere poterit, 
majorem sibi apud Deum acquirit dignitatem, propter puram 
et ex ratione profectam continentiam. Si autem earn, quam 
elegit, regulam superaverit, in majorem deinde ad spetn 
gloriam recidet. Jdabet enim sicut castitas, ita etiam matri- 
monium propria munera et ministeria, quse ad Dominum 
pertinent, filiorum, inquam, curam gerere et uxoris. Quod 
enim honeste causatur is, qui est in matrimonio perfectus, 
est conjugii necessitudo, ut qui omnium curam ac providen- 
tiam in domo communi ostenderit. Ac proinde, “episcopos,” 

/ inquit, oportet constitui, qui ex domo propria toti quoque 
Ecclesise prseesse sint meditati. “Unusquisque” ergo, “in 
quo vocatus est ” 2 opere ministerium peragat, ut liber in 
Christo fiat, et debitam ministerio suo mercedem accipiat. 
Et rursus de lege disserens, utens allegoria : “ Xam quse sub 
viro est mulier,” inquit, “ viventi viro alligata est lege,” 3 et 
quse sequuntur. Et rursus : “ Mulier est alligata, quandiu 
vivit vir ejus ; sin autem mortuus fuerit, libera est ut nubat, 
modo in Domino. Beata est autem si sic permanserit, mea 
quidem sententia.” 4 Sed in priore quidem particula, “ mor- 

1 1 Cor. vii. 5. 
3 Rom. vii. 2. 

2 1 Cor. vii. 24. 

4 1 Cor. vii. 39, 40. 

122 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

tificati estis,” inquit, u legi,” non matrimonio, il ut efficiamini 
vos alteri, qui excitatus est ex mortuis ,” 1 sponsa et Ecclesia ; 
quam castam esse oportet, et ab iis quoe sunt intus, cogita- 
tionibus, quae sunt contrarise veritati ; et ab iis, qui tentant 
extrinsecus, hoc est ab iis, qui sectantur lisereses, et persua- 
clent vobis fornicari ab uno viro, neinpe omnipotenti Deo : 
(i Ne sicut serpens decepit Evam ,” 2 quae u vita ” dicitur, nos 
quoque inducti callidis hseresium illecebris, transgrediamur 
mandata. Secunda autem particula statuit monogamiam : 
non enim, ut quidam existjmarunt, mulieris cum viro alli- 
gationem, carnis cum corrupted connexionem, significari 
putandum est ; impiorum enim hominum, qui matrimonii 
inventionem diabolo aperte tribuunt, opinionem reprehen dit, 
unde in periculum venit legislator ne incessatur maledictis. 
Tatianum arbitror Syrurn talia audere dogmata tradere. His 
verbis quidem certe scribit in libro Be perfeclione secundum 
Servatorem : Consensum quidem conjungit orationi : com- 
munio autem corruptelse, interitus solvit interpellationem. 
Admodum certe circumspecte arcet per concessionem. Nam 
cum rursus permisit u simul convenire propter Satanam et 
intemperantiam,” pronuntiavit eum, qui est obtemperaturus, 
u serviturum duobus dominis : ” 4 per consensum quidem, 
Deo ; per dissensionem autem, intemperantise et fornicationi 
et diabolo. Haec autem dicit, Apostolum exponens. Sopliis- 
tice autem eludit veritatem, per verum, falsum confirmans : 
intemperantiam enim et fornicationem, diabolica vitia et 
affectiones nos quoque confitemur ; intercedit autem mode- 
rati matrimonii consensio, quae turn ad precationem conti- 
n enter deducit, turn ad procreandos liberos cum lionestate 
conciliat. a Cognitio” quidem certe a Scriptura dictum est 
tempus liberorum procreationis, cum dixit : u Cognovit autem 
Adam Evam uxorem suam ; et concepit, et peperit filium, 
et nominavit nomen ejus Seth : Suscitavit enim mihi Deus 
aliud semen pro Abel.” 5 Yides, quemnam maledictis inces- 
sant, qui lionestam ac moderatam incessunt seminationem, 
et diabolo attribuunt generationem. Non enim simpliciter 

1 Rom. vii. 4. 2 2 Cor. xi. 3. 3 1 Cor. vii. 5. 

4 Matt. vi. 24. 5 Gen. iv. 25. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

123 

Deum dixit, qui articuli prsemissione, nempe o 0eo? dicens, 
significavit eum, qui est omnipotens. Quod ab Apostolo 
autem subjungitur : “Et rursus simul convenite propter 
Satanam,” 1 in eum finem dicitur, ut occasionem tollat ad 
alias declinandi cupiditates. Non enim penitus repellit na- 
turse appetitiones, qui fit ad tempus, consensus : per quem 
rursus inducit Apostolus conjugationem matrimonii, non ad 
intemperaiitiam et fornicationem et opus diaboli, sed ne 
subjugetur intemperantise, fornicationi, et diabolo. Distin- 
guit autem veterem quoque hominem et novum Tatianus, 
sed non ut dicimus, “ Veterem ” quidem “virum,” legem; 
“novum” autem, Evangelium. Assentimur ei nos quoque, 
sed non eo modo, quo vult ille, dissolvens legem ut alterius 
Dei : sed idem vir et Dominus, dum vetera renovat, non 
amplius concedit polygamiam (nam hanc quidem expetebat 
Deus, quando oportebat homines augeri et multiplicari), sed 
monogamiam introducit propter liberorum procreationem et 
domus curam, ad quam data est mulier adjutrix : et si cui 
Apostolus propter intemperantiam et ustionem, veniam se- 
cundi concedit matrimonii : nam hie quoque non peccat 
quidem ex Testamento (non est enim a lege prohibitus), non 
implet autem summam illam vitae perfectionem, quae agitur 
ex Evangelio. Gloriam autem sibi acquirit coelestem, qui 
apud se manserit, earn, quae est morte dissoluta, impollutam 
servans conjunctionem, et grato ac lubente animo paret 
oeconomiae, per quam effectum est, ut divelli non possit a 
Domini ministerio. Sed nec eum, qui ex conjugali surgit 
cubili, similiter ut olim, tingi nunc quoque jubet divina per 
Dominum providentia : non enim necessario a liberorum 
abducit procreatione, qui credentes per unum baptismum ad 
consuetudinem omni ex parte perfectam abluit, Dominus, 
qui etiam multa Moysis baptismata per unum comprehendit 
baptismum. Proinde lex, ut per carnal em generationem 
nostram praediceret regenerationem, genitali seminis facultati 
baptismum olim adhibuit, non vero quod ab hominis genera- 
tione abliorreret. Quod enim apparet homo generatus, hoc 
valet seminis dejectio. Non sunt ergo multi coitus genitales, 

1 1 Cor. vii. 5. 

124 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

sed matricis susceptio fatetur generationem, cum in naturae 
officina semen formatur in fetum. Quomodo autem vetus 
quidem est solum matrimoniu.m et legis inventum, alienum 
autem est, quod est ex Domino, matrimonium, cum idem 
Deus servetur a nobis ? “ Non ” enim “ quod Deus con- 

junxit, homo ” jure “ dissolvent ; ” 1 multo autem magis quae 
jussit Pater, servabit quoque Filius. Si autem idem simul 
est et legislator et evangelista, nunquam ipse secum pugnat. 
Vivit enim lex, cum sit spiritalis, et gnostice intelligatur : 
nos autem “ mortui ” sumus “ legi per corpus Christi, ut 
gigneremur alteri, qui resurrexit ex mortuis,” qui praedictus 
fuit a lege, “ ut Deo fructificaremus .” 2 Quare ‘‘lex quidem 
est sancta, et mandatum sanctum, et justum, et bonum .” 3 
Mortui ergo sumus legi, hoc est, peccato, quod a lege signifi- 
catur, quod ostendit, non autem generat lex, per jussionem 
eorum quae sunt facienda, et prohibitionem eorum quae non 
facienda ; reprehendens subjectum peccatum, “ ut appareat 
peccatum.” Si autem peccatum est matrimonium, quod 
secundum legem initur, nescio quomodo quis dicet se Deum 
nosse, dicens Dei jussum esse peccatum. Quod si “lex 
sancta” est, sanctum est matrimonium. Mysterium ei’go 
hoc ad Christum et Ecclesiam ducit Apostolus : quemad- 
modum “ quod ex carne generatur, caro est ; ita quod ex 
spiritu, spiritus ,” 4 non solum in pariendo, sed etiam in dis- 
cendo. Jam “sancti sunt filii ,” 0 Deo gratae oblectationes 
verborurn Dominicorum, quae desponderunt animam. Sunt 
ergo separata fornicatio et matrimonium, quoniam a Deo 
longe abest diabolus. “ Et vos ergo mortui estis legi per 
corpus Christi, ut vos gigneremini alteri, qui surrexit a mor- 
tuis.” 6 Simul autem proxime exauditur, si fueritis obedi- 
entes : quandoquidem etiam ex veritate legis eidem Domino 
obedimus, qui praecipit eminus. Nunquid autem de ejusmodi 
hominibus merito aperte “ dicit Spiritus, quod in posterioribus 
temporibus deficient quidam a fide, attendentes spiritibus 
erroris, et doctrinis daemoniorum, in hypocrisi falsiloquorum, 
cauteriatam habentium conscientiam, et proliibentium nubere, 

1 Matt. xix. 6. 2 Rom. vii. 4. 3 Rom. vii. 12. 

* John iii. 6. c 1 Cor. vii. 14. 0 Rom. vii. 4. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

125 

abstinere a cibis, quos Deus creavit ad participationem cum 
gratiarum actione fidelibus, et qui agnoverunt veritatem, 
quod omnis creatura Dei bona est, et nihil est rejiciendum 
quod sumitur cum gratiarum actione. Sanctificatur enim 
per verbum Dei et orationem ? ” 1 Omnino igitur non est 
prohibendum jungi matrimonio, neque carnibus vesci, aut 
vinum bibere. Scriptum est enim : “ Bonum est carnem 
non comedere, nec vinum bibere, si quis comedat per offen- 
diculum .” 2 Et : “ Bonum est manere sicut ego .” 3 Sed 
et qui utitur, “cum gratiarum actione ,” 4 et qui rursus 
non utitur, ipse quoque u cum gratiarum actione,” et cum 
moderata ac temperanti vivat perceptione, logo seu rationi 

( convenienter. Et, ut in summa dicam, omnes Apostoli epis- 
tolse, quae moderationem docent et continentiam, cum et 
de matrimonio, et de liberorum procreatione, et de domus 
administratione innumerabilia praecepta contineant, nusquam 
honestum moderatumque matrimonium prohibuerunt aut 
abrogarunt: sed legis cum Evangelio servantes convenien- 
tiam, utrumque admittunt : et eum, qui Deo agendo gratias, 
moderate utitur matrimonio ; et eum, qui, ut vult Dominus, 
vivit in castitate, quern admodum “ vocatus est unusquisque ” 
inoffense et perfecte eligens. “ Et erat terra Jacob laudata 
supra omnem terram,” u inquit propheta, ipse vas spiritus 
gloria afficiens. Insectatur autem aliquis generationem, in 
earn dicens interitum cadere, eamque perire : et detorquet 
aliquis ad filiorum procreationem illud dictum Servatoris : 
“ Non oportere in terra thesauros recondere, ubi tinea et 
aerugo demolitur ; ” c nec erubescit his addere ea, quae dicit 
propheta : “ Omnes vos sicut vestimentum veterascetis, et 
tinea vos exedet .” 7 Sed neque nos contradicimus Scripturae, 
neque in nostra corpora cadere interitum, eaque esse fluxa, 
negamus. Fortasse autem iis, quos ibi alloquitur propheta, 
ut peccatoribus, praedicit interitum. Servator autem de 
liberorum procreatione nil dixit, sed ad impertiendum ac 
communicandum eos hortatur, qui solum opibus abundare, 

1 1 Tim. iv. 1, 2, 8, 4, 5. 2 Rom. xiv. 21. 3 1 Cor. vii. 8. 

4 Rom. xiv. 19. 5 Sophon. iii. 19. 6 Matt. vi. 19. 

7 Isa. 1. 9. 

126 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

egentibus autem. nolebant opem ferre. Quamobrcm elicit : 
“ Operamini non cibum, qui perit ; seel eum, qui manet in 
vitam aeternam .” 1 Similitei* autem afferunt etiam illud 
dictum de resurrectione mortuorum : u Filii illius saeculi 
nec nubunt, nec nubuntur.” 2 Sed banc interrogation em et 
eos qui interrogant, si quis consideraverit, inveniet Dominum 
non reprobare matrimonium, sed remedium afferre exspec- 
tationi carnalis cupiditatis in resurrectione. Illud autem, 
“ filiis hujus saeculi ,” 3 non dixit ad distinctionem alicujus 
alius saeculi, sed perinde ac si diceret : Qui in hoc nati sunt 
saeculo, cum per generationem sint filii, et gignunt et gig- 
nuntur ; quoniam non absque generatione lianc quis vitam 
prsetergreditur : sed haec generatio, quae similem suscipit 
interitum, non amplius competit ei qui ab hac vita est sepa- 
ratus. u Unus est ergo Pater noster, qui est in coelis : ” 4 
sed is ipse quoque Pater est omnium per creationem. u Ne 
vocaveritis ergo, inquit, vobis patrem super terram .” 5 Quasi 
diceret : Ne existimetis eum, qui carnali vos sevit satu, auc- 
torem et causa in vestrae essentiae, sed adjuvantem causam 
generationis, vel ministrum potius. Sic ergo nos rursus 
conversos vult effici ut pueros, eum, qui vere Pater est, 
agnoscentes, regeneratos per aquam, cum haec sit alia satio 
in creatione. At, inquit, a Qui est caelebs, curat quae sunt 
Domini ; qui autem duxit uxorem, quomodo placebit uxori.” 
Quid vero ? an non licet etiam eis, qui secundum Deum 
placent uxori, Deo gratias agere ? Annon permittitur etiam 
ei, qui uxorem duxit, una cum conjugio etiam esse sollicitum 
de iis quae sunt Domini ? Sed quemadmodum u quae non 
nupsit, sollicita est de iis, quae sunt Domini, ut sit sancta 
corpore et spiritu : ” G ita etiam quae nupsit, et de iis, quae 
sunt mariti, et de iis, quae sunt Domini, est in Domino 
sollicita, ut sit sancta et corpore et spiritu. Ambae enim 
sunt sanctae in Domino : haec quidem ut uxor, ilia vero ut 
virgo. Ad eos autem pudore afficiendos et reprimendos, qui 
sunt proclives ad secundas nuptias, apte Apostolus alto 

2 Luke xx. 35. 

4 Matt, xxiii. 9. 

6 1 Cor. vii. 32, 33, 34. 

1 John vi. 27. 

3 Luke xx. 34. 

3 Matt, xxiii. 9. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

127 

quodam tono eloquitur ; inquit enim : “ Ecce, omne peccatum 
est extra corpus'; qui autem fornicatur, in proprium corpus 
peccat.” 1 Si quis autem matrimonium audet dicere forni- 
cationem, rursus, legem et Dominum insectans, maledictis 
impetit. Quemadmodum enim avaritia et plura habendi 
cupiditas dicitur fornicatio, ut quee adversetur sufficientise : 
et ut idololatria est ab uno in multos Dei distributio, ita for- 
nicatio est ab uno matrimonio ad plura prolapsio. Tribus 
enim modis, ut diximus, fornicatio et adulterium sumitur 
apud Apostolum. De bis dicit propheta: “Peccatis vestris 
venundati estis.” Et rursus : “ Pollutus es in terra aliena: ” 2 
conjunctionem sceleratam existimans, quse cum alieno cor- 
pore facta est, et non cum eo, quod datur in conjugio, ad 
liberorum procreationem. Unde etiam Apostolus: “Yolo, 
inquit, juniores nubere, filios procreare, domui praeesse, nul- 
lam dare occasionem adversario maledicti gratia. Jam enim 
quaedam diverterunt post Satanam .” 3 Quin et unius quoque 
uxoris virum utique admittit ; seu sit presbyter, seu diaconus, 
seu laicus, utens matrimonio citra reprehensionem : u Servabi- 
tur autem per filiorum procreationem.” 4 Et rursus Servator 
dicens Judasos “ generationem pravam et adulteram,” docet 
eos legem non cognovisse, ut lex vult : u sed seniorum tradi- 
tionem, et hominum prmcepta sequentes,” adulterare legem, 
perinde ac si non esset data vir et dominus eorum virginita- 
tis. Fortasse autem eos quoque innuit esse alienis mancipatos 
cupiditatibus, propter quas assidue quoque servientes peccatis, 
vendebantur alienigenis. Nam apud Judmos non erant 
admissas communes mulieres : verum prohibitum erat adul- 
terium. Qui autem dicit : “ Uxorem duxi, non possum 
venire ,” 5 ad divinam coenam, est quidem exemplum ad eos 
arguendos, qui propter voluptates abscedunt a divino man- 
dato : alioquin nec qui justi fuere ante adventum, nec qui post 
adventum uxores duxerunt, servabuntur, etiamsi sint apostoli. 
Quod si illud attulerint, quod propheta quoque dicit : “ In- 
veteravi inter omnes inimicos meos ,” 6 per inimicos peccata 

1 1 Cor. vi. 18. 2 Isa. 1. 1. 

3 1 Tim. v. 14, 15. 4 1 Tim. ii. 15. 

s Luke xiv. 20. 6 Ps. vi. 8. 

128 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

intelligant. Unum quoddam autem est peccatum, non ma- 
trimonium, sed fornicatio : alioqui generationem quoque 
dicunt peccatum, et creatorem generationis. 

CAPUT XIII. 

JULII CASSIANI HiERETICI YERBIS RESPONDET ; ITEM LOCO 
QUEM EX EVANGELIO APOCRYPHO IDEM ADDUXERAT. 

Talibus argumentis utitur quoque Julius Cassianus, qui 
fuit princeps sectge Docetarum. In opere certe De conti- 
nentia, vel De castitate, his verbis dicit : u Nec dicat aliquis, 
quod quoniam talia habemus membra, ut aliter figurata sit 
femina, aliter vero masculus : ilia quidem ad suscipiendum, 
hie vero ad seminandum, concessam esse a Deo consuetu- 
dinem. Si enim a Deo, ad quern tendimus, esset hsec con- 
stitutio, non beatos dixisset esse eunuchos ; neque propheta 
dixisset, eos ‘ non esse arborem infrugiferam 1 transferens 
ab arbore ad hominem, qui sua sponte et ex instituto se 
castrat tali cogitatione.” Et pro impia opinione adhuc 
decertans, subjungit : “ Quomodo autem non jure quis. 
reprehenderit Servatorem, si nos transformavit, et ab errore 
liberavit, et a! conjunctione membrorum, et additamentorum, 
et pudendorum V* in hoc eadem decernens cum Tatiano : 
hie autem prodiit ex schola Yalentini. Propterea dicit 
Cassianus : “ Cum interrogaret Salome, quando cognoscen- 
tur, ea, de quibus interrogabat, ait Dominus : Quando pudoris 
indumentum conculcaveritis, et quando duo facta fuerint 
unum, et masculum cum femina, nec masculum nec femi- 
neum.” Primum quidem, in nobis traditis quatuor Evan- 
geliis non habemus hoc dictum, sed in eo, quod est secundum 
.ZEgyptios. Deinde mihi videtur ignorare, iram quidem, 
masculam appetitionem ; feminam vero, significare cupidita- 
tem : quorum operationem poenitentia et pudor consequuntur. 
Cum quis ergo neque iroe neque cupiditati obsequens, qum 
quidem et consuetudine et mala educatione auctse, obumbrant 

1 Isa. lvi. 3. 

Book nr.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

129 

et contegunt rationem, sed quae ex iis proficiscitur exuens 
caliginem, et pudore affectus ex poenitentia, spiritum et 
animam unierit in obedientia Logi sen rationis ; tunc, ut 
ait Paulus, “non inest in nobis nec masculus, nec femina.” 
Recedens enim anitna ab ea figura, qua discernitur masculus 
et femina, traducitur ad unionem, cum ea nutrum sit. Exis- 
timat autem hie vir praeclarus plus, quam par sit, Platonice, 
animam, cum sit ab initio divina, cupiditate effeminatam, 
hue venire ad generationem et interitum. 

CAPUT XIV. 

2 COR. XI. 3, ET EPH. IV. 24, EXPONIT. 

Jam vero vel invitum cogit Paulum generationem ex decep- 
tione deducere, cum dicit : “ Vereor autem, ne sicut serpens 
Evam decepit, corrupti sint sensus vestri a simplicitate, quae est 
in Christo.” 1 Sed certum est, Dominum quoque “ venisse” 
ad ea, “ quae aberraverant.” 2 Aberraverunt autem, non ab 
alto repetita origin e in earn, quae hie est, generationem (est 
enim generatio creatura Omnipotentis, qui nunquam ex meli- 
oribus ad deteriora deduxerit animam) ; sed ad eos, qui sen- 
sibus seu cogitationibus aberraverant, ad nos, inquam, venit 
Servator ; qui quidem ex nostra in proeceptis inobedientia 
corrupti sunt, dnm nimis avide voluptatem persequeremur ; 
cum utique protoplastus noster tempus prmvenisset, et ante 
debitum tempus matrimonii gratiam appetiisset et aberrasset : 
quoniam “ quicunque aspicit mulierem ad concupiscendum 
earn, janvmoechatus est earn,” 3 ut qui voluntatis tempus non 
exspectaverit. Is ipse ergo erat Dominus, qui tunc quoque 
damnabat cupiditatem, quae praevenit matrimonium. Cum 
ergo dicit Apostolus : “ Induite novum hominem, qui secun- 
dum Ueum creatur,” 4 nobis dicit, qui ab Omnipotentis volun- 
tate efficti sumus, sicut sumus efficti. “Veterem” autem 
dixit, non rescipiens ad generationem et regenerationem, sed 
1 2 Cor. xi. 8. 2 Matt, xviii. 11, 12. 

3 Matt. v. 28. 4 Epli. iv. 24. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

I 

130 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book iii. 

ad vitam inobedientise et obedientise. “ Pelliceas ” autem 
“ tunicas ” 1 existimat Cassianus esse corpora : in quo postea 
et eum, et qui idem cum eo sentiunt, aberrasse ostendemus, 
cum de ortu hominis, iis consequenter, quae prius dicenda 
sunt, aggrediemur expositionem. “ Quoniam, inquit, qui a 
terrenis reguntur, et gen er ant, et generantur : Nostra autem 
conversatio est in ccelo, ex quo etiam Salvatorem exspectcimus .” 2 
Becte ergo nos haec quoque dicta esse scimus, quoniam ut 
hospites et advenae peregrinantes debemus vitam instituere ; 
qui uxorem habent, ut non habentes ; qui possident, ut non 
possidentes ; qui liberos procreant, ut mortales gignentes, ut 
relicturi possessiones, ut etiam sine uxore victuri, si opus sit ; 
non cum immodico actione, et animo excelso. 

CAPUT XV. 

1 COP. VII. 1 ; LUC. XIV. 26 ; ISA. LVI. 2, 3, EXPLICAT. 

Et rursus cum dicit : “ Bonum est homini uxorem non tan- 
gere, sed propter fornicationes unusquisque suam uxorem 
habeat ;” 3 id veluti exponens, rursus dicit: “ Ne vos tentet 
Satan as .” 4 Non enim iis, qui continenter utuntur matri- 
monio propter solam liberorum procreationem, dicit, u propter 
intemperantiam sed iis, qui finem liberorum procreationis 
cupiunt transilire : ne, cum nimium annuerit noster adver- 
sarius, excitet appetitionem ad alien as voluptates. Fortasse 
autem quoniam iis, qui juste vivunt, resistit propter eemula- 
tionem, et adversus eos contendit, volens eos ad suos ordines 
traducere, per laboriosam continentiam eis vult prsebere occa- 
sionem. Merito ergo dicit : u Melius est matrimonio jungi 
quam uri ,” 5 ut “ vir redd at debitum uxori, et uxor viro, et 
ne frustrentur invicem ” 0 hoc divino ad generationem dato 
auxilio. u Qui autem, inquiunt, non oderit patrem, vel ma- 
trem, vel uxorem, vel filios, non potest meus esse discipulus .” 7 

1 Gen. iii. 21. 2 Phil. iii. 20. 3 1 Cor. vii. 1, 2. 

4 1 Cor. vii. 5. 5 1 Cor. vii. 9. c 1 Cor. vii. 3, 5. 

7 Luke xiv. 26. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

131 

Non jubet odisse proprium genus : “ Honora ” enim, inquit, 
“patrem et matrem, ut tibi bene sit :” 1 seel ne abducaris, 
in quit, per appetitiones a ratione alienas, sed neque civilibus 
moribus conformis fias. Domus enim constat ex genere, 
civitates autem ex domibus ; quemadmodum Paulus quoque 
eos, qui occupantur in matrimonio, “ mundo dixit placere.” 2 
Rursus dicit Dominus : “ Qui uxorem duxit, ne expellat ; et 
qui non duxit, ne ducat ;” 3 qui ex proposito castitatis pro- 
fessus est uxorem non ducere maneat ceelebs. Utrisque 
ergo idem Dominus per prophetam Isaiam convenientes dat 
promissiones sic dicens : “ Ne dicat eunuchus : Sum lignum 
aridum;” heec enim dicit Dominus eunucliis : “ Si custodieri- 
tis sabbata mea, et feceritis qujecunque preecipio, dabo vobis 
locum meliorem filiis et filiabus .” 4 Non sola enim justificat 
castitas, sed nec sabbatum eunuchi, nisi fecerit mandata. 
Infert autem iis, qui uxorem duxerunt, et dicit : “ Electi mei 
non laborabunt in vanum, neque procreabunt filios in exse- 
crationem, quia semen est benedictum a Domino .” 5 Ei 
enim, qui secundum Logon filios procreavit et educavit, et 
erudivit in Domino, sicut etiam ei, qui genuit per veram 
catechesim et institutionem, merces qusedam est proposita, 
sicut etiam electo semini. Alii autem “ exsecrationem ” 
accipiunt esse ipsam liberorum procreationem, et non intelli- 
gunt adversus illos ipsos ea dicere Scripturam. Qui enim 
sunt revera electi Domini, non dogmata decernunt, nec filios 
progignunt, qui sunt ad exsecrationem, et hsereses. Eunu- 
chus ergo, non qui per vim excisas habet partes, sed nec qui 
cselebs est, dictus est, sed qui non gignit veritatem. Lignum 
hie prius erat aridum ; si autem Logo obedierit, et sabbata 
custodierit per abstinentiam a peccatis, et fecerit mandata, 
erit honorabilior iis, qui absque recta vitee institutione solo 
sermone erudiuntur. u Filioli, modicum adhuc sum vobis- 
cum,” c in quit Magister. Quare Paulus quoque scribens ad 
Galatas, dicit : <c Filioli mei, quos iterum parturio, donee 
formetur in vobis Cliristus .” 7 Rursus ad Corinthios scri- 

1 Ex. xx. 12. 2 1 Cor. vii. 33. 3 1 Cor. vii. 10, 11. 

4 Isa. lvi. 3-5. 5 Isa. lxv. 23. 6 John xiii. 33. 

7 Gal. iv. 19. 

132 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

bens : “ Si enim decies mille paedagogos,” inquit, “ habeatis 
in Christo, sed non multos patres. In Christo enim per 
Evangelium ego vos genui.” 1 Propterea “ non ingrediatur 
eunuchus in Ecclesiam Dei ,” 2 qui est sterilis, et non fert 
fructum, nec vitae institutione, nec sermone. Sed “ qui se” 
quidem “ castrarunt ” ab omni peccato “ propter regnum coe- 
lorum,” 3 ii sunt beati, qui a mundo jejunant. 

CAPUT XVI. 

JER. XX. 14; JOB XIV. 3; PS. L. 5 ; 1 COE. IX. 27, EXPONIT. 

“ ExSECRANDA ” autem “dies in qua natus sum, et ut non 
sit optanda ,” 4 inquit Jeremias: non absolute exsecrandam 
dicens generationem, sed populi peccata aegre ferens et in- 
obedientiam. Subjungit itaque : “Cur enim natus sum ut 
viderem labores et dolores, et in perpetuo probro fuerunt 
dies mei ?” 5 Quin etiam omnes, qui praedicabant veritatem, 
propter eorum, qui audiebant, inobedientiam, quaerebantur ad 
poenam, et veniebant in periculum. “ Cur enim non fuit 
uterus matris meae sepulcrum, ne viderem afflictionem Jacob . 
et laborem generis Israel ? ” 6 ait Esdras proplieta. “Nullus 
est a sorde mundus,” ait Job, “ nec si sit quidem una dies 
vita ejus .” 7 Dicant ergo nobis, ubi fornicatus est infans 
natus? vel quomodo sub Adas cecidit exsecrationem, qui 
nihil est operatus ? Pestat ergo eis, ut videtur, consequenter, 
ut dicant malam esse generationem, non solum corporis, sed 
etiam animae, per quam exsistit corpus. Et quando dixit 
David : “ In peccatis conceptus sum, et in iniquitatibus con- 
cepit me mater mea :” 8 dicit prophetice quidem matrem 
Evam ; sed Eva quidem fuit “ mater viventium ; ” et si is 
“ in peccatis fuit conceptus,” at non ipse in peccato, neque 
vero ipse peccatum. Utrum vero quicunque etiam a peccato 
( ad fidem convertitur, a peccandi consuetudine tanquam a 

1 1 Cor. iv. 15. 2 Deut. xxiii. 1. 3 Matt. xix. 12. 

4 Jer. xx. 14. 5 Jer. xx. 18. 0 4 Esdr. v. 35. 

7 Job xiv. 4, 5. 8 Ps. 1. 7. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

133 

u matre ” convert! dicatur ad u vitam,” feret mihi testimo- 
nium unus ex duodecim prophetis, qui dixit : “ Si dedero 
primogenita pro impietate fructum ventris mei, pro peccatis 
animae meae.” 1 Non accusat eran, qui dixit : “ Crescite et 
multiplicamini : ” 2 sed primos post generationem motus, 
quorum tempore Deum non cognoscimus, dicit “ impietates.” 
Si quis autem ea ratione dicit malam generationem, idem 
earn dicat bonam, quatenus in ipso veritatem cognoscimus. 
u Abluamini juste, et ne peccetis. Ignorationem enim Dei 
quidam liabent,” 3 videlicet qui peccant. “ Quoniam nobis est 
colluctatio non adversus carnem et sanguinem, sed adversus 
spiritalia .” 4 Potentes autem sunt ad tentandum “ principes 
tenebrarum liujus mundi,” et ideo datur venia. Et ideo 
Paulus quoque : “ Corpus meurn,” inquit, u castigo, et in 
servitutem redigo ; quoniam qui certat, omnia continet,” hoc 
est, in omnibus continet, non ab omnibus abstinens, sed con- 
tinenter utens iis, quae utenda judicavit, “ illi quidem ut cor- 
ruptibilem coronam accipiant; nos autem ut incorruptibilem ,” 5 
in lucta vincentes, non autem sine pulvere coronam accipi- 
entes. Jam nonnulli quoque praeferunt viduam virgini, ut 
quae, quam experta est, voluptatem magno animo contempserit. 

CAPUT XV II. 

QUI NUPTIAS ET GENERATIONEM MALAS ASSERUNT, II ET 
DEI CREATIONEM ET IPS AM EVANGELII DISPENSATIO- 
NEM VITUPERANT. 

Sin autem malum est generatio, in malo blasphemi dicant 
fuisse Dominum qui fuit particeps generationis, in malo Vir- 
ginem quae genuit. Hei mihi ! quot et quanta mala ! Dei 
voluntatem maledictis incessunt, et mysterium creationis, dum 
invehuntur in generationem. Et hinc “ Docesin” fingit Cas- 
sianus ; hinc etiam Marcioni, et Valentino quoque est corpus 

1 Mic. vi. 7. 2 Gen. i. 28. 

3 1 Cor. xv. 34. Clement reads here ixi/tyctrs, “wash,” instead of 
£jcs'^aT£, “ awake.” 

4 Eph. vi. 12. 

5 1 Cor. ix. 27, 20. 

134 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

animale.; quoniam homo, inquiunt, operam dans veneri, u as- 
similatus est jumentis.” 1 Atqui profecto, cum libidine vere 
insaniens, aliena inire voluerit, tunc revera, qui talis est, effe- 
ratur : u Equi in feminas furentes facti sunt, unusquisque 
liinniebat ad uxorem proximi sui.” 2 Quod si dicat serpentem, 
a brutis animantibus accepta consilii sui ratione, Adamo per- 
suasisse ut cum Eva coire consentiret, tanqnam alioqui, ut 
quidam existimant, protoplasti hac natura usuri non fuissent : 
rursus vituperatur creatio, ut quae rationis expertium animan- 
tium natura homines fecerit imbecilliores, quorum exempla 
consecuti sunt, qui a Deo primi formati fuere. Sin autem 
natura quidem eos sicut bruta deduxit ad filiorum procreatio- 
nem ; moti autem sunt citius quam oportuit, fraude inducti, 
cum adhuc essent juvenes ; justum quidem est Dei judicium 
in eos qui non exspectarunt ejus voluntatem : sancta est 
autem generatio, per quam mundus consistit, per quam es- 
sentias, per quam naturae, per quam angeli, per quam potes- 
tates, per quam animae, per quam praecepta, per quam lex, 
per quam Evangelium, per quam Dei cognitio. “ Et omnis 
caro fenum, et omnis gloria ejus quasi flos feni ; et fenum 
quidem exsiccatur, flos autem decidit, sed verbum Domini 
manet,” 3 quod unxit animam et uniit spiritui. Quomodo 
autem, quae est in Ecclesia nostra, oeconomia ad finem perduci 
potuisset absque corpore, cum etiam ipse, qui est caput Eccle- 
siae, in carne quidem informis et specie carens vitam transiit, 
ut doceret nos respicere ad naturam divinae causae informem 
et incorpoream ? “ Arbor enim vitae,” inquit propheta, “ est 

in bono desiderio,” 4 docens bona et munda desideria, quae 
sunt in Domino vivente. Jam vero volunt viri cum uxore 
in matrimonio consuetudinem, quae dicta est “ cognitio,” esse 
peccatum : earn quippe indicari ex esu u ligni boni et mali,” 5 
per significationem hujus vocabuli 11 cognovit,” 6 quaemandati 
transgressionem notat. Si autem hoc ita est, veritatis quoque 
cognitio, est esus ligni vitae. Potest ergo lionestum ac mode- 
ratum matrimonium illius quoque ligni esse particeps. Nobis 
autem prius dictum est, quod licet bene et male uti matri- 

1 Ps. xlviii. 13, 21. 2 Jer. v. 8. 3 Isa. xl. G, 7, 8. 

4 Prov. xiii. 12. 6 Gen. iii. 5. c Gen. iv. 1. 

Book iii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

135 

monio ; et hoc est lignum u cognitionis,” si non transgredi- 
amur leges matrimonii. Quid vero ? annon Servator noster, 
sicut animam, ita etiam corpus curavit ab affectionibus % 
Neque vero si esset caro inimica animse, inimicam per sani- 
tatis restitutionem adversus ipsam muniisset. u Hoc autem 
dico, fratres, quod caro et sanguis regnum Dei non possunt 
possidere, neque corruptio possidet incorruptionem .” 1 Pecca- 
tum enim, cum sit u corruptio,” non potest habere societatem 
cum “ in corruption e,” quae est justitia. 11 Adeo stulti,” inquit, 
“estis? cum spiritu coeperitis, nunc carne consummamini .” 2 

CAPUT XVIII. 

DUAS EXTREMAS OPINIONES ESSE VITANDAS : PRIMAM 
ILLORUM QUI CREATORIS ODIO A NUPTIIS ABSTINENT; 
ALTERAM ILLORUM QUI HINC OCCASIONEM ARRIPIUNT 
NEFARIIS LIBIDINIBUS INDULGENDI. 

J ustitiam ergo et salutis harmoniam, quse est veneranda 
firmaque, alii quidern, ut ostendimus, nimium intenderunt, 
blaspheme ac maledice cum quavis impietate suscipientes 
continentiam; cum pie liceret castitatem, quse secundum 
sanam regulam instituitur, eligere : gratias quidern agendo 
propter datam ipsis gratiam, non habendo autem odio crea- 
turam, neque eos aspernando, qui juncti sunt matrimonio ; 
est enim creatus mundus, creata est etiam castitas; ambo 
autem agant gratias in iis, in quibus sunt collocati, si modo 
ea quoque norunt, in quibus sunt collocati: Alii autem 
effrenati se petulanter et insolenter gesserunt, revera “ effecti 
equi in feminas insanientes, et ad proximorum suorum uxores 
hinnientes ; ” 3 ut qui et ipsi contineri non possint, et proxi- 
mis suis persuadeant ut dent operam voluptati; infeliciter 
illas audientes Scripturas : u Quse tibi obtigit, partem pone 
nobiscum, crumenam autem unam possideamus communem, 
et unum fiat nobis marsupium.” 4 Propter eos idem pro- 
pheta dicit, nobis consulens : “ Ne ambulaveris in via cum 
1 1 Cor. xv. 50. 2 Gal. iii. 3. 3 Jer. v. 8. * Prov. i. 14. 

136 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iii. 

apsis, declina peclem tuum a semitis eorum. Non enim in- 
juste tenduntur retia pennatis. Ipsi enim, cum sint sangui- 
num participes, thesauros malorum sibi recondunt ; ” 1 hoc 
est, sibi affectantes immunditiam, et proximos similia docentes, 
bellatores, percussores caudis suis , 2 ut ait propheta, quas 
quidem Graeci rcep/covs appellant. Fuerint autem ii, quos 
significat prophetia, libidinosi intemperantes, qui sunt caudis 
suis pugnaces, tenebrarum “ irseque filii ,” 3 caede polluti, 
manus sibi afferentes, et homicidte propinquorum. u Ex- 
purgate ergo vetus fermentum, ut sitis novo conspersio,” 4 
nobis exclamat Apostolus. Et rursus, propter quosdam 
ejusmodi homines indignans, praecipit, u Ne conversari 
quidem, si quis frater nominetur vel fornicator, vel avarus, 
vel idololatra, vel maledicus, vel ebriosus, vel raptor ; cum eo, 
qui est talis, ne una quidem comedere. Ego enim per legem 
legi mortuus sum,” inquit ; u ut Deo vivam, cum Christo 
sum crucifixus ; vivo autem non amplius ego,” ut vivebam 
per cupiditates ; “ vivit autem in me Christus,” caste et beate 
per obedientiam praeceptorum. Quare tunc quidem in carne 
vivebam carnaliter : u quod autem nunc vivo in carne, in fide 
vivo Filii Dei.” 5 — u In viam gentium ne abieritis, et ne in- 
grediamini in urbem Samaritanorum,” 6 a contraria vitae in- 
stitutione nos dehortans dicit Dominus ; quoniam u Iniquorum 
virorum mala est conversatio ; et hre sunt vise omnium, qui 
ea, quae sunt iniqua, efficiunt.” 7 — “Vse liomini illi,” inquit 
Dominus ; “ bonum esset ei, si non natus esset, quam ut 
unum ex electis meis scandalizaret. s Melius esset, ut ei mola 
circumponeretur, et in mari demergeretur, quam ut unum ex 
meis perverteret . 9 Nomen enim Dei blasphematur propter 
ipsos.” 10 Unde prseclare Apostolus: “ Scripsi,” inquit, “vobis 
in epistola, non conversari cum fornicatoribus,” 11 usque ad 
illud : u Corpus autem non fornicationi, sed Domino, et 
Dominus corpori.” 12 Et quod matrimonium non dicat forni- 
cationem, ostendit eo, quod subjungit : a An nescitis, quod 

1 Prov. i. 15, 16, 17. 2 Apoc. ix. 10. 3 Eph. ii. 3. 

4 1 Cor. v. 7. 5 Gal. ii. 19, 20. c Matt. x. 5. 

7 Prov. i. 18, 19. 8 Matt. xxvi. 24. 0 Matt, xviii. 6 seqq. 

10 Rom. ii. 24. 11 1 Cor. v. 11. 12 1 Cor. vi. 13. 

Book hi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

137 

qui adhseret meretrici, unum est corpus?” 1 An meretricem 
quis clicet virginem, priusquam nubat? “Et ne fi'audetis,” 
inquit, “ vos invicem, nisi ex consensu ad tempus :” 2 per 
dictionem, “ fraudetis,” ostendens matrimonii debitum esse 
liberorum procreationem : quod quidem in iis, quse pi'cece- 
dunt, ostendit, dicens : “ Mulieri vir debitum reddat ; simili- 
ter autem mulier quoque viro 3 post quam exsolutionem, in 
domo custodienda, et in ea quae est in Christo fide, adjutrix 
est. Et adhuc apertius, dicens : “ Iis, qui sunt juncti matri- 
monio, praecipio, inquit, non ego, sed Dominus, uxorem a viro 
non separari ; sin autem separata fuerit, maneat innupta, vel 
viro reconcilietur ; et virum uxorem non dimittere. Reliquis 
autem dico ego, non Dominus : Si quis frater ,” 4 usque ad 
illud : “Nunc autem sancta est .” 5 Quid autem ad hsec 
dicunt, qui in legem invehuntur, et in matrimonium, quasi sit 
solum a lege concessum, non autem etiam in Novo Testa- 
mento? Quid ad has leges latas possunt dicere, qui sationem 
abhorrent et generationem ? cum “ episcopum ” quoque, “ qui 
domui recte prsesit,” c Ecclesise ducem constituat; domuin 
autem Dominicam “ unius mulieris” constituat conjugium. 
“ Omnia” ergo dicit esse “munda mundis; pollutis autem et 
infidelibus nihil est nmndum, sed polluta est eorum et mens, 
et conscientia.” 7 De ea autem voluptate, quse est preeter 
regulam : “ Ne erretis,” inquit ; “ nec fornicatores, nec idolo- 
latras, nec adulteri, nec molles, nec masculorum concubitores, 
neque avari, neque fures, neque ebriosi, neque maledici, nec 
raptores, regnum Dei possidebunt ; et nos quidem abluti 
sumus ,” 8 qui in his eramus ; qui autem in banc tingunt 
intemperantiam, ex temperantia in fornicationem baptizant, 
voluptatibus et affectibus esse indulgendum decernentes, in- 
continentes ex moderatis fieri docentes, et in spe sua mem- 
brorum suorum impudentise affixi ; ut a regno Dei abdieentur, 
non autem ut inscribantur, qui ad eos ventitant, efficientes ; 
sub falso nominatse cognitionis titulo, earn, quae ad exteriores 

1 1 Cor. vi. 16. 2 1 Cor. vii. 5. 

3 1 Cor. vii. 3. 4 1 Cor. vii. 10, 11, 12. 

5 1 Cor. vii. 14. 6 1 Tim. iii. 2, 4 ; Tit. i. 6. 

7 Tit. i. 15. 8 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10, 11. 

138 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book hi. 

ducit tenebras, viam ingredientes. a Quod reliquum est, 
fratres, qusecunque vera, qusecunque honesta, qusecunque 
justa, qusecunque casta, qusecunque amabilia, qusecunque 
bonse famse ; si qua virtus, et si qua laus, ea considerate ; 
quae et didicistis ; quse etiam accepistis et audiistis et vidistis 
in me, ea facite ; et Deus pacis erit vobiscum.” 1 Et Petrus 
similia dicit in Epistola : u Ut tides vestra et spes sit in Deum, 
cum animas vestras castas effeceritis in obedientia veritatis 2 
quasi filii obedientise, non configurati prioribus desideriis, 
quse fuerunt in ignorantia ; sed secundum eum, qui vocavit 
vos, sanctum, et ipsi sancti sitis in omni conversatione. 
Quoniam scriptum est : “ Sancti eritis, quoniam ego sanctus 
sum.” 3 Yerumtamen quse adversus eos, qui cognitionem 
falso nomine simulant, necessario suscepta est a nobis dis- 
putatio, nos longius, quam par sit, abduxit, et orationem 
effecit prolixiorem. Unde tertius quoque liber Stromateus 
eorum, quse sunt de vera philosophia, commentariorum, hunc 
tinem habeat. 

1 Phil. iv. 8, 9. 

2 1 Pet. i. 21, 22. 

3 1 Pet. i. 14, 15, 16. 

BOOK IV. 

CHAPTER I. 

OEDEIt OF CONTENTS. 

T will follow, I think, that I should treat of martyr- 
dom, and of who the perfect man is. With these 
points shall be included what follows in accord- 
ance with the demands of the points to be spoken 
about, and how both bond and free must equally philosophize, 
whether male or female in,, sex. And in the sequel, after 
finishing what is to he said on faith and inquiry, we shall set 
forth the department of symbols ; so that, on cursorily con- 
cluding the discourse on ethics, we shall exhibit the advantage 
which has accrued to the Greeks from the barbarian philo- 
sophy. After which sketch, the brief explanation of the 
Scriptures both against the Greeks and against the Jews will 
be presented, and whatever points we were unable to embrace 
in the previous Miscellanies (through having respect neces- 
sarily to the multitude of matters), in accordance with the 
commencement of the proem, purposing to finish them in one 
commentary. In addition to these points, afterwards on 
completing the sketch, as far as we can in accordance with 
what we propose, we must give an account of the physical 
doctrines of the Greeks and of the barbarians, respecting 
elementary principles, as far as their opinions have reached 
us, and argue against the principal views excogitated by the 
philosophers. 

It will naturally fall after these, after a cursory view of 
theology, to discuss the opinions handed down respecting 
prophecy ; so that, having demonstrated that the Scriptures 

140 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

which we believe are valid from their omnipotent authority, 
we shall be able to go over them consecutively, and to show 
thence to all the heresies one God and Omnipotent Lord to 
be truly preached by the law and the prophets, and besides 
by the blessed gospel. Many contradictions against the hete- 
rodox await us while we attempt, in writing, to do away with 
the force of the allegations made by them, and to persuade 
them against their will, proving by the Scriptures themselves. 

On completing, then, the whole of what we propose in the 
commentaries, on which, if the Spirit will, we ministering 
to the urgent need, (for it is exceedingly necessary, before 
coming to the truth, to embrace what ought to be said by way 
of preface), shall address ourselves to the true gnostic science 
of nature, receiving initiation into the minor mysteries before 
the greater ; so that nothing may be in the way of the truly 
divine declaration of sacred things, the subjects requiring 
preliminary detail and statement being cleared away, and 
sketched beforehand. The science of nature, then, or rather 
observation, as contained in the gnostic tradition according 
to the rule of the truth, depends on the discussion concerning 
cosmogony, ascending thence to the department of theology. 
Whence, then, we shall begin our account of what is handed 
down, with the creation as related by the prophets, intro- 
ducing also the tenets of the heterodox, and endeavouring as 
far as we can to confute them. But it shall be written if 
God will, and as He inspires ; and now we must proceed to 
what we proposed, and complete the discourse on ethics. 

CHAPTER II. 

THE MEANING OF THE NAME STROMATA [MISCELLANIES]. 

Let these notes of ours, as we have often said for the sake 
of those that consult them carelessly and unskilfully, be of 
varied character — and as the name itself indicates, patched 
together — passing constantly from one thing to another, and 
in the series of discussions hinting at one thing and demon- 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

141 

strating another. “ For those who seek for gold,” says 
Heraclitus, “dig much earth and find little gold.” But those 
who are of the truly golden race, in mining for what is allied 
to them, will find the much in little. For the word will find 
one to understand it. The Miscellanies of notes contribute, 
then, to the recollection and expression of truth in the case of 
him who is able to investigate with reason. And you must 
prosecute, in addition to these, other labours and researches ; 
since, in the case of people who are setting out on a road 
with which they are unacquainted, it is sufficient merely to 
point out the direction. After this they must walk and find 
out the rest for themselves. As, they say, when a certain 
slave once asked at the oracle what he should do to please 
his master, the Pythian priestess replied, “ You will find if 
you seek.” It is truly a difficult matter, then, as turns out, 
to find out latent good ; since 

V “ Before virtue is placed exertion, 

And long and steep is the way to it, 

And rough at first ; but when the summit is reached, 

Then is it easy, though difficult [before].” 

“For narrow,” in truth, “and strait is the way” of the Lord. 
And it is to the “violent that the kingdom of God belongs .” 1 

Whence, “ Seek, and ye shall find,” holding on by the 
truly royal road, and not deviating. As we might expect, 
then, the generative power of the seeds of the doctrines com- 
prehended in this treatise is great in small space, as the 
“ universal herbage of the field,” 2 as Scripture saith. Thus 
the Miscellanies of notes have their proper title, wonderfully 
like that ancient oblation culled from all sorts of things of 
which Sophocles writes : 

' “ For there was a sheep’s fleece, and there was a vine, 

And a libation, and grapes well stored ; 

And there was mixed with it fruit of all kinds, 

And the fat of the olive, and the most curious 
Wax-formed work of the yellow bee.” 

Just so our Stromata, according to the husbandman of the 
comic poet Timocles, produce “ figs, olives, dried figs, honey, 
1 Matt. vii. 14, xi. 12, vii. 7. 2 Job v. 25. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

]42 

[Book iv. 

as from an all-fruitful field;” on account of which exuberance 
he adds : 

“ Thou speakest of a harvest- wreath not of husbandry.” 

F or the Athenians were wont to cry : 

“ The harvest- wreath bears figs and fat loaves, 

And honey in a cup, and olive oil to anoint you.” 

We must then often, as in winnowing sieves, shake and toss up 
this the great mixture of seeds, in order to separate the wheat. 

CHAPTER III. 

THE TRUE EXCELLENCE OF MAN. 

The most of men have a disposition unstable and heedless, 
like the nature of storms. “ Want of faith has done many 
good things, and faith evil things.” And Epicharmus says, 
“ Don’t forget to exercise incredulity ; for it is the sinews of 
the soul.” Now, to disbelieve truth brings death, as to be- 
lieve, life ; and again, to believe the lie and to disbelieve the 
truth hurries to destruction. The same is the case with self- 
restraint and licentiousness. To restrain one’s self from doing 
good is the work of vice ; but to keep from wrong is the be- 
ginning of salvation. So the Sabbath, by abstinence from 
evils, seems to indicate self-restraint. And what, I ask, is it 
in which man differs from beasts, and the angels of God, on 
the other hand, are wiser than he ? u Thou madest him a 
little lower than the angels .” 1 For some do not interpret 
this scripture of the Lord, although He also bore flesh, but 
of the perfect man and the gnostic, inferior in comparison 
with the angels in time, and by reason of the vesture [of 
the body]. I call then wisdom nothing but science, since 
life differs not from life. For to live is common to the 
mortal nature, that is to man, with that to which has been 
vouchsafed immortality ; as also the faculty of contemplation 
and of self-restraint, one of the two being more excellent. 

1 Ps. viii. 6. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

143 

On this ground Pythagoras seems to me to have said that 
God alone is wise, since also the apostle writes in the Epistle 
to the Romans, “For the obedience of the faith among all 
nations, being made known to the only wise God through 
Jesus Christ;” 1 and that he himself was a philosopher, on 
account of his friendship with God. Accordingly it is said, 
“ God talked with Moses as a friend with a friend.” 2 That, 
then, which is true being clear to God, forthwith generates 
truth. And the gnostic loves the truth. “ Go,” it is said, 
“ to the ant, thou sluggard, and be the disciple of the bee;” 
thus speaks Solomon. 3 For if there is one function belong- 
ing to the peculiar nature of each creature, alike of the ox, 
and horse, and dog, what shall we say is the peculiar func- 
tion of man ? He is like, it appears to me, the Centaur, a 
Thessalian figment, compound ed of a rational and irrational 
part, of soul and body. Well, the body tills the ground, and 
hastes to it ; but the soul is raised to God : trained in the 
true philosophy, it speeds to its kindred above, turning away 
from the lusts of the body, and besides these, from toil and 
fear, although we have shown that patience and fear belong 
to the good man. For if “ by the law is the knowledge of 
sin,” 4 as those allege who disparage the law, and “ till the 
law sin was in the world;” 5 yet “without the law sin was 
dead,” 6 we oppose them. For when you take away the 
cause of fear, sin, you have taken away fear ; and much more, 
punishment, when you have taken away that which gives 
rise to lust. “ For the law is not made for the just man,” 7 
says the Scripture. Well, then, says Heraclitus, “ They 
would not have known the name of Justice if these things 
had not been.” And Socrates says, “ that the law was not 
made for the sake of the good.” But the cavillers did not 
know even this, as the apostle says, “ that he who loveth his 
brother worketh not evil ;” for this, “ Thou shalt not kill, 
thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not steal ; and if 
there be any other commandment, it is comprehended in the 

1 Rom. xvi. 26, 27. 2 Ex. xxxiii. 11. 3 Prov. vi. 6, 8 . 

4 Rom. iii. 20. 5 Rom. v. 13. 6 Rom. vii. 6. 

7 1 Tim. i. 9. 

144 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

word, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” 1 So also 
is it said, “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” 2 And 
“if he that loveth his neighbour worketh no evil,” and if 
“ every commandment is comprehended in this, the loving 
our neighbour,” the commandments, by menacing with fear, 
work love, not hatred. Wherefore the law is productive of 
the emotion of fear. “ So that the law is holy,” and in truth 
“spiritual,” 3 according to the apostle. We must, then, as is 
fit, in investigating the nature of the body and the essence of 
the soul, apprehend the end of each, and not regard death as 
an evil. “ For when ye were the servants of sin,” says the 
apostle, “ye were free from righteousness. What fruit had 
ye then in those things in which ye are now ashamed? For 
the end of those things is death. But now, being made free 
from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit 
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. For the wages 
of sin is death : but the gift of God is eternal life, through 
Jesus Christ our Lord.” 4 The assertion, then, may be 
hazarded, that it has been shown that death is the fellow- 
ship of the soul in a state of sin with the body ; and life the 
separation from sin. And many are the stakes and ditches 
of lust which impede us, and the pits of wrath and anger 
which must be overleaped, and all the machinations we must 
avoid of those who plot against us, — who would no longer 
see the knowledge of God “ through a glass.” 

“ The half of virtue the far-seeing Zeus takes 

From man, when he reduces him to a state of slavery.” 

As slaves the Scripture views those “ under sin ” and “ sold 
to sin,” the lovers of pleasure and of the body ; and beasts 
rather than men, “ those who have become like to cattle, 
female-mad horses, neighing after their neighbours’ wives.” 5 
The licentious is “ the lustful ass,” the covetous is the “ savage 
wolf,” and the deceiver is “ a serpent.” The severance, there- 
fore, of the soul from the body, made a life-long study, pro- 

1 Rom. xiii. 8, x. 9. 2 Luke x. 27. 3 Rom. vii. 12, 14. 

4 Rom. vi. 20-23. 5 Ps. xlviii. 13, 21 ; Jer. v. 8, etc. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

145 

duces in the philosopher gnostic alacrity, so that he is easily 
able to bear natural death, which is the dissolution of the 
chains which bind the soul to the body. u For the world is 
crucified to me, and I to the world,” the [apostle] says ; “ and 
now I live, though in the flesh, as having my conversation in 
heaven.” 1 

CHAPTER IY. 

THE PRAISES OF MARTYRDOM. 

Whence, as is reasonable, the gnostic, when called, obeys 
easily, and gives up his body to him who asks; and, pre- 
viously divesting himself of the affections of this carcase, not 
insulting the tempter, but rather, in my opinion, training him 
and convincing him, 

u From what honour and what extent of wealth fallen,” 

as says Empedocles, here for the future he walks with mortals. 
He, in truth, bears witness to himself that he is faithful and 
loyal towards God ; and to the tempter, that he in vain envied 
him who is faithful through love ; and to the Lord, of the 
inspired persuasion in reference to His doctrine, from which 
he will not depart through fear of death ; further, he con- 
firms also the truth of preaching by his deed, showing that 
God to whom he hastes is powerful. You will wonder at 
his love, which he conspicuously shows with thankfulness, in 
being united to what is allied to him, and besides by his 
precious blood, shaming the unbelievers. He then avoids 
denying Christ through fear by reason of the command ; nor 
does he sell his faith in the hope of the gifts prepared, but 
in love to the Lord he will most gladly depart from this life ; 
perhaps giving thanks both to him who afforded the cause 
of his departure hence, and to him who laid the plot against 
him, for receiving an honourable reason which he himself 
furnished not, for showing what he is, to him by his patience, 
and to the Lord in love, by which even before his birth he 
1 Gal. vi. 14 ; Phil. iii. 20. 

CLEM. — YOL. II. 

K 

146 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

was manifested to the Lord, who knew the martyr s choice. 
With good courage, then, he goes to the Lord, his friend, 
for whom he voluntarily gave his body, and, as his judges 
hoped, his soul, hearing from our Saviour the words of 
poetry, “Dear brother,” by reason of the similarity of his 
life. We call martyrdom perfection, not because the man 
comes to the end of his life as others, but because he has 
exhibited the perfect work of love. And the ancients laud 
the death of those among the Greeks who died in war, not 
that they advised people to die a violent death, but because 
he who ends his life in war is released without the dread of 
dying, severed from the body without experiencing previous 
suffering or being enfeebled in his soul, as the people that 
suffer in diseases. For they depart in a state of effeminacy 
and desiring to live ; and therefore they do not yield up the 
soul pure, but bearing with it their lusts like weights of lead ; 
all but those who have been conspicuous in virtue. Some 
die in battle with their lusts, these being in no respect dif- 
ferent from what they would have been if they had wasted 
away by disease. 

If the confession to God is martyrdom, each soul which 
has lived purely in the knowledge of God, which has obeyed 
the commandments, is a witness both by life and word, in 
whatever way it may be released from the body, — shedding 
faith as blood along its whole life till its departure. For in- 
stance, the Lord says in the Gospel, “ Whosoever shall leave 
father, or mother, or brethren,” and so forth, “ for the sake 
of the gospel and my name,” 1 he is blessed; not indicating 
simple martyrdom, but the gnostic martyrdom, as of the 
man who has conducted himself according to the rule of the 
gospel, in love to the Lord (for the knowledge of the Name 
and the understanding of the gospel point out the gnosis, but 
not the bare appellation), so as to leave his worldly kindred, 
and wealth, and every possession, in order to lead a life free 
from passion. “Mother” figuratively means country and 
sustenance ; “ fathers ” are the laws of civil polity : which 
must be contemned thankfully by the high-souled just man; 

1 Matt. xix. 29. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

Book iv.] 

147 

for the sake of being the friend of God, and of obtaining 
the right hand in the holy place, as the Apostles have done. 

Then Heraclitus says, “ Gods and men honour those slain in 
battle and Plato in the fifth book of the Republic writes, 
u Of those who die in military service, whoever dies after 
winning renown, shall we not say that he is chief of the 
golden race ? Most assuredly.” But the golden l’ace is with 
the gods, who are in heaven, in the fixed sphere, who chiefly 
hold command in the providence exercised towards men. 
Now some of the heretics who have misunderstood the Lord, 
have at once an impious and cowardly love of life ; saying 
that the true martyrdom is the knowledge of the only true 
God (which we also admit), and that the man is a self-mur- 
derer and a suicide who makes confession by death; and 
adducing other similar sophisms of cowardice. To these we 
shall reply at the proper time ; for they differ with us in 
regard to first principles. Now we, too, say that those who 
have rushed on death (for there are some, not belonging to 
us, but sharing the name merely, who are in haste to give 
themselves up, the poor wretches dying through hatred to the 
Creator 1 ) — these, we say, banish themselves without being 
martyrs, even though they are punished publicly. For they 
do not preserve the chai’acteristic mark of believing martyr- 
dom, inasmuch as they have not known the only true God, 
but give themselves up to a vain death, as the Gym nosophists 
of the Indians to useless fire. 

But since these falsely named [gnostics] calumniate the 
body, let them learn that the harmonious mechanism of the 
body contributes to the understanding which leads to good- 
ness of nature. Wherefore in the third book of the Republic, 
Plato, whom they appeal to loudly as an authority that dis- 
parages generation, says, “ that for the sake of harmony of 
soul, care must be taken for the body,” by which, he who 
announces the proclamation of the truth, finds it possible to 
live, and to live well. For it is by the path of life and 
health that we learn gnosis. But is he who cannot advance 
to the height without being occupied with necessary things, 

1 Demiurgus. 

148 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

and through them doing what tends to knowledge, not to 
choose to live well ? In living, then, living well is secured. 
And he who in the body has devoted himself to a good life, 
is being sent on to the state of immortality. 

CHAPTER V. 

ON CONTEMPT FOR PAIN, POVERTY, AND OTHER 

EXTERNAL THINGS. 

Fit objects for admiration are the Stoics, who say that the soul 
is not affected by the body, either to vice by disease, or to virtue 
by health ; but both these things, they say, are indifferent. 
And indeed Job, through exceeding continence, and excellence 
of faith, when from rich he became poor, from being held in 
honour dishonoured, from being comely unsightly, and sick 
from being healthy, is depicted as a good example, putting the 
Tempter to shame, blessing his Creator ; bearing what came 
second, as the first, and most clearly teaching that it is pos- 
sible for the gnostic to make an excellent use of all circum- 
stances. And that ancient achievements are proposed as 
images for our correction, the apostle shows, when he says, 
u So that my bonds in Christ are become manifest in all the 
palace, and to all the rest ; and several of the brethren in the 
Lord, waxing confident by rny bonds, are much, more bold 
to speak the word of God without fear,” 1 — since martyrs’ 
testimonies are examples of conversion gloriously sanctified. 
“ For what things the Scripture speaks were written for our 
instruction, that we, through patience and the consolation of 
the Scriptures, might have the hope of consolation.” 2 When 
pain is present, the soul appears to decline from it, and to 
deem release from present pain a precious thing. At that 
moment it slackens from studies, when the other virtues also 
are neglected. And yet we do not say that it is virtue itself 
which suffers, for virtue is not affected by disease. But he 
who is partaker of both, of virtue and the disease, is afflicted 
by the pressure of the latter ; and if he who has not yet 
i Phil. i. 18, 14. 2 Rom. xv. 4. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

149 

attained the habit of self-command be not a high-souled man, 
he is distraught; and the inability to endure it is found 
equivalent to fleeing from it. 

The same holds good also in the case of poverty. For it 
compels the soul to desist from necessary things, I mean con- 
templation and from pure sinlessness, forcing him, who has 
not wholly dedicated himself to God in love, to occupy him- 
self about provisions ; as, again, health and abundance of 
necessaries keep the soul free and unimpeded, and capable 
of making a good use of what is at hand. “For,” says the 
apostle, “ such shall have trouble in the flesh. But I spare 
you. For I would have you without anxiety, in order to 
decorum and assiduity for the Lord, without distraction.” 1 

These things, then, are to be abstained from, not for their, 
own sakes, but for the sake of the body ; and care for the - 
body is exercised for the sake of the soul, to which it lias 
reference. For on this account it is necessary for the man 
who lives as a gnostic to know what is suitable. Since the 
fact that pleasure is not a good tiling is admitted from the 
fact that certain pleasures are evil, by this reason good 
appears evil, and evil good. And then, if we choose some 
pleasures and shun others, it is not every pleasure that is a 
good thing. 

Similarly, also, the same rule holds with pains, some of 
which we endure, and others we shun. But choice and avoid- 
ance are exercised according to knowledge ; so that it is not 
pleasure that is the good thing, but knowledge by which we 
shall choose a pleasure at a certain time, and of a certain kind. 
Now the martyr chooses the pleasure that exists in prospect 
through the present pain. If pain is conceived as existing 
in thirst, and pleasure in drinking, the pain that has preceded 
becomes the efficient cause of pleasure. But evil cannot be 
the efficient cause of good. Neither, then, is the one thing 
nor the other evil. Simonides accordingly (as also Aris- 
totle) writes, “ that to be in good health is the best thing, 
and the second best thing is to be handsome, and the third 
best thing is to be rich without cheating.” 

1 1 Cor. vii. 28, 82, 85. 

150 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

And Theognis of Megara says : 

“You must, to escape poverty, throw 
Yourself, 0 Cyrnus, down from 
The steep rocks into the deep sea.” 

On the other hand, Antiphanes, the comic poet, says, 
“Plutus (Wealth), when it has taken hold of those who see 
better than others, makes them blind.” Now by the poets he 
is proclaimed as blind from his birth : 

“And brought him forth blind who saw not the sun.” 

Says the Chalcidian Euphorion : 

“ Riches, then, and extravagant luxuries, 

"Were for men the worst training for manliness.” 

Wrote Euripides in Alexander : 

“ And it is said, 

Penury has attained wisdom through misfortune ; 

But much wealth will capture not 
Sparta alone, but every city.” 

a It is not then the only coin that mortals have, that which 
is white silver or golden, but virtue too,” as Sophocles says. 

CHAPTER VI. 

SOME POINTS IN THE BEATITUDES. 

Oue. holy Saviour applied poverty and riches, and the like, 
both to spiritual things and objects of sense. For when He 
said, “Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness’ 
sake,” 1 Pie clearly taught us in every circumstance to seek for 
the martyr who, if poor for righteousness’ sake, witnesses that 
the righteousness which he loves is a good thing ; and if he 
a hunger and thirst for righteousness’ sake,” testifies that 
righteousness is the best thing. Likewise he, that weeps and 
mourns for righteousness’ sake, testifies to the best law that it 
is beautiful. As, then, “ those that are persecuted,” so also 
“ those that hunger and thirst ” for righteousness’ sake, are 
called “ blessed ” by Him who approves of the true desire, 
which not even famine can put a stop to. And if “ they 

1 Matt. v. 10. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

151 

hunger after righteousness itself,” they are blessed. “ And 
blessed are the poor,” whether “inspirit” or in circumstances 
— that is, if for righteousness’ sake. It is not the poor 
simply, but those that have wished to become poor for right- 
eousness’ sake, that He pronounces blessed — those who have 
despised the honours of this world in order to attain “ the 
good ; ” likewise also those who, through chastity, have be- 
come comely in person and character, and those who are of 
noble birth, and honourable, having through righteousness 
attained to adoption, and therefore “ have received power to 
become the sons of God,” 1 and “ to tread on serpents and 
scorpions,” and to rule over demons and “ the host of the 
adversary .” 2 And, in fine, the Lord’s discipline draws the 
soul away gladly from the body, even if it wrench itself 
away in its removal. “For he that lovetli his life shall lose 
it, and he that loseth his life shall find it,” if we only join that 
which is mortal of us with the immortality of God. It is the 
will of God [that we should attain] the knowledge of God, 
which is the communication of immortality. Fie therefore, 
who, in accordance with the word of repentance, knows his 
life to be sinful will lose it — losing it from sin, from which 
it is wrenched ; but losing it, will find it, according to the 
obedience which lives again to faith, but dies to sin. This, 
then, is what it is “ to find one’s life,” “ to know one’s self.” 

The conversion, however, which leads to divine things, the 
Stoics say, is effected by a change, the soul being changed to 
wisdom. And Plato : “ On the soul taking a turn to what is 
better, and a change from a kind of nocturnal day.” Now 
the philosophers also allow the good man an exit from life in 
accordance with reason, in the case of one depriving him of 
active exertion, so that the hope of action is no longer left 
him. And the judge who compels us to deny Him whom 
we love, I regard as showing who is and who is not the friend 
of God. In that case there is not left ground for even 
examining what one prefers — the menaces of man or the love 
of God. And abstinence from vicious acts is found, somehow, 
[to result in] the diminution and extinction of vicious propen- 
1 John i. 12. 2 Luke x. 19. 

152 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

sities, their energy being destroyed by inaction. And this is 
the import of “ Sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and 
come, follow me” 1 — that is, follow what is said by the Lord. 
Some say that by what “thou hast” He designated the things 
in the soul, of a nature not akin to it, though how these 
are bestowed on the poor they are not able to say. For God 
dispenses to all according to desert, His distribution being 
righteous. Despising, therefore, the possessions which God 
apportions to thee in thy magnificence, comply with what 
is spoken by me; haste to the ascent of the Spirit, being 
not only justified by abstinence from what is evil, but in 
addition also perfected, by Christlike beneficence . 2 In this 
instance He convicted the man, who boasted that he had 
fulfilled the injunctions of the law, of not loving his neigh- 
bour ; and it is by beneficence that the love which, according 
to the gnostic ascending scale, is lord of the Sabbath, pro- 
claims itself. We must then, according to my view, have 
recourse to the word of salvation neither from fear of punish- 
ment nor promise of a gift, but on account of the good itself. 
Such, as do so, stand on the right hand of the sanctuary ; but 
those who think that by the gift of what is perishable they 
shall receive in exchange what belongs to immortality are in 
the parable of the two brothers called “hirelings.” And is 
there not some light thrown here on the expression “ in the 
likeness and image,” in the fact that some live according to the 
likeness of Christ, while those who stand on the left hand 
live according to their image ? There are then two things 
proceeding from the truth, one root lying beneath both, — the 
choice being, however, not equal, or rather the difference 
that is in the choice not being equal. To choose by way 
of imitation differs, as appears to me, from the choice of him 
who chooses according to knowledge, as that which is set on 
fire differs from that which is illuminated. Israel, then, is 
the light of the likeness which is according to the Scripture. 
But the image is another thing. What means the parable of 
Lazarus, by showing the image of the rich and poor ? And 
what the saying, “ No man can serve two masters, God and 
1 Matt. xix. 21. 2 xvptcix.y iv7rou'x. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

153 

Mammon?” — the Lord so terming the love of money. For 
instance, the covetous, who were invited, responded not to 
the invitation to the supper, not because of their possess- 
ing property, but of their inordinate affection to what they 
possessed. “ The foxes,” then, have holes. He called those 
evil and earthly men who are occupied about the wealtli 
which is mined and dug from the ground, foxes. Thus also, 
in reference to Herod : “ Go, tell that fox, Behold, I cast 
out devils, and perform cures to-day and to-morrow, and the 
third day I shall be perfected.” 1 For He applied the name 
“ fowls of the air ” to those who were distinct from the other 
birds — those really pure, those that have the power of fly- 
ing to the knowledge of the heavenly Word. For not riches 
only, but also honour, and marriage, and poverty, have ten 
thousand cares for him who is unfit for them. And those 
cares He indicated in the parable of the fourfold seed, when 
He said that “ the seed of the word which fell unto the 
thorns” and hedges was choked by them, and could not bring 
forth fruit. It is therefore necessary to learn how to make 
use of every occurrence, so as by a good life, according to 
knowledge, to be trained for the state of eternal life. For it 
said, “ I saw the wicked exalted and towering as the cedars 
of Lebanon ; and I passed,” says the Scripture, “ and, lo, he 
was not; and I sought him, and his place was not found. 
Keep innocence, and look on uprightness : for there is a 
remnant to the man of peace.” 2 Such will he be who be- 
lieves unfeignedly with his whole heart, and is tranquil in his 
whole soul. “ For the different people honours me with their 
lips, but their heart is far from the Lord.” 3 “ They bless 

with their mouth, but they curse in their heart.” 4 “They 
loved Him with their mouth, and lied to Him with their 
tongue ; but their heart was not right with Him, and they 
were not faithful to His covenant.” Wherefore “ let the false 
lips become speechless, and let the Lord destroy the boastful 
tongue: those who say, We shall magnify our tongue, and 
our lips are our own ; who is Lord over us ? For the 

1 Luke xiii. 32. 2 Ps. xxxvii. 35-37. 

3 Isa. xxix. 13 (o' hepoi inserted). 4 Ps. lxi. 5. 

154 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

affliction of the poor and the groaning of the needy now will 
I arise, saitli the Lord ; I will set him in safety ; I will speak 
out in his case.” 1 For it is to the humble that Christ be- 
longs, who do not exalt themselves against His flock. “ Lay 
not up for yourselves, therefore, treasures on the earth, where 
moth and rust destroy, and thieves break through and steal,” 2 
says the Lord, in reproach perchance of the covetous, and 
perchance also of those who are simply anxious and full of 
cares, and those too who indulge their bodies. For amours, 
and diseases, and evil thoughts “ break through ” the mind 
and the whole man. But our true “ treasure” is where what 
is allied to our mind is, since it bestows the communicative 
power of righteousness, showing that we must assign to the 
habit of our old conversation what we have acquired by it, 
and have recourse to God, beseeching mercy. He is, in truth, 
“ the bag that waxeth not old,” the provisions of eternal life, 
“ the treasure that faileth not in heaven.” 3 “ For I will have 
mercy on whom I will have mercy,” 4 saith the Lord. And 
they say those things to those who wish to be poor for right- 
eousness’ sake. For they have heard in the commandment 
that “ the broad and wide way leadeth to destruction, and 
many there are who go in by it.” 5 It is not of anything else 
that the assertion is made, but of profligacy, and love of 
women, and love of glory, and ambition, and similar passions. 
For so He says, “Fool, this night shall thy soul be required 
of thee; and whose shall those things be which thou hast 
prepared?” 6 And the commandment is expressed in these 
very words, “Take heed, therefore, of covetousness. For a 
man’s life does not consist in the abundance of those things 
which he possesses. For what shall it profit a man, if he 
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul ? or what 
shall a man give in exchange for his soul ? ” 7 “ Wherefore 

I say, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat ; 
neither for your body, what ye shall put on. For your life 
is more than meat, and your body than raiment.” s And 

1 Ps. xii. 3-5. 2 Matt. vi. 19. 3 Luke xii. 33. 

4 Rom. iv. 15. 5 Matt. viii. 13. 0 Luke xii. 20. 

7 Matt. xvi. 26. 8 Matt. vi. 31 ; Luke xii. 22, 23. 

Book iv.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

155 

again, “For your Father knovvetli that ye have need of all 
these things.” “ But seek first the kingdom of heaven, and 
its righteousness,” for these are the great things, and the 
things which are small and appertain to this life “ shall he 
added to you.” 1 Does He not plainly then exhort us to follow 
the gnostic life, and enjoin us to seek the truth in word and 
deed? Therefore Christ, who trains the soul, reckons one 
rich, not by his gifts, hut by his choice. It is said, therefore, 
that Zaccheus, or, according to some, Matthew, the chief of 
the publicans, on hearing that the Lord had deigned to come 
to him, said, “ Lord, and if I have taken anything by false 
accusation, I restore him fourfold;” on which the Saviour said, 
“ The Son of man, on coming to-day, has found that which 
was lost.” 2 Again, on seeing the rich cast into the treasury 
according to their wealth, and the widow two mites, He said 
“ that the widow had cast in more than they all,” for “ they had 
contributed of their abundance, but she of her destitution.” 
And because He brought all things to bear on the discipline 
of the soul, He said, “ Blessed are the meek : for they shall 
inherit the earth.” 3 And the meek are those who have 
quelled the battle of unbelief in the soul, the battle of wrath, 
and lust, and the other forms that are subject to them. And 
He praises those meek by choice, not by necessity. For 
there are with the Lord both rewards and “ many mansions,” 
corresponding to men’s lives. “Whosoever shall receive,” 
says He, “ a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive 
a prophet’s reward ; and whosoever shall receive a righteous 
man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous 
man’s reward; and whoso shall receive one of the least of 
these my disciples, shall not lose his reward.” 4 And again, 
the differences of virtue according to merit, and the noble 
rewards, He indicated by the hours unequal in number ; and 
in addition, by the equal reward given to each of the labourers 
— that is, salvation, which is meant by the penny — He indi- 
cated the equality of justice; and the difference of those 
called He intimated, by those who worked for unequal por- 

1 Matt. vi. 32, 33 ; Luke xii. 30, 31. 2 Luke xix. 8, 9, 10. 

3 Matt. v. 5. 4 Luke xix. 8-10. 

156 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

tions of time. They shall work, therefore, in accordance 
with the appropriate mansions of which they have been 
deemed worthy as rewards, being fellow -workers in the 
ineffable administration and service. 1 u Those, then,” says 
Plato, u who seem called to a holy life, are those who, freed 
and released from those earthly localities as from prisons, 
have reached the pure dwelling-place on high.” In clearer 
terms again he expresses the same thing : “ Those who by 
philosophy have been sufficiently purged from those things, 
live without bodies entirely for all time. Although they are 
enveloped in certain shapes ; in the case of some, of air, and 
others, of fire.” He adds further : “ And they reach abodes 
fairer than those, which it is not easy, nor is there sufficient 
time now to describe.” Whence with reason, “ Blessed are 
they that mourn: for they shall be comforted;” 2 for they 
who have repented of their former evil life shall attain to 
u the calling” (k\t)(tiv), for this is the meaning of being 
comforted (7 TapaK\t]dr)vcu). And there are two styles of 
penitents. That which is more common is fear on account of 
what is done ; and what is more special, the shame which the 
spirit feels in itself arising from conscience. Whether then, 
here or elsewhere (for no place is devoid of the beneficence 
of God), He again says, “ Blessed are the merciful : for they 
shall obtain mercy.” And mercy is not, as some of the philo- 
sophers have imagined, pain on account of others’ calamities, 
but rather something good, as the prophets say. For it is 
said, “ I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.” 3 And He 
means by the merciful, not only those who do acts of mercy, 
but those who wish to do them, though they be not able ; 
who do as far as purpose is concerned. For sometimes we 
wish by the gift of money or by personal effort to do mercy, 
as to assist one in want, or help one who is sick, or stand by 
one who is in any emergency ; and are not able either from 
poverty, or disease, or old age (for this also is natural dis- 
ease), to carry out our purpose, in reference to the things to 

1 Translated as completed, and amended by Heinsius. In the text it 
is plainly mutilated and corrupt. 

2 Matt. v. 4, 7. 

3 Hos. vi. G ; Matt. ix. 13, xii. 7. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

157 

which we are impelled, being unable to conduct them to the 
end we wished. Those, who have entertained the wish whose 
purpose is equal, share in the same honour with those who 
have the ability, although others have the advantage in point 
of resources. And since there are two paths of reaching 
the perfection of salvation, works and knowdedge, He called 
the “ pure in heart blessed, for they shall see God.” And if 
we really look to the truth of the matter, knowledge is the 
purification of the leading faculty of the soul, and is a good 
activity. Some things accordingly are good in themselves, 
and others by participation in what is good, as we say good 
actions are good. But without things intermediate which 
hold the place of material, neither good nor bad actions are 
constituted, such I mean as life, and health, and other neces- 
sary things or circumstantials. Pure then as respects corpo- 
real lusts, and pure in respect of holy thoughts, he means 
those are, who attain to the knowledge of God, when the 
chief faculty of the soul has nothing spurious to stand in the 
way of its power. When, therefore, he who partakes gnos- 
tically of this holy quality devotes himself to contempla- 
tion, communing in purity with the divine, he enters more 
nearly into the state of impassible identity, so as no longer 
to have science and possess knowledge, but to be science and 
knowledge. 

O 

u Blessed, then, are the peacemakers,” who have subdued 
and tamed the law which wars against the disposition of the 
mind, the menaces of anger, and the baits of lust, and the 
other passions which war against the reason ; who, having 
lived in the knowledge both of good works and true reason, 
shall be reinstated in adoption, which is dearer. It follows 
that the perfect peacemaking is that which keeps unchanged 
in all circumstances what is peaceful; calls Providence holy 
and good ; and has its being in the knowledge of divine and 
human affairs, by which it deems the opposites that are in the 
world to be the fairest harmony of creation. They also are 
peacemakers, who teach those who war against the stratagems 
of sin to have recourse to faith and peace. And it is the 
sum of all virtue, in my opinion, when the Lord teaches us 

158 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

that for love to God we must gnostically despise death. 
“ Blessed are they,” says He, u who are persecuted for right- 
eousness’ sake, for they shall be called the sons of God ;’ 51 or, 
as some of those who transpose the Gospels say, u Blessed 
are they who are persecuted by righteousness, for they shall 
be perfect.” And, “ Blessed are they who are persecuted for 
my sake ; for they shall have a place where they shall not 
be persecuted.” And, “ Blessed are ye when men shall hate 
you, when they shall separate you, when they shall cast out 
your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake 2 if we do not 
detest our persecutors, and undergo punishments at their 
hands, not hating them under the idea that we have been put 
to trial more tardily than we looked for ; but knowing this 
also, that every instance of trial is an occasion for testifying. 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE MARTYR. 

Then he who has lied and shown himself unfaithful, and 
revolted to the devil’s army, in what evil do we think him to 
be ? He belies, therefore, the Lord, or rather he is cheated 
of his own hope who believes not God ; and he believes not 
who does not what He has commanded. 

And what ? Does not he, who denies the Lord, deny him- 
self ? For does he not rob his Master of His authority, who 
deprives himself of his relation to Him “? He, then, who 
denies the Saviour, denies life; for “the light was life.” 3 
He does not term those men of little faith, but faithless and 
hypocrites, 4 who have the name inscribed on them, but deny 
that they are really believers. But the faithful is called 
both servant and friend. So that if one loves himself, he 
loves the Lord, and confesses to salvation that he may save 
his soul. Though you die for your neighbour out of love, 
and regard the Saviour as our neighbour (for God who 
saves is said to be nigh in respect to what is saved) ; you do so, 
1 Matt. v. 10. 2 Luke vi. 22. 3 John i. 4. 4 Matt. vi. SO. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

159 

choosing deatli on account of life, and suffering for your own 
sake rather than his. And is it not for this that he is called 
brother? he who, suffering out of love to God, suffered for 
his own salvation ; while he, on the other hand, who dies for 
his own salvation, endures for love to the Lord. For he being 
life, in what he suffered, wished to suffer that we might live 
by his suffering. 

“ Why call ye me Lord, Lord,” He says, “ and do not the 
things which I say?” 1 For “the people that loveth with 
their lips, but have their heart far from the Lord,” 2 is an- 
other people, and trust in another, and have willingly sold 
themselves to another ; but those who perform the command- 
ments of the Lord, in every action “ testify,” by doing what 
He wishes, and consistently naming the Lord’s name ; and 
“ testifying” by deed to Him in whom they trust, that they 
are those “ who have crucified the flesh, with the affections 
and lusts.” “If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the 
Spirit.” 3 “He that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh 
reap corruption ; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of 
the Spirit reap life everlasting.” 4 

But to those miserable men, witness to the Lord by blood 
seems a most violent death, not knowing that such a gate of 
death is the beginning of the true life ; and they will under- 
stand neither the honours after death, which belong to those 
who have lived holily, nor the punishments of those who 
have lived unrighteously and impurely. I do not say only 
from our Scriptures (for almost all the commandments indi- 
cate them) ; but they will not even hear their own discourses. 
For the Pythagorean Theano writes, “Life were indeed a 
feast to the Avicked, who, having done evil, then die ; were 
not the soul immortal, death would be a godsend.” And 
Plato in the Phcedo , “ For if death Avere release from every- 
thing,” and so forth. We are not then to think according 
to the Telephus of HSschylus, “ that a single path leads to 
Hades.” The Avays are many, and the sins that lead thither. 
Such deeply erring ones as the unfaithful are, Aristophanes 
properly makes the subjects of comedy. “ Come,” he says, 

1 Luke vi. 46. 2 Isa. xxix. 15. 3 Gal. v. 24, 25. 4 Gal. vi. 8. 

160 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

“ ye men of obscure life, ye that are like the race of leaves, 
feeble, wax figures, shadowy tribes, evanescent, fleeting, 
ephemeral.” And Epicharmus, “ This nature of men is in- 
flated skins.” And the Saviour has said to us, “ The spirit 
is willing, but the flesh is weak.” 1 “ Because the carnal mind 
is enmity against God,” explains the apostle : “ for it is not 
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. And they 
that are in the flesh cannot please God.” And in further 
explanation continues, that no one may, like Marcion, regard 
the creature as evil. “ But if Christ be in you, the body is 
dead because of sin ; but the Spirit is life because of right- 
eousness.” And again: “For if ye live after the flesh, ye 
shall die. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared to the glory which shall 
be revealed in us. If we suffer with Him, that we also may 
be glorified together as joint-heirs of Christ. And we know 
that all things work together for good to them that love God, 
to them that are called according to the purpose. For whom 
He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed 
to the image of His Son, that He might be the first-born 
among many brethren. And whom He did predestinate, 
them He also called ; and whom He called, them He also 
justified ; and whom He justified, them He also glorified.” 2 

You see that martyrdom for love’s sake is taught. And 
should you wish to be a martyr for the recompense of ad- 
vantages, you shall hear again. “ For we are saved by hope : 
but hope that is seen is not hope : for what a man seeth, why 
doth he yet hope for ? But if we hope for that we see not, 
then do we with patience wait for it.” 3 “ But if we also suffer 

for righteousness’ sake,” says Peter, “blessed are we. Be 
not afraid of their fear, neither be troubled. But sanctify 
the Lord God in your hearts : and be ready always to give 
an answer to him that asks a reason of the hope that is in 
you, but with meekness and fear, having a good conscience ; 
so that in reference to that for which you are spoken against, 

1 Matt. xxvi. 41. 

2 Rom. viii. 7, 8, 10, 13, 17, 18, 28, 29, 30. 

3 Rom. viii. 24, 25. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

161 

they may be ashamed who calumniate your good conversa- 
tion in Christ. For it is better to suffer for well-doing, if 
the will of God, than for evil-doing.” But if one should cap- 
tiously say, And how is it possible for feeble flesh to resist 
the energies and spirits of the Powers ? 1 well, let him know 
this, that, confiding in the Almighty and the Lord, we war 
against the principalities of darkness, and against death. 
u Whilst thou art yet speaking,” lie says, “Lo, here am I.” 
See the invincible Helper who shields us. a Think it not 
strange, therefore, concerning the burning sent for your trial, 
as though some strange thing happened to you : But, as you 
are partakers in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice ; that at the 
revelation of His glory ye may rejoice exultant. If ye be re- 
proached in the name of Christ, happy are ye ; for the Spirit 
of glory and of God resteth on you .” 2 As it is written, 
“ Because for Thy sake we are killed all the day long ; we 
are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these 
things we are more than conquerors, through Him that loved 
us.” s 

“ What you wish to ascertain from my mind, 

You shall not ascertain, not were you to apply 

Horrid saws from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, 

Not were you to load me with chains,” 

says a woman acting manfully in the tragedy. And Anti- 
gone, contemning the proclamation of Creon, says boldly : 

“ It was not Zeus who uttered this proclamation.” 

But it is God that makes proclamation to us, and He must 
be believed. u For with the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness ; and with the mouth confession is made unto 
salvation. Wherefore the Scripture saith, Whosoever be- 
lieveth on Him shall not be put to shame .” 4 Accordincdv 
Simonides justly writes, “ It is said that virtue dwells among 
all but inaccessible rocks, but that she speedily traverses a 
pure place. Nor is she visible to the eyes of all mortals. 

1 In allusion to Eph. vi. 12. 2 1 Pet. iv. 12, 13, 14. 

0 Rom. viii. 36, 37. 4 Rom. x. 10, 11. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. -L 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

162 

[Book iv. 

He who is not penetrated by heart- vexing sweat will not scale 
the summit of manliness.” And Pindar says : 

“ But the anxious thoughts of youths, revolving with toils, 

Will find glory : and in time their deeds 
Will in resplendent ether splendid shine.” 

Aeschylus, too, having grasped this thought, says : 

“ To him who toils is due, 

As product of his toil, glory from the gods.” 

“ For great Fates attain great destinies,” according to 
Heraclitus : 

“ And what slave is there, who is careless of death ?” 

“ For God hath not given us the spirit of bondage again 
to fear; but of power, and love, and of a sound mind. Be 
not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, or of 
me his prisoner,” he writes to Timothy . 1 Such shall he be 
“who cleaves to that which is good,” according to the 
apostle , 2 “ who hates evil, having love unfeigned ; for he 
that loveth another fulfilleth the law .” 3 If, then, this God, 
to whom we bear witness, be as He is, the God of hope, we 
acknowledge our hope, speeding on to hope, “ saturated with 
goodness, filled with all knowledge .” 4 

The Indian sages say to Alexander of Macedon: “You 
transport men’s bodies from place to place. But you shall 
not force our souls to do what we do not wish. Fire is to 
men the greatest torture, this we despise.” Hence Heraclitus 
preferred one thing, glory, to all else ; and professes “ that he 
allows the crowd to stuff themselves to satiety like cattle.” 

“ For on account of the body are many toils, 

For it we have invented a roofed house, 

And discovered how to dig up silver, and sow the land, 

And all the rest which we know by names.” 

4 

To the multitude, then, this vain labour is desirable. But to 
us the apostle says, “ Now we know this, that our old man is 
crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, 

1 2 Tim. i. 7, 8 ; Rom. viii. 15. 2 Rom. xii. 9. 3 Rom. xiii. 8. 

4 Instead of /Aiytaroi, read from Rom. xv. 13, 14, /Ataroi. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

163 

that henceforth we should not serve sin.” 1 Does not the 
apostle then plainly add the following, to show the contempt 
for faith in the case of the multitude ? u For I think that God 
hath set forth us the apostles last, as appointed to death : we 
are made a spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to men. 
Up to this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are 
naked, and are beaten, and are feeble, and labour, working 
with our hands. Being reviled, we bless ; being persecuted, 
we endure ; being defamed, we entreat ; we are become as it 
were the offscourings of the world.” 2 Such also are the words 
of Plato in the Republic : u The just man, though stretched 
on the rack, though his eyes are dug out, will be happy.” 
The Gnostic will never then have the chief end placed in 
life, but in being always happy and blessed, and a kingly 
friend of God. Although visited with ignominy and exile, 
and confiscation, and above all, death, he will never be 
wrenched from his freedom, and signal love to God. “ The 
charity which bears all things, endures all things ,” 3 is 
assured that Divine Providence orders all things well. a I 

O 

exhort you,” therefore it is said, u Be followers of me.” The 
first step to salvation 4 is the instruction accompanied with 
fear, in consequence of which we abstain from wdiat is wrong ; 
and the second is hope, by reason of which we desire the best 
things ; but love, as is fitting, perfects, by training now 
according to knowledge. For the Greeks, I know not how, 
attributing events to unreasoning necessity, own that they 
yield to them unwillingly. Accordingly Euripides says : 

. “ What I declare, receive from me, madam : 

No mortal exists who has not toil ; 

He buries children, and begets others, 

And he himself dies. And thus mortals are afflicted.” 

Then he adds : 

“We must bear those things which are inevitable according to nature, 
and go through them : 

Not one of the things which are necessary is formidable for mortals.” 

1 Rom. vi. 6. 

3 1 Cor. xiii. 7. 

164 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

Ancl for those who are aiming at perfection there is proposed 
the rational gnosis, the foundation of which is “ the sacred 
Triad.” “Faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is 
love.” 1 Truly, “ all things are lawful, but all things are not 
expedient,” says the apostle : “ all things are lawful for 
me, but all things edify not.” 2 And, “ Let no one seek his 
own advantage, but also that of his neighbour,” 8 so as to be 
able at once to do and to teach, building and building up. 
For that “the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof,” 
is admitted ; but the conscience of the weak is supported. 
“ Conscience, I say, not his own, but that of the other ; for 
why is my liberty judged of by another conscience? For if 
I by grace am partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for 
which I give thanks ? Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, 
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.” 4 “For 
though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh ; 
for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty 
through God to the demolition of fortifications, demolishing 
thoughts, and every high thing which exalteth itself against 
the knowledge of Christ.” 5 Equipped with these weapons, 
the Gnostic says : O Lord, give opportunity, and receive 
demonstration ; let this dread event pass ; I contemn dangers 
for the love I bear to Thee. 

“ Because alone of human things 
Virtue receives not a recompense from without, 

But has itself as the reward of its toils.” 

“ Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, 
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness, meekness, long- 
suffering. And above all these, love, which is the bond of 
perfection. And let the peace of God reign in your hearts, 
to which also ye are called in one body ; and be thankful,” 6 
ye who, while still in the body, like the just men of old, enjoy 
impassibility and tranquillity of soul 

1 1 Cor. xiii. 13. 2 1 Cor. x. 23. 

* 1 Cor. x. 2G, 28, 29, 30, 31. 

« Col. iii. 12, 14, 15 

3 1 Cor. x. 24. 

3 2 Cor. x. 3, 4, 5. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

165 

CHAPTER VIII. 

WOMEN AS WELL AS MEN, SLAVES AS WELL AS FREEMEN, 
CANDIDATES FOE THE MARTYR’S CROWN. 

Since, then, not only the ZEsopians, and Macedonians, and 
the Lacedaemonians endured when subjected to torture, as 
Eratosthenes says in his work, On Things Good and Evil ; 
but also Zeno of Elea, when subjected to compulsion to 
divulge a secret, held out against the tortures, and confessed 
nothing ; who, when expiring, bit out his tongue and spat it 
at the tyrant, whom some term Nearchus, and some Demulus. 
Theodotus the Pythagorean acted also similarly, and Paulus 
the friend of Lacydes, as Timotheus of Pergamus says in 
his work on The Fortitude of Philosophers, and Achaicus in 
The Ethics. Posthumus also, the Roman, when captured by 
Peucetion, did not divulge a single secret; but putting his 
hand on the fire, held it to it as if to a piece of brass, without 
moving a muscle of his face. I omit the case of Anaxarchus, 
who exclaimed, u Pound away at the sack which holds Anax- 
archus, for it is not Anaxarchus you are pounding,” when by 
the tyrant’s orders he was being pounded with iron pestles. 
Neither, then, the hope of happiness nor the love of God 
takes what befalls ill, but remains free, although thrown 
among the wildest beasts or into the all-devouring fire ; 
though racked with a tyrant’s tortures. Depending as it does 
on the divine favour, it ascends aloft unenslaved, surrender- 
ing the body to those who can touch it alone. A barbarous 
nation, not cumbered with philosophy, select, it is said, an- 
nually an ambassador to the hero Zamolxis. Zamolxis was 
one of the disciples of Pythagoras. The one, then, who is 
judged of the most sterling worth is put to death, to the 
distress of those who have practised philosophy, but have not 
been selected, at being reckoned unworthy of a happy service. 

So the church is full of those, as well chaste women as 
men, wdio all their life have courted the death which rouses 
up to Christ. For the individual whose life is framed as 

1G6 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

ours is, may philosophize without Learning, whether barbarian, 
whether Greek, whether slave — whether an old man, or a 
boy, or a woman. For self-control is common to all human 
beings who have made choice of it. And we admit that the 
same nature exists in every race, and the same virtue. As 
far as respects human nature, the woman does not possess 
one nature, and the man exhibit another, but the same : so 

/ also with virtue. If, consequently, a self-restraint and right- 
eousness, and whatever qualities are regarded as following 
them, is the virtue of the male, it belongs to the male alone 
to be virtuous, and to the woman to be licentious and unjust. 
But it is offensive even to say this. Accordingly woman is 
to practise self-restraint and righteousness, and every other 
virtue, as well as man, both bond and free ; since it is a fit 
consequence that the same nature possesses one and the same 
virtue. We do not say that woman’s nature is the same as 
man’s, as she is woman. For undoubtedly it stands to reason 
that some difference should exist between each of them, in 
virtue of which one is male and the other female. Preg- 
nancy and parturition, accordingly, we say belong to woman, 
1 as she is woman, and not as she is a human being. But if 
there were no difference between man and woman, both 
would do and suffer the same things. As then there is 
sameness, as far as respects the soul, she will attain to 
the same virtue ; but as there is difference as respects 
the peculiar construction of the body, she is destined for 
child-bearing and housekeeping. “For I would have you 
know,” says the apostle, “ that the head of every man is 
Christ ; and the head of the woman is the man : for the 
man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man. For 
neither is the woman without the man, nor the man without 
the woman, in the Lord.” 1 For as we say that the man 
ought to be continent, and superior to pleasures ; so also we 
reckon that the woman should be continent and practised in 
fighting against pleasures. “ But I say, Walk in the Spirit, 
and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh,” counsels the 
apostolic command ; “ for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, 

1 1 Cor. xi. 3, 8, 11. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

167 

and the spirit against the flesh. These, then, are contrary” 
(not as good to evil, but as fighting advantageously), he 
adds therefore, “so that ye cannot do the things that ye 
would. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are, 
fornication, uncleanness, profligacy, idolatry, witchcrafts, 
enmities, strifes, jealousies, wrath, contentions, dissensions, 
heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and such like ; 
of which I tell you before, as I have also said before, that 
they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of 
God. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long- 
suffering, gentleness, temperance, goodness, faith, meekness.” 
He calls sinners, as I think, “ flesh,” and the righteous 
“spirit.” Further, manliness is to be assumed in order to 
produce confidence and forbearance, so as “ to him that 
strikes on the one cheek, to give to him the other ; and to 
him that takes away the cloak, to yield to him the coat also,” 
strongly restraining anger. For we do not train our women 
like Amazons to manliness in war ; since we wish the men 
even to be peaceable. I hear that the Sannatian women 
practise war no less than the men ; and the women of the 
Sacse besides, who shoot backwards, feigning flight as well 
as the men. I am aware, too, that the women near Iberia 
practise manly work and toil, not refraining from their 
tasks even though near their delivery ; but even in the 
very struggle of her pains, the woman, on being delivered, 
taking up the infant, carries it home. Further, the females 
no less than the males manage the house, and hunt, and keep 
the flocks : 

“ Cressa the hound ran keenly in the stag’s track.” 

Women are therefore to philosophize equally with men, 
though the males are best at everything, unless they have 
become effeminate. To the whole human race, then, discipline 
and virtue are a necessity, if they would pursue after happi- 
ness. And how recklessly Euripides writes variously ! On 
one occasion, “For every wife is inferior to her husband, 
though the most excellent one marry her that is of fair fame.” 
And on another : 

1G8 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

“ For the chaste is her husband’s slave, 

While she that is unchaste in her folly despises her consort. 

. . . For nothing is better and more excellent, / 

Than when as husband and wife ye keep house, _ 
Harmonious in your sentiments.” 

The ruling power is therefore the head. And if “ the Lord 
is head of the man, and the man is head of the woman,” 
the man, “ being the image and glory of God, is lord of the 
woman.” 1 Wherefore also in the Epistle to the Ephesians 
it is written, “ Subjecting yourselves one to another in the 
fear of God. Wives, submit yourselves to your own hus- 
bands, as to the Lord. For the husband is head of the wife, 
as also Christ is the head of the church; and He is the Saviour 
of the body. Husbands, love your wives, as also Christ 
loved the church. So also ought men to love their wives 
as their own bodies : he that loveth his wife loveth himself. 
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh.” 2 And in that to 
the Colossians it is said, “ Wives, submit yourselves to your 
own husbands, as is fit in the Lord. Husbands, love your 
wives, and be not bitter against them. Children, obey your 
parents in all things ; for this is well pleasing to the Lord. 
Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be dis- 
couraged. Servants, be obedient in all things to those who are 
your masters according to the flesh ; not Avith eye-service, as 
men-pleasers ; but with singleness of heart, fearing the Lord. 
And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as serving the Lord and 
not men ; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the re- 
ward of the inheritance : for ye serve the Lord Christ. For 
the wrong-doer shall receive the wrong, which he hath done ; 
and there is no respect of persons. Masters, render to your 
servants justice and equity; knowing that ye also have a 
Master in heaven, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, cir- 
cumcision and un circumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bond, free: 
but Christ is all, and in all.” 3 And the earthly church is the 
image of the heavenly, as we pray also “ that the will of God 
may be done upon the earth as in heaven.” 4 “Putting on, 

1 1 Cor. xi. 8, 7. 2 Eph. v. 21-29. 

s Col. in. 18-25, iv. 1, iii. 11. 4 Matt. vi. 10. 

Book iv.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

169 

therefore, bowels of mercy, gentleness, humbleness, meek- 
ness, Iona-suffering ; forbearing one another, and forcivine 
one another, if one have a quarrel against any man ; as also 
Christ hath forgiven us, so also let us. And above all these 
things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness. And 
let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which ye are 
called in one body; and be thankful .” 1 For there is no 
obstacle to adducing frequently the same Scripture in order 
to put Marcion to the blush, if perchance he be persuaded 
and converted; by learning that the faithful ought to be 
grateful to God the Creator, who hath called us, and who 
preached the gospel in the body. From these considerations 
the unity of the faith is clear, and it is shown who is the 
perfect man ; so that though some are reluctant, and offer as 
much resistance as they can, though menaced with punish- 
ments at the hand of husband or master, both the domestic 
and the wife will philosophize. Moreover, the free, though 
threatened with death at a tyrant’s hands, and brought before 
the tribunals, and all his substances imperilled, will by no 
means abandon piety ; nor will the wife who dwells with a 
wicked husband, or the son if he has a bad father, or the 
domestic if he has a bad master, ever fail in holding nobly 
to virtue. But as it is noble for a man to die for virtue, and, 
for liberty, and for himself, so also is it for a woman. For 
this is not peculiar to the nature of male s, but to the nature 
of the good. Accordingly, both the old man, the young, and 
the servant will live faithfully, and if need be die ; which 
will be to be made alive by death. So we know that both 
children, and women, and servants have often, against their 
fathers’, and masters’, and husbands’ will, reached the highest 
degree of excellence. Wherefore those who are determined 
to live piously ought none the less to exhibit alacrity, when 
some seem to exercise compulsion on them ; but much more, 
I think, does it become them to show eagerness, and to 
strive with uncommon vigour, lest, being overcome, they 
abandon the best and most indispensable counsels. For it 
does not, I think, admit of comparison, whether it be better 

1 Col. iii. 12-15. 

170 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

to be a follower of the Almighty than to choose the dark- 
ness of demons. For the things which are done by us on 
account of others we are to do always, endeavouring to have 
respect to those for whose sake it is proper that they be 
done, regarding the gratification rendered in their case, as 
what is to be our rule ; but the things which are done for 
our own sake rather than that of others, are to be done with 
equal earnestness, whether they are like to please certain 
people or not. If some indifferent things have obtained 
such honour as to appear worthy of adoption, though against 
the will of some ; much more is virtue to be regarded by us 
as worth contending for, looking the while to nothing but 
what can be rightly done, whether it seem good to others or 
not. Well then, Epicurus, writing to Menoeceus, says, “Let 
not him who is young delay philosophizing, and let not the 
old man grow weary of philosophizing ; for no one is either 
not of age or past age for attending to the health of his soul. 
And he who says that the time for philosophizing is not 
come or is past, is like the man who says that the time for 
happiness is not come or has gone. So that young as well as 
old ought to philosophize: the one, in order that, while growing 
old, he may grow young in good things out of favour accru- 
ing from what is past ; and the other, that he may be at once 
young and old, from want of fear for the future.” 

CHAPTER IX. 

Christ’s sayings respecting martyrdom. 

On martyrdom the Lord hath spoken explicitly, and what is 
written in different places we bring together. “ But I say 
unto you, Whosoever shall confess in me before men, the Son 
of man also shall confess before the angels of God ; but 
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before 
the angels .” 1 “ Whosoever shall be ashamed of me or of my 
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall 
the Son of man also be ashamed when He corneth in the 

1 Luke xii. 8. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

171 

glory of His Father with His angels. Whosoever therefore 
shall confess in me before men, him will I also confess before 
my Father in heaven.” 1 “ And when they bring you before 

synagogues, and rulers, and powers, think not beforehand 
how ye shall make your defence, or what ye shall say. For 
the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye 
must say .” 2 In explanation of this passage, Heracleon, the 
most distinguished of the school of Valentinians, says ex- 
pressly, “ that there is a confession by faith and conduct, 
and one with the voice. The confession that is made with 
the voice, and before the authorities, is what the most reckon 
the only confession. Not soundly : and hypocrites also can 
confess with this confession. But neither will this utterance 
be found to be spoken universally ; for all the saved have 
confessed with the confession made by the voice, and de- 
parted. Of whom are Matthew, Philip, Thomas, Levi, and 
many others. And confession by the lip is not universal, but 
partial. But that which He specifies now is universal, that 
which is by deeds and actions corresponding to faith in Him. 
This confession is followed by that which is partial, that before 
the authorities, if necessai’y, and reason dictate. For he will 
confess rightly with his voice who has first confessed by his 
disposition. And he has well used, with regard to those who 
confess, the expression 1 in me,’ and applied to those who deny 
the expression ‘me.’ For those, though they confess Him 
with the voice, yet deny Him, not confessing Plim in their 
conduct. But those alone confess 1 in Him,’ who live in the 
confession and conduct according to Him, in which He also 
confesses, who is contained in them and held by them. Where- 
fore ‘He never can deny Himself.’ And those deny Idim who 
are not in Him. For He said not, ‘ Whosoever shall deny’ 
in me, but 1 me.’ For no one who is in Him will ever deny 
Him. And the expression ( before men ’ applies both to the 
saved and the heathen similarly by conduct before the one, 
and by voice before the other. "Wherefore they never can 
deny Him. But those deny Him who are not in Him.” So 
far Heracleon. And in other things he seems to be of the 
1 Matt. x. 32. 2 Luke xii. 11, 12. 

172 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

same sentiments with ns in this section ; but he has not ad- 
verted to this, that if some have not by conduct and in their 
life “confessed Christ before men,” they are manifested to have 
believed with the heart, by confessing Him with the mouth 
at the tribunals, and not denying Him when tortured to the 
death. And the disposition being confessed, and especially 
not being changed by death at any time, cuts away all pas- 
sions which were engendered by corporeal desire. For there 
is, so to speak, at the close of life a sudden repentance in 
action, and a true confession toward Christ, in the testimony 
of the voice. But if the Spirit of the Father testifies in us, 
how can we be any more hypocrites, who are said to bear 
testimony with the voice alone % But it will be given to 
some, if expedient, to make a defence, that by their witness 
and confession all may be benefited — those in the church 
being confirmed, and those of the heathen who have devoted 
themselves to the search after salvation wondering and being 
led to the faith ; and the rest seized with amazement. So 
that confession is by all means necessary. For it is in our 
power. But to make a defence for our faith is not univer- 
sally necessary. For that does not depend on us. “ But he 
that endureth to the end shall be saved.” For who of those 
who are wise would not choose to reign in God, and even to 
serve ? So some “ confess that they know God,” according 
to the apostle ; “ but in works they deny Him, being abomi- 
nable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.” 1 
And these, though they confess nothing but this, will have 
done at the end one good work. Their witness, then, appears 
to be the cleansing away of sins with glory. For instance, 
the Shepherd says : “You will escape the energy of the wild 
beast, if your heart become pure and blameless.” Also the 
Lord Himself says : “ Satan hath desired to sift you ; but I 
have prayed .” 2 Alone, therefore, the Lord, for the pui'ifica- 
tion of the men who plotted against Him and disbelieved 
Him, “ drank the cup ; ” in imitation of whom the apostles, 
that they might be in reality Gnostics, and perfect, suffered 
for the churches which they founded. So, then, also the 
1 Tit. i. 16. 2 Luke xxii. 31, 32. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

173 

Gnostics who tread' in the footsteps of the apostles ought to 
be sinless, and, out of love to the Lord, to love also their 
brother; so that, if occasion call, enduring without stumbling, 
afflictions for the church, u they may drink the cup.” Those 
who witness in their life by deed, and at the tribunal by word, 
whether entertaining hope or surmising fear, are better than 
those who confess salvation by their mouth alone. But if 
one ascend also to love, he is a really blessed and true martyr, 
having confessed perfectly both to the commandments and to 
God, by the Lord ; whom having loved, he acknowledged a 
brother, giving himself up wholly for God, resigning plea- 
santly and lovingly the man when asked, like a deposit. 

CHAPTER X. 

THOSE WHO OFFERED THEMSELVES FOR MARTYRDOM 

REPROVED. 

When, again, He says, u When they persecute you in this 
city, flee ye to the other,” 1 He does not advise flight, as if 
persecution were an evil thing; nor does He enjoin them by 
flight to avoid death, as if in dread of it, but wishes us neither 
to be the authors nor abettors of any evil to any one, either 
to ourselves or the persecutor and murderer. For He, in a 
way, bids us take care of ourselves. But he who disobeys is 
rash and foolhardy. If he who kills a man of God sins 
against God, he also who presents himself before the judg- 
ment-seat becomes guilty of his death. And such is also the 
case with him who does not avoid persecution, but out of 
daring presents himself for capture. Such a one, as far as 
in him lies, becomes an accomplice in the crime of the per- 
secutor. And if he also uses provocation, lie is wholly guilty, 
challenging the wild beast. And similarly, if he afford any 
cause for conflict or punishment, or retribution or enmity, he 
gives occasion for persecution. Wherefore, then, we are 
enjoined not to cling to anything that belongs to this life ; 
but “ to him that takes our cloak to give our coat,” not only 

1 Matt. s. 23. 

-L 

\ 

/* 

\ 

174 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

that we may continue destitute of inordinate affection, but 
that we may not by retaliating make our persecutors savage 
against ourselves, and stir them up to blaspheme the name. 

CHAPTER XI. 

THE OBJECTION, WHY DO YOU SUFFER IF GOD CARES FOR 

YOU, ANSWERED. 

But, say they, if God cares for you, why are you persecuted 
and put to death ? Has He delivered you to this ? No, 
we do not suppose that the Lord wishes us to be involved 
in calamities, but that He foretold prophetically what would 
happen — that we should be persecuted for His name’s sake, 
slaughtered, and impaled. So that it was not that He wished 
us to be persecuted, but He intimated beforehand what we 
shall suffer by the prediction of what would take place, train- 
ing us to endurance, to which He promised the inheritance, 
although we are punished not alone, but along with many. 
But those, it is said, being malefactors, are righteously pun- 
ished. Accordingly, they unwillingly bear testimony to our 
righteousness, we being unjustly punished for righteousness’ 
sake. But the injustice of the judge does not affect the pro- 
vidence of God. For the judge must be master of his own 
opinion — not pulled by strings, like inanimate machines, set 
in motion only by external causes. Accordingly he is judged 
in respect to his judgment, as we also, in accordance with our 
choice of things desirable, and our endurance. Although 
we do not wrong, yet the judge looks on us as doing wrong, 
for he neither knows nor wishes to know about us, but is 
influenced by unwarranted prejudice ; wherefore also he is 
judged. Accordingly they persecute us, not from the sup- 
position that we are wrong-doers, but imagining that by the 
very fact of our being Christians we sin against life in so con- 
ducting ourselves, and exhorting others to adopt the like life. 

But why are you not helped when persecuted ? say they. 
What wrong is done us, as far as we are concerned, in being 
released by death to go to the Lord, and so undergoing a 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

175 

Book iv.] 

change of life, as if a change from one time of life to 

another 1 ? Did we think rightly, we should feel obliged to 

those who have afforded the means for speedy departure, if 
it is for love that \Ve bear witness ; and if not, we should 
appear to the multitude to be base men. Had they also 
known the truth, all would have bounded on to the way, and 
there would have been no choice. But our faith, being the 
light of the world, reproves unbelief. 11 Should Anytus and 
Melitus kill me, they will not hurt me in the least ; for I do 
not think it right for the better to be hurt by the worse,” 
[says Socrates]. So that each one of us may with confidence 
say, u The Lord is my helper ; I will not fear : what shall 

man do to me ?” 1 “For the souls of the righteous are in 

the hand of the Lord, and no plague shall touch them .” 2 

CHAPTER XII. 

BASILIDES’ IDEA OF MARTYEDOM REFUTED. 

Basilides, in the twenty-third book of the Exegetics , re- 
specting those that are punished by martyrdom, expresses 
himself in the following language : u For I say this, Who- 
soever fall under the afflictions mentioned, in consequence of 
unconsciously transgressing in other matters, are brought to 
this good end by the kindness of Him who brings them, but 
accused on other grounds ; so that they may not suffer as 
condemned for what are owned to be iniquities, nor re- 
proached as the adulterer or the murderer, but because they 
are Christians ; which will console them, so that they do not 
appear to suffer. And if one who has not sinned at all incur 
suffering — a rare case — yet even he will not suffer aught 
through the machinations of power, but will suffer as the 
child which seems not to have sinned would suffer.” Then 
further on he adds : “ As, then, the child which has not 
sinned before, or committed actual sin in itself, but has 
that which committed sin, when subjected to suffering, gets 
1 Ps. cxviii. 6. 2 Wisd. iii. 1. 

176 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

good, reaping the advantage of many difficulties; so also, 
although a perfect man may not have sinned in act, while he 
endures afflictions, he suffers similarly with the child. Having 
within him the sinful principle, but not embracing the oppor- 
tunity of committing sin, he does not sin ; so that he is not 
to be reckoned as not having sinned. For as he who wishes 
to commit adultery is an adulterer, although he do not suc- 
ceed in committing adultery ; and he that wishes to commit 
murder is a murderer, although he is unable to kill ; so also, 
if I see the man without sin, whom I specify, suffering, 
though he have done nothing bad, I should call him bad, on 
account of his wishing to sin. For I will affirm anything 
rather than call Providence evil.” Then, in continuation, he 
says expressly concerning the Lord, as concerning man : u If 
then, passing from all these observations, you were to pro- 
ceed to put me to shame by saying, perchance impersonating 
certain parties, This man has then sinned ; for this man has 
suffered: — if you permit, I will say, He has not sinned; 
but was like a child suffering. If vou were to insist more 
urgently, I would say, That the man you name is man, 
but that God is righteous : 1 For no one is pure,’ as one 
said, ‘from pollution.’” 1 But the hypothesis of Basilides 
says that the soul, having sinned before in another life, en- 
dures punishment in this — the elect soul with honour by 
martyrdom, the other purged by appropriate punishment. 
How can this be true, when the confessing and suffering 
punishment or not depends on ourselves ? For in the case 
of the man who shall deny, Providence, as held by Basilides, 
is done away with. I will ask him, then, in the case of a 
confessor who has been arrested, whether he will confess and 
be punished in virtue of Providence or not? For in the case 
of denying he will not be punished. But if, for the sake of 
escaping and evading the necessity of punishing such an one, 
he shall say that the destruction of those who shall deny is of 
Providence, he will be a martyr against his will. And how 
any more is it the case, that there is laid up in heaven the 
very glorious recompense to him who has witnessed, for his 

1 Job xiv. 4. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

177 

witnessing ? If Providence did not permit the sinner to get 
the length of sinning, it is unjust in both cases ; both in not 
rescuing the man who is dragged to punishment for right- 
eousness’ sake, and in having rescued him who wished to do 
wrong, he having done it as far as volition was concerned, 
but [Providence] having prevented the deed, and unjustly 
favoured the sinner. And how impious, in deifying the 
devil, and in daring to call the Lord a sinful man ! For the 
devil tempting us, knowing what we are, but not knowing if 
we will hold out, but wishing to dislodge us from the faith, 
attempts also to bring us into subjection to himself. Which 
is all that is allowed to him, partly from the necessity of 
saving us, who have taken occasion from the command- 
ment, from ourselves ; partly for the confusion of him who 
has tempted and failed; for the confirmation of the mem- 
bers of the church, and the conscience of those who admire 
the constancy [displayed]. But if martyrdom be retribu- 
tion by way of punishment, then also faith and doctrine, 
on account of which martyrdom comes, are co-operators in 
punishment — than which, what other absurdity could be 
greater ? But with reference to these dogmas, whether the 
soul is changed to another body, also of the devil at the 
proper time mention will be made. But at present, to what 
has been already said, let us add the following : Where any 
more is faith in the retribution of sins committed before 
martyrdom takes place ? And where is love to God, which 
is persecuted and endures for the truth ? And where is the 
praise of him who has confessed, or the censure of him 
who has denied ? And for what use is right conduct, the 
mortification of the lusts, and the hating of no creature ? 
But if, as Basilides himself says, we suppose one part of the 
declared will of God to be the loving of all things because 
all things bear a relation to the Whole, and another u not 
to lust after anything,” and a third u not to hate anything,” 
by the will of God these also will be punishments, which it 
were impious to think. For neither did the Lord suffer by 
the will of the Father, nor are those who are persecuted per- 
secuted by the will of God ; since either of two things is the 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 31 

178 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

case : either persecution in consequence of the will of God is 
a good thing, or those who decree and afflict are guiltless. 
But nothing is without the will of the Lord of the universe. 
It remains to say that such things happen without the pre- 
vention of God ; for this alone saves both the providence and 
the goodness of God. We must not therefore think that He 
actively produces afflictions (far be it that we should think 
this !) ; but we must be persuaded that He does not prevent 
those that cause them, but overrules for good the crimes of 
His enemies : 11 1 will therefore,’’ He says, “ destroy the 
w r all, and it shall be for treading under foot.” 1 2 Providence 
being a disciplinary art \ in the case of others for each indi- 
vidual’s sins, and in the case of the Lord and His apostles 
for ours. To this point says the divine apostle : “ For 
this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye 
abstain from fornication : that each one of you should know 
how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour ; not in 
the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles -who know not the 
Lord : that none of you should overreach or take advantage 
of his brother in any matter ; because the Lord is the avenger 
in respect of all such, as we also told you before, and testi- 
fied. For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but to. 
holiness. Wherefore he that despiseth, despiseth not man, 
but God, who hath also given His Holy Spirit to you.” 3 
Wherefore the Lord was not prohibited from this sanctifi- 
cation of ours. If, then, one of them were to say, in reph', 
that the martyr is punished for sins committed before this 
embodying, and that he will again reap the fruit of his con- 
duct in this life, for that such are the arrangements of the 
[divine administration], we shall ask him if the retribution 
takes place by Providence. For if it be not of the divine 
administration, the economy of expiations is gone, and their 
hypothesis falls to the ground ; but if expiations are by 
Providence, punishments are by Providence too. But Pro- 

1 Tsa. v. 5. 

2 The text lias -TrcciosvriKv;; A:; rotads, for which Sylburgius 

suggests rotciuo?., as translated above. 

2 1 Thess. iv. 3-8. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

179 

vidence, although it begins, so to speak, to move with the 
Euler, yet is implanted in substances along with their origin 
by the God of the universe. Such being the case, they 
must confess either that punishment is not just, and those 
who condemn and persecute the martyrs do right, or that 
persecutions even are wrought by the will of God. Labour 
and fear are not, then, as they say, incident to affairs as rust 
to iron, but come upon the soul through its own will. And 
on these points there is much to say, which will be reserved 
for future consideration, taking them up in due course. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

V 

VALENTINIAN S VAGARIES ABOUT THE ABOLITION OF 
DEATH REFUTED. 

Valentinian, in a homily, writes in these words : “ Ye 
are originally immortal, and children of eternal life, and 
ye would have death distributed to you, that ye may spend 
and lavish it, and that death may die in you and by you ; 
for when ye dissolve the world, and are not yourselves dis- 
solved, ye have dominion over creation and all corruption.” 
For he also, similarly with Basilides, supposes a class saved 
by nature, and that this different race has come hither to us 
from above for the abolition of death, and that the origin of 
death is the work of the Creator of the world. Wherefore 
also he so expounds that scripture, “ No man shall see the 
face of God, and live,” as if He were the cause of death. 
Respecting this God, he makes those allusions when writing- 
in these expressions : “ As much as the image is inferior to 
the living face, so much is the world inferior to the living 
.ZEon. What is, then, the cause of the image? The majesty 
of the face, which exhibits the figure to the painter, to be 
honoured by his name ; for the form is not found exactly to 
the life, but the name supplies what is wanting in the effigy. 
The invisibility of God co-operates also in order to the faith 
of that which has been fashioned.” For the Creator, called 
God and Father, he designated as “Painter,” and “Wis- 
dom,” whose image that which is formed is, to the glory of 

180 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

the invisible One ; since the things which proceed from a 
pair are complements, and those which proceed from one are 
images. But since what is seen is no part of Him, the soul 
comes from - what is intermediate, which is different; and 
this is the inspiration of the different spirit, and generally 
what is breathed into the soul, which is the image of the 
spirit. And in general, what is said of the Creator, who was 
made according to the image, they say was foretold by a 
sensible image in the book of Genesis respecting the origin 
of man ; and the likeness they transfer to themselves, teach- 
ing that the addition of the different spirit was made, un- 
known to the Creator. When, then, we treat of the unity 
of the God who is proclaimed in the law, the prophets, 
and the gospel, we shall also discuss this ; for the topic is 
supreme. But we must advance to that which is urgent. 
If for the purpose of doing away with death the peculiar 
race has come, it is not Christ who has abolished death, 
unless He also is said to be of the same essence with them. 
And if He abolished it to this end, that it might not touch 
the peculiar race, it is not these, the rivals of the Creatoi*, 
who breathe into the image of their intermediate spirit the 
life from above — in accordance with the principle of the 
dogma — that abolish death. But should they say that this 
takes place by His mother, or should they say that they, 
along with Christ, war against death, let them own the 
secret dogma that they have the hardihood to assail the 
divine power of the Creator, by setting to rights His crea- 
tion, as if they were superior, endeavouring to save the vital 
image which He was not able to rescue from corruption. 
Then the Lord would be superior to God the Creator ; for 
the son would never contend with the father, especially 
among the gods. But the point that the Creator of all 
things, the omnipotent Lord, is the Father of the Son, we 
have deferred till the discussion of these points, in which we 
have undertaken to dispute against the heresies, showing that 
He alone is the God proclaimed by Him. 

But the apostle, writing to us with reference to the en- 
durance of afflictions, says, a And this is of God, that it is« 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

181 

given to you on behalf of Christ, not only to believe on 
Him, but also to suffer for His sake ; having the same con- 
flict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me. If 
there is therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort 
of love, if any communion of spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 
fulfil ye my joy, that ye may be of the same mind, having the 
same love, unanimous, thinking one thing. And if he is offered 
on the sacrifice and service of faith, joying and rejoicing” 1 
with the Philippians, to whom the apostle speaks, calling them 
“ fellow-partakers of joy,” 2 how does he say that they are of 
one soul, and having a soul ? Likewise also, writing respect- 
ing Timothy and himself, he says, “For I have no one like- 
souled, who will nobly cai’e for your state. For all seek 
their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s.” 3 

Let not the above-mentioned people, then, call us, by way 
of reproach, “natural men” (i| rv^i/iol ), nor the Phrygians 
either ; for these now call those who do not apply them- 
selves to the new prophecy “ natural men ” (^rv^iKOi), with 
whom we shall discuss in our remarks on “ Prophecy.” 
The perfect man ought therefore to practise love, and 
thence to haste to the divine friendship, fulfilling the com- 
mandments from love. And loving one’s enemies does not 
mean loving wickedness, or impiety, or adultery, or theft; 
but the thief, the impious, the adulterer, not as far as he 
sins, and in respect of the actions by which he stains the 
name of man, but as he is a man, and the work of God. 
Assuredly sin is an activity, not an existence : and therefore it 
is not a work of God. Now sinners are called enemies of God 
— enemies, that is, of the commands which they do not obey, 
as those who obey become friends, the one named so from 
their fellowship, the others from their estrangement, which 
is the result of free choice ; for there is neither enmity nor 
sin without the enemy and the sinner. And the command 
“ to covet nothing,” not as if the things to be desired did 
not belong to us, does not teach us not to entertain desire, 
as those suppose who teach that the Creator is different 
from the first God, not as if creation was loathsome and 
1 Phil. i. 29, 30, ii. 1 , 2, 17. 2 Phil. i. 7. 3 Phil. ii. 20, 21. 

182 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

bad (for such opinions are impious). But we say that the 
things of the world are not our oivn, not as if they were mon- 
strous, not as if they did not belong to God, the Lord of the 
universe, but because we do not continue among them for ever; 
being, in respect of possession, not ours, and passing from 
one to another in succession ; but belonging to us, for whom 
they were made in respect of use, so long as it is necessary to 
continue with them. In accordance, therefore, with natural 
appetite, things disallowed are to be used rightly, avoiding 
all excess and inordinate affection. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

THE LOYE OF ALL, EVEN OF OUE ENEMIES. 

Plow great also is benignity! “Love your enemies,” it is 
said, “ bless them who curse you, and pray for them who 
despitefully use you,” 1 and the like; to which it is added, 
“ that ye may be the children of your Father who is in 
heaven,” in allusion to resemblance to God. Again, it is 
said, “ Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in 
the way with him.” 2 The adversary is not the body, as some 
would have it, but the devil, and those assimilated to him, 
who walks along with us in the person of men, who emulate 
his deeds in this earthly life. It is inevitable, then, that 
those who confess themselves to belong to Christ, but find 
themselves in the midst of the devil’s works, suffer the most 
hostile treatment. For it is written, “Lest he deliver thee 
to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officers of 
Satan’s kingdom.” “For I am persuaded that neither death,” 
through the assault of persecutors, “nor life” in this world, 
“ nor angels,” the apostate ones, “ nor powers ” (and Satan’s 
power is the life which he chose, for such are the powers 
and principalities of darkness belonging to him), “ nor things 
present,” amid which we exist during the time of life, as the 
hope entertained by the soldier, and the mei’chant’s gain, 
“ nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,” in conse- 
1 Matt. v. 44, 45. 2 Matt. v. 24. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

183 

quence of the energy proper to a man, — opposes the faith of 
him who acts according to free choice. “Creature” is synony- 
mous with activity, being our work, and such activity “ shall 
not be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in 
Christ Jesus our Lord.” 1 You have got a compendious 
account of the gnostic martyr. 

CHAPTER XY. 

ON AVOIDING OFFENCE. 

“We know that we all have knowledge ” — common know- 

O 

ledge in common things, and the knowledge that there is 
one God. For he was writing to believers; whence he adds, 
“ But knowledge ( gnosis ) is not in all,” being communicated 
to few. And there are those who say that the knowledge 
about things sacrificed to idols is not promulgated among all, 
“ lest our liberty prove a stumbling-block to the weak. For 
by thy knowledge he that is weak is destroyed.” 2 Should 
they say, “ Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, ought that to 
be bought % ” adding, by way of interrogation, “ asking no 
questions,” 3 as if equivalent to “ asking questions,” they give 
a ridiculous interpretation. For the apostle says, “All other 
things buy out of the shambles, asking no questions,” with 
the exception of the things mentioned in the catholic epistle 
of all the apostles, 4 “ with the consent of the Holy Ghost,” 
which is written in the Acts of the Apostles, and conveyed to 
the faithful by the hands of Paul himself. For they inti- 
mated “that they must of necessity abstain from things 
offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, 
and from fornication, from which keeping themselves, they 
should do well.” It is a different matter, then, which is ex- 
pressed by the apostle : “ Have we not power to eat and to 
drink % Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as 
the rest of the apostles, as the brethren of the Lord and 
Cephas ? But we have not used this power,” he says, “ but 

1 Bom. viii. 38, 39. 2 1 Cor. viii. 1, 7, 9, 11. 

s 1 Cor. x. 25. 4 Acts xv. 24, etc. 

184 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

bear all things, lest we should occasion hindrance to the gos- 
pel of Christ ; ” namely, by bearing about burdens, when it 
was necessary to be untrammelled for all things; or to become 
an example to those who wish to exercise temperance, not en- 
couraging each other to eat greedily of what is set before us, 
and not to consort inconsiderately with woman. And espe- 
cially is it incumbent on those entrusted with such a dispensa- 
tion to exhibit to disciples a pure example. “For though I 
be free from all men, I have made myself servant to all,” it 
is said, “ that I might gain all. And every one that striveth 
for mastery is temperate in all things.” 1 “ But the earth is 

the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof .” 2 For conscience sake, 
then, we are to abstain from what we ought to abstain. “ Con- 
science, I say, not his own,” for it is endued with knowledge, 
“ but that of the other,” lest he be trained badly, and by imi- 
tating in ignorance what he knows not, he become a despiser 
instead of a strong-minded man. “For why is my liberty 
judged of by another conscience ? For if I by grace am a 
partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give 
thanks ? Whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God ” 3 — 
what you are commanded to do by the rule of faith. 

CHAPTER XYI. 

PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE RESPECTING THE CONSTANCY, 
PATIENCE, AND LOVE OF THE MARTYRS. 

“ With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Where- 
fore the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on Him shall 
not be ashamed ; that is, the word of faith which we preach : 
for if thou confess the word with thy mouth that Jesus is 
Lord, and believe in thy heart that God hath raised Him 
from the dead, thou shalt be saved .” 4 There is clearly de- 
scribed the perfect righteousness, fulfilled both in practice 
and contemplation. Wherefore we are “ to bless those who 

1 1 Cor. ix. 19-25. 9 1 Cor. x. 26. 

3 1 Cor. x. 28-31. 4 Rom. x. 10, 11, 8, 9. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

185 

persecute us. Bless, and curse not.” 1 “For cur rejoicing 
is this, the testimony of a good conscience, that in holiness 
and sincerity we know God ” by this inconsiderable instance 
exhibiting the work of love, that “ not in fleshly wisdom, but 
by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the 
world.” 2 So far the apostle respecting knowledge ; and in 
the second Epistle to the Corinthians he calls the common 
“ teaching of faith ” the savour of knowledge. “For unto 
this day the same veil remains on many in the reading of 
the Old Testament,” 3 not being uncovered by turning to 
the Lord. Wherefore also to those capable of perceiving 
he showed resurrection, that of the life still in the flesh, 
creeping on its belly. Whence also he applied the name 
“ brood of vipers ” to the voluptuous, who serve the belly and 
the pudenda, and cut off one another’s heads for the sake 
of worldly pleasures. “Little children, let us not love in 
word, or in tongue,” says John, teaching them to be perfect, 
“ but in deed and in truth ; hereby shall we know that we 
are of the truth.” 4 And if “ God be love,” piety also is love : 
“ there is no fear in love ; but perfect love casteth out 
fear.” 5 “ This is the love of God, that we keep His com- 

mandments.” 6 And again, to him who desires to become a 
Gnostic, it is written, “ But be thou an example of the be- 
lievers, in word, in conversation, in love, in faith, in purity.” 7 
For perfection in faith differs, I think, from ordinary faith. 
And the divine apostle furnishes the rule for the Gnostic in 
these words, writing as follows: “For I have learned, in 
whatsoever state I am, to be content. I know both how to 
be abased, and I know how to abound. Everywhere and in 
all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, 
both to abound and to lack. I can do all things through 
Him who strengtheneth me.” 8 And also, when discussing 
with others in order to put them to shame, he does not shrink 
from saying, “ But call to mind the former days, in which, 
after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflic- 

1 Eom. xii. 14. 2 2 Cor. ii. 12. 3 2 Cor. iii. 14. 

4 1 John iii. 18, 19. 5 1 John iv. 16, 18. 6 1 John v. 3. 

7 1 Tim. iv. 12. 8 Phil. iv. 11-13. 

186 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

tions ; partly, whilst ye were made a gazing-stock, both by 
reproaches and afflictions ; and partly, whilst ye became 
companions of them that were so used. For ye had com- 
passion of me in my bonds, and took with joy the spoiling 
of your goods, knowing that you have a better and enduring 
substance. Cast not away therefore your confidence, which 
hath great recompense of reward. For ye have need of 
patience, that, after doing the will of God, ye may obtain 
the promise. For yet a little while, and He that cometli 
will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by 
faith : and if any man draw back, my soul shall have no 
pleasure in him. But we are not of them that draw back 
unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of 
the soul.” 1 He then brings forward a swarm of divine 
examples. For was it not “ by faith,” he says, this endur- 
ance, that they acted nobly who u had trial of mockeries 
and scourgings, and, moreover, of bonds and imprisonments ? 
They were stoned, they were tempted, were slain with the 
sword. They wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, 
being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was 
not worthy. They wandered in deserts, in mountains, in 
dens, and caves of the earth. And all having received a 
good report, through faith, received not the promise of God” 
(what is expressed by a parasiopesis is left to be understood, 
viz. “ alone”). Pie adds accordingly, “ God having provided 
some better thing for us (for lie was good), that they should 
not without us be made perfect. Wherefore also, having 
encompassing us such a cloud,” holy and transparent, “of 
witnesses, laying aside every weight, and the sin which doth 
so easily beset us, let us run with patience the race set before 
us, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.” 2 
Since, then, he specifies one salvation in Christ of the right- 
eous, 3 and of us he has expressed the former unambiguously, 
and saying nothing less respecting Moses, adds, “ Esteeming 
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of 
Egypt : for he had respect to the recompense of the reward , 

1 Heb. x. 32-39. 2 Hcb. xi. 3G-40, xii. 1 , 2. 

5 Who lived before Christ. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

187 

By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the 
king : for he endured as seeing Him who is invisible .” 1 
The divine Wisdom says of the martyrs, “They seemed in the 
eyes of the foolish to die, and their departure was reckoned 
a calamity, and their migration from us an affliction. But 
they are in peace. For though in the sight of men they 
were punished, their hope was full of immortality .” 2 He 
then adds, teaching martyrdom to be a glorious purifica- 
tion, “ And being chastened a little, they shall be benefited 
much ; because God proved them,” that is, suffered them to 
be tried, to put them to the proof, and to put to shame the 
author of their trial, “ and found them worthy of Himself,” 
plainly, to be called sons. “ As gold in the furnace He proved 
them, and as a whole burnt-offering of sacrifice He accepted 
them. And in the time of their visitation they will shine 
forth, even as sparks run along the stubble. They shall 
judge the nations, and rule over the peoples, and the Lord 
shall reign over them for ever .” 3 

CHAPTER XVII. 

PASSAGES FROM CLEMENT’S EPISTLE TO THE COPJNTHIANS 

ON MARTYRDOM. 

Moreover, in the Epistle to the Corinthians, the Apostle 
Clement also, drawing a picture of the Gnostic, says : “ For 
who that has sojourned among you has not proved your per- 
fect and firm faith ? and has not admired your sound and 
gentle piety ? and has not celebrated the munificent style 
of your hospitality ? and has not felicitated your complete 
and sure knowledge ? For ye did all things impartially, and 
walked in the ordinances of God and so forth. 

Then more clearly : “ Let us fix our eyes on those who 
have yielded perfect service to His magnificent glory. Let 
us take Enoch, who, being by his obedience found righteous, 
was translated ; and Noah, who, having believed, was saved ; 
and Abraham, who for his faith and hospitality was called 
1 Heb. xi. 26, 27. 2 Wisd. iii. 2, 3, 4. 2 Wisd. iii. 5, 6, 7, 8. 

188 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

the friend of God, and was the father of Isaac.” “ For hospi- 
tality and piety, Lot was saved from Sodom.” “For faith and 
hospitality, Rahab the harlot was saved.” “From patience and 
faith they walked about in goat-skins, and sheep-skins, and 
folds of camels’ hair, proclaiming the kingdom of Christ. W e 
name His prophets Elias, and Eliseus, and Ezekiel, and John.” 

“For Abraham, who for his free faith was called ‘the 
friend of God,’ was not elated by glory, but modestly said, 
‘ I am dust and ashes.’ 1 And of J ob it is thus written : 
‘Job was just and blameless, true and pious, abstaining from 
all evil.’” 2 He it was who overcame the tempter by patience, 
and at once testified and was testified to by God ; who keeps 
hold of humility, and says, “ No one is pure from defilement, 
not even if his life were but for one day.” 3 “Moses, ‘the 
servant who was faithful in all his house,’ said to Him who 
uttered the oracles from the bush, ‘ Who am I, that Thou 
sendest me? I am slow of speech, and of a stammering 
tongue,’ to minister the voice of God in human speech. 
And again : ‘I am smoke from a pot.’” “For God resisteth 
the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.” 4 

“ David too, of whom the Lord, testifying, says, ‘ I found 
a man after my own heart, David the son of Jesse. With 
my holy oil I anointed him.’ 5 But he also says to God, 
‘ Pity me, O God, according to Thy mercy ; and according 
to the multitude of Thy tender mercies, blot out my trans- 
gression. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and 
cleanse me from my sin. For I know my transgression, and 
my sin is ever before me.’ ” 6 Then, alluding to sin which 
is not subject to the law, in the exercise of the moderation 
of true knowledge, he adds, “ Against Thee only have I 
sinned, and done evil in Thy sight.” 7 For the Scripture 
somewhere says, “The Spirit of the Lord is a lamp, search- 
ing the recesses of the belly.” 8 And the more of a Gnostic 
a man becomes by doing right, the nearer is the illumi- 
nating Spirit to him. “ Thus the Lord draws near to the 

1 Gen. xviii. 27. 

4 Jas. iv. 6 ; 1 Pet. iv. 5. 
6 Ps. li. 1-4. 

2 Job i. 1. 

3 Job xiv. 4, 5. 

5 Ps. lxxxix. 21. 
8 Prov. xx. 27. 

7 Ps. li. 6. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

189 

righteous, and none of the thoughts and reasonings of which 
we are the authors escape Him — I mean the Lord Jesus,” 
the scrutinizer by His omnipotent will of our heart, “ whose 
blood was consecrated 1 for us. Let us therefore respect those 
who are over us, and reverence the elders ; let us honour the 
young, and let us teach the discipline of God.” For blessed 
is he who shall do and teach the Lord’s commands worthily ; 
and he is of a magnanimous mind, and of a mind contempla- 
tive of truth. “ Let us direct our wives to what is good ; 
let them exhibit,” says he, “ the lovable disposition of chas- 
tity ; let them show the guileless will of their meekness ; let 
them manifest the gentleness of their tongue by silence ; let 
them give their love not according to their inclinations, but 
equal love in sanctity to all that fear God. Let our children 
share in the discipline that is in Christ ; let them learn what 
humility avails before God ; what is the power of holy love 
before God, how lovely and great is the fear of the Lord, 
saving all that walk in it holily, with a pure heart : for He is 
the Searcher of the thoughts and sentiments, whose breath 
is in us, and when He wills He will take it away.” 

“Now all those things are confirmed by the faith that is in 
Christ. ‘ Come, ye children,’ says the Lord, ‘ hearken to me, 
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Who is the man 
that desireth life, that loveth to see good days ?’ 2 Then He 
subjoins the gnostic mystery of the numbers seven and eight. 
‘Stop thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. 
Depart from evil, and do good. Seek peace, and pursue it .’ 3 
For in these words He alludes to knowledge (gnosis), with 
abstinence from evil and the doing of what is good, teaching 
that it is to be perfected by word and deed. ‘ The eyes of the 
Lord are on the righteous, and His ears are to their prayer. 
But the face of God is against those that do evil, to root out 
their memory from the earth. The righteous cried, and the 
Lord heard, and delivered him out of all his distresses .’ 4 
‘ Many are the stripes of sinners ; but those who hope in 
the Lord, mercy shall compass about .’” 5 “A multitude of 

1 '/lytuati 17 . Clemens Romanus has sBc'&j. 2 Ps. xxxiv. 12 . 

3 Ps. xxxiv. 13, 14. 4 Ps. xxxiv. 15-17. 5 Ps. xxxii. 10 . 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

190 

[Book iv. 

mercy,” he nobly says, “ surrounds him that trusts in the 
Lord” 

For it is written in the Epistle to the Corinthians, “ Through 
Jesus Christ our foolish and darkened mind springs up to the 
light. By Him the Sovereign Lord wished us to taste the 
knowledge that is immortal.” And, showing more expressly 
the peculiar nature of knowledge, he added : “ These things, 
then, being clear to us, looking into the depths of divine 
knowledge, we ought to do all things in order which the 
Sovereign Lord commanded us to perform at the appointed 
seasons. Let the wise man, then, show his wisdom not in 
words only, but in good deeds. Let the humble not testify 
to himself, but allow testimony to be borne to him by another. 
Let not him who is pure in the flesh boast, knowing that it is 
another who furnishes him with continence. Ye see, brethren, 
that the more we are subjected to peril, the more knowledge 
are we counted worthy of.” 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

ON LOVE, AND THE REPRESSING OF OUR DESIRES. 

u The decorous tendency of our philanthropy, therefore,” 
according to Clement, “seeks the common good;” whether 
by suffering martyrdom, or by teaching by deed and word, 
— the latter being twofold, unwritten and written. This 
is love, to love God and our neighbour. “ This conducts 
to the height which is unutterable. ‘ Love covers a multi- 
tude of sins. 1 Love beareth all things, suffereth all things.’ 2 
Love joins us to God, does all things in concord. In love, 
all the chosen of God were perfected. Apart from love, 
nothing is well pleasing to God.” “ Of its perfection there 
is no unfolding,” it is said. “ Who is fit to be found in it, 
except those whom God counts worthy?” To the point the 
Apostle Paul speaks, “ If I give my body, and have not love, 
I am sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal.” 0 If it is not 
from a disposition determined by gnostic love that I shall 
1 Jas. v. 20 ; 1 Pet. iv. 8. 2 1 Cor. xiii. 7. 3 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 3. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

191 

testify, lie means ; but if through fear and expected reward, 
moving my lips in order to testify to the Lord that I shall 
confess the Lord, I am a common man, sounding the Lord’s 
name, not knowing Him. “For there is the people that 
loveth with the lips ; and there is another which gives the 
body to be burned.” “And if I give all my goods in alms,” 
he says, not according to the principle of loving communi- 
cation, but on account of recompense, either from him who 
has received the benefit, or the Lord who has promised ; “ and 
if I have all faith so as to remove mountains,” and cast away 
obscuring passions, and be not faithful to the Lord from love, 
“ I am nothing,” as in comparison of him who testifies as a 
Gnostic, and the crowd, and being reckoned nothing better. 

“ Now all the generations from Adam to this day are 
gone. But they who have been perfected in love, through 
the grace of God, hold the place of the godly, who shall 
be manifested at the visitation of the kingdom of Christ.” 
Love permits not to sin ; but if it fall into any such case, 
by reason of the interference of the adversary, in imitation 
of David, it will sing: “I will confess unto the Lord, and it 
will please Him above a young bullock that has horns and 
hoofs. Let the poor see it, and be glad.” For he says, 
“ Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise, and pay to the Lord 
thy vows ; and call upon me in the day of trouble, and I 
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me .” 1 “For the 
sacrifice of God is a broken spirit .” 2 

“ God,” then, being good, “ is love,” it is said . 3 Whose 
“love worketh no ill to his neighbour ,” 4 neither injuring nor 
revenging ever, but, in a word, doing good to all according 
to the image of God. “Love is,” then, “the fulfilling of 
the law 4 like as Christ, that is the presence of the Lord 
who loves us; and our loving teaching of, and discipline 
according to Christ. By love, then, the commands not to 
commit adultery, and not to covet one’s neighbour’s wife, are I 
fulfilled, [these sins being] formerly prohibited by fear. 

The same work, then, presents a difference, according as it 
is done by fear, or accomplished by love, and is wrought by 
1 Ps. lxix. 30, 31. 2 Ps. li. 17. 3 1 John iv. 8, 1G. 4 Rom. xiii. 10. 

192 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

faith or by knowledge. Rightly, therefore, their rewards are 
different. To the Gnostic “ are prepared what eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, nor hath entered into the heart of man;” 
but to him who has exercised simple faith He testifies a 
hundred-fold in return for what he has left, — a promise 
which has turned out to fall within human comprehension. 

Come to this point, I recollect one who called himself 
a Gnostic. For, expounding the words, u But I say unto 
you, he that looketh on a woman to lust after, hath com- 
mitted adultery,” 1 he thought that it was not bare desire 
that was condemned ; but if through the desire the act 
that results from it proceeding beyond the desire is accom- 
plished in it. For dream employs phantasy and the body. 
Accordingly, the historians relate the following decision of 
Bocchoris the just. A youth, falling in love with a cour- 
tezan, persuades the girl, for a stipulated reward, to come to 
him next day. But his desire being unexpectedly satiated, 
by laying hold of the girl in a dream, by anticipation, 
when the object of his love came according to stipulation, 
he prohibited her from coining in. But siie, on learning 
what had taken place, demanded the reward, saying that in 
this way she had sated the lover’s desire. They came ac- 
cordingly to the judge. He, ordering the youth to hold out 
the purse containing the reward in the sun, bade the courte- 
zan take hold of the shadow; facetiously bidding him pay 
the image of a reward for the image of an embrace. 

Accordingly one dreams, the soul assenting to the vision. 
But he dreams waking, who looks so as to lust ; not only, as 
that Gnostic said, if along with the sight of the woman he 
imagine in his mind intercourse, for this is already the act of 
lust, as lust; but if one looks on beauty of person (the Word 
says), and the flesh seem to him in the way of lust to be fair, 
looking on carnally and sinfully, he is judged because he , 
admired. For, on the other hand, he who in chaste love looks 
on beauty, thinks not that the flesh is beautiful, but the spirit, 
admiring, as I judge, the body as an image, by whose beauty \ 
he transports himself to the Artist, and to the true beauty ; 

1 Matt. v. 28. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

193 

exhibiting the sacred symbol, the bright impress of righteous- 
ness to the angels that wait on the ascension I mean the 
unction of acceptance, the quality of disposition which resides 
in the soul that is gladdened by the communication of the 
Holy Spirit. This glory, which shone forth on the face of 
Moses, the people could not look on. Wherefore he took a 
veil for the glory, to those who looked carnally. For those, 
who demand toll, detain those who bring in any worldly 
things, who are burdened with their own passions. But him 
that is free of all things which are subject to duty, and is full 
of knowledge, and of the righteousness of works, they pass 
on with their good wishes, blessing the man with his work. 

“ And his life shall not fall away” — the leaf of the living 
tree that is nourished “by the water-courses .” 1 2 Now the 
righteous is likened to fruit-bearing trees, and not only to 
such as are of the nature 3 of tall-growing ones. And in the 
sacrificial oblations, according to the law, there were those 
who looked for blemishes in the sacrifices. They who are 
skilled in such matters distinguish propension 4 ( opegis ) from 
lust (eVt^u/ita) ; and assign the latter, as being irrational, 
to pleasures and licentiousness ; and propension, as being a 
rational movement, they assign to the necessities of nature. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

WOMEN AS WELL AS MEN CAPABLE OF PERFECTION. 

In this perfection it is possible for man and woman equally x 
to share. It is not only Moses, then, that heard from God, 

“ I have spoken to thee once, and twice, saying, I have seen 
this people, and lo, it is stiff-necked. Suffer me to exter- 
minate them, and blot out their name from under heaven ; 

1 i.e. of blessed souls. 2 Ps. i. 3 . 

3 The text has Svcn'ctf, for which (pvitv has been suggested as probably 

the true reading. 

4 o' os^i; the Stoics define to be a desire agreeable to reason ; swiQvfii'x, 
a desire contrary to reason. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. N 

194 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

and I will make tliee into a great and wonderful nation much 
greater than this who answers not regarding himself, but 
the common salvation : “ By no means, O Lord ; forgive this 
people their sin, or blot me out of the book of the living.” 1 
How great was his perfection, in wishing to die together with 
the people, rather than be saved alone ! 

But Judith too, who became perfect among women, in the 
siege of the city, at the entreaty of the elders went forth into 
the strangers’ camp, despising all danger for her country’s 
sake, giving herself into the enemy’s hand in faith in God ; 
and straightway she obtained the reward of her faith, — 
though a woman, prevailing over the enemy of her faith, and 
gaining possession of the head of Holofernes. And again, 
Esther perfect by faith, who rescued Israel from the power 
of the king and the satrap’s cruelty: a woman alone, afflicted 
with fastings, 2 3 held back ten thousand armed ° hands, annul- 
ling by her faith the tyrant’s decree; him indeed she appeased, 
Haman she restrained, and Israel she preserved scathless by 
her perfect prayer to God. I pass over in silence Susanna 
and the sister of Moses, since the latter was the prophet’s 
associate in commanding the host, being superior to all the 
women among the Hebrews who were in repute for their 
wisdom; and the former in her surpassing modesty, going 
even to death condemned by licentious admirers, remained 
the unwavering martyr of chastity. 

Dion, too, the philosopher, tells that a certain woman 
Lysidica, through excess of modesty, bathed in her clothes ; 
and that Philotera, when she was to enter the bath, gradually 
drew back her tunic as the water covered the naked parts ; 
and then rising by degrees, put it on. And did not Lea3na 
of Attica manfully bear the torture? She being privy to the 
conspiracy of Harmodius and Aristogeiton against Hippar- 
chus, uttered not a word, though severely tortured. And 

1 Ex. xxxii. 32. 

2 So rendered by the Latin translator, as if the reading were -r sS'hiy.- 

/ASM). 

3 Sylburgius’ conjecture of u^'Auxylvus instead of o-'Kiuau.i’jag is here 
adopted. 

Book iy\] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

195 

they say that the Argolic women, under the guidance of 
Telesiila the poetess, turned to flight the doughty Spartans by 
merely showing themselves ; and that she produced in them 
fearlessness of death. Similarly speaks he who composed the 
Danais respecting the daughters of Danaus : 

“ And then the daughters of Danaus swiftly armed themselves, 

Before the fair-flowing river, majestic Nile ; ” 

and so forth. 

And the rest of the poets sing of Atalanta’s swiftness in the 
chase, of Anticlea’s love for children, of Alcestis’ love for her 
husband, of the courage of Makseria and of the Hyacinthides. 
What shall I say ? Did not Theano the Pythagorean make 
such progress in philosophy, that to him who looked intently 
at her, and said, “Your arm is beautiful,” she answered “Yes, 
but it is not public ? ” Characterized by the same propriety, 
there is also reported the following reply. When asked when 
a woman after being with her husband attends the Themso- 
phoria, said, “ From her own husband at once, from a stranger 
never.” Themisto too, of Lampsacus, the daughter of Zoilus, 
the wife of Leontes of Lampsacus, studied the Epicurean 
philosophy, as Myia the daughter of Theano the Pythagorean, 
and Arignote, who wrote the history of Dionysius. 

And the daughters of Diodorus, who was called Kronus, 
all became dialecticians, as Philo the dialectician says in the 
Menexenus, whose names are mentioned as follow — Menexene, 
Argia, Theognis, Artemesia, Pantaclea. I also recollect a 
female Cynic, — she was called Ilipparchia, a Maronite, the 
wife of Crates, — in whose case the so-called dog-w r edding 
was celebrated in the Poecile. Arete of Cyrene, too, the 
daughter of Aristippus, educated her son Aristippus, who Yvas 
surnamed Mother-taught. Lastheneia of Arcis, and Axiothea 
of Phlius, studied philosophy with Plato. Besides, Aspasia 
of Miletus, of whom the writers of comedy write much, -was 
trained by Socrates in philosophy, by Pericles in rhetoric. 
I omit, on account of the length of the discourse, the rest ; 
enumerating neither the poetesses Corinna, Telesiila, Myia, 
and Sappho ; nor the painters, as Irene the daughter of Crati- 
nus, and Anaxandra the daughter of Nealces, according to 

196 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

tlic account of Didymus in the Symposiaci. The daughter 
of Cleobulus, the sage and monarch of the Lindii, was not 
ashamed to wash the feet of her father’s guests. Also the 
wife of Abraham, the blessed Sarah, in her own person pre- 
pared the cakes baked in the ashes for the angels ; and princely 
maidens among the Hebrews fed sheep. Whence also the 
Nausicaa of Homer went to the washing-tubs. 

The wise woman, then, will first choose to persuade her hus- 
band to be her associate in what is conducive to happiness. 
And should that be found impracticable, let her by herself 
earnestly aim at virtue, gaining her husband’s consent in 
everything, so as never to do anything against his will, with 
exception of what is reckoned as contributing to virtue and 
salvation. But if one keeps from such a mode of life either 
wife or maid-servant, whose heart is set on it ; what such 
a person in that case plainly does is nothing else than deter- 
mine to drive her away from righteousness and sobriety, and 
to choose to make his own house wicked and licentious. 

It is not then possible that man or woman can be con- 
versant with anything whatever, without the advantage of 
education, and application, and training ; and virtue, we have 
said, depends not on others, but on ourselves above all. Other 
things one can repress, by waging war against them ; but with 
what depends on one’s self, this is entirely out of the question, 
even with the most strenuous persistence. For the gift is one 
conferred by God, and not in the power of any other. Whence 
licentiousness should be regarded as the evil of no other one 
than of him who is guilty of licentiousness ; and temperance, 
on the other hand, as the good of him who is able to practise it. 

CHAPTER XX. 

A GOOD WIFE. 

The woman who, with propriety, loves her husband, Euripides 
describes, while admonishing, 

“ That when her husband says aught, 

She ought to regard him as speaking well if she say nothing ; 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

107 

And if she will say anything, to do her endeavour to gratify her 
husband.” 

Ancl again he subjoins the like : 

“ And that the wife should sweetly look sad with her husband, 
Should aught evil befall him, 

And have in common a share of sorrow and joy.” 

Then, describing her as gentle and kind even in misfortunes, 
he adds : 

“ And I, when you are ill, will, sharing your sickness, bear it ; 

And I will bear my share in your misfortunes.” 

And : 

‘ ‘ Nothing is bitter to me, 

For with friends one ought to be happy, 

For what else is friendship but this ?” 

The marriage, then, that is consummated according to the 
word, is sanctified, if the union be under subjection to God, 
and be conducted “ with a true heart, in full assurance of 
faith, having hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and 
the body washed with pure water, and holding the confession 
of hope ; for He is faithful that promised.” And the happi- 
ness of marriage ought never to be estimated either by wealtli 
or beauty, but by virtue. 

u Beauty,” says the tragedy, 

“ Helps no wife with her husband ; 

But virtue has helped many ; for every good wife 

IV ho is attached to her husband knows how to practise sobriety.” 

Then, as giving admonitions, he says : 

“ First, then, this is incumbent on her who is endowed with mind, 
That even if her husband be ugly, he must appear good-looking ; 
For it is for the mind, uot the eye, to judge.” 

And SO forth. 

For with perfect propriety Scripture has said that woman 
is given by God as “an help” to man. It is evident, then, 
in my opinion, that she will charge herself with 'remedying, 
by good sense and persuasion, each of the annoyances that 
originate with her husband in domestic economy. And if he 
do not yield, then she will endeavour, as far as possible for 

193 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

human nature, to lead a sinless life ; whether it be necessary 
to die, in accordance with reason, or to live ; considering 
that God is her helper and associate in such a course of 
conduct, her true defender and Saviour both for the present 
and for the future ; making Him the leader and guide 
of all her actions, reckoning sobriety and righteousness her 
work, and making the favour of God her end. Grace- 
fully, therefore, the apostle says in the Epistle to Titus, 
“ that the elder women should be of godly behaviour, should 
not be slanderers, not enslaved to much wine ; that they 
should counsel the young women to be lovers of their hus- 
bands, lovers of their children, discreet, chaste, housekeepers, 
good, subject to their own husbands ; that the word of God 
be not blasphemed .” 1 But rather, he says, “ Follow peace 
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see 
the Lord : looking diligently, lest there be any fornicator 
or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel surrendered 
his birthright ; and lest any root of bitterness springing, up 
trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.” 2 And then, as 
putting the finishing stroke to the question about marriage, 
he adds : “ Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed unde- 
filed : but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.” 3 
And one aim and one end, as far as regards perfection, being 
demonstrated to belong to the man and the woman, Peter in 
his epistle says, “ Though now for a season, if need be, ye are 
in heaviness through manifold temptations ; that the trial of 
your faith, being much more precious than that of gold which 
perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto 
praise, and honour, and glory at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ ; whom, having not seen, ye love ; in whom, though 
now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy un- 
speakable, and full of glory, receiving the end of your faith, 
the salvation of your souls.” 4 Wherefore also Paul rejoices 
for Christ’s sake that he was “ in labours more abundantly, 
in stripes above measure, in deaths oft .” 5 

1 Tit. ii. 3-5. 2 Heb. xii. 13-17. 

4 1 Pet. i. 6-9. 6 2 Cor. xi. 23. 

3 Hcb. xiii. 4. 

Book iv.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

199 

CHAPTER XXL 

DESCRIPTION OF THE PERFECT MAN, OR GNOSTIC. 

Here I find perfection apprehended variously in relation to 
Him who excels in every virtue. Accordingly one is perfected 
as pious, and as patient, and as continent, and as a worker, 
and as a martyr, and as a Gnostic. But I know no one of 
men perfect in all things at once, while still human, though 
according to the mere letter of the law, except Him alone who 
for us clothed Himself with humanity. Who then is per- 
fect? He who professes abstinence from what is bad. Well, 
this is the way to the gospel and to well-doing. But gnostic 
perfection in the case of the legal man is the acceptance 
of the gospel, that he that is after the law may be perfect. 
For so he, who was after the law, Moses, foretold that it was 
necessary to hear in order that we might, according to the 
apostle, receive Christ, the fulness of the law . 1 But now in 
the gospel the Gnostic attains proficiency not only by making 
use of the law as a step, but by understanding and compre- 
hending it, as the Lord who gave the Covenants delivered it 
to the apostles. And if he conduct himself rightly (as as- 
suredly it is impossible to attain knowledge {gnosis) by bad 
conduct) ; and if, further, having made an eminently right 
confession, he become a martyr out of love, obtaining con- 
siderable renown as among men ; not even thus will he be 
called perfect in the flesh beforehand ; since it is the close of 
life which claims this appellation, when the gnostic martyr 
has first shown the perfect work, and rightly exhibited it, and 
having thankfully shed his blood, has yielded up the ghost : 
blessed then will he be, and truly proclaimed perfect, u that 
the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us,” 
as the apostle says. Only let us preserve free-will and love : 
“ troubled on every side, yet not distressed ; perplexed, but 
not in despair ; persecuted, but not forsaken ; cast down, but 
not destroyed .” 2 For those who strive after perfection, 

1 Deut. xviii. 13 ; Rom. x. 4. 2 2 Cor. iv. 8, 9. 

200 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

according to the same apostle, must “ give no offence in any- 
thing, but in everything approve themselves not to men, but 
to God.” And, as a consequence, also they ought to yield to 
men ; for it is reasonable, on account of abusive calumnies. 
Here is the specification: “in much patience, in afflictions, 
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in 
tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, in pureness, in 
knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Ghost, 
in love unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God,” 1 
that we may be the temples of God, purified “ from all filthi- 
ness of the flesh and of the spirit.” “And I,” He says, “will 
receive you ; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye shall 
be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” 2 
“Let us then,” he says, “perfect holiness in the fear of God.” 
For though fear beget pain, “ I rejoice,” he says, “ not that 
ye were made sorry, but that ye showed susceptibility to re- 
pentance. For ye sorrowed after a godly sort, that ye might 
receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh 
repentance unto salvation not to be regretted ; but the sorrow 
of the world worketh death. For this same thing that ye 
sorrowed after a godly sort, what earnestness it wrought in 
you ; yea, what clearing of yourselves ; yea, what compunc- 
tion ; yea, what fear ; yea, what desire ; yea, what zeal ; yea, 
revenge ! In all things ye have showed yourselves clear in 
the matter.” 3 Such are the preparatory exercises of gnostic 
discipline. And since the omnipotent God Himself “ gave 
some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and 
some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, 
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body 
of Christ, till we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of 
the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the 
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ ;” 4 we are 
then to strive to reach manhood as befits the Gnostic, and to 
be as perfect as we can while still abiding in the flesh, making 
it our study with perfect concord here to concur with the will 
of God, to the restoration of what is the truly perfect noble- 

1 2 Cor. vi. 3-7. 2 2 Cor. vii. 1, vi. 1G, 17, 18. 

s 2 Cor. vii. 1-11. 4 Eph. iv. 11, 12, 13. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

201 

ness ancl relationship, to the fulness of Christ, that which 
perfectly depends on our perfection. 

And now we perceive where, and how, and when the divine 
apostle mentions the perfect man, and how he shows the 
differences of the perfect. And again, on the other hand : 
“ The manifestation of the Spirit is given for our profit. 
For to one is given the word of wisdom by the Spirit ; to 
another the word of knowledge according to the same Spirit ; 
to another faith through the same Spirit ; to another the 
gifts of healing through the same Spirit ; to another the 
working of miracles ; to another prophecy ; to another dis- 
cernment of spirits; to another diversities of tongues; to 
another the interpretation of tongues : and all these worketh 
the one and the same Spirit, distributing to each one accord- 
ing as He wills.” 1 Such being the case, the prophets are 
perfect in prophecy, the righteous in righteousness, and the 
martyrs in confession, and others in preaching, not that they 
are not sharers in the common virtues, but are proficient in 
those to which they are appointed. For what man in his 
senses would say that a prophet was not righteous? For what? 
did not righteous men like Abraham prophesy ? 

“ For to one God lias given warlike deeds, 

To another the accomplishment of the dance, 

To another the lyre and song,” 2 

says Homer. “But each has his own proper gift of God,” 3 
— one in one way, another in another. But the apostles were 
perfected in all. You will find, then, if you choose, in their 
acts and writings, knowledge, life, preaching, righteousness, 
purity, prophecy. We must know, then, that if Paul is 
young in respect to time — having flourished immediately 
after the Lord’s ascension — yet his writings depend on the 
Old Testament, breathing and speaking of them. For faith 
in Christ and the knowledge of the gospel are the explanation 
and fulfilment of the law ; and therefore it was said to the 
Hebrews, “ If ye believe not, neither shall you understand ;” 4 
that is, unless you believe what is prophesied in the law, and 

1 1 Cor. xii. 7-11. 2 Iliad , xiii. 730. 

3 1 Cor. vii. 7. 4 Isa. vii. 9. 

202 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

oracularly delivered by the law, you will not understand the 
Old Testament, which He by His coming expounded. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

THE TRUE GNOSTIC DOES GOOD, NOT FROM FEAR OF PUNISH- 
MENT OR HOPE OF REWARD, BUT ONLY FOR THE SAKE 
OF GOOD ITSELF. 

The man of understanding and perspicacity is, then, a 
Gnostic. And his business is not abstinence from what is 
evil (for this is a step to the highest perfection), or the 
doing of good out of fear. For it is written, “Whither 
shall I flee, and where shall I hide myself from Thy pre- 
sence ? If I ascend into heaven, Thou art there ; if I go 
away to the uttermost parts of the sea, there is Thy right 
hand ; if I go down into the depths, there is Thy Spirit.” 1 
Nor any more is he to do so from hope of promised recom- 
pense. For it is said, “ Behold the Lord, and His reward is 
before His face, to give to every one according to his works ; 
what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and hath 
not entered into the heart of man what God hath prepared 
for them that love Him .” 2 But only the doing of good out 
of love, and for the sake of its own excellence, is to be the 
Gnostic’s choice. Now, in the person of God it is said to the 
Lord, “ Ask of me, and I will give the heathen for Thine 
inheritance ; ” s teaching Him to ask a truly regal request — 
that is, the salvation of men without price, that we may 
inherit and possess the Lord. For, on the contrary, to desire 
knowledge about God for any practical purpose, that this may 
be done, or that may not be done, is not proper to the Gnostic ; 
but the knowledge itself suffices as the reason for contem- 
plation. For I will dare aver that it is not because he wishes 
to be saved that he, who devotes himself to knowledge for the 
sake of the divine science itself, chooses knowledge. For the 

1 Ps. cxxxix. 7-10. 

2 Isa. xl. 10, lxii. 11 ; Ps. lxii. 12 ; Rev. xxii. 12 ; Rom. ii. 6. 

2 Ps. ii. 8. 

Book iv.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

203 

exertion of the intellect by exercise is prolonged to a per- 
petual exertion. And the perpetual exertion of the intellect 
is the essence of an intelligent being, which results from an 
uninterrupted process of admixture, and remains eternal con- 
templation, a living substance. Could we, then, suppose any 
one proposing to the Gnostic whether he would choose the 
knowledge of God or everlasting salvation ; and if these, 
which are entirely identical, were separable, he would with- 
out the least hesitation choose the knowledge of God, deeming 
that property of faith, which from love ascends to knowledge, 
desirable, for its own sake. This, then, is the perfect man’s 
first form of doing good, when it is done not for any advan- 
tage in what pertains to him, but because he judges it right 
to do good ; and the energy being vigorously exerted in all 
things, in the very act becomes good ; not, good in some 
things, and not good in others ; but consisting in the habit of 
doing good, neither for glory, nor, as the philosophers say, 
for reputation, nor from reward either from men or God ; but 
so as to pass life after the image and likeness of the Lord. 

And if, in doing good, he be met with anything adverse, he 
will let the recompense pass without resentment as if it were 
good, he being just and good “to the just and the unjust.” 
To such the Lord says, “ Be ye, as your Father is perfect.” 

To him the flesh is dead ; but he himself lives alone, having 
consecrated the sepulchre into a holy temple to the Lord, 
having turned towards God the old sinful soul. 

Such an one is no longer continent, but has reached a state 
of passionlessness, waiting to put on the divine image. “ If 
thou doest alms,” it is said, “ let no one know it ; and if thou 
fastest, anoint thyself, that God alone may know,” 1 and not 
a single human being. Not even he himself who shows 
mercy ought to know that he does show mercy ; for in this 
way he will be sometimes merciful, sometimes not. And 
when he shall do good by habit, he will imitate the nature of 
good, and his disposition will be his nature and his practice. 
There is no necessity for removing those who are raised on 
high, but there is necessity for those who are walking to reach 

1 Matt. vi. 2, etc. 

204 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Cooic iv. 

the requisite goal, by passing over the whole of the narrow 
way. For this is to be drawn by the Father, to become 
worthy to receive the power of grace from God, so as to run 
without hindrance. And if some hate the elect, such an one 
knows their ignorance, and pities their minds for its folly. 

As is right, then, knowledge itself loves and teaches the 
ignorant, and instructs the whole creation to honour God 
Almighty. And if such an one teaches to love God, he will 
not hold virtue as a thing to be lost in any case, either awake 
or in a dream, or in any vision ; since the habit never goes 
out of itself by falling from being a habit. Whether, then, 
knowledge be said to be habit or disposition ; on account of 
diverse sentiments never obtaining access, the guiding faculty, 
remaining unaltered, admits no alteration of appearances by 
framing in dreams visionary conceptions out of its move- 
ments by day. Wherefore also the Lord enjoins “ to watch/’ 
so that our soul may never be perturbed with passion, even in 
dreams; but also to keep the life of the night pure and stain- 
less, as if spent in the day. For assimilation to God, as far 
as we can, is preserving the mind in its relation to the same 
things. And this is the relation of mind as mind. 

But the variety of disposition arises from inordinate affection 
to material things. And for this reason, as they appear to me, 
to have called night Enphrone; since then the soul, released 
from the perceptions of sense, turns in on itself, and has a 
truer hold of intelligence (c ppovrjcn 1 ;)} Wherefore the mys- 
teries are for the most part celebrated by night, indicating 
the withdrawal of the soul from the body, which takes place 
by night. “ Let us not then sleep, as do others ; but let us 
watch and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep in the night; 
and they that are drunken, are drunken in the night. But 
let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate 
of faith and love, and as an helmet the hope of salvation.”" 
And as to what, again, they say of sleep, the very same things 
are to be understood of death. For each exhibits the depar- 
ture of the soul, the one more, the other less ; as we may 
also get this in Heraclitus: “Man touches night in himself, 

1 Euplirone is plainly “ kindly, cheerful.” 2 1 Thcss. v. G-S. 

Book iv.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

205 

when dead and his light quenched ; and alive, when he sleeps 
he touches the dead ; and awake, when he shuts his eyes, he 
touches the sleeper.” 1 “ For blessed are those that have seen 
the Lord,” 2 according to the apostle ; “ for it is high time to 
awake out of sleep. For now is our salvation nearer than 
when we believed. The night is far spent, the day is at 
hand. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and 
put on the armour of light.” 3 By day and light lie designates 
figuratively the Son, and by the armour of light metaphori- 
cally the promises. 

So it is said that we ought to go washed to sacrifices and 
prayers, clean and bright ; and that this external adornment 
and purification are practised for a sign. Now purity is to 
think holy thoughts. Further, there is the image of baptism, 
which also was handed down to the poets from Moses as follows: 

“ And slie having drawn water, and wearing on her body clean clothes.” 4 

It is Penelope that is going to prayer : 

“ And Telemachus, 

Having washed his hands in the hoary sea, prayed to Athene.” 5 

It was a custom of the Jews to wash frequently after being 
in bed. It was then well said, 

“ Be pure, not by washing of water, but in the mind.” 

For sanctity, as I conceive it, is perfect pureness of mind, 
and deeds, and thoughts, and words too, and in its last 
decree sinlessness in dreams. 

And sufficient purification to a man, I reckon, is thorough 
and sure repentance. If, condemning ourselves for our former 
actions, we go forward, after these things taking thought, 0 and 
divesting our mind both of the things which please us through 
the senses, and of our former transgressions. 

If, then, we are to give the etymology of eVtcn-j^M;, know- 

1 As it stands in the text the passage is unintelligible, and has been 
variously amended successfully. 

2 Clement seems to have read Kvoiou for Koupou in Rom. xiii. 11. 

3 Rom. xiii. 11, 12. 4 Homer, Odyss. iv. 751, 7G0 ; xvii. 48, 58. 

5 Odyss. ii. 261. 6 Explaining psrctvoka etymologically. 

206 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

ledge, its signification is to be derived from ardent, placing ; 
for our soul, which was formerly borne, now in one way, 
now in another, it settles in objects. Similarly faith is to be 
explained etymologically, as the settling ( ' ardent ; ) of our soul 
respecting that which is. 

But we desire to learn about the man who is always and 
in all things righteous; who, neither dreading the penalty 
proceeding from the law, nor fearing to entertain hatred of 
evil in the case of those who live with him and who prosecute 
the injured, nor dreading danger at the hands of those who 
do wrong, remains righteous. For he who, on account of 
these considerations, abstains from anything wrong, is not 
voluntarily kind, but is good from fear. ' Even Epicurus 
says, that the man who in his estimation was wise, “ would 
not do wrong to any one for the sake of gain ; for he could 
not persuade himself that he would escape detection.” So 
that, if he knew he -would not be detected, he would, accord- 
ing to him, do evil. And such are the doctrines of darkness. 
If, too, one shall abstain from doing wrong from hope of the 
recompense given by God on account of righteous deeds, he 
is not on this supposition spontaneously good. For as fear 
makes that man just, so reward makes this one; or rather, 
makes him appear to be just. But with the hope after 
death — a good hope to the good, to the bad the reverse — 
not only they who follow after Barbarian wisdom, but also 
the Pythagoreans, are acquainted. For the latter also pro- 
posed hope as an end to those who philosophize. Whereas 
Socrates also, in the Phcedo, says “ that good souls depart 
hence with a good hope ; ” and again, denouncing the wicked, 
he sets against this the assertion, “For they live with an evil 
hope.” With him Heraclitus manifestly agrees in his dis- 
sertations concerning men : “ There awaits man after death 
what they neither hope nor think.” "Divinely, therefore, 
Paul writes expressly, “ Tribulation worketh patience, and 
patience experience, and experience hope ; and hope maketli 
not ashamed.” 1 For the patience is on account of the hope 
in the future. Now hope is synonymous with the recoin- 

1 Rom. v. 3-5. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

207 

pense and restitution of hope ; which maketh not ashamed, 
not being any more vilified. 

But he who obeys the mere call, as he is called, neither for 
fear, nor for enjoyments, is on his way to knowledge (yvco<?i<;). 
For he does not consider whether any extrinsic lucrative gain 
or enjoyment follows to him ; but drawn by the love of Him 
who is the true object of love, and led to what is requisite, 
practises piety. So that not even were we to suppose him to 
receive from God leave to do things forbidden with impu- 
nity ; not even if he were to get the promise that he would 
receive as a reward the good things of the blessed ; but be- 
sides, not even if he _ could persuade himself that God would 
be hoodwinked with reference to what he does (which is im- 
possible), would he ever wish to do aught contrary to right 
reason, having once made choice of what is truly good and 
worthy of choice on its own account, and therefore to be 
loved. For it is not in the food of the belly. that we have 
heard good to be situated. But he has heard that u meat 
will not commend us,” 1 nor marriage, nor abstinence from 
marriage in ignorance; but virtuous gnostic conduct. For 
the dog, which is an irrational animal, may be said to be 
continent, dreading as it does the uplifted stick, and there- 
fore keeping away from the meat. But let the predicted 
promise be taken away, and the threatened dread cancelled, 
and the impending danger removed, and the disposition of 
such people will be revealed. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED. 

For it is not suitable to the nature of the thing itself, that they 
should apprehend in the truly gnostic manner the truth, that 
all things which were created for our use are good; as, for 
example, marriage and procreation, when used in moderation ; 
and that it is better than good to become free of passion, and 
virtuous by assimilation to' the divine. But in the case of ex- 

1 1 Cor. viii. 8. 

208 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

ternal things, agreeable or disagreeable, from some they ab- 
stain, from others not. But in those things from which they 
abstain from disgust, they plainly find fault with the creature 
and the Creator ; and though in appearance they walk faith- 
fully, the opinion they maintain is impious. That command, 
u Thou shalt not lust, 5 ’ needs neither the necessity arising 
from fear, which compels to keep from things that are 
pleasant ; nor the reward, which by promise persuades to 
restrain the impulses of passion. 

And those who obey God through the promise, caught by 
the bait of pleasure, choose obedience not for the sake of 
the commandment, but for the sake of the promise. Nor 
will turning away from objects of sense, as a matter of neces- 
sary consequence, produce attachment to intellectual objects. 
On the contrary, the attachment to intellectual objects 
naturally becomes to the Gnostic an influence which draws 
away from the objects of sense ; inasmuch as he, in virtue of 
the selection of what is good, has chosen what is good accord- 
ing to knowledge (yvcoariKc 5?), admiring generation, and by 
sanctifying the Creator sanctifying assimilation to the divine. 
But I shall free myself from lust, let him say, O Lord, for 
the sake of alliance with Thee. For the economy of creation 
is good, and all things are well administered : nothing happens 
without a cause. I must be in what is Thine, O Omnipotent 
One. And if I am there, I am near Thee. And I would be 
free of fear that I may be able to draw near to Thee, and to 
be satisfied with little, practising Thy just choice between 
things wood and things like. 

o o o 

Eight mystically and sacredly the apostle, teaching us the 
choice which is truly gracious, not in the way of rejection of 
other things as bad, but so as to do things better than what is 
good, has spoken, saying, “ So he that giveth his virgin in 
marriage doeth well; and he that giveth her notdoeth better; 
as far as respects seemliness and undistracted attendance on 
the Lord.” 1 

Now we know that things which are difficult are not essen- 

O 

tial ; but that things which are essential have been graciously 

1 1 Cor. vii. 38, 35. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

209 

made easy of attainment by God. Wherefore Democritus 
well says, that nature and instruction ” are like each other. 
And we have briefly assigned the cause. For instruction har- 
monizes man, and by harmonizing makes him natural; and it 
is no matter whether one was made such as he is by nature, or 
transformed by time and education. The Lord has furnished 
both ; that which is by creation, and that which is by creating 
again and renewal through the covenant. And that is prefer- 
able which is advantageous to what is superior ; but what is 
superior to everything is mind. So, then, what is really good is 
seen to be most pleasant, and of itself produces the fruit which 
is desired — tranquillity of soul. u And he who hears me,” it is 
said, u shall rest in peace, confident, and shall be calm with- 
out fear of any evil.” 1 “ Lely with all thy heart and thy 

mind on God .” 2 

On this wise it is possible for the Gnostic already to have 
become God. “I said, Ye are gods, and sons of the Highest .” 3 
And Empedocles says that the souls of the wise become gods, 
writing as follows : 

“ At last prophets, minstrels, and physicians, 

And the foremost among mortal men, approach ; 

Whence spring gods supreme in honours.” 

Man, then, generically considered, is formed in accordance 
with the idea of the connate spirit. For he is not created 
formless and shapeless in the workshop of nature, where 
mystically the production of man is accomplished, both art 
and essence being common. But the individual man is 
stamped according to the impression produced in the soul 
by the objects of his choice. Thus we say that Adam was 
perfect, as far as respects his formation ; for none of the 
distinctive characteristics of the idea and form of man were 
wanting to him ; but in the act of coming into being he 
received perfection. And he was justified by obedience; this 
was reaching manhood, as far as depended on him. And 
the cause lay in his choosing, and especially in his choosing 
what was forbidden. God was not the cause. 

For production is twofold — of things procreated, and of 
1 Prov. i. 33. 2 Prov. iii. 5. 3 Ps. lxxxii. 6. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

O 

210 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

things that grow. And manliness in man, who is subject 
to perturbation, as they say, makes him who partakes of it 
essentially fearless and invincible ; and anger is the mind’s 
satellite in patience, and endurance, and the like ; and self- 
constraint and salutary sense are set over desire. But God 
is impassible, free of auger, destitute of desire. And He is 
not free of fear, in the sense of avoiding what is terrible ; 
or temperate, in the sense of having command of desires. 
For neither can the nature of God fall in with anything 
terrible, nor does God flee fear; just as He will not feel 
desire, so as to rule over desires. Accordingly that Pytha- 
gorean saying was mystically uttered respecting us, u that man 
ought to become one for the high priest himself is one, 
God being one in the immutable state of the perpetual flow 1 
of good things. Now the Saviour has taken away wrath in 
and with lust, wrath being lust of vengeance. For universally 
liability to feeling belongs to every kind of desire ; and man, 
when deified purely into a passionless state, becomes a unit. 
As, then, those, who at sea are held by an anchor, pull at 
the anchor, but do not drag it to them, but drag themselves 
to the anchor ; so those who, according to the gnostic life, 
draw God towards them, imperceptibly bring themselves to 
' God: for he who reverences God, reverences himself. In 
the contemplative life, then, one in worshipping God attends 
to himself, and through his own spotless purification beholds 
the holy God holily ; for self-control, being present, surveying 
and contemplating itself uninterruptedly, is as far as possible 
assimilated to God. 

CHAPTER XXI Y. 

THE REASON AND END OF DIVINE PUNISHMENTS. 

Now that is in our power, of which equally with its opposite 
we are masters, — as, say, to philosophize or not, to believe 
or disbelieve. In consequence, then, of our being equally 
masters of each of the opposites, what depends on us is found 

1 Quv . . . ©soV* 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

211 

possible. Now the commandments may be done or not done 
by us, who, as is reasonable, are liable to praise and blame. 
And those, again, who are punished on account of sins com- 
mitted by them, are punished for them alone ; for what is 
done is past, and what is done can never be undone. The 
sins committed before faith are accordingly forgiven by the / 
Lord, not that they may be undone, but as if they had not 
been done. “ But. not all,” says Basilides, u but only sins in- 
voluntary and in ignorance, are forgiven;” as would be the 
case were it a man, and not God, that conferred such a boon. 
To such an one Scripture says, “Thou thoughtest that I 
would be like thee .” 1 But if we are punished for volun- 
tary sins, we are punished not that the sins which are done 
may be undone, but because they were done. But punish- 
ment does not avail to him who has sinned, to undo his sin, 
but that he may sin no more, and that no one else fall into 
the like. Therefore the good God corrects for these three 
causes : First, that he who is corrected may become better 
than his former self ; then that those who are capable of 
being saved by examples may be driven back, being admo- 
nished ; and thirdly, that he who is injured, may not be 
readily despised, and be apt to receive injury. And there 
are two methods of correction — the instructive and the puni- , 
tive, which we have called the disciplinary. It ought to be 
known, then, that those who fall into sin after baptism 2 are 
those who are subjected to discipline ; for the deeds done 
before are remitted, and those done after are purged. It is 
in reference to the unbelieving that it is said, u that they are 
reckoned as the chaff which the wind drives from the face of 
the earth, and the drop which falls from a vessel .” 3 

1 Ps. ]. 21. 2 Aovrpcv. 3 Ps. i. 4 ; Isa. xl. 15. 

212 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

TRUE PERFECTION CONSISTS IN THE KNOWLEDGE AND LOVE 

OF GOD. 

u Happy he who possesses the culture of knowledge, and is 
not moved to the injury of the citizens or to wrong actions, 
hut contemplates the undecaying order of immortal nature, 
how and in what way and manner it subsists. To such the 
practice of base deeds attaches not.” Rightly, then, Plato 
says, u that the man who devotes himself to the contemplation 
of ideas will live as a god among men ; now the mind is the 
place of ideas, and God is mind.” He says that he who com 'sj 
templates the unseen God lives as a god among men. And 
in the Sophist , Socrates calls the stranger of Elea, who was a 
dialectician, u god :” “ Such are the gods who, like stranger 
guests, frequent cities. For when the soul, rising above the 
sphere of generation, is by itself apart, and dwells amidst 
ideas,” like the Coryphaeus in Theaetetus, now become as an 
angel, it will be with Christ, being rapt in contemplation, 
ever keeping in view the will of God ; in reality 
“ Alone wise, while these flit like shadows.” 1 

a F or the dead bury their dead.” Whence Jeremiah says : 
a I will fill it with the earth-born dead whom mine an<rer has 

O 

smitten.” 

God, then, being not a subject for demonstration, cannot 
be the object of science. But the Son is wisdom, and know- 
ledge, and truth, and all else that has affinity thereto. He 
is also susceptible of demonstration and of description. And 
all the powers of the Spirit, becoming collectively one thing, 
terminate in the same point — that is, in the Son. But He 
is incapable of being declared, in respect of the idea of each 
one of His powers. And the Son is neither simply one thing 
as one thing, nor many things as parts, but one thing as all 
things; whence also He is all things. For He is the circle of 
all powers rolled and united into one unity. Wherefore the 
Word is called the Alpha and the Omega, of whom alone the 
1 Horn. Odyss. 2 Jer. xxxiii. 5. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

218 

end becomes beginning, and ends again at the original begin- 
ning without any break. Wherefore also to believe in Him, 
and by Him, is to become a unit, being indissolubly united in 
Him ; and to disbelieve is to be separated, disjoined, divided. 

11 Wherefore thus saith the Lord, Every alien son is un- 
circumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh” (that is, 
unclean in body and soul) : u there shall not enter one of 
the strangers into the midst of the house of Israel, but the 
Levites .” 1 He calls those that would not believe, but would 
disbelieve, strangers. Only those who live purely being true 
priests of God. Wherefore, of all the circumcised tribes, 
those anointed to be high priests, and kings, and prophets, 
were reckoned more holy. Whence He commands them 
not to touch dead bodies, or approach the dead ; not that 
the body was polluted, but that sin and disobedience were 
incarnate, and embodied, and dead, and therefore abomin- 
able. It was only, then, when a father and mother, a son 
and daughter died, that the priest was allowed to enter, 
because these were related only by flesh and seed, to whom 
the priest was indebted for the immediate cause of his en- 
trance into life. And they purify themselves seven days, 
the period in which Creation was consummated. For on 
the seventh day the rest is celebrated ; and on the eighth he 
brings a propitiation, as is written in Ezekiel, according to 
which propitiation the promise is to be received . 2 And the 
perfect propitiation, I take it, is that propitious faith in the 
gospel which is by the law and the prophets, and the purity 
which shows itself in universal obedience, with the abandon- 
ment of the things of the world; in order to that grateful sur- 
render of the tabernacle, which results from the enjoyment of 
the soul. Whether, then, the time be that which through the 
seven periods enumerated returns to the chiefest rest , 3 or the 
seven heavens, which some reckon one above the other ; or 
whether also the fixed sphere which borders on the intellec- 
tual world be called the eighth, the expression denotes that 
the Gnostic ought to rise out of the sphere of creation and 
of sin. After these seven days, sacrifices are offered for sins. 

1 Ezek. xliv. 9, 10. 2 Ezek. xliv. 27. 3 The jubilee. 

214 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

For there is still fear of change, and it touches the seventh 
circle. The righteous Job says : “ Naked came I out of my 
mother’s womb, and naked shall I return there ;’ 51 not naked 
of possessions, for that were a trivial and common thing ; but, 
as a just man, he departs naked of evil and sin, and of the 
unsightly shape which follows those who have led bad lives. 
For this was what was said, “ Unless ye be converted, and 
become as children,” 2 pure in flesh, holy in soul by abstinence 
from evil deeds ; showing that He would have us to be such as 
also He generated us fi’om our mother — the water. 3 For the 
intent of one generation succeeding another is to immortalize 
by progress. a But the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.” 4 
That purity in body and soul which the Gnostic partakes of, 
the all-wise Moses indicated, by employing repetition in de- 
scribing the incorruptibility of body and of soul in the person 
of Rebecca, thus : “ Now the virgin was fair, and man had 
not known her.” J And Rebecca, interpreted, means “glory 
of God;” and the glory of God is immortality. This is in 
reality righteousness, not to desire other things, but to be 
entirely the consecrated temple of the Lord. Righteousness 
is peace of life and a well-conditioned state, to which the 
Lord dismissed her when Pie said, “ Depart into peace.” G 
For Salem is, by interpretation, peace ; of which our Saviour 
is enrolled King, as Moses says, Melchizedek king of Salem, 
priest of the most high God, who gave bread and wine, fur- 
nishing consecrated food for a type of the Eucharist. And 
Melchizedek is interpreted “righteous king;” and the name 
is a synonym for righteousness and peace. Basilides, how- 
ever, supposes that Righteousness and her daughter Peace 
dwell stationed in the eighth sphere. 

But we must pass from physics to ethics, which are clearer; 
for the discourse concerning these will follow after the treatise 
in hand. The Saviour Himself, then, plainly initiates us into 
the mysteries, according to the words of the tragedy : 4 
“ Seeing those who see, lie also gives the orgies.” 

1 Job i. 21. 2 Matt, xviii. 3. 

4 Job xxi. 10. 5 Gen. xxiv. 1G. 

7 Eurip. Bacchx , 4G5, etc. 

3 i.c. Baptism. 
c Mark v. 34. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

215 

Book iv.] 

And if you ask, 

“ These orgies, what is their nature ? ” 

You will hear again : 

“ It is forbidden to moi’tals uninitiated in the Bacchic rites to know.” 

And if any one will inquire curiously what they are, let him 
hear : 

“ It is not lawful for thee to hear, but they are worth knowing ; 

The rites of the God detest him who practises impiety.” 

Now God, who is without beginning, is the perfect beginning 
of the universe, and the producer of the beginning. As, 
then, lie is being, He is the first principle of the department 
of action, as He is good, of morals; as He is mind, on the 
other hand, He is the first principle of reasoning and of judg- 
ment. Whence also He alone is Teacher, who is the only Son 
of the Most High Father, the Instructor of men. 

CHAPTER XXYI. 

HOW TIIE rERFECT MAN TREATS THE BODY AND THE 
THINGS OF THE WORLD. 

Those, then, who run down created existence and vilify the 
body are wrong; not considering that the frame of man was 
formed erect for the contemplation of heaven, and that the 
organization of the senses tends to knowledge ; and that the 
members and parts are arranged for good, not for pleasure. 
Whence this abode becomes receptive of the soul which is most 
precious to God; and is dignified with the Holy Spirit through 
the sanctification of soul and body, perfected with the perfec- 
tion of the Saviour. And the succession of the three virtues 
is found in the Gnostic, who morally, physically, and logically 
occupies himself with God. For wisdom is the knowledge of 
things divine and human ; and righteousness is the concord 
of the parts of the soul ; and holiness is the service of God. 
But if one were to say that he disparaged the flesh, and gene- 
ration on account of it, by quoting Isaiah, who says, “ All 
flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass : 

216 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

the grass is withered, and the flower has fallen ; but the 
word of the Lord endureth for ever ;” 1 let him hear the 
Spirit interpreting the matter in question by Jeremiah, “ And 
I scattered them like dry sticks, that are made to fly by the 
wind into the desert. This is the lot and portion of your 
disobedience, saith the Lord. As thou hast forgotten me, 
and hast trusted in lies, so will I discover thy hinder parts 
to thy face; and thy disgrace shall be seen, thy adultery, 
and thy neighing,” and so on . 2 For “ the flower of grass,” 
and u walking after the flesh,” and u being carnal,” accord- 
ing to the apostle, are those who are in their sins. The soul 
of man is confessedly the better part of man, and the body 
the inferior. But neither is the soul good by nature, nor, on 
the other hand, is the body bad by nature. Nor is that 
which is not good straightway bad. For there are things 
which occupy a middle place, and among them are things to 
be preferred, and things to be rejected. The constitution of 
man, then, which has its place among things of sense, was 
necessarily composed of things diverse, but not opposite — 
body and soul. 

Always therefore the good actions, as better, attach to the 
better and ruling spirit; and voluptuous and sinful actions 
are attributed to the worse, the sinful one. 

Now the soul of the wise man and Gnostic, as sojourning 
in the body, conducts itself towards it gravely and respect- 
fully, not with inordinate affections, as about to leave the 
tabernacle if the time of departure summon. “ I am a stranger 
in the earth, and a sojourner with you,” it is said . 3 And 
hence Basilides says, that he apprehends that the election 
are strangers to the world, being supramundane by nature. 
But this is not the case. For all things are of one God. 
And no one is a stranger to the world by nature, their essence 
being one, and God one. But the elect man dwells as a 
sojourner, knowing all things to be possessed and disposed 
of ; and he makes use of the things which the Pythagoreans 
make out to be the threefold good things. The body, too, as 
one sent on a distant pilgrimage, uses inns and dwellings by 

1 Isa. xl. 6-8. 2 Jer. xiii. 24-27. 3 Gen. xxiii. 4 ; Ps. xxxviii. 13. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

217 

the way, having care of the things of the world, of the places 
where he halts; but leaving his dwelling-place and property 
without excessive emotion ; readily following him that leads 
him away from life ; by no means and on no occasion turning 
back ; giving thanks for his sojourn, and blessing [God] for 
his departure, embracing the mansion that is in heaven. “For 
we know, that, if the earthly house of our tabernacle be dis- 
solved, we have a building of God, an house not made with 
hands, eternal in the heavens. For we that are in this taber- 
nacle do groan, desiring to be clothed upon with our house 
which is from heaven : if so be that being clothed we shall 
not be found naked. For we walk by faith, not by sight,” 1 
as the apostle says ; “ and we are willing rather to be absent 
from the body, and present with God.” The rather is in 
comparison. And comparison obtains in the case of things 
that fall under resemblance ; as the more valiant man is 
more valiant among the valiant, and most valiant among 
cowards. Whence he adds, “ Wherefore we strive, whether 
present or absent, to be accepted with' Him,” 2 that is, God, 
whose work and creation are all things, both the world and 
things supramundane. I admire Epicharmus, who clearly says : 

“ Endowed with pious mind, you will not, in dying, 

Suffer aught evil. The spirit will dwell in heaven above 

and the minstrel 3 who sings : 

“ The souls of the wicked flit about below the skies on earth, 

In murderous pains beneath inevitable yokes of evils ; 

But those of the pious dwell in the heavens, 

Hymning in songs the Great, the Blessed One.” 

The soul is not then sent down from heaven to what is worse. 
For God works all things up to what is better. But the soul 
which has chosen the best life — the life that is from God and 
righteousness — exchanges earth for heaven. With reason 
therefore, Job, who had attained to knowledge, said, “ Now 
I know that Thou canst do all things ; and nothing is im- 
possible to Thee. For who tells me of what I know not, 

1 2 Cor. v. 1, 2, 3, 7. 2 2 Cor. v. 8. 

3 Pindar, according to Theodoret. 

218 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book iv. 

great and wonderful things with which I was unacquainted? 
And I felt myself vile, considering myself to be earth and 
ashes.” 1 For he who, being in a state of ignorance, is sin- 
ful, “ is earth and ashes ; ” while he who is in a state of 
knowledge, being assimilated as far as possible to God, is 
already spiritual, and so elect. And that Scripture calls the 
senseless and disobedient “earth,” will be made clear by Jere- 
miah the prophet, saying, in reference to Joachim and his 
brethren, “ Earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord ; Write 
this man, as man excommunicated.” 2 And another prophet 
says again, “Hear, O heaven; and give ear, O earth ,” 3 calling 
understanding “ear,” and the soul of the Gnostic, that of the 
man who has applied himself to the contemplation of heaven 
and divine things, and in this way has become an Israelite, 
“heaven.” For again he calls him who has made ignorance 
and hardness of heart his choice, “earth.” And the expres- 
sion “give ear” he derives from the “organs of hearing,” 
“ the ears,” attributing carnal things to those who cleave to 
the things of sense. Such are they of whom Micah the pro- 
phet says, “ Hear the word of the Lord, ye peoples who dwell 
with pangs .” 4 And Abraham said, “By no means. The 
Lord is He who judgeth the earth ; ” 5 “ since he that be- 
lieveth not, is,” according to the utterance of the Saviour, 
“condemned already .” 0 And there is written in the Kings 7 
the judgment and sentence of the Lord, which stands thus : 
“ The Lord hears the righteous, but the wicked He saveth 
not, because they do not desire to know God.” For the 
Almighty will not accomplish what is absurd. What do the 
heresies say to this utterance, seeing Scripture proclaims the 
Almighty God to be good, and not the author of evil and 
wrong, if indeed ignorance arises from one not knowing ? 
But God does nothing absurd. “ For this God,” it is said, 
“ is our God, and there is none to save besides Him.” 8 “ For 
there is no unrighteousness with God ,” 9 according to the 

1 Job xlii. 2, 3, G. 2 Jer. xxii. 29, 30. 3 Isa. i. 2. 

4 Mic. i. 2, where, however, the concluding words arc not found. 

5 Gen. xviii. 25. c John iii. 18. 7 Where ? 

8 Isa. xlv. 21. 0 Rom. ix. 14. 

Book iv.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

219 

apostle. And clearly yet the prophet teaches the will of God, 
and the gnostic proficiency, in these words : “ And now, Israel, 
what doth the Lord God require of thee, but to fear the Lord 
thy God, and walk in all His ways, and love Him, and serve 
Him alone ? ” 1 He asks of thee, who hast the power of choos- 
ing salvation. What is it, then, that the Pythagoreans mean 
when they bid us “pray with the voice?” As seems to me, 
not that they thought the Divinity could not hear those who 
speak silently, but because they wished prayers to be right, 
which no one would be ashamed to make in the knowledge 
of many. We shall, however, treat of prayer in due course 
by and by. But we ought tojiave works that cry aloud, as 
becoming “ those who walk in the day.” 3 “ Let thy works 

shine ,” 3 and behold a man and his works before his face. 
“For behold God and His works .” 4 For the gnostic must, 
as far as is possible, imitate God. And the poets call the 
elect in their pages godlike and gods, and equal to the gods, 
and equal in sagacity to Zeus, and having counsels like the 
gods, and resembling the gods, — nibbling, as seems to me, 
at the expression, “ in the image and likeness.” 5 

Euripides accordingly says, “ Golden wings are round my 
back, and I am shod with the winged sandals of the Sirens ; 
and I shall go aloft into the wide ether, to hold converse with 
Zeus.” 

But I shall pray the Spirit of Christ to wing me to my 
Jerusalem. For the Stoics say that heaven is properly a 
city, but places here on earth are not cities ; for they are 
called so, but are not. For a city is an important thing, and 
the people a decorous body, and a multitude of men regulated 
by law as the church by the word — a city on earth impreg- 
nable — free from tyranny ; a product of the divine will on 
earth as in heaven. Images of this city the poets create 
with their pen. For the Hyperboreans, and the Arimaspian 
cities, and the Elysian plains, are commonwealths of just men. 
And we know Plato’s city placed as a pattern in heaven. 

1 Deut. x. 12. 2 Rom. xiii. 13. 3 Matt. v. 16. 

4 Isa. lxii. 11. 5 Gen. i. 26. 

BOOK V. 

CHAPTER I. 

ON FAITH. 

F the gnostic so much has been cursorily, as it 
were, written. We proceed now to the sequel, 
and must again contemplate faith ; for there 
are some that draw the distinction, that faith has 
reference to the Son, and knowledge to the Spirit. But it 
has escaped their notice that, in order to believe truly in the 
Son, we must believe that He is the Son, and that He came, 
and how, and for what, and respecting His passion ; and we 
must know who is the Son of God. Now neitheivis know- 
ledge without faith, nor faith without knowledge. Nor is 
the Father without the Son ; for the Son is with the Father. 
And the Son is'the true teacher respecting the Father ; and 
that we may believe in the Son, we must know the Father, 
with whom also is the Son. Again, in order that we may 
know the Father, we must believe in the Son, that it is the 
Son of God who teaches ; for from faith to knowledge by 
the Son is the Father. And the knowledge of the Son and 
Father, which is according to the gnostic rule — that which 
in reality is gnostic — is the attainment and comprehension of 
the truth by the truth. 

We, then, are those who are believers in what is not 
believed, and who are gnostics as to what is unknown ; that 
is, gnostics as to what is unknown and disbelieved by all, but 
believed and known by a few ; and gnostics, not describing 
actions by speech, but gnostics in the exercise of contem- 

220 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

221 

plation. Happy is he who speaks in the ears of the hearing. 
Now Faith is the ear of the souk And such the Lord inti- 
mates faith to be, when He says, “He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear;” 1 so that by believing he may compre- 
hend what He says, as He says it. Homer, too, the oldest 
of the poets, using the word “ hear ” instead of “ perceive ” 
— the specific for the generic term — writes : 

“ Him most they heard.” 2 

For, in fine, the agreement and harmony of the faith of 
both 8 contribute to one end — salvation. We have in the 
apostle an unerring witness: “For I desire to see you, that 
I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, in order that ye 
may be strengthened ; that is, that I may be comforted in 
you, by -the mutual faith of you and me.” 4 And further on 
again he adds, “ The righteousness of God is revealed from 
faith to faith.” 5 The apostle, then, manifestly announces a 
double faith, or rather one which admits of growth and per- 
fection ; for the common faith lies beneath as a foundation. 
To those, therefore, who desire to be healed, and are moved 
by faith, He added, “Thy faith hath saved thee.” G But 
that which is excellently built upon is consummated in the 
believer, and is again perfected by the faith which results 
from instruction and the word, in order to the performance 
of the commandments. Such were the apostles, in whose 
case it is said that “ faith removed mountains and trans- 
planted trees.” 7 Whence, perceiving the greatness of its 
power, they asked “ that faith might be added to them s a 
faith which salutarily bites the soil “ like a grain of mustard,” 
and grows magnificently in it, to such a degree that the reasons 
of things sublime rest on it. For if one by nature knows 
God, as Basilides thinks, who calls intelligence of a superior 
order at once faith and kingship, and a creation worthy of the 
essence of the Creator ; and explains that near Him exists 

1 Matt. xi. 15. 2 Odijss. vi. 186. 3 Teacher and scholar. 

4 Rom. i. 11, 12. 5 Rom. i. 17. 6 Matt. ix. 22. 

7 Matt. xvii. 20 ; Luke xvii. 6 ; 1 Cor. xiii. 2. 

8 Luke xvii. 5. 

222 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

not power, but essence ancl nature and substance ; and says 
that faith is not the rational assent of the soul exercising 
free-will, but an undefined beauty, belonging immediately to 
the creature ; — the precepts both of the Old and of the New 
Testament are, then, superfluous, if one is saved by nature, 
as Valentinus would have it, and is a believer and an elect 
man by nature, as Basilides thinks ; and nature would have 
been able, one time or other, to have shone forth, apart 
from the Saviour’s appearance. But wei*e they to say that 
the visit of the Saviour was necessary, then the properties 
of nature are gone from them, the elect being saved by 
instruction, and purification, and the doing of good works. 
Abraham, accordingly, who through hearing believed the 
voice, which promised under the oak in Mamre, “ I will give 
this land to thee, and to thy seed,” was either elect or not. 
But if he was not, how did he straightway believe, as it 
were naturally? And if he was elect, their hypothesis is 
done away with, inasmuch as even previous to the coming 
of the Lord an election was found, and that saved : u For it 
was reckoned to him for righteousness.” 1 For if any one, 
following Marcion, should dare to say that the Creator 
(jdrjfuovpyov) saved the man that believed on him, even 
before the advent of the Lord, (the election being saved with 
their own proper salvation); the power of the good Being 
will be eclipsed; inasmuch as late only, and subsequent to the 
Creator spoken of by them in words of good omen, it made 
the attempt to save, and by his instruction, and in imitation 
of him. But if, being such, the good Being save, according 
to them; neither is it his own that he saves, nor is it with the 
consent of him who formed the creation that he essays salva- 
tion, but by force or fraud. And how can he any more be 
good, acting thus, and being posterior ? But if the locality 
is different, and the dwelling-place of the Omnipotent is 
remote from the dwelling-place of the good God; yet the 
will of him who saves, having been the first to begin, is not 
inferior to that of the good God. From what has been 
previously proved, those who believe not are proved sense- 
1 Gen. xv. 6 ; Rom. iv. 3. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

22 3 

less: “For their paths are perverted, and they know not 
peace,” saitli the prophet . 1 “ But foolish and unlearned 
questions ” the divine Paul exhorted to “ avoid, because they 
gender strifes.” 2 And HSschylus exclaims : 

“ In what profits not, labour not in vain.” 

For that investigation, which accords with faith, which builds, 
on the foundation of faith, the august knowledge of the 
truth, we know to be the best. Now w T e know that neither 
things which are clear are made subjects of investigation, 
such as if it is day, while it is day ; nor things unknown, and 
never destined to become clear, as whether the stars are even 
or odd in number ; nor things convertible ; and those are so 
which can be said equally by those who take the opposite side, 
as if what is in the womb is a living creature or not. A fourth 
mode is, when, from either side of those, there is advanced 
an unanswerable and irrefragable argument. If, then, the 
ground of inquiry, according to all of these modes, is re- 
moved, faith is established. For we advance to them the 
unanswerable consideration, that it is God who speaks and 
comes to our help in writing, respecting each one of the 
points regarding which I investigate. Who, then, is so im- 
pious as to disbelieve God, and to demand proofs from God 
as from men ? Again, some questions demand the evidence 
of the senses, as if one were to ask whether the fire be warm, 
or the snow white ; and some admonition and rebuke, as the 
question if you ought to honour your parents. And there are 
those that deserve punishment, as to ask proofs of the exist- 
ence of Providence. There being then a Providence, it were 
impious to think that the whole of prophecy and the economy 
in reference to a Saviour did not take place in accordance 
with Providence. And perchance one should not even 
attempt to demonstrate such points, the divine Providence 
being evident from the sight of all its skilful and wise works 
which are seen, some of which take place in order, and some 
appear in order. And He who communicated to us being 
and life, has communicated to us also reason, wishing us to 
1 Isa. lix. 8. 2 2 Tim. ii. 23. 

224 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

live rationally and rightly. For the Word of the Father of 
the universe is not the uttered word (A,oyo? 7 rpocfropucos), 
but the wisdom and most manifest kindness of God, and His 
power too, which is almighty and truly divine, and not in- 
capable of being conceived by those who do not confess — the 
all-potent will. But since some are unbelieving, and some 
are disputatious, all do not attain to the perfection of the 
good. For neither is it possible to attain it without the exer- 
cise of free choice ; nor does the whole depend on our own 
purpose ; as, for example, what is destined to happen. “ For 
by grace we are saved not, indeed, without good works ; 
but we must, by being formed for what is good, acquire an 
inclination for it. And we must possess the healthy mind 
which is fixed on the pursuit of the good ; in order to which 
we have the greatest need of divine grace, and of right 
teaching, and of holy susceptibility, and of the drawing of 
the Father to Him. For, bound in this earthly body, we 
apprehend the objects of sense by means of the body; but 
we grasp intellectual objects by means of the logical faculty 
itself. But if one expect to apprehend all things by the 
senses, he has fallen far from the truth. Spiritually, there- 
fore, the apostle writes respecting the knowledge of God, 

“ For now we see as through a glass, but then face to face.” 1 
For the vision of the truth is given but to few. Accord- 
ingly, Plato says in the Epinomis, 11 1 do not say that it is 
possible for all to be blessed and happy ; only a few. Whilst 
we live, I pronounce this to be the case. But there is a 
good hope that after death I shall attain all.” To the same 
effect is what we find in Moses : t( No man shall see my 
face, and live.” 2 For it is evident that no one during the ^ 
period of life has been able to apprehend God clearly. But 
“ the pure in heart shall see God,” 3 when they arrive at the 
final perfection. For since the soul became too enfeebled for 
the apprehension of realities, we needed a divine teacher. 
The Saviour is sent down — a teacher and leader in the 
acquisition of the good — the secret and sacred token of the 
great Providence. “ Where, then, is the scribe? where is 
1 1 Cor. xiii. 12. 2 Ex. xxxiii. 20. 3 Matt. v. 8. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

225 

the searcher of this world ? Hath not God made foolish 
the wisdom of this world? ” 1 it is said. And again, u I will 
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the 
understanding of the prudent,” 2 plainly of those wise in their 
own eyes, and disputatious. Excellently therefoi’e Jeremiah 
says, u Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the ways, and ask for 
the eternal paths, what is the good way, and walk in it, and ye 
shall find expiation for your souls.” 3 Ask, he says, and inquire 
of those who know, without contention and dispute. And 
on learning the way of truth, let us walk on the right way, 
without turning till we attain to what we desire. It was 
therefore with reason that the king of the Romans (his name 
was Numa), being a Pythagorean, first of all men, erected a 
temple to Faith and Peace. “ And to Abraham, on believing, 
righteousness was reckoned .” 4 He, prosecuting the loft} 7- 
philosophy of aerial phenomena, and the sublime philosophy 
of the movements in the heavens, was called Abram, which 
is interpreted “ sublime father .” 5 But afterwards, on look- 
ing up to heaven, whether it was that he saw the Son in the 
spirit, as some explain, or a glorious angel, or in any other 
way recognised God to be superior to the creation, and all 
the order in it, he receives in addition the Alpha, the know- 
ledge of the one and only God, and is called Abraam, having, 
instead of a natural philosopher, become wise, and a lover of 
God. For it is interpreted, “elect father of sound.” For 
by sound is the uttered word : the mind is its father ; and the 
mind of the good man is elect. I cannot forbear praising 
exceedingly the poet of Agrigentum, who celebrates faith as 
follows : 

“ Friends, I know, then, that there is truth in the myths 
Which I will relate. But very difficult to men, 

And irksome to the mind, is the attempt of faith.” 6 

Wherefore also the apostle exhorts, “ that your faith should 
not be in the wisdom of men,” who profess to persuade, “ but 

i 1 Cor. i. 20. 2 1 Cor. i. 19. 

3 Jer. vi. 16. 4 Rom. iv. 3, 5, 9, 22. 

5 Philo Judaeus, De Alrahame, p. 413, vol. ii. Bohn. 

c Empedocles. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

* 

P 

226 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

in the power of God /’ 1 which alone without proofs, by mere 
faith, is able to save. “ For the most approved of those that 
are reputable knows how to keep watch. And justice will 
apprehend the forgers and witnesses of lies,” says the Ephe- 
sian . 2 For he, having derived his knowledge from the bar- 
barian philosophy,' is acquainted with the purification by fire 
of those who have led bad lives, which the Stoics afterwards 
called the Conflagration ( etarvpwai’i ), in which also they 
teach that each will arise exactly as he was, so treating 
of the resurrection ; while Plato says as follows, that the 
earth at certain periods is purified by fire and water : 
“ There have been many destructions of men in many 
ways ; and there shall be very great ones by fire and water ; 
and others briefer by innumerable causes.” And after a 
little he adds : “ And, in truth, there is a change of the 
objects which revolve about earth and heaven ; and in the 
course of long periods there is the destruction of the objects 
on earth by a great conflagration.” Then he subjoins re- 
specting the deluge : “ But when, again, the gods deluge the 
earth to purify it with water, those on the mountains, herds- 
men and shepherds, are saved ; those in your cities are carried 
down by the rivers into the sea.” And we showed in the 
first Miscellany that the philosophers of the Greeks ai’e called 
thieves, inasmuch as they have taken without acknowledg- 
ment their principal dogmas from Moses and the prophets. 
To which also we shall add, that the angels who had obtained 
the superior rank, having sunk into pleasures, told to the 
women the secrets which had come to their knowledge ; while 
the rest of the angels concealed them, or rather, kept them 
asainst the coming of the Lord. Thence emanated the 
"doctrine of providence, and the revelation of high things; 
and prophecy having already been imparted to the philoso- 
phers of the Greeks, the treatment of dogma ai'ose among 
the philosophers, sometimes true when they hit the mark, and 
sometimes erroneous, when they comprehended not the secret 
of the prophetic allegory. And this it is proposed briefly to 
indicate in running over the points requiring mention. Faith, 
1 1 Cor. ii. 5. 2 Heraclitus. 

Book v.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

227 

then, we say, we are to show must not be inert and alone, 
but accompanied with investigation. For I do not say that 
we are not to inquire at all. For “ Search, and thou slialt 
find,” 1 it is said. 

“ What is sought may be captured, 

But what is neglected escapes,” 

according to Sophocles. 

The like also says Menander the comic poet : 

“ All things sought, 

The wisest say, need anxious thought.” 

But we ought to direct the visual faculty of the soul aright 
to discovery, and to clear away obstacles ; and to cast clean 
away contention, and envy, and strife, destined to perish 
miserably from among men. 

For very beautifully does Timon of Phlius write : 

“ And Strife, the Plague of Mortals, stalks vainly shrieking, 

The sister of Murderous Quarrel and Discord, 

Which rolls blindly over all things. But then 

It sets its head towards men, and casts them on hope.” 

Then a little below he adds : 

“For who hath set these to fight in deadly strife ? 

A rabble keeping pace with Echo ; for, enraged at those silent, 

It raised an evil disease against men, and many perished 

of the speech which denies what is false, and of the dilemma, 
of that which is concealed, of the Sorites, and of the Croco- 
dilean, of that which is open, and of ambiguities and sophisms. 
To inquire, then, respecting God, if it tend not to strife, 
but to discovery, is salutary. For it is written in David, 
“ The poor eat, and shall be filled ; and they shall praise the 
Lord that seek Him. Your heart shall live for ever.” 2 For 
they who seek Him after the true search, praising the Lord, 
shall be filled with the gift that comes from God, that is, 
knowledge. And their soul shall live ; for the soul is figura- 
tively termed the heart, which ministers life : for by the Son 
is the Father known. 

We ought not to surrender our ears to all who speak and 
1 Matt. vii. 7. 2 Ps. xxii. 6. 

2 28 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

write rashly. For cups also, which are taken hold of by many 
by the ears, are dirtied, and lose the ears ; and besides, when 
they fall they are broken. In the same way also, those, who 
have polluted the pure hearing of faith by many trifles, at last 
becoming deaf to the truth, become useless and fall to the 
earth. It is not, then, without reason that we commanded 
boys to kiss their relations, holding them by the ears ; in- 
dicating this, that the feeling of love is engendered by hear- 
ing. And u God,” who is known to those who love, u is 
love,” 1 as God,” who by instruction is communicated to 
the faithful, “ is faithful ; ” 2 and we must be allied to Him 
by divine love : so that by like we may see like, hearing the 
word of truth guilelessly and pui'ely, as children who obey us. 
And this was what he, whoever he was, indicated who wi’ote 
on the entrance to the temple at Epidaurus the inscription : 

u Pure he must be who goes within 
The incense-perfumed fane.” 

And purity is “ to think holy thoughts.” u Except ye be- 
come as these little children, ye shall not enter,” it is said, 
“into the kingdom of heaven.” 3 For there the temple of 
God is seen established on three foundations — faith, hope, 
and love. 

CHAPTER II. 

ON HOPE. 

Respecting faith we have adduced sufficient testimonies of 
writings among the Greeks. But in order not to exceed 
bounds, through eagerness to collect a very great many also 
respecting hope and love, suffice it merely to say that in the 
Crito Socrates, who prefers a good life and death to life itself, 
thinks that we have hope of another life after death. 

Also in the Phccdrus he says, u That only when in a 
separate state can the soul become partaker of the wisdom 
which is true, and surpasses human power ; and when, having 
reached the end of hope by philosophic love, desire shall 
1 1 John iv. 1C. 2 1 Cor. i. 9, x. 13. s Matt, xviii. 3. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

220 

waft ic to heaven, then,” says he, u does it receive the 
commencement of another, an immortal life.” And in the 
Symposium he says, “ That there is instilled into all the 
natural love of generating what is like, and in men of generat- 
ing men alone, and in the good man of the generation of the 
counterpart of himself. But it is impossible for the good 
man to do this without possessing the perfect virtues, in 
which he will train the youth who have recourse to him.” 
And as he says in the Thecetetas, “ He will beget and finish 
men. For some procreate by the body, others by the soul ; ” 
since also with the barbarian philosophers to teach and en- 
lighten is called to regenerate ; and u I have begotten you 
in Jesus Christ,” 1 says the good apostle somewhere. 

Empedocles, too, enumerates friendship among the ele- 
ments, conceiving it as a combining; love : 

“ Which do 3 r ou look at with your mind ; and don’t sit gaping with 
your eyes.” 

Parmenides, too, in his poem, alluding to hope, speaks 
thus : 

“ Yet look with the mind certainly on what is absent as present, 

For it will not sever that which is from the grasp it has of that 
which is 

Not, even if scattered in every direction over the world or combined.” 

CHAPTER III. 

THE OBJECTS OF FAITH AND HOPE PERCEIVED BY THE 

MIND ALONE. 

F OR he who hopes, as he who believes, sees intellectual objects 
and future things with the mind. If, then, we affirm that 
aught is just, and affirm it to be good, and we also say that 
truth is something, yet we have never seen any of such 
objects with our eyes, but with our mind alone. Now the 
Word of God says, “I am the truth .” 2 The Word is then 
to be contemplated by the mind. u Do you aver,” it was said , 3 
1 1 Cor. iv. 15. 2 John xiv. C. 3 By Plato. 

230 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

“ that there are any true philosophers ? ” “ Yes,” said I, 

“ those who love to contemplate the truth.” In the Phcedrus 
also, Plato, speaking of the truth, shows it as an idea. Now 
an idea is a conception of God; and this the barbarians have 
termed the Word of God. The words are as follow: “For 
one must then dare to speak the truth, especially in speaking 
of the truth. For the essence of the soul, being colourless, 
formless, and intangible, is visible only to God, 1 its guide.” 
Now the Word issuing forth was the cause of creation ; then 
also he generated himself, “ when the Word had become 
flesh,” 2 that He might be seen. The righteous man will 
seek the discovery that flows from love, to which if he hastes 
he prospers. For it is said, “To him that knoeketh, it shall 
be opened : ask, and it shall be given to you.” 3 “For the 
violent that storm the kingdom” 4 are not so in disputatious 
speeches ; but by continuance in a right life and unceasing 
prayers, are said “ to take it by force,” wiping away the 
blots left by their previous sins. 

“ You may obtain wickedness, even in great abundance. 5 
And him who toils God helps ; 

For the gifts of the Muses, hard to win, 

Lie not before you, for any one to bear away.” 

The knowledge of ignorance is, then, the first lesson in walk- 
ing according to the Word. An ignorant man has sought, 
and having sought, he finds the teacher ; and finding has 
believed, and believing has hoped ; and henceforward having 
loved, is assimilated to what was loved — endeavouring to be 
what he first loved. Such is the method Socrates shows 
Alcibiades, who thus questions : “ Do you not think that I 
shall know about what is right otherwise?” “Yes, if you 
have found out.” “ But you don’t think I have found out ?” 
“Certainly, if you have sought.” “Then you don’t think 
that I have sought ?” “ Yes, if you think you do not know.” 6 

1 In Plato we have vu instead of ©sw. 2 John i. 14. 

3 Matt. vii. 7. 4 Matt. xi. 12. 

5 Hesiod, first line, “Works and Days,” 285. The other three are 

variously ascribed to different authors. 

6 Plato, Alcibiades , book L 

Book v.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

231 

So with the lamps of the wise virgins, lighted at night in the 
great darkness of ignorance, which the Scripture signified by 
“ night.” Wise souls, pure as virgins, understanding them- 
selves to be situated amidst the ignorance of the world, 
kindle the light, and x’ouse the mind, and illumine the dark- 
ness, and dispel ignorance, and seek truth, and await the 
appearance of the Teacher. 

“ The mob, then,” said I, “cannot become a philosopher.” 1 

“ Many rod-bearers there are, but few Bacclii,” according to 
Plato. “For many are called, but few chosen.” 2 “Know- 
ledge is not in all,” 3 says the apostle. “And pray that we 
may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men : for 
all men have not faith.” 4 And the Poetics of Cleanthes, the 
Stoic, writes to the following effect : 

“ Look not to glory, wishing to be suddenly wise, 

And fear not the undiscerning and rash opinion of the many ; 

For the multitude has not an intelligent, or wise, or right judgment, 
And it is in few men that you will find this.” 5 

And more sententiously the comic poet briefly says : 

“ It is a shame to judge of what is right by much noise.” 

For they heard, I think, that excellent wisdom, which says to 
us,. “Watch your opportunity in the midst of the foolish, 
and in the midst of the intelligent continue.” 6 And amain, 
“The wise will conceal sense.” 7 For the many demand 
demonstration as a pledge of truth, not satisfied with the 
bare salvation by faith. 

“ But it is strongly incumbent to disbelieve the dominant wicked, 
And as is enjoined by the assurance of our muse, 

Know by dissecting the utterance within your breast.” 

“ For this is habitual to the wicked,” says Empedocles, “ to 
wish to overbear what is true by disbelieving it.” And that 
our tenets are probable and worthy of belief, the Greeks shall 
know, the point being more thoroughly investigated in what 

1 Plato, Republic , vi. p. 678. 2 Matt. xx. 16. 

3 1 Cor. viii. 7. 4 2 Thess. iii. 1, 2. 

5 Quoted by Socrates in the Phaedo , p. 52. 

6 Ecclus. xxvii. 12. 7 Prov. x. 14. 

232 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

follows. For we are taught what is like by what is like. 
For says Solomon, “Answer a fool according to his folly.” 1 
Wherefore also, to those that ask the wisdom that is with us, 
we are to hold out things suitable, that with the greatest 
possible ease they may, through their own ideas, be likely to 
arrive at faith in the truth. For “ I became all things to all 
men, that I might gain all men.” 2 Since also “ the rain” of 
the divine grace is sent down “on the just and the unjust.” 3 
“Is He the God of the Jews only, and not also of the 
Gentiles ? Yes, also of the Gentiles : if indeed He is one 
God,” 4 exclaims the noble apostle. 

CHAPTER IY. 

DIVINE THINGS WRAPPED UP IN FIGURES BOTH IN THE 
SACRED AND IN HEATHEN WRITERS. 

But since they will believe neither in what is good justly 
nor in knowledge unto salvation, we ourselves reckoning 
what they claim as belonging to us, because all things are 
God’s ; and especially since what is good proceeded from 
us to the Greeks, let us handle those things as they are 
capable of hearing. For intelligence or rectitude this great 
crowd estimates not by truth, but by what they are delighted 
with. And they will be pleased not more with other things 
than with what is like themselves. For he who is still blind 
and dumb, not having understanding, or the undazzled and 
keen vision of the contemplative soul, which the Saviour 
confers, like the uninitiated at the mysteries, or the un- 
musical at dances, not being yet pure and worthy of the 
pure truth, but still discordant and disordered and material, 
must stand outside of the divine choir. “For we compare 
spiritual things with spiritual.” ° Wherefore, in accordance 
with the method of concealment, the truly sacred Word, truly 
divine and most necessary for us, deposited in the shrine of 
truth, was by the Egyptians indicated by what were called 

1 Prov. xxvi. 5. 2 1 Cor. ix. 22. 3 Matt. v. 45. 

4 Rom. iii. 29, 30. 5 1 Cor. ii. 13. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

233 

among them aclyta , and by the Hebrews by the veil. Only 
the consecrated — that is, those devoted to God, circumcised 
in the desires of the passions for the sake of love to that which 
is alone divine — were allowed access to them. For Plato also 
thought it not lawful for “ the impure to touch the pure.” 

Thence the prophecies and oracles are spoken in enigmas, 
and the mysteries are not exhibited incontinently to all and 
sundry, but only after certain purifications and previous in- 
structions. 

“ For the Muse was not then 
Greedy of gain or mercenary ; 

Nor were Terpsichore’s sweet, 

Honey-toned, silvery soft-voiced 
Strains made merchandise of.” 

Now those instructed among the Egyptians learned first of 
all that style of the Egyptian letters which is called Epistolo- 
graphic; and second, the Hieratic, which the sacred scribes 
practise ; and finally, and last of all, the Hieroglyphic, 
of which one kind which is by the first elements is literal 
(Ivyriologic), and the other Symbolic. Of the Symbolic, one 
kind speaks literally by imitation, and another writes as it 
were figuratively ; and another is quite allegorical, using 
certain enigmas. 

Wishing to express Sun in writing, they make a circle ; and 
Moon, a figure like the Moon, like its proper shape. But in 
using the figurative style, by transposing and transferring, by 
changing and by transforming in many ways as suits them, 
they draw characters. In relating the praises of the kings in 
theological myths, they write in anaglyphs . 1 Let the following 
stand as a specimen of the third species — the Enigmatic. For 
the rest of the stars, on account of their oblique course, they 
have figured like the bodies of serpents ; but the sun like that 
of a beetle, because it makes a round figure of ox-dung, and 
rolls it before its face. And they say that this creature lives six 
months under ground, and the other division of the year above 
ground, and emits its seed into the ball, and brings forth ; and 
that there is not a female beetle. All then, in a word, who 

1 Bag relief. 

234 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

have spoken of divine things, both Barbarians and Greeks, 
have veiled the first principles of things, and delivered the 
truth in enigmas, and symbols, and allegories, and metaphors, 
and such like tropes. Such also are the oracles among the 
Greeks. And the Pythian Apollo is called Loxias. Also the 
maxims of those among the Greeks called wise men, in a 
few sayings indicate the unfolding of matter of considerable 
importance. Such certainly is that maxim, u Spare Time 
either because life is short, and we ought not to expend 
this time in vain ; or, on the other hand, it bids you spare 
your personal expenses ; so that, though you live many 
years, necessaries may not fail you. Similarly also the 
maxim a Know thyself ” shows many things ; both that 
thou art mortal, and that thou wast born a human being ; 
and also that, in comparison with the other excellences of 
life, thou art of no account, because thou sayest that thou 
art rich or renowned; or, on the other hand, that, being 
rich or renowned, you are not honoured on account of your 
advantages alone. And it says, Know for what thou wert 
born, and -whose image thou art ; and what is thy essence, 
and what thy creation, and what thy relation to God, and 
the like. And the Spirit says by Isaiah the prophet, 11 1 will 
give thee treasures, hidden, dark.” 1 Now wisdom, hard to 
hunt, is the treasures of God and unfailing riches. But those, 
taught in theology by those prophets, the poets, philosophize 
much by way of a hidden sense. I mean Orpheus, Linus, 
Musseus, Homer, and Hesiod, and those in this fashion wise. 
The persuasive style of poetry is for them a veil for the 
many. Dreams and signs are all more or less obscure to 
men, not from jealousy (for it were wrong to conceive of 
God as subject to passions), but in order that research, in- 
troducing to the understanding of enigmas, may haste to the 
discovery of truth. Thus Sophocles the tragic poet some- 
where says : 

“ And God I know to be such an one, 

Ever the revealer of enigmas to the wise, 

But to the' perverse bad, although a teacher in few words,” — 

1 Isa. xlv. ?>. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

235 

putting bad instead of simple. Expressly then respecting all 
our Scripture, as if spoken in a parable, it is written in the 
Psalms, u Hear, O my people, my law : incline your ear to 
the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in parables, 
I will utter my problems from the beginning .” 1 Similarly 
speaks the noble apostle to the following effect : “ Howbeit 
we speak wisdom among those that are perfect ; yet not the 
wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that 
come to nought. But we speak the wisdom of God hidden 
in a mystery ; which none of the princes of this world knew. 
For had they known it, they would not have crucified the 
Lord of glory .” 2 

The philosophers did not exert themselves in contemning 
the appearance of the Lord. It therefore follows that it is 
the opinion of the wise among the Jews which the apostle 
inveighs against it. Wherefore he adds, <e But we preach, as 
it is written, what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, 
and hath not entered into the heart of man, what God hath 
prepared for them that love Him. For God hath revealed 
it to us by the Spirit. For the Spirit searcheth all things, 
even the deep things of God .” 3 For he recognises the spiri- 
tual man and the gnostic as the disciple of the Holy Spirit 
dispensed by God, which is the mind of Christ. “ But the 
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit, for they 
are foolishness to him .” 4 Now the apostle, in contradistinc- 
tion to gnostic perfection, calls the common faith the founda- 
tion, and sometimes milk, writing on this wise : u Brethren, I 
could not speak to you as to spiritual, but as to carnal, to 
babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, not with meat : 
for ye were not able. Neither yet are ye now able. For 
ye are yet carnal : for whereas there is among you envy and 
strife, are ye not carnal, and walk as men “? ” 5 Which things 
are the choice of those men who are sinners. But those who 
abstain from these things give their thoughts to divine things, 
and partake of gnostic food. u According to the grace,” it 
is said, “ given to me as a wise master builder, I have laid 

1 Ps. Ixxviii. 1, 2. 2 1 Cor. ii. 6-8. 3 1 Cor. ii. 9, 10. 

4 1 Cor. ii. 14. 6 1 Cor. iii. 1-3. 

236 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

the foundation. And another buildeth on it gold and silver, 
precious stones.” 1 Such is the gnostic superstructure on the 
foundation of faith in Christ Jesus. But “ the stubble, and 
the wood, and the hay,” are the additions of heresies. “ But 
the fire shall try every man’s work, of what sort it is.” In 
allusion to the gnostic edifice also in the Epistle to the 
Romans, he says, “For I desire to see you, that I may im- 
part unto you a spiritual gift, that ye may be established.” 2 
It was impossible that gifts of this sort could be written 
without disguise. 

CHAPTER Y. 

ON THE SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS. 

Now the Pythagorean symbols were connected with the 
Barbarian philosophy in the most recondite way. For in- 
stance, the Samian counsels “not to have a swallow in the 
house ;” that is, not to receive a loquacious, whispering, 
garrulous man, who cannot contain what has been commu- 
nicated to him. “For the swallow, and the turtle, and the 
sparrows of the field, know the times of their entrance ,” 3 
says the Scripture ; and one ought never to dwell with trifles. 
And the turtle-dove murmuring shows the thankless slander 
of fault-finding, and is rightly expelled the house. 

“Don’t mutter against me, sitting by one in one place, another 
in another.” 4 

The swallow too, which suggests the fable of Pandion, seeing 
it is right to detest the incidents reported of it, some of 
which we hear Tereus suffered, and some of which he 
inflicted. It pursues also the musical grasshoppers, whence 
he who is a persecutor of the word ought to be driven away. 

“ By sceptre-bearing Here, whose eye surveys Olympus, 

I have a trusty closet for tongues,” 

1 1 Cor. iii. 10-13. 

3 Jcr. viii. 7. 

- Rom. i. 11. 

4 Iliad, ix. 311. 

237 

Book v.] THE MISCELLANIES. 

says Poetry. AEschylus also says : 

“ But I, too, have a key as a guard on my tongue.” 

Again Pythagoras commanded, “ When the pot is lifted off 
the fire, not to leave its mark in the ashes, hut to scatter 
them;” and “people on getting up from bed, to shake the 
bed-clothes.” For he intimated that it was necessary not 
only to efface the mark, but not to leave even a trace of 
anger ; and that on its ceasing to boil, it was to be composed, 
and all memory of injury to be wiped out. “And let not 
the sun,” says the Scripture, “'go down upon your wrath.” 1 
And he that said, “ Thou slialt not desire,” 3 took away all 
memory of wrong ; for wrath is found to be the impulse of 
concupiscence in a mild soul, especially seeking irrational 
revenge. In the same way “ the bed is ordered to be shaken 
up,” so that there may be no recollection of effusion in sleep, 
or sleep in the day-time; nor, besides, of pleasure during the 
night. And he intimated that the vision of the dark ought 
to be dissipated speedily by the light of truth. “ Be angry, 
and sin not,” says David, teaching us that we ought not to 
assent to the impression, and not to follow it up by action, 
and so confirm wrath. 

Again, “Don’t sail on land” is a Pythagorean saw, and 
shows that taxes and similar contracts, being troublesome and 
fluctuating, ought to be declined. Wherefore also the Word 
says that the tax-gatherers shall be saved with difficulty. 3 

And again, “Don’t wear a ring, nor engrave on it 
the images of the gods,” enjoins Pythagoras ; as Moses 
ages before enacted expressly, that neither a graven, nor 
molten, nor moulded, nor painted likeness should be made ; 
so that we may not cleave to things of sense, but pass 
to intellectual objects : for familiarity witli the sight dis- 
parages the reverence of what is divine ; and to worship that 
which is immaterial by matter, is to dishonour it by sense. 
Wherefore the wisest of the Egyptian priests decided that the 
temple of Athene should be hypaethral, just as the Hebrews 
constructed the temple without an image. And some, in 

1 Eph. iv. 26. 2 Ex. xx. 17. 

3 It is so said of the rich : Matt. xix. 23 ; Mark x. 23 ; Luke xviii. 24. 

238 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

worshipping God, make a representation of heaven containing 
the stars ; and so worship, although Scripture says, “ Let us 
make man in our image and likeness .” 1 I think it worth 
while also to adduce the utterance of Eurysus the Pytha- 
gorean, which is as follows, who in his book On Fortune , 
having said that the “ Creator, on making man, took Himself 
as an exemplar,” added, “And the body is like the other 
things, as being made of the same material, and fashioned 
by the best workman, who wrought it, taking Himself as 
the archetype.” And, in fine, Pythagoras and his followers, 
with Plato also, and most of the other philosophers, were best 
acquainted with the Lawgiver, as may be concluded from their 
doctrine. And by a happy utterance of divination, not with- 
out divine help, concurring in certain prophetic declarations, 
and seizing the truth in portions and aspects, in terms not 
obscure, and not going beyond the explanation of the things, 
they honoured it on ascertaining the appearance of relation 
with the truth. Whence the Hellenic philosophy is like 
the torch of wick which men kindle, artificially stealing the 
light from the sun. But on the proclamation of the Word 
all that holy light shone forth. Then in houses by night the 
stolen light is useful ; but by day the fire blazes, and all the 
night is illuminated by such a sun of intellectual light. 

Now Pythagoras made an epitome of the statements on 
righteousness in Moses, when he said, “ Do not step over the 
balance ;” that is, do not transgress equality in distribution, 
honouring justice so. 

“ Which friends to friends for ever, 

To cities, cities — to allies, allies binds, 

For equality is what is right for men ; 

But less to greater ever hostile grows, 

And days of hate begin,” 

as is said with poetic grace. 

Wherefore the Lord says, “ Take my yoke, for it is gentle 
and light .” 2 And on the disciples, striving for the pre- 
eminence, He enjoins equality with simplicity, saying “ that 
they must become as little children .” 3 Likewise also the 
1 Gen. i. 26. 2 Matt. xi. 29, 30. 3 Matt, xviii. 3. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

239 

apostle writes, that “no one in Christ is bond or free, or 
Greek or Jew. For the creation in Christ Jesus is new, is 
equality, free of strife — not grasping — just.” For envy, and 
jealousy, and bitterness, stand without the divine choir. 

Thus also those skilled in the mysteries forbid “ to eat the 
heart;” teaching that we ought not to gnaw and consume the 
soul by idleness and by vexation, on account of things which 
happen against one’s wishes. Wretched, accordingly, was the 
man whom Homer also says, wandering alone, “ ate his own 
heart.” But again, seeing the Gospel supposes two ways 
— the apostles, too, similarly with all the prophets — and 
seeing they call that one “narrow and confined” which is 
circumscribed according to the commandments and prohibi- 
tions, and the opposite one, which leads to perdition, “ broad 
and roomy,” open to pleasures and wrath, and say, “ Blessed 
is the man who walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, 
and standeth not in the way of sinners .” 1 Hence also comes 
the fable of Prodicus of Ceus about Virtue and Vice. And 
Pythagoras shrinks not from prohibiting to walk on the 
public thoroughfares, enjoining the necessity of not following 
the sentiments of the many, which are crude and inconsistent. 
And Aristoeritus, in the first book of his Positions against 
Heracliodorus , mentions a letter to this effect : “ Atoeeas 
king of the Scythians to the people of Byzantium : Do not 
impair my revenues in case my mares drink your water;” 
for the Barbarian indicated symbolically that he would make 
war on them. Likewise also the poet Euphorion introduces 
Nestor saying, 

“We have not yet wet the Achaean steeds in Simois.” 

Therefore also the Egyptians place Sphinxes before their 
temples, to signify that the doctrine respecting God is enig- 
matical and obscure ; perhaps also that we ought both to love 
and fear the Divine Being : to love Him as gentle and benign 
to the pious; to fear Him as inexorably just to the impious; 
for the sphinx shows the image of a wild beast and of a man 
together. 

1 Ps. i. 1. 

240 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

CHAPTER VI. 

THE MYSTIC MEANING OF THE TABERNACLE AND ITS 

FURNITURE. 

It were tedious to go over all the Prophets and the Law, 
specifying what is spoken in enigmas ; for almost the whole 
Scripture gives its utterances in this way. It may suffice, I 
think, for any one possessed of intelligence, .for the proof 
of the point in hand, to select a few examples. 

Now concealment is evinced in the reference of the seven 
circuits around the temple, which are made mention of among 
the Hebrews ; and the equipment on the robe, indicating by 
the various symbols, which had reference to visible objects, 
the agreement which from heaven reaches down to earth. 
And the covering and the veil were variegated with blue, 
and purple, and scarlet, and linen. And so it was suggested 
that the nature of the elements contained the revelation of 
God. For purple is from water, linen from the earth; blue, 
being dark, is like the air, as scarlet is like fire. 

In the midst of the covering and veil, where the priests 
were allowed to enter, was situated the altar of incense, the 
symbol of the earth placed in the middle of this universe ; 
and from it came the fumes of incense. And that place 
intermediate between the inner veil, where the high priest 
alone, on prescribed days, was permitted to enter, and the ex- 
ternal court which surrounded it — free to all the Hebrews — 
was, they say, the middlemost point of heaven and earth. 
But others say it was the symbol of the intellectual world, 
and that of sense. The covering, then, the barrier of popu- 
lar unbelief, was stretched in front of the five pillars, keeping 
back those in the surrounding space. 

So very mystically the five loaves are broken by the Saviour, 
and fill the crowd of the listeners. For great is the crowd 
that keep to the things of sense, as if they were the only 
things in existence. “ Cast your eyes round, and see,” says 
Plato, “ that none of the uninitiated listen.” Such are they 

Book v.] 

241 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

i 

who think that nothing else exists, but what they can hold 
tight with their hands ; but do not admit as in the depart- 
ment of existence, actions and processes of generation, and 
the whole of the unseen. For such are those who keep by the 
five senses. But the knowledge of God is a thing inacces- 
sible to the ears and like organs of this kind of people. Hence 
the Son is said to be the Father’s face, being the revealer of 
the Father’s character to the five senses by clothing Himself 
with flesh. “ But if we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in 
the Spirit .” 1 “For we walk by faith, not by sight,” 2 the 
noble apostle says. Within the veil, then, is concealed the 
sacerdotal service ; and it keeps those engaged in it far from 
those without. 

Again, there is the veil of the entrance into the holy of 
holies. Four pillars there are, the sign of the sacred tetrad 
of the ancient covenants. Further, the mystic name of four 
letters which was affixed to those alone to whom the adytum 
was accessible, is called Jave, which is interpreted, “ Who is 
and shall be.” The name of God, too, among the Greeks 
contains four letters. 

Now the Lord, having come alone into the intellectual 
world, enters by His sufferings, introduced into the know- 
ledge of the Ineffable, ascending above every name which is 
known by sound. The lamp, too, was placed to the south of 
the altar of incense ; and by it v r ere shown the motions of 
the seven planets, that perform their revolutions towards the 
south. For three branches rose on either side of the lamp, 
and lights on them ; since also the sun, like the lamp, set in 
the midst of all the planets, dispenses with a kind of divine 
music the light to those above and to those below’. 

The golden lamp conveys another enigma as a symbol of 
Christ, not in respect of form alone, but in his casting light, 
u at sundry times and divers manners,” 3 on those who believe 
on Him and hope, and who see by means of the ministry of 
the First-born. And they say that the seven eyes of the Lord 
“ are the seven spirits resting on the rod that springs from 
the root of Jesse .” 4 

1 Gal. v. 25. 2 2 Cor. v. 7. 3 Heb. i. 1. 4 Rev. v. 6 ; Isa. xi. 12. 

Q 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

242 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

North of the altar of incense was placed a table, on which 
there was “ the exhibition of the loaves ; ” for the most 
nourishing of the winds are those of the north. And thus 
are signified certain seats of churches conspiring so as to 
form one body and one assemblage. 

And the things recorded of the sacred ark signify the pro- 
perties of the world of thought, which is hidden and closed to 
the manv. 

And those golden figures, each of them with six wings, 
signify either the two bears, as some will have it, or rather 
the two hemispheres. And the name cherubim meant “ much 
knowledge.” But both together have twelve wings, and by 
the zodiac and time, which moves on it, point out the world 
of sense. It is of them, I think, that Tragedy, discoursing of 
Nature, says : 

“ Unwearied Time circles full in perennial flow, 

Producing itself. And the twin-bears 

On the swift wandering motions of their wings, 

Keep the Atlantean pole.” 

And Atlas , 1 the unsnffering pole, may mean the fixed sphere, 
or better perhaps, motionless eternity. But I think it better 
to regard the ark, so called from the Hebrew word Thebotha , 2 
as signifying something else. It is interpreted, one instead of 
one in all places. Whether, then, it is the eighth region and 
the world of thought, or God, all-embracing, and without 
shape, and invisible, that is indicated, we may for the present 
defer saying. But it signifies the repose which dwells with 
the adoring spirits, which are meant by the cherubim. 

For He who prohibited the making of a graven image, 
would never Plimself have made an imacre in the likeness of 

O 

holy things. Nor is there at all any composite thing, and 
creature endowed with sensation, of the sort in heaven. But 
the face is a symbol of the rational soul, and the wings are 
the lofty ministers and energies of powers right and left ; 
and the voice is delightsome glory in ceaseless contempla- 

1 "A — rAsic, unsuffering. 

2 The Clialdaic XflWfl. The Hebrew is HUM. Sept, xifiaro;, Vulg. 

area. 

Book v.] 

TI1E MISCELLANIES. 

243 

tion. Let it suffice that the mystic interpretation has ad- 
vanced so far. 

Now the high priest’s robe is the symbol of the world of 
sense. The seven planets are represented by the five stones 
and the two carbuncles, for Saturn and the Moon. The 
former is southern, and moist, and earthy, and heavy ; the 
latter aerial, whence she is called by some Artemis, as if 
Aerotomos (cutting the air) ; and the air is cloudy. And 
co-operating as they did in the production of things here 
below, those that by Divine Providence are set over the 
planets ai*e rightly represented as placed on the breast and 
shoulders ; and by them was the work of creation, the first 
week. And the breast is the seat of the heart and soul. 

Differently, the stones might be the various phases of 
salvation; some occupying the upper, some the lower parts of 
the entire body saved. The three hundred and sixty bells, sus- 
pended from the robe, is the space of a year, “ the acceptable 
year of the Lord,” proclaiming and resounding the stupendous 
manifestation of the Saviour. Further, the broad gold mitre 
indicates the regal power of the Lord, u since the head of the 
church” is the Saviour . 1 The mitre that is on it \i.e. the 
head] is, then, a sign of most princely rule ; and otherwise 
we have heard it said, “ The Head of Christ is the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .” 2 Moreover, there was 
the breastplate, comprising the ephod, which is the symbol 
of work, and the oracle (Xoylov) ; and this indicated the 
Word (Aoyoy) by which it was framed, and is the symbol of 
heaven, made by the Word , 3 and subjected to Christ, the 
Head of all things, inasmuch as it moves in the same way, 
and in a like manner. The luminous emerald stones, there- 
fore, in the ephod, signify the sun and moon, the helpers of 
nature. The shoulder, I take it, is the commencement of 
the hand. 

1 Epli. v. 23. 2 1 Cor. xi. 3 ; 2 Cor. xi. 31. 

3 And the whole place is very correctly called the Logeum (^ayihv), 
since everything in heaven has been created and arranged in accordance 

with right reason (hoyots) and proportion (Philo, vol. iii. p. 195, Bohn’s 
translation). 

244 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

The twelve stones, set in four rows on the breast, describe 
for us the circle of the zodiac, in the four changes of the 
year. It was otherwise requisite that the law and the 
prophets should be placed beneath the Lord’s head, because 
in both Testaments mention is made of the righteous. For 
were we to say that the apostles were at once prophets and 
righteous, we should say well, “ since one and the self-same 
Holy Spirit works in all .” 1 And as the Lord is above the 
whole world, yea, above the world of thought, so the name 
engraven on the plate has been regarded to signify, above all 
rule and authority ; and it was inscribed with reference both 
to the written commandments and the manifestation to sense. 
And it is the name of God that is expressed ; since, as the 
Son sees the goodness of the Father, God the Saviour works, 
being called the first principle of all things, which was imaged 
forth from the invisible God first, and before the ages, and 
which fashioned all things which came into being after itself. 
Nay more, the oracle 2 exhibits the prophecy which by the 
Word cries and preaches, and the judgment that is to come ; 
since it is the same Word which prophesies, and judges, and 
discriminates all things. 

And they say that the robe prophesied the ministry in the 
flesh, by which He was seen in closer relation to the world. 
So the high priest, putting off his ‘consecrated robe (the 
universe, and the creation in the universe, were consecrated 
by Him assenting that, what was made, was good), washes 
himself, and puts on the other tunic — a holy-of-holies one, 
so to speak — which is to accompany him into the adytum ; 
exhibiting, as seems to me, the Levite and Gnostic, as the 
chief of other priests (those bathed in water, and clothed in 
faith alone, and expecting their own individual abode), him- 
self distinguishing the objects of the intellect from the things 
of sense, rising above other priests, hasting to the entrance 
to the world of ideas, to wash himself from the things here 
below, not in water, as formerly one -was cleansed on being 
enrolled in the tribe of Levi. But purified already by the 
gnostic Word in his whole heart, and thoroughly regulated, 
1 1 Cor. xii. 11. 2 i.e. the oracular breastplate. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

245 

and having improved that mode of life received from the 
priest to the highest pitch, being quite sanctified both in word 
and life, and having put on the bright array of glory, and 
received the ineffable inheritance of that spiritual and perfect 
man, “ which eye hath not seen and ear hath not heard, and 
it hath not entered into the heart of man and having 
become son and friend, he is now replenished with insatiable 
contemplation face to face. For there is nothing like hearing 
the Word Himself, who by means of the Scripture inspires 
fuller intelligence. For so it is said, “And he shall put off 
the linen robe, which he had put on when he entered into the 
holy place ; and shall lay it aside there, and wash his body 
in water in the holy place, and put on his robe.” 1 But in 
one way, as I think, the Lord puts off and puts on by 
descending into the region of sense ; and in another, he who 
through Him has believed puts off and puts on, as the apostle 
intimated, the consecrated stole. Thence, after the image 
of the Lord, the worthiest were chosen from the sacred tribes 
to be high priests, and those elected to the kingly office and 
to prophecy were anointed. 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE EGYPTIAN SYMBOLS AND ENIGMAS OF SACRED THINGS. 

Whence also the Egyptians did not entrust the mysteries 
they possessed to all and sundry, and did not divulge the 
knowledge of divine things to the profane ; but only to those 
destined to ascend the throne, and those of the priests that 
were judged the worthiest, from their nurture, culture, and 
birth. Similar, then, to the Hebrew enigmas in respect to 
concealment, are those of the Egyptians also. Of the Egyp- 
tians, some show the sun on a ship, others on a crocodile. 
And they signify hereby, that the sun, making a passage 
through the delicious and moist air, generates time ; which 
is symbolized by the crocodile in some other sacerdotal 

1 Lev. xvi. 23, 24. 

246 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

account. Further, at Diospolis in Egypt, on the temple 
called Pylon, there was figured a boy as the symbol of pro- 
duction, and an old man as that of decay. A hawk, on the 
other hand, was the symbol of God, as a fish of hate ; and, 
according to a different symbolism, the crocodile of impu- 
dence. The whole symbol, then, when put together, appears 
to teach this : u Oh ye who are born and die, God hates 
impudence.” 

And there are those who fashion ears and eyes of costly 
material, and consecrate them, dedicating them in the temples 
to the gods — by this plainly indicating that God sees and 
hears all things. Besides, the lion is with them the symbol 
of strength and prowess, as the ox clearly is of the earth 
itself, and husbandry and food, and the horse of fortitude 
and confidence ; while, on the other hand, the sphinx, of 
strength combined with intelligence — as it had a body en- 
tirely that of a lion, and the face of a man. Similarly to 
these, to indicate intelligence, and memory, and power, and 
art, a man is sculptured in the temples. And in what is 
called among them the Komasise of the gods, they carry 
about golden images — two dogs, one hawk, and one ibis ; and 
the four figures of the images they call four letters. For 
the dogs are symbols of the two hemispheres, which, as it 
w’ere, go round and keep watch ; the hawk, of the sun, for 
it is fiery and destructive (so they attribute pestilential 
diseases to the sun) ; the ibis, of the moon, likening the 
shady parts to that which is dark in plumage, and the lumi- 
nous to the light. And some will have it that bv the dogs 
are meant the tropics, which guard and watch the sun’s 
passage to the south and north. The hawk signifies the 
equinoctial line, which is high and parched with heat, as the 
ibis the ecliptic. For the ibis seems, above other animals, to 
have furnished to the Egyptians the first rudiments of the 
invention of number and measure, as the oblique line did of 
circles. 

Book w] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

247 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE USE OF THE SYMBOLIC STYLE BY POETS AND 
. PHILOSOPHERS. 

But it was not only the most highly intellectual of the 
Egyptians, but also such of other barbarians as prosecuted 
philosophy, that affected the symbolical style. They say, 
then, that Idanthuris king of the Scythians, as Pherecydes 
of Syros relates, sent to Darius, on his passing the Ister in 
threat of war, a symbol, instead of a letter, consisting of a 
mouse, a frog, a bird, a javelin, a plough. And there being 
a doubt in reference to them, as was to be expected, Oronto- 
pagas the Chiliarch said that they were to resign the king- 
dom ; taking dwellings to be meant by the mouse, waters by 
the frog, air by the bird, land by the plough, arms by the 
javelin. But Xiphodres interpreted the contrary ; for he 
said, “If we do not take our flight like birds, or like mice get 
below the earth, or like frogs beneath the water, we shall not 
escape their arrows ; for we are not lords of the territory.” 

It is said that Anacharsis the Scythian, while asleep, 
held his secret parts with his left hand, and his mouth with 
his right, to intimate that both ought to be mastered, but 
that it was a greater thing to master the tongue than volup- 
tuousness. 

And why should I linger over the barbarians, when I can 
adduce the Greeks as exceedingly addicted to the use of the 
method of concealment? Androcydes the Pythagorean says 
the far-famed so-called Ephesian letters were of the class of 
symbols. For he said that aenuov (shadowless) meant dark- 
ness, for it has no shadow ; and Kardaiaov (shadowy) light, 
since it casts with its rays the shadow ; and is the 
earth, according to an ancient appellation ; and tct pa? is the 
year, in reference to the seasons ; and 8a/xva/j,eveu<; is the sun, 
which overpowers ( Sa/xdfav ) ; and ra alcna is the true voice. 
And then the symbol intimates that divine things have been 
arranged in harmonious order — darkness to light, the sun to 
the year, and the earth to nature’s processes of production of 

248 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

every sort. Also Dionysius Thrax, the grammarian, in his 
book, Respecting the Exposition of the Symbolical Significa- 
tion in Circles , says expressly, “ Some signified actions not 
by words only, but also by symbols : by words, as is the case 
of what are called the Delphic maxims, 1 Nothing in excess,’ 
1 Know thyself,’ and the like ; and by symbols, as the wheel 
that is turned in the temples of the gods, derived from the 
Egyptians, and the branches that are given to the wor- 
shippers. For the Thracian Orpheus says : 

“Whatever works of branches are a care to men on earth, 

Not one has one fate in the mind, but all things 
Revolve around ; and it is not lawful to stand at one point, 

But each one keeps an equal part of the race as they began.” 

The branches either stand as the symbol of the first food, or 
they ai’e that the multitude may know that fruits spring and 
grow universally, remaining a very long time ; but that the 
duration of life allotted to themselves is brief. And it is on 
this account that they will have it that the branches are 
given ; and perhaps also that they may know, that as these, 
on the other hand, are burned, so also they themselves speedily 
leave this life, and will become fuel for fire. 

Very useful, then, is the mode of symbolic interpretation 
for many purposes ; and it is helpful to the right theology, 
and to piety, and to the display of intelligence, and the prac- 
tice of brevity, and the exhibition of wisdom. “For the 
use of symbolical speech is characteristic of the wise man,” 
appositely remarks the grammarian Didymus, “ and the ex- 
planation of what is signified by it.” And indeed the most 
elementary instruction of children embraces the interpretation 
of the four elements ; for it is said that the Phrygians call 
water Bedu, as also Orpheus says : 

“ And bright water is poured down, the Bedu of the nymphs.” 
Dion Thytes also seems to write similarly : 

“ And taking Bedu, pour it on your hands, and turn to divination.” 

On the other hand, the comic poet, Philydeus, understands 
by Bedu the air, as being (Biodoros) life-giver, in the fol- 
lowing lines : 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

249 

“ I pray that I may inhale the salutary Bedu, 

Which is the most essential part of health ; 

Inhale the pure, the unsullied air.” 

In the same opinion also concurs Neanthes of Cyzicum, 
who writes that the Macedonian priests invoke Bedu, which 
they interpret to mean the air , to be propitious to them and 
to their children. And Zaps some have ignorantly taken for 
fire (from %ecriv, boiling ) ; for so the sea is called, as Eupho- 
rion, in his reply to Theoridas : 

“ And Zaps, destroyer of ships, wrecked it on the rocks.” 

And Dionysius Iambus similarly : 

“ Briny Zaps moans about the maddened deep.” 

Similarly Cratinus the younger, the comic poet ; 

“ Zaps casts forth shrimps and little fishes.” 

And Simmias of Rhodes : 

“ Parent of the Ignetes and the Telchines briny Zaps was born.” 1 

And 'xOc ov is the earth (ice-^u/xevT]), spread forth to bigness. 
And Plectron, according to some, is the sky (77-0X09), according 
to others, it is the air, which strikes ( Tfkrjacrovra .) and moves 
to nature and increase, and which fills all things. But these 
have not read Cleanthes the philosopher, who expressly calls 
Plectron the sun ; for darting his beams in the east, as if 
striking the world, he leads the light to its harmonious course. 
And from the sun it signifies also the rest of the stars. 

And the Sphinx is not the comprehension 2 of the uni- 
verse, and the revolution of the world, according to the poet 
Aratus ; but perhaps it is the spiritual tone which pervades 
and holds together the universe. But it is better to regard 
it as the ether, which holds together and presses all things ; 
as also Empedocles says : 

1 This line has given commentators considerable trouble. Diodorus 
says that the Telchines — fabled sons of Ocean — were the first inhabitants 
of Rhodes. 

2 axjviaig. Sylburgius, with much probability, conjectures ovvhoi;, 
binding together. 

250 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

“ But come now, first will I speak of the Sun, the first principle 
of all things, 

From which all, that we look upon, has sprung, 

'Both earth, and billowy deep, and humid air ; 

Titan and Ether too, which binds all things around.” 

And Apollodorus of Corey ra says that these lines were re- 
cited by Branchus the seer, when purifying the Milesians 
from plague ; for he, sprinkling the multitude with branches 
of laurel, led off the hymn somehow as follows : 

“ Sing Boys Hecaergus and Hecaerga.” 

And the people accompanied him, saying, “ Bedu, 1 Zaps, 
Chthon, Plectron, Sphinx, Cnaxzbi, Chthyptes, Pldegmos, 
Drops.” Callimachus relates the story in iambics. Cnaxzbi 
is, by derivation, the plague, from its gnawing ( tcvaUiv ) and 
destroying ( <$ia(f)9elpeiv ), and du^jrat is to consume with a 
thunderbolt. Thespis the tragic poet says that something 
else was signified by these, writing thus : “ Lo, I offer to 
thee a libation of white Cnaxzbi, having pressed it from the 
yellow nurses. Lo, to thee, O two-horned Pan, mixing 
Chthyptes cheese with red honey, I place it on thy sacred 
altars. Lo, to thee I pour as a libation the sparkling gleam 
of Bromius.” He signifies, as I think, the soul’s first milk- 
like nutriment of the four-and-tvventy elements, after which 
solidified milk comes as food. And last, he teaches of the 
blood of the vine of the Word, the sparkling wine, the per- 
fecting gladness of instruction. And Drops is the operating 
Word, which, beginning with elementary training, and ad- 
vancing to the growth of the man, inflames and illumines 
man up to the measure of maturity. 

The third is said to be a writing copy for children — fidpTTT e? 
/Aah|c ^vv^drjSov. And it signifies, in my opinion, 
that by the arrangement of the elements and of the world, 
we must advance to the knowledge of what is more perfect, 
since eternal salvation is attained by force and toil ; for 
fiap-ty-ai is to grasp. And the harmony of the world is meant 

1 ZeU'^/j Xlay, 2 K uct^f3i } ’KtivTrrY);, <I>Agy,44oV, 

Apo)\p. On the interpretation of which, much learning and ingenuity 
have been expended. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

251 

by the Sphinx ; and ^vvyLhjbov means difficulty ; and /cX&n/r? 
means at once the secret knowledge of the Lord and day. 

O «/ 

Well ! does not Epigenes, in his book on the Poetry of 
Orpheus , in exhibiting the peculiarities found in Orpheus, 
say that by “ the curved rods” (jcepalab) is meant “ ploughs ;” 
and by the warp (aTiyxoab), the furrows ; and the woof 
(jxltoz;) is a figurative expression for the seed ; and that the 
tears of Zeus signify a shower ; and that the “ parts” (/ xolpat , ) 
are, again, the phases of the moon, the thirtieth day, and the 
fifteenth, and the new moon, and that Orpheus accordingly 
calls them “ white-robed,” as being parts of the light? Again, 
that the Spring is called “flowery,” from its nature; and Night 
“still,” on account of rest; and the Moon “ Gorgonian,” 
on account of the face in it ; and that the time in which 
it is necessary to sow is called Aphrodite by the “ Theo- 
logian.” 1 In the same way, too, the Pythagoreans figura- 
tively called the planets the “dogs of Persephone ;” and to the 
sea they applied the metaphorical appellation of “the tears 
of Kronus.” Myriads on myriads of enigmatical utterances 
by both poets and philosophers are to be found ; and there 
are also whole books which present the mind of the writer 
veiled, as that of Heraclitus On Nature , who on this very 
account is called “Obscure.” Similar to this book is the 
Theology of Pherecydes of Syrus ; for Euphorion the poet, 
and the Causes of Callimachus, and the Alexandra of Lyco- 
phron, and the like, are proposed as an exercise in exposition 
to all the grammarians. 

It is, then, proper that the Barbarian philosophy, on which 
it is our business to speak, should prophesy also obscurely 
and by symbols, as was evinced. Such are the injunctions 
of Moses : “ These common things, the sow, the hawk, the 
eagle, and the raven, are not to be eaten .” 2 For the sow is 
the emblem of voluptuous and unclean lust of food, and 
lecherous and filthy licentiousness in venery, always prurient, 
and material, and lying in the mire, and fattening for 
slaughter and destruction. 

Again, he commands to eat that which parts the hoof and 
1 Orpheus. 2 Lev. xi. ; Deut. xiv. 

252 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

ruminates ; “ intimating,” says Barnabas, “ that vve ought to 
cleave to those who fear the Lord, and meditate in their heart 
on that portion of the word which they have received, to those 
who speak and keep the Lord’s statutes, to those to whom 
meditation is a work of gladness, and who ruminate on the 
word of the Lord. And what is the parted hoof ? That the 
righteous walks in this world, and expects the holy eternity to 
come.” Then he adds, u See how well Moses enacted. But 
whence could they understand or comprehend these things? 
We who have rightly understood speak the commandments 
as the Lord wished ; wherefore He circumcised our ears and 
hearts, that we may comprehend these things. And when 
he says, ‘ Thou shalt not eat the eagle, the hawk, the kite, 
and the crpw;’ he says, ‘ Thou shalt not adhere to or 
become like those men who know not how to procure for 
themselves subsistence b}^ toil and sweat, but live by plunder, 
and lawlessly.’ For the eagle indicates robbery, the hawk 
injustice, and the raven greed. It is also written, * With the 
innocent man thou wilt be innocent, and with the chosen 
choice, and with the perverse thou shalt pervert .’ 1 It is 
incumbent on us to cleave to the saints, because they that 
cleave to them shall be sanctified.” 

Thence Theognis writes : 

“ For from the good you will learn good things ; 

But if you mix with the bad, you will destroy any mind you may 
have.” 

And when, again, it is said in the ode, “For He hath 
triumphed gloriously : the horse and his rider hath He cast 
into the sea ;” 2 the many-limbed and brutal affection, lust, 
with the rider mounted, who gives the reins to pleasures, 
“ He has cast into the sea,” throwing them away into the 
disorders of the world. Thus also Plato, in his book On the 
Soul, says that the charioteer and the horse that ran off — 
the irrational part, which is divided in two, into anger and 
concupiscence — fall down ; and so the myth intimates that 
it was through the licentiousness of the steeds that Phaethon 
was thrown out. Also in the case of Joseph : the brothers 
1 Ps. xvii. 25, 26. 2 Ex. xv. 1. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

253 

having envied this young man, who by his knowledge was 
possessed of uncommon foresight, stripped off the coat of 
many colours, and took and threw him into a pit (the pit 
was empty, it had no water), rejecting the good man’s varied 
knowledge, springing from his love of instruction ; or, in the 
exercise of the bare faith, which is according to the law, 
they threw him into the pit empty of water, selling him into 
Egypt, which was destitute of the divine word. And the 
pit was destitute of knowledge ; into which being thrown 
and stript of his knowledge, he that had become uncon- 
sciously wise, stript of knowledge, seemed like his brethren. 
Otherwise interpreted, the coat of many colours is lust, which 
takes its way into a yawning pit. “ And if one open up or 
hew out a pit,” it is said, “ and do not cover it, and there fall 
in there a calf or ass, the owner of the pit shall pay the price 
in money, and give it to his neighbour ; and the dead body 
shall be his.” 1 Here add that prophecy : “ The ox knoweth 
his owner, and the ass his master’s crib : but Israel hath not 
understood me.” 2 In order, then, that none of those, who 
have fallen in with the knowledge taught by thee, may 
become incapable of holding the truth, and disobey and fall 
away, it is said, Be thou sure in the treatment ’of the word, 
and shut up the living spring in the depth from those who 
approach irrationally, but reach drink to those that thirst for 
truth. Conceal it, then, from those who are unfit to receive 
the depth of knowledge, and so cover the pit. The owner 
of the pit, then, the Gnostic, shall himself be punished, in- 
curring the blame of the others stumbling, and of being 
overwhelmed by the greatness of the word, he himself being 
of small capacity ; or transferring the worker into the region 
of speculation, and on that account dislodging him from off- 
hand faith. “ And will pay money,” rendering a reckoning, 
and submitting his accounts to the “ omnipotent Will.” 

This, then, is the type of “the law and the prophets which 
were until John 3 while he, though speaking more perspicu- 
ously as no longer prophesying, but pointing out as now present, 
Him, who was proclaimed symbolically from the beginning, 

1 Ex. xxi. 33, 36. 2 Isa. i. 3. 3 Matt. xi. 13; Luke xvi. 16. 

254 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

nevertheless said, “ I am not worthy to loose the latchet of 
the Lord’s shoe.” 1 For he confesses that he is not worthy 
to baptize so great a Power ; for it behoves those, who purify 
others, to free the soul from the body and its sins, as the foot 
from the thong. Perhaps also this signified the final exertion 
of the Saviour’s power toward us — the immediate, 1 mean — 
that by His presence, concealed in the enigma of prophecy, 
inasmuch as he, by pointing out to sight Him that had been 
prophesied of, and indicating the Presence which had come, 
walking forth into the light, loosed the latchet of the oracles of 
the [old] economy, by unveiling the meaning of the symbols. 

And the observances practised by the Romans in the case 
of wills have a place here ; those balances and small coins to 
denote justice, and freeing of slaves, and rubbing of the 
ears. For these observances are, that things may be trans- 
acted with justice ; and those for the dispensing of honour ; 
and the last, that he who happens to be near, as if a burden 
were imposed on him, should stand and hear and take the 
post of mediator. 

CHAPTER IX. 

REASONS FOR VEILING THE TRUTH IN SYMBOLS. 

But, as appears, I have, in my eagerness to establish my 
point, insensibly gone beyond what is requisite. For life 
would fail me to adduce the multitude of those who philoso- 
phize in a symbolical manner. For the sake, then, of memory 
and brevity, and of attracting to the truth, such are the 
scriptures of the Barbarian philosophy. 

For only to those who often approach them, and have 
given them a trial by faith and in their whole life, will they 
supply the real philosophy and the true theology. They also 
wish us to require an interpreter and guide. For so they con- 
sidered, that, receiving truth at the hands of those who knew 
it well, we would be more earnest and less liable to deception, 
and those worthy of them would profit. Besides, all things that 
1 Mark i. 7 ; Luke iii. 1G ; John i. 27. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

255 

shine through a veil show the truth grander and more imposing; 
as fruits shining through water, and figures through veils, which 
give added reflections to them. For, in addition to the fact 
that things unconcealed are perceived in one way, the rays 
of light shining round reveal defects. Since, then, we may 
draw several meanings, as we do from what is expressed in 
veiled form, such being the case, the ignorant and unlearned 
man fails. But the Gnostic apprehends. Now, then, it is not 
wished that all things should be exposed indiscriminately to 
all and sundry, or the benefits of wisdom communicated to 
those who have not even in a dream been purified in soul, 
(for it is not allowed to hand to every chance comer what has 
been procured with such laborious efforts) ; nor are the mys- 
teries of the word to be expounded to the profane. 

They say, then, that Hipparchus the Pythagorean, being 
guilty of writing the tenets of Pythagoras in plain language, 
was expelled from the school, and a pillar raised for him 
as if he had been dead. Wherefore also in the Barbarian 
philosophy they call those dead who have fallen away from 
the dogmas, and have placed the mind in subjection to carnal 
passions. “ For what fellowship hath righteousness and ini- 
quity?” according to the divine apostle. “Or what com- 
munion hath light with darkness ? or what concord hath 
Christ with Belial ? or what portion hath the believer with 
the unbeliever ?” 1 For the honours of the Olympians and 
of mortals lie apart. “ Wherefore also go forth from the 
midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and touch 
not the unclean thing ; and I will receive you, and will he to 
you for a Father, and ye shall be my sons and daughters .” 2 

It was not only the Pythagoreans and Plato, then, that con- 
cealed many things ; but the Epicureans too say that they 
have things that may not be uttered, and do not allow all to 
peruse those writings. The Stoics also say that by the first 
Zeno things were written which they do not readily allow 
disciples to read, without their first giving proof whether 
or not they are genuine philosophers. And the disciples of 
Aristotle say that some of their treatises are esoteric, and 
1 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15. 2 2 Cor. vi. 17, 18. 

256 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

others common and exoteric. Further, those who instituted 
the mysteries, being philosophers, buried their doctrines in 
myths, so as not to be obvious to all. Did they then, by 
veiling human opinions, prevent the ignorant from handling 
them ; and was it not more beneficial for the holy and blessed 
contemplation of realities to be concealed? But it was not only 
the tenets of the Barbarian philosophy, or the Pythagorean 
myths. But even those myths in Plato (in the Republic , 
that of Hero the Armenian ; and in the Gorgias , that of 
Abacus and Bhadamanthus ; and in the Phcedo, that of 
Tartarus ; and in the Protagoras, that of Prometheus and 
Epimetheus ; and besides these, that of the war between the 
Atlantini and the Athenians in the Atlanticum) are to be 
expounded allegorically, not absolutely in all their expressions, 
but in those which express the general sense. And these we 
shall find indicated by symbols under the veil of allegory. 
Also the association of Pythagoras, and the twofold intercourse 
with the associates which designates the majority, hearers 
( aKovcrfiarucoL ), and the others that have a genuine attach- 
ment to philosophy, disciples (padeparifcol), yet signified that 
something was spoken to the multitude, and something con- 
cealed from them. Perchance, too, the twofold species of the 
Peripatetic teaching — that called probable, and that called 
knowable — came very near the distinction between opinion 
on the one hand, and glory and truth on the other. 

“ To win the flowers of fair renown from men, 

Be not induced to speak aught more than right.” 

The Ionic muses accordingly expressly say, “That the 
majority of people, wise in their own estimation, follow min- 
strels and make use of laws, knowing that many are bad, few 
good ; but that the best pursue glory : for the best make 
choice of the everlasting glory of men above all. But the 
multitude cram themselves like brutes, measuring happiness 
by the belly and the pudenda, and the basest things in us.” 
And the great Parmenides of Elea is introduced describing 
thus the teaching of the two ways: 

“ The one is the dauntless heart of convincing truth ; 

The other is in the opinions of men, in whom is no true faith.” 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

257 

CHAPTER X. 

THE OPINION OF THE APOSTLES ON VEILING THE MYSTERIES 

OF THE FAITH. 

Rightly, therefore, the divine apostle says, u By revelation 
the mystery was made known to me (as I wrote before in 
brief, in accordance with which, when ye read, ye may under- 
stand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ), which in 
other ages was not made known to the sons of men, as it is 
now revealed to His holy apostles and prophets .” 1 For 
there is an instruction of the perfect, of which, writing to 
the Colossians, he says, u We cease not to pray for you, 
and beseech that ye may be filled with the knowledge of His 
will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding ; that ye may 
walk worthy of the Lord to all pleasing; being fruitful in 
every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God ; 
strengthened with all might according to the glory of His 
power.” 2 And again he says, “ According to the disposition 
of the grace of God which is given me, that ye may fulfil 
the word of God; the mystery which has been hid from ages 
and generations, which now is manifested to His saints : to 
whom God wished to make known what is the riches of the 
glory of this mystery among the nations .” 3 So that, on the 
one hand, then, are the mysteries which were hid till the 
time of the apostles, and were delivered by them as they 
received from the Lord, and, concealed in the Old Tes- 
tament, were manifested to the saints. And, on the other 
hand, there is u the riches of the glory of the mystery in the 
Gentiles,” which is faith and hope in Christ; which in 
another place he has called the “ foundation .” 4 And again, 
as if in eagerness to divulge this knowledge, he thus writes : 
“ Warning every man in all wisdom, that we may present 
every man (the whole man) perfect in Christ;” not every 
man simply, since no one would be unbelieving. Nor does 
he call every man who believes in Christ perfect ; but he 
says all the man, as if he said the whole man, as if purified 
1 Epli. iii. 3-5. 2 Col. i. 9-11. 3 Col. i. 25-27. 4 Col. i. 27. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. E 

258 

TI1E MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

in body and soul. For that the knowledge does not apper- 
tain to all, he expressly adds : u Being knit together in love, 
and unto all the riches of the full assurance of knowledge, 
to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God in Christ, in 
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.” 1 
u Continue in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving.” 2 
And thanksgiving has place not for the soul and spiritual 
blessings alone, but also for the body, and for the good things 

of the body. And he still more clearly reveals that know- 

ledge belongs not to all, by adding : u Praying at the same 
time for you, that God would open to us a door to speak the 
mystery of Christ, for which I am bound ; that I may make 
it known as I ought to speak.” 3 For there were certainly, 
among the Hebrews, some things delivered unwritten. u For 
when ye ought to be teachers for the time,” it is said, as if 

they had grown old in the Old Testament, u ye have again 

need that one teach you which be the first principles of the 
oracles of God ; and are become such as have need of milk, 
and not of solid food. For every one that partaketh of milk 
is unskilful in the word of righteousness ; for he is a babe, 
being instructed with the first lessons. But solid food be- 
longs to those who are of full age, who by reason of use 
have their senses exercised so as to distinguish between good 
and evil. Wherefore, leaving the first principles of the 
doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection.” 4 

Barnabas, too, who in person preached the word along with 
the apostle in the ministry of the Gentiles, says, 11 1 write to 
you most simply, that ye may understand.” Then below, 
exhibiting already a clearer trace of gnostic tradition, he says, 
u What says the other prophet Moses to them ? Lo, thus saith 
the Lord God, Enter ye into the good land which the Lord 
God sware, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob ; and 
ye received for an inheritance that land, flowing with milk 
and honey. What says knowledge? Learn, hope, it says, in 
Jesus, who is to be manifested to you in the flesh. For man 
is the suffering land ; for from the face of the ground was 

1 Col. ii. 2, 3. 2 Col. iv. 2. 

3 Col. iv. 3, 4. 4 Heb. v. 12, 13, 14, vi. 1. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

259 

the formation of Adam. What, then, does it say in reference 
to the good land, flowing with milk and honey ? Blessed 
be our Lord, brethren, who has put into our hearts wisdom, 
and the understanding of His secrets. For the prophet says, 

“ Who shall understand the Lord’s parable but the wise and 
understanding, and he that loves his Lord?” It is but for few 
to comprehend these things. For it is not in the way of envy 
that the Lord announced in a Gospel, “ My mystery is to me, 
and to the sons of my house 1 placing the election in safety, 
and beyond anxiety ; so that the things pertaining to what it 
has chosen and taken may be above the reach of envy. For 
he who has not the knowledge of good is wicked : for there 
is one good, the Father; and to be ignorant of the Father is 
death, as to know Him is eternal life, through participation 
in the power of the incorrupt One. And to be incorruptible 
is to participate in divinity ; but revolt from the knowledge 
of God brings corruption. Again the prophet says : “ And 
I will give thee treasures, concealed, dark, unseen ; that they 
may know that I am the Lord.” 2 Similarly David sings : 
“For, lo, Thou hast loved truth; the obscure and hidden 
things of wisdom hast Thou showed me .” 3 “ Day utters 

speech to day ” 4 (what is clearly written), “and night to night 
proclaims knowledge ” (which is hidden in a mystic veil) ; 

“ and there are no words or utterances whose voices shall not 
be heard ” by God, who said, “ Shall one do what is secret, 
and I shall not see him?” 

Wherefore instruction, which reveals hidden things, is \j 
called illumination, as it is the teacher only who uncovers 
the lid of the ark, contrary to what the poets say, that “ Zeus 
stops up the jar of good things, but opens that of evil.” “For 
I know,” says the apostle, “ that when I come to you, I shall 
come in the fulness of the blessing of Christ ;” 5 designating 
the spiritual gift, and the gnostic communication, which being 
present he desires to impart to them present as “ the fulness 
of Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery sealed 
in the ages of eternity, but now manifested by the prophetic 

1 Isa. ii. 16. 2 Isa. xlv. 3. 3 Ps. li. 6, Sept. 

4 Ps. xix. 2, 3. 5 Rom. xv. 25, 26. 

260 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

Scriptures, according to the command of the eternal God, 
made known to all the nations, in order to the obedience of 
faith,” that is, those of the nations who believe that it is. 
But only to a few of them is shown what those things are 
which are contained in the mystery. 

Rightly then, Plato, in the epistles, treating of God, says : 
“We must speak in enigmas ; that should the tablet come 
by any mischance on its leaves either by sea or land, he who 
reads may remain ignorant.” For the God of the universe, 
who is above all speech, all conception, all thought, can 
never be committed to writing, being inexpressible even by 
His ow r n power. And this too Plato showed, by saying : 
“ Considering, then, these things, take care lest some time or 
other you repent on account of the present things, departing 
in a manner unworthy. The greatest safeguard is not to 
write, but learn ; for it is utterly impossible that what is 
written will not vanish.” 

Akin to this is what the holy Apostle Paul says, preserving 
the prophetic and truly ancient secret from which the teach- 
ings that were good were derived by the Greeks : “ Howbeit 
we speak wisdom among them who are perfect ; but not the 
wisdom of this world, or of the princes of this world, that come 
to nought; but we speak the wisdom of God hidden in a 
mystery .” 1 Then proceeding, he thus inculcates the caution 
against the divulging of his words to the multitude in the 
following terms : “ And I, brethren, could not speak to you 
as to spiritual, but as to carnal, even to babes in Christ. I 
have fed you with milk, not with meat : for ye were not yet 
able ; neither are ye now able. For ye are yet carnal.” 2 

If, then, “the milk” is said by the apostle to belong to 
the babes, and “ meat ” to be the food of the full-grown, 
milk will be understood to be catechetical instruction — the 
first food, as it were, of the soul. And meat is the mystic con- 
templation ; for this is the flesh and the blood of the Word, 
that is, the comprehension of the divine power and essence. 
“ Taste and see that the Lord is Christ,” 3 it is said. For so 

1 1 Cor. ii. G, 7. 2 1 Cor. iii. 1-3. 

3 Ps. xxxiv. 8 ; according to the reading Xpiaro; for ypr^ro;- 

Book y.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

261 

He imparts of Himself to those who partake of such food in 
a more spiritual manner ; when now the soul nourishes itself, 
according to the truth-loving Plato. For the knowledge of 
the divine essence is the meat and drink of the divine Word. 
Wherefore also Plato says, in the second book of the Republic , 
<l It is those that sacrifice not a sow. but some great and diffi- 
cult sacrifice,” who ought to inquire respecting God. And 
the apostle writes, u Christ our passover was sacrificed for 
us 1 — a sacrifice hard to procure, in truth, the Son of God 
consecrated for us. 

CHAPTER XI. 

ABSTRACTION FROM MATERIAL THINGS NECESSARY IN ORDER 
TO ATTAIN TO THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. 

Now the sacrifice which is acceptable to God is unswerving 
abstraction from the body and its passions. This is the really 
true piety. And is not, on this account, philosophy rightly 
called by Socrates the practice of Death? For he who neither 
employs his eyes in the exercise of thought, nor draws aught 
from his other senses, but with pure mind itself applies to 
objects, practises the true philosophy. This is, then, the 
import of the silence of five years prescribed by Pythagoras, 
which he enjoined on his disciples ; that, abstracting them- 
selves from the objects of sense, they might with the mind 
alone contemplate the Deity. It was from Moses that the 
chief of the Greeks drew these philosophical tenets. For he 
commands holocausts to be skinned and divided into parts. 
For the gnostic soul must be consecrated to the light, stript 
of the integuments of matter, devoid of the frivolousness of 
the body and of all tbe passions, which are acquired through 
vain and lying opinions, and divested of the lusts of the 
flesh. But the most of men, clothed with what is perishable, 
like cockles, and rolled all round in a ball in their excesses, 
like hedgehogs, entertain the same ideas of the blessed and 
incorruptible God as of themselves. But it has escaped their 
notice, though they be near us, that God has bestowed on us 

1 1 Cor. v. 7. 

262 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

£Book v. 

ten thousand things in which He does not share : birth, beiim 
Himself unborn ; food, He wanting nothing ; and growth, 
He being always equal ; and long life and immortality, He 
being immortal and incapable of growing old. Wherefore 
let no one imagine that hands, and feet, and mouth, and eyes, 
and going in and coming out, and resentments and threats, 
are said by the Hebrews to be attributes of God. By no 
means ; but that certain of these appellations are used more 
sacredly in an allegorical sense, which, as the discourse pro- 
ceeds, we shall explain at the proper time. 

u Wisdom of all medicines is the Panacea,” writes Calli- 
machus in the Epigrams. “ And one becomes wise from 
another, both in past times and at present,” says Bacchylides 
in the Paeans ; u for it is not very easy to find the portals of 
unutterable words.” Beautifully, therefore, Isocrates writes 
in the Panathenaic, having put the question, u Who, then, 
are well trained?” adds, “ First, those who manage well the 
things which occur each day, whose opinion jumps with oppor- 
tunity, and is able for the most part to hit on what is bene- 
ficial ; then those who behave becomingly and rightly to those 
who approach them, who take lightly and easily annoyances 
and molestations offered by others, but conduct themselves as 
far as possible, to those with whom they have intercourse, with 
consummate care and moderation ; further, those who have 
the command of their pleasures, and are not too much over- 
come by misfortunes, but conduct themselves in the midst of 
them with manliness, and in a way worthy of the nature which 
we share; fourth — and this is the greatest — those who are not 
corrupted by prosperity, and are not put beside themselves, or 
made haughty, but continue in the class of sensible people.” 
Then he puts on the top-stone of the discourse : “ Those who 
have the disposition of their soul well suited not to one only 
of these things, but to them all — those I assert to be wise and 
perfect men, and to possess all the virtues.” 

Do you see how the Greeks deify the gnostic life (though 
not knowing how to become acquainted with it) ? And what 
knowledge it is, they know not even in a dream. If, then, 
it is agreed among us that knowledge is the food of reason, 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

263 

“ blessed truly are they/’ according to the scripture, (( who 
hunger and thirst after truth : for they shall be filled ” with 
everlasting food. In the most wonderful harmony with these 
words, Euripides, the philosopher of the drama, is found in 
the following words, — making allusion, I know not how, at 
once to the Father and the Son : 

“ To thee, the lord of all, I bring 
Cakes and libations too, 0 Zeus, 

Or Hades would’st thou choose be called ; 

Do thou accept my offering of all fruits, 

Bare, full, poured forth.” 

For a whole burnt-offering and rare sacrifice for us is Christ. 
And that unwittingly he mentions the Saviour, he will make 
plain, as he adds : 

“ For thou who, ’midst the heavenly gods, 

Jove’s sceptre sway’st, dost also share 
The rule of those on earth.” 

Then he says expressly : 

“ Send light to human souls that fain would know 
Whence conflicts spring, and what the root of ills, 

And of the blessed gods to whom due rites 
Of sacrifice we needs must pay, that so 
We may from troubles find repose.” 

It is not then without reason that in the mysteries that obtain 
among the Greeks, lustrations hold the first place ; as also 
the laver among the Barbarians. After these are the minor 
mysteries, which have some foundation of instruction and of 
preliminary preparation for what is to come after ; and the 
great mysteries, in which nothing remains to be learned of 
the universe, but only to contemplate and comprehend nature 
and things. 

We shall understand the mode of purification by confession, 
and that of contemplation by analysis, advancing by analysis 
to the first notion, beginning with the properties underlying 
it ; abstracting from the body its physical properties, taking 
away the dimension of depth, then that of breadth, and then 
that of length. For the point which remains is a unit, so to 
speak, having position ; from which if we abstract position, 
there is the conception of unity. 

264 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book v. 

X 

If, then, abstracting all that belongs to bodies and things 
called incorporeal, we cast ourselves into the greatness of 
Christ, and thence advance into immensity by holiness, we 
may reach somehow to the conception of the r Almighty, know T - 
ing not what He is, but what He is not . And form and 
motion, or standing, or a throne, or place, or right hand or 
left, are not at all to be conceived as belonging to the Father 
of the universe, although it is so written. But what each of 
these means will be shown in its proper place. The First 
Cause is not then in space, but above both space, and time, 
and name, and conception. 

Wherefore also Moses says, “ Show thyself to me,” 1 — inti- 
mating most clearly that God is not capable of being taught 
by man, or expressed in speech, but to be known only by His 
own power. For inquiry was obscure and dim ; but the grace 
of knowledge is from Him by the Son. Most clearly Solomon 
shall testify to us, speaking thus : “ The prudence of man 
is not in me : but God giveth me wisdom, and I know holy 
things .” 2 Now Moses, describing allegorically the divine 
prudence, called it the tree of life planted in Paradise ; which 
Paradise may be the world in which all things proceeding 
from creation grow. In it also the Word blossomed and bore 
fruit, being “ made flesh,” and gave life to those “ who had 
tasted of His graciousness;” since it was not without the wood 
of the tree that He came to our knowledge. For our life 
was hung on it, in order that we might believe. And Solo- 
mon again says : “ She is a tree of immortality to those who 
take hold of her.” 3 “ Behold, I set before thy face life and 

death, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk in His ways, 
and hear His voice, and trust in life. But if ye transgress 
the statutes and the judgments which I have given you, ye 
shall be destroyed with destruction. For this is life, and the 
length of thy days, to love the Lord thy God.” 4 

Again : “Abraham, when he came to the place which God 
told him of on the third day, looking up, saw the place afar 
off .” 5 For the first day is that which is constituted by the sight 

1 Ex. xxxiii. 18. 2 Prov. xxx. 2. 3 Prov. iii. 18. 

4 Ex. xxx. 15, 16, etc. 5 Gen. xxii. 3, 4. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

2G5 

of good tilings ; and the second is the soul’s 1 best desire ; on 
the third, the mind perceives spiritual things, the eyes of the 
understanding being opened by the Teacher who rose on the 
third day. The three days may be the mystery of the seal, 2 
in which God is really believed. It is consequently afar off 
that he sees the place. For the region of God is hard to 
attain ; which Plato called the region of ideas, having learned 
from Moses that it was a place which contained all things 
universally. But it is seen by Abraham afar off, rightly, 
because of his beinir in the realms of generation, and he is 
forthwith initiated by the angel. Thence says the apostle : 
“ Now we see as through a glass, but then face to face,” by 
those sole pure and incorporeal applications of the intellect. 
In reasoning, it is possible to divine respecting God, if one 
attempt without any of the senses, by reason, to reach what 
is individual ; and do not quit the sphere of existences, till, 
rising up to the things which transcend it, he apprehends by 
the intellect itself that which is good, moving in the very 
confines of the world of thought, according to Plato. 

Again, Moses, not allowing altars and temples to be con- 
structed in many places, but raising one temple of God, an- 
nounced that the world was only-begotten, as Basilides says, 
and that God is one, as does not as yet appear to Basilides. 
And since the gnostic Moses does not circumscribe within 
space Him that cannot be circumscribed, he set up no image 
in the temple to be worshipped; showing that God was invi- 
sible, and incapable of being circumscribed ; and somehow 
leading the Hebrews to the conception of God by the honour 
for His name in the temple. Further, the Word, prohibiting 
the constructing of temples and all sacrifices, intimates that 
the Almighty is not contained in anything, by what He says : 
“ What house will ye build to me ? saith the Lord. Heaven 
is my throne,” 3 and so on. Similarly respecting sacrifices: 
“ I do not desire the blood of bulls and the fat of lambs,” 4 and 
what the Holy Spirit by the prophet in the sequel forbids. 

1 Or, “the desire of a very good soul,” according to the text which 

reads 'H dpwrn;. The other reading is dowry]. 

2 Baptism. 2 Isa. Ixvi. 1. 

4 Ps. 1. 15. 

266 THE MISCELLANIES. [Book v. 

Most excellently, therefore, Euripides accords with these, 
when he writes : 

“ What house constructed by the workmen’s hands, 

With folds of walls, can clothe the shape divine?” 

And of sacrifices he thus speaks : 

“ For God needs nought, if He is truly God. 

These of the minstrels are the wretched myths.” 

“ For it was not from need that God made the world ; that 
He might reap honours from men and the other gods and 
demons, winning a kind of revenue from creation, and from 
us, fumes, and from the gods and demons, their proper mini- 
stries,” says Plato. Most instructively, therefore, says Paul 
in the Acts of the Apostles : “ The God that made the world, 
and all things in it, being the Lord of heaven and earth, 
dwelleth not in temples made with hands ; neither is wor- 
shipped by men’s hands, as if He needed anything ; seeing 
that it is He Himself that giveth to all breath, and life, 
and all things.” 1 And Zeno, the founder of the Stoic sect, 
says in this book of the Republic , “ that we ought to make 
neither temples nor images ; for that no work is worthy of 
the gods.” And he was not afraid to write in these very 
words: “ There will be no need to build temples. For a 
temple is not worth much, and ought not to be regarded as 
holy. For nothing is worth much, and holy, which is the 
work of builders and mechanics.” Rightly, therefore, Plato 
too, recognising the world as God’s temple, pointed out to the 
citizens a spot in the city where their idols were to be laid 
up. u Let not, then, any one again,” he says, u consecrate 
temples to the gods. For gold and silver in other states, in 
the case of private individuals and in the temples, is an in- 
vidious possession ; and ivory, a body which has abandoned 
the life, is not a sacred votive offering ; and steel and brass 
are the instruments of wars ; but whatever one wishes to 
dedicate, let it be wood of one tree, as also stone for com- 
mon temples.” Rightly, then, in the great epistle he says : 
“For it is not capable of expression, like other branches of 
study. But as the result of great intimacy with this subject, 

1 Acts xvii. 24, 25. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

267 

and living with it, a sudden light, like that kindled by a 
coruscating fire, arising in the soul, feeds itself.” Are not 
these statements like those of Zephanialr the prophet % u And 
the Spirit of the Lord took me, and brought me up to the 
fifth heaven, and I beheld .angels called Lords ; and their 
diadem was set on in the Holy Spirit ; and each of them had 
a throne sevenfold brighter than the light of the rising sun ; 
and they dwelt in temples of salvation, and hymned the in- 
effable, Most High God.” 1 

f 

CHAPTER XII. 

GOD CANNOT BE EMBRACED IN WORDS OR BY THE MIND. 

“ For both is it a difficult task to discover the Father and 
Maker of this universe; and having found Him, it is impos- 
sible to declare Him to all. For this is by no means capable 
of expression, like the other subjects of instruction,” says the 
truth-loving Plato. For he had heard right well that the 
all-wise Moses, ascending the mount for holy contemplation, 
to the summit of intellectual objects, necessarily commands 
that the whole people do not accompany him. And when the 
Scripture says, “ Moses entered into the thick darkness where 
God was,” this shows to those capable of understanding, that 
God is invisible and beyond expression by words. And u the 
darkness ” — which, is in truth, the unbelief and ignorance of 
the multitude — obstructs the gleam of the truth. And again 
Orpheus, the theologian, aided from this quarter, says : 

“One is perfect in himself, and all things are made the progeny of one,” 
or, u are born for so also is it written. He adds : 

“ Him 

No one of mortals has seen, but He sees all.” 

And he adds more clearly : 

“ Him see T not, for round about, a cloud 
Has settled ; for in mortal eyes are small, 

And mortal pupils — only flesh and bones grow there.” 

To these statements the apostle will testify : “ I know a man 
in Christ, caught up into the third heaven, and thence into 
1 From some apocryphal writing. 

268 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

Paradise, who heard unutterable words which it is not lawful 
for a man to speak,” — intimating thus the impossibility of ex- 
pressing God, and indicating that what is divine is unutter- 
able by human 1 power ; if, indeed, he begins to speak above 
the third heaven, as it is lawful to initiate the elect souls in 
the mysteries there. For I know what is in Plato (for the 
examples from the barbarian philosophy, which are many, are 
suggested now by the composition which, in accordance with 
promises previously given, waits the suitable time). For 
doubting, in Timceus , whether we ought to regard several 
worlds as to be understood by many heavens, or this one, he 
makes no distinction in the names, calling the world and 
heaven by the same name. But the words of the statement 
are as follows : u Whether, then, have we rightly spoken of 
one heaven, or of many and infinite? It were more correct 
to say one, if indeed it was created according to the model.” 
Further, in the Epistle of the Romans to the Corinthians it 
is written, u An ocean illimitable by men and the worlds 
after it.” Consequently, therefore, the noble apostle exclaims, 
u Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the 
knowledge of God !” 2 

And was it not this which the prophet meant, when he 
ordered unleavened cakes 3 to be made, intimating that the 
truly sacred mystic word, respecting the unbegotten and His 
powers, ought to be concealed ? In confirmation of these 
things, in the Epistle to the Corinthians the apostle plainly 
says : u Howbeit we speak wisdom among those who are per- 
fect, but not the wisdom of this world, or of the princes of 
this world, that come to nought. But w T e speak the wisdom 
of God hidden in a mystery.” 4 And again in another place 
he says : u To the acknowledgment of the mystery of God 
in Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and 

1 uyia is the reading of the text. This is with great probability sup- 
posed to be changed from clvy, a usual contraction for dv6pa^l»vj. 

2 Bom. xi. 38. 

3 Alluding to Gen. xviii. 6 ; the word used is syxpv(plcti, which Clement, 
following Philo, from its derivation, takes to signify occult mysteries. 

4 1 Cor. vi. C, 7. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

269 

knowledge.” 1 These things the Saviour Himself seals when 
He says : u To you it is given to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of heaven.” 2 And again the Gospel says that the 
Saviour spake to the apostles the word in a mystery. For 
prophecy says of Him : “ He will open His mouth in parables, 
and will utter things kept secret from the foundation of the 
world.” 3 And now, by the parable of the leaven, the Lord 
shows concealment ; for He says, “ The kingdom of heaven 
is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures 
of meal, till the whole was leavened.” 4 For the tripartite 
soul is saved by obedience, through the spiritual power hid- 
den v in it by faith ; or because the power of the word which 
is given to us, being strong 5 and powerful, draws to itself 
secretly and invisibly eveiy one who receives it, and keeps 
it within himself, and brings his whole system into unity. 

Accordingly Solon has written most wisely respecting God, 
thus : 

“ It is most difficult to apprehend the mind’s invisible measure 
Which alone holds the boundaries of all things.” 

For u the divine,” says the poet of Agrigentum , 8 

“ Is not capable of being approached with our eyes, 

Or grasped with our hands ; but the highway 
Of persuasion, highest of all, leads to men’s minds.” 

And John the apostle says : “ No man hath seen God at any 
time. The only-begotten God, who is in the bosom of the 
Father, He hath declared Him,” 7 — calling invisibility and 
ineffableness the bosom of God. Hence some have called it 
the Depth, as containing and embosoming all things, inacces- 
sible and boundless. 

This discourse respecting God is most difficult to handle. 
For since the first principle of everything is difficult to find 
out, the absolutely first and oldest principle, which is the 
cause of all other things being and having been, is difficult 

1 Col. ii. 2, 3. 2 Matt. xii. 11 ; Mark iv. 11 ; Luke viii. 10. 

3 Ps. lxxviii. 2. 4 Matt. xiii. 33. 

5 According to the conjecture of Sylburgius, ain itodos is adopted for 

cvvro^og, 

6 Empedocles. 7 John i. IS. 

270 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

to exhibit. For how can that be expressed which is neither 
genus, nor difference, nor species, nor individual, nor num- 
ber; nay more, is neither an event, nor that to which an 
even happens? No one can rightly express Him wholly. 
For on account of His greatness Fie is ranked as the All, 
and is the Father of the universe. Nor are any parts to be 
predicated of Him. For the One is indivisible ; wherefore 
also it is infinite, not considered with reference to inscrutability, 
but with reference to its being without dimensions, and not 
having a limit. And therefore it is without form and name. 
And if we name it, we do not do so properly, terming it either 
the One, or the Good, or Mind, or Absolute Being, or Father, 
or God, or Creator, or Lord. We speak not as supplying 
His name ; but for want, we use good names, in order that 
the mind may have these as points of support, so as not to 
err in other respects. For each one by itself does not ex- 
press God; but all together are indicative of the power of the 
Omnipotent. For predicates are expressed either from what 
belongs to things themselves, or from their mutual relation. 
But none of these are admissible in reference to God. Nor 
any more is He apprehended by the science of demonstration. 
For it depends on primary and better known principles. But 
there is nothing antecedent to the Unbegotten. 

It remains that we understand, then, the Unknown, by 
divine grace, and by the word alone that proceeds from 
Him ; as Luke in the Acts of the Apostles relates that Paul 
said, u Men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are 
too superstitious. For in walking about, and beholding the 
objects of your worship, I found an altar on which was in- 
scribed, To the Unknown God. Whom therefore ye igno- 
rantly worship, Him declare I unto you .” 1 

CHAPTER XIII. 

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD A DIVINE GIFT, ACCORDING TO 
THE PHILOSOPHERS. 

Everything, then, which falls under a name, is originated, 

1 Acts xvii. 22, 23. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

271 

whether they will or not. Whether, then, the Father Him- 
self draws to Himself every one who has led a pure life, and 
Kas^ reached the conception of the blessed and incorruptible 
nature ; or whether the free-will which is in us, by reaching 
the knowledge of the good, leaps and bounds over the barriers, 
as the gymnasts say ; yet it is not without eminent grace that 
the soul is winged, and soars, and is raised above the higher 
spheres, laying aside all that is heavy, and surrendering itself 
to its kindred element. 

Plato, too, in Meno, says that virtue is God-given, as the 
following expressions show : “ From this argument then, O 
Meno, virtue is shown to come to those, in whom it is found, 
by divine providence.” Does it not then appear that “ the 
gnostic disposition ” which has come to all is enigmatically 
called u divine providence?” And he adds more explicitly": 
“ If, then, in this whole treatise we have investigated well, it 
results that virtue is neither by nature, nor is it taught, but 
is produced by divine providence, not without intelligence, 
in those in whom it is found.” Wisdom which is God-given, 
as being the power of the Father, rouses indeed our free-will, 
and admits faith, and repays the application of the elect with 
its crown ing fellowship^ 

And now I will adduce Plato himself, who clearly deems 
it fit to believe the children of God. For, discoursing on gods 
that are visible and born, in Timceus , he says : “But to speak 
of the other demons, and to know their birth, is too much for 
us. But we must credit those who have formerly spoken, they 
being the offspring of the gods, as they said, and knowing well 
their progenitors, although they speak without probable and 
necessary proofs.” I do not think it possible that clearer tes- 
timony could be borne by the Greeks, that our Saviour, and 
those anointed to prophesy (the latter being called the sons of 
God, and the Lord being His own Son), are the true witnesses 
respecting divine things. Wherefore also they ought to be 
believed, being inspired, he added. And were one to say in 
a more tragic vein, that we ought not to believe, 

“ For it was not Zeus that told me these things,” 
yet let him know that it was God Himself that promulgated 

272 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

the Scriptures by His Son. And he, who announces what is 
his own, is to be believed. “ No one,” says the Lord, “ hath 
known the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son 
shall reveal Him.” 1 This, then, is to be believed, according to 
Plato, though it is announced and spoken “ without probable 
and necessary proofs,” but in the Old and New Testament. 
“ For except ye believe,” says the Lord, “ ye shall die in your 
sins.” 2 And again : “ He that believeth hath everlasting 

O CD 

life.” 3 “ Blessed are all they that put their trust in Him.” 4 

For trusting is more than faith. For when one has be- 
lieved 5 that the Son of God is our teacher, he trusts 6 that 
his teaching is true. And as “ instruction,” according to 
Empedocles, “ makes the mind grow,” so trust in the Lord 
makes faith grow. 

We say, then, that it is characteristic of the same persons 
to vilify philosophy and run down faith, and to praise ini- 
quity and felicitate a libidinous life. But now faith, if it 
is the voluntary assent of the soul, is still the doer of good 
things, the foundation of right conduct ; and if Aristotle 
defines strictly when he teaches that ttoigIv is applied to 
the irrational creatures and to inanimate things, while 7 rpar- 
t eiv is applicable to men only, let him correct those who 
say that God is the maker (ttolt] tt??) of the universe. 
And what is done (7 rpaicTov), he says, is as good or as 
necessary. To do wrong, then, is not good, for no one does 
wrong except for some other thing ; and nothing that is 
necessary is voluntary. To do wrong, then, is voluntary, so 
that it is not necessary. But the good differ especially from 
the bad in inclinations and good desires. For all depravity 
of soul is accompanied with want of restraint ; and he who 
acts from passion, acts from want of restraint and from 
depravity. 

I cannot help admiring in every particular that divine 
utterance : “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that enteretli 

1 Matt. xi. 27 ; Luke iii. 22. 2 John viii. 24. 

3 John iii. 15, 1G, 36, v. 24. 4 Ps. ii. 12. 

5 The text s ttwtyitcii, but the sense seems to require I: rL-ivm. 

6 •xsTToihv is confidence. 

Book v.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

273 

not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some 
other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that 
entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To 
him the porter openeth.” Then the Lord says in explana- 
tion, u I am the door of the sheep.” 1 Men must then be 
saved by learning the truth through Christ, even if they 
attain philosophy. For now that is clearly shown “which 
was not made known to other ages, which is now revealed 
to the sons of men .” 2 For there was always a natural mani- 
festation of the one Almighty God, among all right-thinking 
men ; and the most, who had not quite divested them- 
selves of shame with respect to the truth, apprehended the 
eternal beneficence in divine providence. In fine, then, 
Xenocrates the Chalcedonian was not quite without hope 
that the notion of the Divinity existed even in the irrational 
creatures. And Democritus, though against his will, will 
make this avowal by the consequences of his dogmas ; for 
he represents the same images as issuing, from the divine 
essence, on men and on the irrational animals. Far from 
destitute of a divine idea is man, who, it is written in Genesis, 
partook of inspiration, being endowed with a purer essence 
than the other animate creatures. Hence the Pythagoreans 
say that mind comes to man by divine providence, as Plato 
and Aristotle avow; but we assert that the Holy Spirit 
inspires him who has believed. The Platonists hold that 
mind is an effluence of divine dispensation in the soul, and 
they place the soul in the body. For it is expressly said by 
Joel, one of the twelve prophets, “ And it shall come to pass 
after these things, I will pour out of my Spirit on all flesh, 
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy .” 3 But it 
is not as a portion of God that the Spirit is in each of us. 
But how this dispensation takes place, and what the Holy 
Spirit is, shall be shown by us in the books on prophecy, 
and in those on the soul. But “ incredulity is good at con- 
cealing the depths of knowledge,” according to Heraclitus ; 
“ for incredulity escapes from ignorance.” 

1 John x. 1-3, 7. 2 Eph. iii. 5. 3 Joel ii. 28. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

S 

274 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

CHAPTER XI Y. 

GREEK PLAGIARISMS FROM THE HEBREWS. 

Let us aclcl in completion what follows, and exhibit now 
with greater clearness the plagiarism of the Greeks from the 
Barbarian philosophy. 

Now the Stoics say that God, like the soul, is essentially 
body and spirit. You will find all this explicitly in their 
writings. Do not consider at present their allegories as the 
gnostic truth presents them ; whether they show one thing 
and mean another, like the dexterous athletes. Well, they 
say that God pervades all being ; while we call Him solely 
Maker, and Maker by the Word. They were misled by 
what is said in the book of Wisdom : “ He pervades and 
passes through all by reason of His purity ;” 1 since they did 
not understand that this was said of Wisdom, which was the 
first of the creation of God. 

So be it, they say. But the philosophers, the Stoics, and 
Plato, and Pythagoras, nay more, Aristotle the Peripatetic, 
suppose the existence of matter among the first principles ; 
and not one first principle. Let them then know that what 
is called matter by them, is said by them to be without qua- 
lity, and without form, and more daringly said by Plato to be 
non-existence. And does he not say very mystically, know- 
ing that the true and real first cause is one, in these very 
words : “ Now, then, let our opinion be so. As to the first 
principle or principles of the universe, or what opinion we 
ought to entertain about all these points, we are not now to 
speak, for no other cavise than on account of its being diffi- 
cult to explain our sentiments in accordance with the present 
form of discourse.” But undoubtedly that prophetic expres- 
sion, “ Now the earth was invisible and formless,” supplied 
them with the ground of material essence. 

And the introduction of “chance” was hence suggested 
to Epicurus, who misapprehended the statement, “Vanity of 
vanities, and all is vanity.” And it occurred to Aristotle to 

1 Wisd. vii. 24. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . . 

275 

extend Providence as far as the moon from this psalm: “Lord, 
Thy mercy is in the heavens ; and Thy truth reacheth to the 
clouds .” 1 For the explanation of the prophetic mysteries had 
not yet been revealed previous to the advent of the Lord. 

Punishments after death, on the other hand, and penal re- 
tribution by fire, were pilfered from the Barbarian philosophy 
both by all the poetic Muses and by the Hellenic philosophy. 
Plato, accordingly, in the last book of the Republic , says in 
these express terms : “ Then these men fierce and fiery to look 
on, standing by, and hearing the sound, seized and took some 
aside ; and binding Arideeus and the rest hand, foot, and 
head, and throwing them down, and flaying them, dragged 
them along the way, tearing their flesh with thorns.” For the 
fiery men are meant to signify the angels, who seize and punish 
the wicked. “Who maketh,” it is said, “His angels spirits; 
His ministers flaming fire.” 2 It follows from this that the 
soul is immortal. For what is tortured or corrected being in a 
state of sensation lives, though said to suffer. Well ! Did not 
Plato know of the rivers of fire and the depth of the earth, 
and Tartarus, called by the Barbarians Gehenna, naming, as 
he does prophetically , 3 Cocytus, and Acheron, and Pyriphlc- 
gethon, and introducing such corrective tortures for discipline? 

But indicating “the angels,” as the Scripture says, “of the 
little ones, and of the least, which see God,” and also the over- 
sight reaching to us exercised by the tutelary angels, he shrinks 
not from writing, “That when all the souls have selected their 
several lives, according as it has fallen to their lot, they ad- 
vance in order toLachesis; and she sends alone with each 
one, as his guide in life, and the joint accomplisher of his 
purposes, the demon which he has chosen.” Perhaps also 
the demon of Socrates suggested to him something similar. 

Nay, the philosophers, having so heard from Moses, taught 
that the world w r as created . 4 And so Plato expressly said, 
“ Whether was it that the world had no beginning of its exist- 
ence, or derived its beginning from some beginning ? For 
being visible, it is tangible ; and being tangible, it has a body. ” 

1 Ps. xxxvi. 5, 2 Ps. civ. 4. 

3 Eusebius reads •arotnuKus. 4 yvj/nov. 

276 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

Again, when he says, “It is a difficult task to find the Maker 
and Father of this universe,” he not only showed that the 
universe was created, but points out that it was generated by 
him as a son, and that he is called its father, as deriving its 
being from him alone, and springing from non-existence. 
The Stoics, too, hold the tenet that the world was created. 

And that the devil so spoken of by the Barbarian philosophy, 
the prince of the demons, is a wicked spirit, Plato asserts in 
the tenth book of the Laws , in these words : “ Must we not 
say that spirit which pervades the things that are moved on 
all sides, pervades also heaven? Well, what? One or more? 
Several, say I, in reply for you. Let us not suppose fewer 
than two — that which is beneficent, and that which is able 
to accomplish the opposite.” Similarly in the Phcedms he 
writes as follows : “ Now there are other evils. But some 
demon has mingled pleasure with the most things at present.” 
Further, in the tenth book of the Laws , he expressly emits 
that apostolic sentiment, “ Our contest is not with flesh and 
blood, but principalities, with powers, with the spiritual things 
of those which are in heaven;” writing thus: “For since 
we are agreed that heaven is full of many good beings; but 
it is also full of the opposite of these, and more of these; and 
as we assert such a contest is deathless, and requiring mar- 
vellous watchfulness.” 

Again, the Barbarian philosophy knows the world of 
thought and the world of sense — the former archetypal, and 
the latter the image of that which is called the model ; and 
assigns the former to the Monad, as being perceived by the 
mind, and the world of sense to the number six. For six is 
called by the Pythagoreans marriage, as being the genital 
number ; and he places in the Monad the invisible heaven and 
the holy earth, and intellectual light. For “ in the beginning,” 
it is said, “ God made the heaven and the earth ; and the earth 
was invisible.” And it is added, “And God said, Let there be 
light ; and there was light .” 1 And in the material cosmogony 
He creates a solid heaven (and what is solid is capable of 
being perceived by sense), and a visible earth, and a light that 

1 Gen. i. 1-3. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

277 

is seen. Does not Plato hence appear to have left the ideas of 
living creatures in the intellectual world, and to make intel- 
lectual objects into sensible species according to their genera? 
Rightly then Moses says, that the body which Plato calls “ the 
earthly tabernacle ” was formed of the ground, but that the 
rational soul was breathed by God into man’s face. For there, 
they say, the ruling faculty is situated; interpreting the access 
by the senses into the first man as the addition of the soul. 

Wherefore also man is said “to have been made in [God’s] 
image and likeness.” For the image of God is the divine 
and royal Word, the impassible man ; and the image of the 
image is the human mind. And if you wish to apprehend 
the likeness by another name, you will find it named in 
Moses, a divine correspondence. For he says, “Walk after 
the Lord your God, and keep His commandments.” 1 And 
I reckon all the virtuous, servants and followers of God. 
Hence the Stoics say that the end of philosophy is to live 
agreeably to nature ; and Plato, likeness to God, as we have 
shown in the second Miscellany. And Zeno the Stoic, borrow- 
ing from Plato, and he from the Barbarian philosophy, says 
that all the good are friends of one another. For Socrates 
says in the Phcedrus, “ that it has not been ordained that 
the bad should be a friend to the bad, nor the good be 
not a friend to the good;” as also he showed sufficiently in 
the Lysis, that friendship is never preserved in wickedness 
and vice. And the Athenian stranger similarly says, “ that 
there is conduct pleasing and conformable to God, based on 
one ancient ground-principle, That like loves like, provided 
it be within measure. But things beyond measure are con- 
genial neither to what is within nor what is beyond measure. 
Now it is the case that God is the measure to us of all things.” 
Then proceeding, Plato 2 adds : “For every good man is like 
every other good man ; and so being like to God, he is liked 
by every good man and by God.” At this point I have just 
recollected the following. In the end of the Tunceus he says : 
“ You must necessarily assimilate that which perceives to 
that which is perceived, according to its original nature ; and 

1 Dent. xiii. 4. 2 The text has tuKiv ; Euseb. reads IT 'haruv. 

278 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

it is by so assimilating it that you attain to the end of the 
highest life proposed by the gods to men/ for the present 
or the future time.” For those have equal power with these. 
He, who seeks, will not stop till he find ; and having found, 
he will wonder ; and wondering, he will reign ; and reigning, 
he will rest. And what ? Were not also those expressions 
of Thales derived fi’om these ? The fact that God is glorified 
for ever, and that He is expressly called by us the Searcher 
of hearts, he interprets. For Thales being asked, What is 
the divinity? said, What has neither beginning nor end. 
And on another asking, u If a man could elude the know- 
ledge of the Divine Being while doing aught? ” said, u How 
could he who cannot do so while thinking ? ” 

Further, the Barbarian philosophy recognises good as alone 
excellent, and virtue as sufficient for happiness, when it says, 
“ Behold, I have set before your eyes good and evil, life and 
death, that ye may choose life.” 2 For it calls good, u life,” 
and the choice of it excellent, and the choice of the opposite 
11 evil.” And the end of good and of life is to become a lover 
of God : “ For this is thy life and length of days,” to love that 
which tends to the truth. And these points are yet clearer. 
For the Saviour, in enjoining to love God and our neighbour, 
says, “ that on these two commandments hang the whole law 
and the prophets.” Such are the tenets promulgated by the 
Stoics ; and before these, by Socrates, in the Phccdrus , who 
prays, u O Pan, and ye other gods, give m>e to be beautiful 
within.” And in the Theceletus he says expressly, “For he 
that speaks well (/caXco?) is both beautiful and good.” And 
in the Protagoras he avers to the companions of Protagoras 
that he has met in with one more beautiful than Alcibiades, 
if indeed that which is wisest is most beautiful. For he said 
that virtue was the soul’s beauty, and, on the contrary, that 
vice was the souks deformity. Accordingly, Antipatrus the 
Stoic, who composed three books on the point, “That, accord- 
ing to Plato, only the beautiful is good,” shows that, according 
to him, virtue is sufficient for happiness ; and adduces several 

1 The text has duffponra ; Plato and Eusebius, dvdpu^oii. 

2 Dcut. xxx. 15, 19, 20. 

Book y.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

279 

other dogmas agreeing with the Stoics. And by Aristobulus, 
who lived in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, who is men- 
tioned by the composer of the epitome of the books of the 
Maccabees, there were abundant books to show that the Peri- 
patetic philosophy was derived from the law of Moses and 
from the other prophets. Let such be the case. 

Plato plainly calls us brethren, as being of one God and 
one teacher, in the following words: “For ye who are in the 
state are entirely brethren (as we shall say to them, continuing 
our story). But the God who formed you, mixed gold in 
the composition of those of you who are fit to rule, at your 
birth, wherefore you are most highly honoured ; and silver 
in the case of those who are helpers ; and steel and brass in 
the case of farmers and other workers.” Whence, of neces- 
sity, some embrace and love those things to which knowledge 
pertains ; and others matters of opinion. Perchance he pro- 
phesies of that elect nature which is bent on knowledge ; 
if by the supposition he makes of three natures he does not 
describe three polities, as some supposed : that of the Jews, 
the silver; that of the Greeks, the third; and that of the 
Christians, with whom has been mingled the regal cold, the 
Holy Spirit, the golden . 1 

And exhibiting the Christian life, he writes in the Thecv- 
tetus in these words : “ Let us now speak of the highest prin- 
ciples. For why should we speak of those who make an abuse 
of philosophy ? These know neither the way to the forum, 
nor know they the court or the senate-house, or any other 
public assembly of the state. As for laws and decrees spoken 
or 2 written, they neither see nor hear them. But party feel- 
ings of political associations and public meetings, and revels 
with musicians [occupy them] ; but they never even dream 
of taking part in affairs. Has any one conducted himself 
either well or ill in the state, or has aught evil descended to a 
man from his forefathers? — it escapes their attention as much 
as do the sands of the sea. And the man does not even 

1 T'/j» xpvoYi’j is supplied, according to a very probable conjecture. 

2 “ Spoken or” supplied from Plato and Eusebius. 

3 po'vov iv tyi 'iri'hu is here supplied from Plato. 

280 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

know that he does not know all these things ; but in reality 
his body alone is situated and dwells in the state, while the 
man himself flies, according to Pindar, beneath the earth and 
above the sky, astronomizing, and exploring all nature on all 
sides. 

Again, with the Lord’s saying, “ Let your yea be yea, and 
your nay nay,” may be compared the following : u But to 
admit a falsehood, and destroy a truth, is in nowise lawful.” 
With the prohibition, also, against swearing agrees the saying 
in the tenth book of the Laws : “ Let praise and an oath in 
everything be absent.” 

An d in general, Pythagoras, and Socrates, and Plato say 
that they hear God’s voice while closely contemplating the 
fabric of the universe, made and preserved unceasingly by 
God. For they heard Moses say, “ He said, and it was done,” 
describing the word of God as an act. 

And founding on the formation of man from the dust, the 
philosophers constantly term the body earthy. Homer, too, 
does not hesitate to put the following as an imprecation : 

“ But may you all become earth and water.” 

As Esaias says, “ And trample them down as clay.” And 
Callimachus clearly writes : 

“ That was the year in which 
Birds, fishes, quadrupeds, 

Spoke like Prometheus’ clay.” 

And the same again : 

“ If thee Prometheus formed, 

And thou art not of other clay.” 

Hesiod says of Pandora : 

“ And bade Hephaestus, famed, with all his speed, 

Knead earth with water, and man’s voice and mind 
Infuse.” 

The Stoics, accordingly, define natui’e to be artificial fire, 
advancing systematically to generation. And God and Ilis 
Word are by Scripture figuratively termed fire and light. 
But how? Does not Homer himself, is not Homer himself, 
paraphrasing the retreat of the water from the land, and the 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

281 

clear uncovering of the dry land, when he says of Tethys 
and Oceanus : 

u For now for a long time they abstain from 
Each other’s bed and love ? ” 1 

Again, power in all things is by the most intellectual 
among the Greeks ascribed to God ; Epicharmus — he was a 
Pythagorean — saying : 

“ Nothing escapes the divine. This it behoves thee to know. 

He is our observer. To God nought is impossible.” ' 

And the lyric poet : 

tc And God from gloomy night 
Can raise unstained light, 

And can in darksome gloom obscure 
The day’s refulgence pure.” 

He alone who is able to make night during the period of 
day is God. 

In the Phamomena Aratus writes thus : 

u With Zeus let us begin ; whom let us ne’er, 

Being men, leave unexpressed. All full of Zeus, 

The streets, and throngs of men, and full the sea, 

And shores, and everywhere we Zeus enjoy.” 

He adds : 

“ For we also are 

His offspring 

that is, by creation. 

“ Who, bland to men, 

Propitious signs displays, and to their tasks 
Arouses. For these signs in heaven He fixed, 

The constellations spread, and crowned the year 
With stars ; to show to men the seasons’ tasks, 

That all things may proceed in order sure. 

Him ever first, Him last too, they adore : 

Hail Father, marvel great — great boon to men.” 

And before him, Homer, framing the world in accordance 
with Moses on the Vulcan-wrought shield, says : 

“ On it he fashioned earth, and sky, and sea, 

And all the signs with which the heaven is crowned.” 2 

1 Iliad, xiv. 206. 

2 Iliad, xviii. 

282 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

For the Zeus celebrated in poems and prose compositions 
leads the mind up to God. And already, so to speak, De- 
mocritus writes, u that a few men are in the light, who 
stretch out their hands to that place which we Greeks now 
call the air. Zeus speaks all, and he hears all, and distri- 
butes and takes away, and he is king of all.” And more 
mystically the Boeotian Pindar, being a Pythagorean, says : 

“ One is the race of gods and men, 

And of one mother both have breath ; ” 

that is, of matter : and names the one creator of these things, 
whom he calls Father, chief artificer, who furnishes the 
means of advancement on to divinity, according to merit. 

For I pass over Plato ; he plainly, in the epistle to Erastus 
and Coriscus, is seen to exhibit the Father and Son somehow 
or other from the Hebrew Scriptures, exhorting in these words: 
u In invoking by oath, with not illiterate gravity, and with 
culture, the sister of gravity, God the author of all, and in- 
voking Him by oath as the Lord, the Father of the Leader, 
and author ; whom if ye study with a truly philosophical 
spirit, ye shall know.” And the address in the Timams calls 
the creator, Father, speaking thus : “ Ye gods of gods, of 
whom I am Father; and the Creator of your works.” So 
that when he says, “ Around the king of all, all things are, 
and because of Him are all things ; and he [or that] is the 
cause of all good things ; and around the second are the things 
second in order; and around the third, the third,” I understand 
nothing else than the Holy Trinity to be meant ; for the third 
is the Holy Spirit, and the Son is the second, by whom all 
things were made according to the will of the Father. 

And the same, in the tenth book of the Republic , men- 
tions Eros the son of Armenius, who is Zoroaster. Zoro- 
aster, then, writes : “ These were composed by Zoroaster, 
the son of Armenius, a Pamphyllian by birth: having died 
in battle, and been in Hades, I learned them of the gods.” 
This Zoroaster, Plato says, having been placed on the funeral 
pyre, rose again to life in twelve days. He alludes perchance 
to the resurrection, or perchance to the fact that the path 

Book v.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

2S3 

for souls to ascension lies through the twelve signs of the 
zodiac ; and he himself says, that the descending pathway to 
birth is the same. In the same way we are to understand 
the twelve labours of Hercules, after which the soul obtains 
release from this entire world. 

I do not pass over Empedocles, who speaks thus physi- 
cally of the renewal of all things, as consisting in a trans- 
mutation into the essence of fire, which is to take place. 
And most plainly of the same opinion is Heraclitus of Ephe- 
sus, who considered that there was a world everlasting, and 
recognised one perishable — that is, in its arrangement, not 
being different from the former, viewed in a certain aspect. 
But that he knew the imperishable world which consists of 
the universal essence to be everlastingly of a certain nature, 
he makes clear by speaking thus : “ The same world of 
all things, neither any of the gods, nor any one of men, 
made. But there w r as, and is, and will be ever-living fire, 
kindled according to measure , 1 and quenched according to 
measure.” And that he taught it to be generated and 
perishable, is shown by what follows : “ There are trans- 
mutations of fire, — first, the sea; and of the sea the half 
is land, the half fiery vapour.” For he says that these arc 
the effects of power. For fire is by the Word of God, which 
governs all things, changed by the air into moisture, which 
is, as it were, the germ of cosmical change; and this lie 
calls sea. And out of it again is produced earth, and sky, 
and all that they contain. How, again, they are restored 
and ignited, he shows clearly in these words : u The sea is 
diffused and measured according to the same rule which sub- 
sisted before it became earth.” Similarly also respecting the 
other elements, the same is to be understood. The most 
renowned of the Stoics teach similar doctrines with him, in 
treating of the conflagration and the government of the 
world, and both the world and man properly so called, and 
of the continuance of our souls. 

Plato, again, in the seventh book of the Republic, has 

1 Mir pa is the reading of the text, but is plainly an eiror for psArpu, 
which is the reading of Eusebius. 

284 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

called “ the day here nocturnal,” as I suppose, on account of 
11 the world-rulers of this darkness ; ” 1 and the descent of the 
soul into the body, sleep and death, similarly with Heraclitus. 
And was not this announced, oracularly, of the Saviour, by the 
Spirit, saying by David, “ I slept, and slumbered ; I awoke : 
for the Lord will sustain mef ’ 2 For He not only figuratively 
calls the resurrection of Christ rising from sleep ; but to the 
descent of the Lord into the flesh he also applies the figura- 
tive term sleep. The Saviour Himself enjoins, “ Watch ;” 3 
as much as to say, “Study how to live, and endeavour to 
separate the soul from the body.” 

And the Lord’s day Plato prophetically speaks of in the tenth 
book of the Republic , in these words : “ And when seven days 
have passed to each of them in the meadow, on the eighth they 
are to set out and arrive in four days.” By the meadow’ is 
to be understood the fixed sphere, as being a mild and genial 
spot, and the locality of the pious ; and by the seven days 
each motion of the seven planets, and the whole practical art 
which speeds to the end of rest. But after the wandering 
orbs the journey leads to heaven, that is, to the eighth motion 
and day. And he says that souls are gone on the fourth day, 
pointing out the passage through the four elements. But 
the seventh day is recognised as sacred, not by the Hebrews 
only, but also by the Greeks ; according to which the whole 
world of all animals and plants revolve. Hesiod says of it : 

“ The first, and fourth, and seventh day were held sacred.” 

And again : 

“ And on the seventh the sun’s resplendent orb.” 

And Homer : 

“ And on the seventh then came the sacred day.” 

And : 

“ The seventh was sacred.” 

And again : 

“ It was the seventh day, and all things were accomplished.” 

And again : 

“And on the seventh morn we leave the stream of Acheron.” 
Callimachus the poet also writes : 

1 Eph. vi. 12. 

2 Ps. iii. 5. 

3 Matt. xxiv. 42, etc. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

285 

“ It was the seventh mom, and they had all things done.” 

And again : 

“ Among good days is the seventh day, and the seventh race.” 

And : 

“ The seventh is among the prime, and the seventh is perfect.” 

And : 

“Now all the seven were made in starry heaven, 

In circles shining as the years appear.” 

The Elegies of Solon, too, intensely deify the seventh day. 

And how ? Is it not similar to Scripture when it says, u Let 
us remove the righteous man from us, because he is trouble- 
some to us ?” 1 when Plato, all but predicting the economy 
of salvation, says in the second book of the Republic as fol- 
lows : u Thus he who is constituted just shall be scourged, shall 
be stretched on the rack, shall be bound, have his eyes put 
out ; and at last, having suffered all evils, shall be crucified.” 

And the Socratic Antisthenes, paraphrasing that prophetic 
utterance, u To whom have ye likened me ? saith the Lord,” 2 
says that a God is like no one ; wherefore no one can come 
to the knowledge of Him from an image.” 

Xenophon too, the Athenian, utters these similar senti- 
ments in the following words : “ He who shakes all things, 
and is Himself immoveable, is manifestly one great and 
powerful. But what He is in form, appears not. No more 
does the sun, who wishes to shine in all directions, deem it 
right to permit any one to look on himself. But if one gaze 
on him audaciously, he loses his eyesight.” 

“ What flesh can see with eyes the Heavenly, True, 

Immortal God, whose dwelling is the poles? 

Not even before the bright beams of the sun 
Are men, as being mortal, fit to stand,” — 

the Sibyl had said before. Rightly, then, Xenophanes of 
Colophon, teaching that God is one and incorporeal, adds : 

“ One God there is, ’midst gods and men supreme ; 

In form, in mind, unlike to mortal men.” 

And again : 

O 

“ But men have the idea that gods are born, 

And wear their clothes, and have both voice and shape.” 

1 Wisd. ii. 12. 

2 Isa. xl. 18, 25. 

286 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

And again : 

44 But had the oxen or the lions hands, 

Or could with hands depict a work like men, 

Were beasts to draw the semblance of the gods, 

The horses would them like to horses sketch, 

To oxen, oxen, and their bodies make 
Of such a shape as to themselves belongs.” 

Let us hear, then, the lyric poet Bacchylides speaking of the 
divine : 

44 Who to diseases dire 1 never succumb, 

And blameless are ; in nought resembling men.” 

And also Clean thes, the Stoic, who writes thus in a poem on 
the Deity : 2 

44 If you ask what is the nature of the good, listen — 

That which is regular, just, holy, pious, 

Self-governing, useful, fair, fitting, 

Grave, independent, always beneficial, 

That feels no fear or grief, profitable, painless, 

Helpful, pleasant, safe, friendly, 

Held in esteem, agreeing with itself, honourable, 

Humble, careful, meek, zealous, 

Perennial, blameless, ever-during.” 

And the same, tacitly vilifying the idolatry of the multitude, 
adds : 

44 Base is every one who looks to opinion, 

With the view of deriving any good from it.” 

W e are not, then, to think of God according to the opinion 
of the multitude. • 

44 For I do not think that secretly, 

Imitating the guise of a scoundrel, 

He would go to thy bed as a man,” 

says Amphion to Antiope. And Sophocles plainly writes : 

44 His mother Zeus espoused, 

Not in the likeness of gold, nor covered 
With swan’s plumage, as the Pluronian girl 
He impregnated ; but an out and out man.” 

He further proceeds, and adds : 

1 H. Stephanas, in his Fragments of Bacchylides , reads uiKihuav (foul) 
instead of clstzctthiciv of the text. 

2 Quoted in Exhortation to the Heathen , p. 72, and is here corrected 
from the text there. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

287 

Book v.] 

“ And quick the adulterer stood on the bridal steps.” 

Then he details still more plainly the licentiousness of the 
fabled Zeus : 

“ But he nor food nor cleansing water touched, 

But heart-stung went to bed, and that whole night 
Wantoned.” 

But let these be resigned to the follies of the theatre. 

Heraclitus plainly says : “ But of the word which is eternal 
men are not able to understand, both before they have heard 
it, and on first hearing it.” And the lyrist Melanippides says 
in soim : 

O 

“ Hear me, 0 Father, Wonder of men, 

Ruler of the ever-living soul.” 

And Parmenides the great, as Plato says in the Sophist , writes 
of God thus : 

“ Very much, since unborn and indestructible He is, 

Whole, only-begotten, and immoveable, and unoriginated.” 

Hesiod also says : 

For He of the immortals all is King and Lord. 

With God 1 none else in might may strive.” 

Nay more, Tragedy, drawing away from idols, teaches to look 
up to heaven. Sophocles, as Hecataeus, who composed the 
histories in the work about Abraham and the Egyptians, says, 
exclaims plainly on the stage : 

u One in very truth, God is One, 

Who made the heaven and the far-stretching earth, 

The Deep’s blue billow, and the might of winds. 

But of us mortals, many erring far 
In heart, as solace for our woes, have raised 
Images of gods — of stone, or else of brass, 

Or figures wrought of gold or ivory ; 

And sacrifices and vain festivals 

To these appointing, deem ourselves devout.” 

And Euripides on the stage, in tragedy, says : 

“Dost thou this lofty, boundless Ether see, 

Which holds the earth around in the embrace 

1 This is quoted in Exhortation to the Heathen , p. 73, ch. viii. The 
reading varies, and it has been variously amended. 0s5 is substituted 
above for o so. Perhaps the simplest of the emendations proposed on 
this passage is the change of cto into c oi, with Thee . 

288 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

Of humid arms ? This reckon Zeus, 

And this regard as God.” 

And in the drama of Pirithous, the same writes those lines in 
tragic vein : 

“Thee, self-sprung, who on Ether’s wheel 
Hast universal nature spun, 

Around whom Light and dusky spangled Night, 

The countless host of stars, too, ceaseless dance.” 

For there he says that the creative mind is self-sprung. 
What follows applies to the universe, in which are the oppo- 
sites of light and darkness. 

JEschylus also, the son of Euphorion, says with very 
great solemnity of God : 

“ Ether is Zeus, Zeus earth, and Zeus the heaven ; 

The universe is Zeus, and all above.” 

I am aware that Plato assents to Heraclitus, who writes : 
u The one thing that is wise alone will not be expressed, and 
means the name of Zeus.” And again, a Law is to obey the 
will of one.” And if you wish to adduce that saying, “ He 
that hath ears to hear, let him hear,” you will find it expressed 
by the Ephesian 1 to the following effect : “ Those that hear 
without understanding are like the deaf. The proverb wit- 
nesses against them, that when present they are absent.” 

But do you want to hear from the Greeks expressly of 
one first principle ? Timseus the Locrian, in the work on 
Nature, shall testify in the following words : “ There is one 
first principle of all things unoriginated. For were it ori- 
ginated, it would be no longer the first principle ; but the first 
principle would be that from which it originated.” For this 
true opinion was derived from what follows : “ Hear,” it is 
said, a O Israel ; the Lord thy God is one, and Him only 
shalt thou serve.” 2 

“ Lo 3 He all sure and all unerring is,” 

says the Sibyl. 

Homer also manifestly mentions' tbe Father and the Son 
by a happy hit of divination in the following words : 

1 Heraclitus. 2 Dent. vi. 4. 

3 See Exhortation , p. 7G, where for “ So ” read “ Lo.” 

Book, v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

289 

“ If Outis, 1 alone as thou art, offers thee violence, 

And there is no escaping disease sent by Zeus, 

For the Cyclops heed not JEgis-bearing Zeus.” 2 

And before him Orplieus said, speaking of the point in hand : 

“ Son of great Zeus, Father of JEgis-bearing Zeus.” 

And Xenocrates the Chalcedonian, who mentions the su- 
preme Zeus and the inferior Zeus, leaves an indication of 
the Father and the Son. Homer, while representing the 
gods as subject to human passions, appears to know the 
Divine Being, whom Epicurus does not so revere. He says 
accordingly : 

“ Why, son of Peleus, mortal as thou art, 

With swift feet me pursuest, a god 
Immortal ? Hast thou not yet known 
That I am a god ? ” 3 

For he shows that the Divinity cannot be captured by a 
mortal, or apprehended either with feet, or hands, or eyes, or 
by the body at all. u To whom have ye likened the Lord ? or 
to what likeness have ye likened Him ?” says the Scripture . 4 
Has not the artificer made the image? or the goldsmith, 
melting the gold, has gilded it, and what follows. 

The comic poet Epicharmus speaks in the Republic clearly 
of the Word in the following terms : 

u The life of men needs calculation and number alone, 

And we live by number and calculation, for these save mortals.” 5 

He then acids expressly : 

44 Reason governs mortals, and alone preserves manners.” 

Then : 

44 There is in man reasoning ; and there is a divine Reason. 0 
Reason is implanted in man to provide for life and sustenance, 

But divine Reason attends the arts in the case of all, 

1 44 0 vncj Noman, Nobody; a fallacious name assumed by Ulysses 
(with a primary allusion to pyrig , f zqng , Odys. xx. 20), to deceive Poly- 
phemus.” — Liddel and Scott. The third line is 274 of same book. 

2 Odys . ix. 410. 3 Iliad , xxii. 8. 4 Isa. xl. 18, 19. 

5 All these lines from Epicharmus : they have been rendered as 
amended by Grotius. 

0 T^oyog [or Word]. 

CLEM. — YOL. II. 

T 

290 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book v. 

Teaching them always what it is advantageous to do. 

For it was not man that discovered art, but God brought it ; 

And the Reason of man derives its origin from the divine Reason. 1 ’ 

The Spirit also cries by Isaiah : “ Wherefore the multitude 
of sacrifices? saith the Lord. I am full of holocausts of 
rams, and the fat of lambs and the blood of bulls I wish 
not ; 55 and a little after adds: “Wash you, and be clean. 
Put away wickedness from your souls,” 1 and so forth. 

Menander, the comic poet, writes in these very words : 

“ If one by offering sacrifice," a crowd 
Of bulls or kids, 0 Pamphilus, by Zeus, 

Or such like things ; by making works of art, 

Garments of gold or purple, images 
Of ivory or emerald, deems by these 
God can be made propitious, he does err, 

And lias an empty mind. For the man must prove 
A man of worth, who neither maids deflowers, 

Nor an adulterer is, nor steals, nor kills 
For love of worldly wealth, 0 Pamphilus. 

Nay, covet not a needle’s thread. For God 
Thee sees, being near beside thee.” ... 2 

a I am a God at hand,” it is said by Jeremiah , 3 “ and not a 
God afar off. Shall a man do aught in secret places, and I 
shall not see him ? 55 

And again Menander, paraphrasing that scripture, “ Sacri- 
fice a sacrifice of righteousness, and trust in the Lord , 55 4 thus 
writes : 

“ And not a needle even that is 
Another’s ever covet, dearest friend ; 

For God in righteous works delights, and so 
Permits him to increase his worldly wealth, 

Who toils, and ploughs the land both night and day. 

But sacrifice to God, and righteous be, 

Shining not in bright robes, but in thy heart ; 

And when thou hear’st the thunder, do not flee, 

Being conscious to thyself of nought amiss, 

Good sir, for thee God ever present sees.” 5 

1 Isa. i. 11, 16. 

2 This passage, with four more lines, is quoted by Justin Martyr, De 
Monarchia , p. 335, and ascribed by him to Philemon. 

3 Jer. xxiii. 23, 24. 4 Ps. iv. 6. 

6 In Justin Martyr, in the place above quoted, these lines are joined 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

291 

* c Whilst thou art yet speaking/’ says the Scripture, “ I will 
say, Lo, here I am.” * 1 

Again Diphilus, the comic poet, discourses as follows on 
the judgment : 

Think’st thou, 0 Niceratus, that the dead, 

Who in all kinds of luxury in life have shared, 

Escape the Deity, as if forgot. 

There is an eye of justice, which sees all. 

For two ways, as we deem, to Hades lead — 

One for the good, the other for the bad. 

But if the earth hides both for ever, then 
Go plunder, steal, rob, and be turbulent. 

But err not. For in Hades judgment is, 

Which God the Lord of all will execute, 

Whose name too dreadful is for me to name, 

Who gives to sinners length of earthly life. 

If any mortal thinks, that day by day, 

While doing ill, he eludes the gods’ keen sight, 

His thoughts are evil ; and when justice has 
The leisure, he shall then detected be 
So thinking. Look, whoe’er you be that say 
That there is not a God. There is, there is. 

If one, by nature evil, evil does, 

Let him redeem the time ; for such as he 
Shall by and by due punishment receive.” 2 

And with this agrees the tragedy 3 in the following lines : 

“ For there shall come, shall come 4 that point of time, 

When Ether, golden-eyed, shall ope its store 
Of treasured fire ; and the devouring flame, 

Baging, shall burn all things on earth below, 

And all above.” . . . 

And after a little he adds : 

tc And when the whole world fades, 

And vanished all the abyss of ocean’s waves, 

And earth of trees is bare ; and wrapt in flames, 

to the preceding. They are also quoted by Eusebius, but differently 
arranged. The translation adopts the arrangement of Grotius. 

1 Isa. lxv. 24. 

2 These lines are quoted by Justin ( Be Monarchic t), p. 333, but 
ascribed by him part to Philemon, part to Euripides. 

3 Ascribed by Justin to Sophocles. 

4 Adopting the reading xehog instead of xouvog in the text. 

292 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

The air no more begets the winged tribes ; 

Then He who all destroyed, shall all restore.” 

We shall find expressions similar to these also in the Orphic 
hymns, written as follows : 

u For having hidden all, brought them again 
To gladsome light, forth from his sacred heart, 

Solicitous.” 

And if we live throughout holily and righteously, we are 
happy here, and shall be happier after our departure hence ; 
not possessing happiness for a time, but enabled to rest in 
eternity. 

“ At the same hearth and table as the rest 
Of the immortal gods, we sit all free 
Of human ills, unharmed,” 

says the philosophic poetry of Empedocles. And so, accord- 
ing to the Greeks, none is so great as to be above judgment, 
none so insignificant as to escape its notice. 

And the same Orpheus speaks thus : 

u But to the word divine, looking, attend, 

Keeping aright the heart’s receptacle 
Of intellect, and tread the straight path well, 

And only to the world’s immortal King 
Direct thy gaze .” 1 

And again, respecting God, saying that He was invisible, 
and that He was known to but one, a Chaldean by race — 
meaning either by this Abraham or his son — he speaks as 
follows : 

“ But one a scion of Chaldean race ; 

For lie the sun’s path knew right well. 

And how the motion of the sphere about 
The earth proceeds, in circle moving 
Equally around its axis, how the winds 
Their chariot guide o’er air and sea.” 

Then, as if paraphrasing the expression, cc Heaven is my 
throne, and earth is my footstool ,” 2 lie adds : 

u But in great heaven, He is seated firm 
Upon a throne of gold, and ’neath His feet 

1 Quoted in Exhortation , p. 74. 

2 Isa. lxvi. 1. 

Book w] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

293 

The earth. His right hand round the ocean’s bound 
He stretches ; and the hills’ foundations shake 
To the centre at His wrath, nor can endure 
His mighty strength. He all celestial is, 

And all things finishes upon the earth. 

He the Beginning, Middle is, and End. 

But Thee I dare not speak. In limbs 

And mind I tremble. He rules from on high.” 

And so forth. For in these lie indicates these prophetic 
utterances : “ If Thou openest the heaven, trembling shall 
seize the mountains from Thy presence ; and they shall 
melt, as wax meltetli before the fire 1 and in Isaiah, 
“ Who hath measured the heaven with a span, and the 
whole earth with Ilis fist 2 Again, when it is said : 

“ Ruler of Ether, Hades, Sea, and Land, 

Who with Thy bolts Olympus’ strong-built home 
Dost shake. Whom demons dread, and whom the throng 
Of gods do fear. Whom, too, the Fates obey, 

Relentless though they be. 0 deathless One, 

Our mother’s Sire ! whose wrath makes all things reel ; 

Who mov’st the winds, and shroud’st in clouds the world, 
Broad Ether cleaving with Thy lightning gleams, — 

Thine is the order ’mongst the stars, which run 
As Thine unchangeable behests direct. 

Before Thy burning throne the angels wait, 

Much-working, charged to do all things for men. 

Thy young Spring shines, all prank’d with purple flowers ; 

Thy Winter with its chilling clouds assails ; 

Thine Autumn noisy Bacchus distributes.” 

Then lie adds, naming expressly the Almighty God : 

u Deathless Immortal, capable of being 
To the immortals only uttered ! Come, 

Greatest of gods, with strong Necessity. 

Dread, invincible, great, deathless One, 

Whom Ether crowns.” . . . 

By the expression “Sire of our Mother” (/ i7]rpo7rdro)p ) he not 
only intimates creation out of nothing, but gives occasion to 
those who introduce emissions of imagining a consort of the 
Deity. And he paraphrases those prophetic Scriptures — that 
in Isaiah, “ I am He that fixes the thunder, and creates the 
1 Isa. lx. 1, 2. 2 Isa. xl. 12. 

294 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v 

wind ; whose hands have founded the host of heaven;” 1 and 
that in Moses, “ Behold, behold that I am He, and there is 
no god beside me : I will kill, and I will make to live ; I will 
smite, and I will heal : and there is none that shall deliver 
out of my hands.” 2 

“ And He, from good, to mortals planteth ill, 

And cruel war, and tearful woes,” 

according to Orpheus. 

Such also are the words of the Parian Archilochus : 

“ 0 Zeus, thine is the power of heaven, and thou 
Inflict’st on men things violent and wrong.” 3 

Again let the Thracian Orpheus sing to us : 

“ His right hand all around to ocean’s bound 
He stretches ; and beneath His feet is earth.” 

These are plainly derived from the following : “ The Lord 
will save the inhabited cities, and grasp the whole land in 
His hand like a nest ;” 4 “ It is the Lord that made the 
earth by His power,” as saith Jeremiah, “ and set up the 
earth by His wisdom.” 5 Further, in addition to these, 
Phocylides, who calls the angels demons, explains in the 
following words that some of them are good, and others bad 
(for we also have learned that some are apostate) : 

“ Demons there are — some here, some there — set over men ; 

Some, on man’s entrance [into life], to ward off ill.” 

Rightly, then, also Philemon, the comic poet, demolishes 
idolatry in these words : 

“ Fortune is no divinity to us : 

There’s no such god. But what befalls by chance 
And of itself to each, is Fortune called.” 

And Sophocles the tragedian says : 

“ Not even the gods have all things as they choose, 

Excepting Zeus ; for he beginning is and end.” 

1 Amos iv. 13. 2 Deut. xxxii. 39. 

3 For ovpuvovs opcc; we read dvOpoiTov; (which is the reading of Euse- 

bius) ; and opr,i (Sylburgius’ conjecture), also from Eusebius, instead 
of <* Ospus ccSlputJTu. 

4 Isa. x. 14. 

5 Jcr. x. 12. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

295 

Book v.] 

And Orpheus : 

“ One Might, the great, the flaming heaven, was 
One Deity. All things one Being were ; in whom 
All these revolve fire, water, and the earth.” 

And so forth. 

Pindar, the lyric poet, as if in Bacchic frenzy, plainly says : 

“What is God? The All.” 

And again : 

“ God, who makes all mortals.” 

And when he says, 

“ How little, being a man, dost thou expect 
Wisdom for man ? ’Tis hard for mortal mind 
The counsels of the gods to scan ; and thou 
Wast of a mortal mother born,” 

he drew the thought from the following : u Who hath known 
the mind of the Lord, or who was His counsellor ?” 1 Hesiod, 
too, agrees with what is said above, in what he writes : 

“ No prophet, sprung of men that dwell on earth, 

Can know the mind of iEgis-bearing Zeus.” 

Similarly, then, Solon the Athenian, in the Elegies, following 
Hesiod, writes : 

“ The Immortal’s mind to men is quite unknown.” 

Again Moses, having prophesied that the woman would 
bring forth in trouble and pain, on account of transgression, 
a poet not undistinguished writes : 

“ Never by day 

From toil and woe shall they have rest, nor yet 
By night from groans. Sad cares the gods to men 
Shall give.” 

Further, when Homer says, 

“ The Sire himself the golden balance held,” 2 

he intimates that God is just. 

And Menander, the comic poet, in exhibiting God, says : 

“ To each man, on his birth, there is assigned 
A tutelary Demon, as his life’s good guide. 

For that the Demon evil is, and harms 
A good life, is not to be thought.” 

1 Isa. xl. 13. 

2 Iliad , viii. G9. 

296 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

Then he adds : 

ur/ A Trccura o’ dyctSov uucci tou 0soj/,” — 

meaning either u that every one good is God/’ or, what is 
preferable, u that God in all things is good.” 

Again, JEschylus the tragedian, setting forth the power of 
God, does not shrink from calling Him the Highest, in these 
words : 

“ Place God apart from mortals ; and think not 
That He is, like thyself, corporeal. 

Thou know’st Him not. Now He appears as fire, 

Dread force ; as water now ; and now as gloom ; 

And in the beasts is dimly shadowed forth, 

In wind, and cloud, in lightning, thunder, rain ; 

And minister to Him the seas and rocks, 

Each fountain and the water’s floods and streams. 

The mountains tremble, and the earth, the vast 
Abyss of sea, and towering height of hills, 

When on them looks the Sovereign’s awful eye : 

Almighty is the glory of the Most High God.” 1 

Does lie not seem to you to paraphrase that text, u At the 
presence of the Lord the earth trembles ? ” 2 In addition 
to these, the most prophetic Apollo is compelled — thus tes- 
tifying to the glory of God — to say of Athene, when the 
Medes made war against Greece, that she besought and sup- 
plicated Zeus for Attica. The oracle is as follows : 

“ Pallas cannot Olympian Zeus propitiate, 

Although with many words and sage advice she prays ; 

But he will give to the devouring fire many temples of the immortals, 
Who now stand shaking with terror, and bathed in sweat 3 

and so forth. 

Thearidas, in his book On Nature , writes : u There was then 

1 These lines of jEscliylus are also quoted by Justin Martyr, De 
Monar cilia, p. 330. (Dread force, ocTr'huTog oppevj ; Eusebius reads opptv, 
dative. J. Langus has suggested (ocTr'hctoToi) uncreated ; ocTr^viarog (in- 
satiate) has also been suggested.) The epithet of the text, which means 
primarily unapproachable, then dread or terrible, is applied by Pindar 
to fire. 

2 Ps. lxviii. 8. 

3 This Pythian oracle is given by Herodotus, and is quoted also by 
Eusebius and Theodoret. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

297 

one really true beginning [first principle] of all that exists — 
one. For that Beino; in the beginning is one and alone.” 

o o o 

“ Nor is there any other except the Great King,” 

says Orpheus. In accordance with whom, the comic poet 
Diphilus says very sententiously , 1 the 

“ Father of all, 

To Him alone incessant reverence pay, 

The inventor and the author of such blessings.” 

Rightly therefore Plato u accustoms the best natures to 
attain to that study which formerly we said was the highest, 
both to see the good and to accomplish that ascent. And 
this, as appears, is not the throwing of the potsherds ; 2 but 
the turning round of the soul from a nocturnal day to that 
which is a true return to that which really is, which we shall 
assert to be the true philosophy.” Such as are partakers of 
this he judges 3 to belong to the golden race, when he says : 
11 Ye are all brethren ; and those who are of the golden 
race are most capable of judging most accurately in every 
respect .” 4 

The Father, then, and Maker of all things is apprehended 
by all things, agreeably to all, by innate power and without 
teaching, — things inanimate, sympathizing with the animate 
creation ; and of living beings some are already immortal, 
working in the light of day. But of those that are still mortal, 
some are in fear, and carried still in their mother’s womb; and 
others regulate themselves by their own independent reason. 
And of men all are Greeks and Barbarians. But no race 
anywhere of tillers of the soil, or nomads, and not even of 
dwellers in cities, can live, without being imbued with the 
faith of a superior being. Wherefore every eastern nation, 
and every nation touching the western shores ; or the north, 

1 yvufux.orruTtt.. Eusebius reads ytvtx,on o.tov, agreeing with vrocripa. 

2 A game in which a potsherd with a black and white side was cast 
on a line ; and as the black or white turned up, one of the players fled 
and the other pursued. 

3 Eusebius has xpivu, which we have adopted, for tplvuv of the text. 

4 Plato, Rep. book vii. 

\ 

298 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book v. 

and each one towards the south, 1 — all have one and the same 
preconception respecting Him who hath appointed govern- 
ment ; since the most universal of His operations equally 
pervade all. Much more did the philosophers among the 
Greeks, devoted to investigation, starting from the Barbarian 
philosophy, attribute providence 2 to the “ Invisible, and sole, 
and most powerful, and most skilful and supreme cause of 
all things most beautiful — not knowing the inferences from 
these truths, unless instructed by us, and not even how God 
is to be known naturally ; but only, as we have already often 
said, by a true periphrasis . 3 Rightly therefore the apostle 
says, u Is He the God of the J ews only, and not also of the 
Greeks % ” — not only saying prophetically that of the Greeks 
believing Greeks would know God ; but also intimating that 
in power the Lord is the God of all, and truly Universal 
King. For they know neither what He is, nor how He is 
Lord, and Father, and Maker, nor the rest of the system of 
the truth, without being taught by it. Thus also the pro- 
phetic utterances have the same force as the apostolic word. 
For Isaiah says : “ If ye say, We trust in the Lord our God : 
now make an alliance with my lord the king of the Assy- 
rians.” And he adds : u And now, was it without the Lord 
that we came up to this land to make war against it ?” 4 
And Jonah, himself a prophet, intimates the same thing in 
what he says : u And the shipmaster came to him, and said to 
him, Why dost thou snore ? Rise, call on thy God, that He 
may save us, and that we may not perish .” 5 For the expres- 
sion u thy God ” he makes as if to one who knew Him by 
way of knowledge ; and the expression, “ that God may save 
us,” revealed the consciousness in the minds of heathens who 
had applied their mind to the Ruler of all, but had not yet 

1 According to the reading in Eusebius, 'ra.v ’i6vog suov, %Hv <5s iovsplav 
wvcov, /3 bpuov re x,oi\ to, x.t.A. 

2 Instead of npovotuv, Eusebius has irpovoptcrj (privilege). 

3 Clement seems to mean that they knew God only in a roundabout 
and inaccurate way. The text has 'xipityctoiv ; but 7rspt(ppciaty, which is in 
Eusebius, is preferable. 

4 Isa. xxxvi. 7, 8, 10. 

c Jonah i. 6, 9, 14. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

299 

believed. And again the same : “ And he said to them, I am 
the servant of the Lord ; and I fear the Lord, the God of 
heaven.” And again the same : “ And he said, Let us by 
no means perish for the life of this man.” And Malachi 
the prophet plainly exhibits God saying, u I will not accept 
sacrifice at your hands. For from the rising of the sun to 
its going down, my name is glorified among the Gentiles ; 
and in every place sacrifice is offered to me.” 1 And again : 
u Because I am a great King, saith the Lord omnipotent ; and 
my name is manifest among the nations.” What name? The 
Son declaring the Father among the Greeks who have believed. 

Plato in what follows gives an exhibition of free-will : 
“Virtue owns not a master; and in proportion as each one 
honours or dishonours it, in that proportion lie will be a par- 
taker of it. The blame lies in the exercise of free choice.” 
But God is blameless. For He is never the author of evil, 

“ O warlike Trojans,” says the lyric poet, 2 

“ High ruling Zeus, who beholds all things, 

Is not the cause of great woes to mortals ; 

But it is in the power of all men to find 
Justice, holy, pure, 

Companion of order, 

And of wise Themis 

The sons of the blessed are ye 

In finding her as your associate.” 

And Pindar expressly introduces also Zeus Soter, the con- 
sort of Themis, proclaiming him King, Saviour, Just, in the 
following lines : 

“ First, prudent Themis, of celestial birth, 

On golden steeds, by Ocean’s rock, 

The Fates brought to the stair sublime, 

The shining entrance of Olympus, 

Of Saviour Zeus for aye 3 to be the spouse, 

And she, the Hours, gold-diademed, fair-fruited, 
good, brought forth.” 4 

He, then, who is not obedient to the truth, and is puffed up 

1 Mai. i. 10, 11, 14. 2 Perhaps Bacchylides. 3 dpxui'ctv. 

4 The reading of H. Stephanus, dyct&dg "fipcc;, is adopted in the trans- 
lation. The text has dycidd auN/tpot,?. Some supply "Cipce;, and at the 
same time retain acoTVjpcc^. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

300 

[Book v. 

with human teaching, is wretched and miserable, according to 
Euripides : 

“ Who these things seeing, yet apprehends not God, 

But mouthing lofty themes, casts far 
Perverse deceits ; stubborn in which, the tongue 
Its shafts discharges, about things unseen, 

Devoid of sense.” 

Let him who wishes, then, approaching to the true instruc- 
tion, learn from Parmenides the Eleatic, who promises : 

“Ethereal nature, then, and all the signs 
In Ether thou shalt know, and the effects, 

All viewless, of the sacred Sun’s clear torch, 

And whence produced. The round-eyed Moon’s 

Revolving influences and nature thou 

Shalt learn ; and the ensphering heaven shalt know ; 

Whence sprung ; and how Necessity took it 
And chained so as to keep the starry bounds.” 

And Metrodorus, though an Epicurean, spoke thus, divinely 
inspired: “ Kemember, O Menestratus, that, being a mortal 
endowed with a circumscribed life, thou hast in thy soul 
ascended, till thou hast seen endless time, and the infinity 
of things ; and what is to be, and what has been ; ” when 
with the blessed choir, according to Plato, we shall gaze on 
the blessed sight and vision ; we following with Zeus, and 
others with other deities, if we may be permitted so to say, 
to receive initiation into the most blessed mystery : which we 
shall celebrate, ourselves being perfect and untroubled by the 
ills which awaited us at the end of our time ; and introduced 
to the knowledge of perfect and tranquil visions, and contem- 
plating them in pure sunlight ; we ourselves pure, and now no 
longer distinguished by that, which, when carrying it about, 
we call the body, being bound to it like an oyster to its shell. 

The Pythagoreans call heaven the Antichthon [the opposite 
Earth]. And in this land, it is said by Jeremiah, “ I will place 
thee among the children, and give thee the chosen land as 
inheritance of God Omnipotent;” 1 and they who inherit it 
shall reign over the earth. Myriads on myriads of examples 
rush on my mind which I might adduce. But for the sake 

1 Jer. iii. 19. 

Book v.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

301 

of symmetry the discourse must now stop, in order that we 
may not exemplify the saying of Agatho the tragedian : 

“ Treating our by-work as work, 

And doing our work as by-work.” 

It having been, then, as I think, clearly shown in what way 
it is to be understood that the Greeks were called thieves by 
the Lord, I willingly leave the dogmas of the philosophers. For 
were we to go over their sayings, we should gather together 
directly such a quantity of notes, in showing that the whole 
of the Hellenic wisdom was derived from the Barbarian philo- 
sophy. But this speculation, we shall, nevertheless, again 
touch on, as necessity requires, when ■we collect the opinions 
current among the Greeks respecting first principles. 

But from what has been said, it tacitly devolves on us to 
consider in what way the Hellenic books are to be perused 
by the man who is able to pass through the billows in them. 
Therefore 

“ Happy is he who possesses the wealth of the divine mind,” 
as appears according to Empedocles : 

“ But wretched he, who cares for dark opinion about the gods.” 

He divinely showed knowledge and ignorance to be the 
boundaries of happiness and misery. “For it behoves philo- 
sophers to be acquainted with very many things,” according 
to Heraclitus ; and truly must 

“ He, who seeks to be good, err in many things.” 

It is then now clear to us, from what has been said, that 
the beneficence of God is eternal, and that, from an unbe- 
ginning principle, equal natural righteousness reached all, 
according to the worth of each several race, — never having 
had a beginning. For God did not make a beginning of 
being Lord and Good, being always what He is. JSTor will 
He ever cease to do good, although He bring all things to an 
end. And each one of us is a partaker of His beneficence, 
as far as He wills. For the difference of the elect is made 
by the intervention of a choice worthy of the soul, and by 
exercise. 

Thus, then, let our fifth Miscellany of gnostic notes in ac- 
cordance with the true philosophy be brought to a close. 

BOOK VI. 

CHAPTER I. 

PLAN. 

HE sixth and also the seventh Miscellany of gnostic 
notes, in accordance with the true philosophy, 
having delineated as well as possible the ethical 
argument conveyed in them, and having ex- 
hibited what the Gnostic is in his life, proceed to show the 
philosophers that he is by no means impious, as they suppose, 
but that he alone is truly pious, by a compendious exhibition 
of the Gnostic’s form of religion, as far as it is possible, with- 
out danger, to commit it to writing in a book of reference. 
For the Lord enjoined “to labour for the meat which en- 
dureth to eternity.” 1 And the prophet says, “ Blessed is he 
that soweth into all waters, whose ox and ass tread,” 2 [that is,] 
the people, from the Law and from the Gentiles, gathered into 
one faith. 

“Now the weak eateth herbs,” according to the noble 
apostle. 3 The Instructor , divided by us into three books, has 
already exhibited the training and nurture up from the state 
of childhood, that is, the course of life which from elementary 
instruction grows by faith ; and in the case of those enrolled 
in the number of men, prepares beforehand the soul, endued 
with virtue, for the reception of gnostic knowledge. The 
Greeks, then, clearly learning, from what shall be said by us 
in these pages, that in profanely persecuting the God-loving 
man, they themselves act impiously ; then, as the notes ad- 
vance, in accordance with the style of the Miscellanies , we 
1 John vi. 27. 2 Isa. xxxii. 20. 3 Rom. xiv. 2. 

302 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

303 

must solve the difficulties raised both by Greeks and Bar- 
barians with respect to the coming of the Lord. 

In a meadow the flowers blooming variously, and in a park 
the plantations of fruit-trees, are not separated according to 
their species from those of other kinds. If some, culling 
varieties, have composed learned collections, Meadows, and 
Helicons, and Honeycombs, and Robes ; then, with the things 
which come to recollection by haphazard, and are expurgated 
neither in order nor expression, but purposely scattered, the 
form of the Miscellanies is promiscuously variegated like a 
meadow. And such being the case, my notes shall serve as 
kindling sparks ; and in the case of him, who is fit for know- 
ledge, if he chance to fall in with them, research made with 
exertion will turn out to his benefit and advantage. For it 
is right that labour should precede not only food, but also, 
much more knowledge, in the case of those that are ad- 
vancing to the eternal and blessed salvation by the u strait 
and narrow way,” which is truly the Lord’s. 

Our knowledge, and our spiritual garden, is the Saviour 
Himself ; into whom we are planted, being transferred and 
transplanted, from our old life, into the good land. And 
transplanting contributes to fruitfulness. The Lord, then, 
into whom we have been transplanted, is the Light and the 
true Knowledge. 

Now knowledge is otherwise spoken of in a twofold sense : 
that, commonly so called, which appears in all men (similarly 
also comprehension and apprehension), universally, in the 
knowledge of individual objects ; in which not only the 
rational powers, but equally the irrational, share, which I 
would never term knowledge, inasmuch as the apprehen- 
sion of things through the senses comes naturally. But 
that which par excellence is termed knowledge, bears the 
impress of judgment and reason, in the exercise of which 
there will be rational cognitions alone, applying purely to 
objects of thought, and resulting from the bare energy of 
the soul. “ He is a good man,” says David , 1 u who pities ” 
(those ruined through error), “ and lends ” (from the com- 

1 Ps. cxii. 5, 9. 

304 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

munication of the word of truth) not at haphazard, for “ he 
will dispense his words in judgment : ” with profound cal- 
culation, u he hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor.” 

CHAPTER II. 

THE SUBJECT OF PLAGIARISMS RESUMED. THE GREEKS 
PLAGIARIZED FROM ONE ANOTHER. 

Before handling the point proposed, we must, by way of 
preface, add to the close of the fifth book what is wanting. 
For since we have shown that the symbolical style was 
ancient, and was employed not only by our prophets, but 
also by the majority of the ancient Greeks, and by not a few 
of the rest of the Gentile Barbarians, it was requisite to pro- 
ceed to the mysteries of the initiated. I postpone the eluci- 
dation of these till we advance to the confutation of what 
is said by the Greeks on first principles ; for we shall show 
that the mysteries belong to the same branch of specula- 
tion. And having proved that the declaration of Hellenic 
thought is illuminated all round by the truth, bestowed on 
us in the Scriptures, taking it according to the sense, we 
have proved, not to say what is invidious, that the theft of 
the truth passed to them. 

Come, and let us adduce the Greeks as witnesses against 
themselves to the theft. For, inasmuch as they pilfer 
from one another, they establish the fact that they are 
thieves ; and although against their will, they are detected, 
clandestinely appropriating to those of their own race the 
truth which belongs to us. For if they do not keep their 
hands from each other, they will hardly do it from our 
authors. I shall say nothing of philosophic dogmas, since the 
very persons who are the authors of the divisions into sects, 
confess in writing, so as not to be convicted of ingratitude, that 
they have received from Socrates the most important of their 
dogmas. But after availing myself of a few testimonies of 
men most talked of, and of repute among the Greeks, and 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

305 

exposing their plagiarizing style, and selecting them from 
various periods, I shall turn to what follows. 

Orpheus, then, having composed the line : 

“ Since nothing else is more shameless and wretched than woman,” — 

Homer plainly says : 

“ Since nothing else is more dreadful and shameless than a woman.” 1 

And Musaeus having written : 

“ Since art is greatly superior to strength,” — 

Homer says : 

“ By art rather than strength is the woodcutter greatly superior.” 2 

Again, Musaeus having composed the lines : 

“ And as the fruitful field produceth leaves, 

And on the ash trees some fade, others grow, 

So whirls the race of man its leaf,” 3 — 

Homer transcribes : 

“ Some of the leaves the wind strews on the ground. 

The budding wood bears some ; in time of spring, 

They come. So springs one race of men, and one departs.” 4 

Again, Homer having said : 

“ It is unholy to exult over dead men,” 5 — 

Archilochus and Cratinus write, the former : 

“ It is not noble at dead men to sneer ; ” 

and Cratinus in the Lacones : 

“ For men ’tis dreadful to exult 
Much o’er the stalwart dead.” 

Again, Archilochus, transferring that Homeric line : 

“ I erred, nor say I nay, instead of many,” 6 — 

1 Odyssey , xi. 420. 

2 Homer, Iliad , xxiii. 315 : p sy ’ is found in the Iliad as in 

Musseus. In the text occurs instead which is taken from 

line 318. 

u By art rather than strength is the woodcutter greatly superior ; 
By art the helmsman on the dark sea 
Guides the swift ship when driven by winds ; 

By art one charioteer excels ( 77zpiylvsTcu ) another. 

— Iliad , xxiii. 315-318. 

3 ( pvKhov , for which Sylburg. suggests (pv'hov . 

4 Iliad , vi. 141-149. 5 Odyss . xxii. 412. 6 Iliad, ix. 116. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. U 

306 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vj. 

writes thus : 

“ I erred, and this mischief hath somehow seized another.” 

As certainly also that line : 

“ Even-handed 1 war the slayer slays.” 2 3 

He also, altering, has given forth thus : 

“ I will do it. 

“ For Mars to men in truth is even-handed.” 1 

Also, translating the following : 

y £3 £3 

“ The issues of victory among men depend on the gods,” s 

lie openly encourages youth, in the following iambic : 

“ Victory’s issues on the gods depend.” 

Again, Homer having said : 

“ With feet unwashed sleeping on the ground,” 4 

Euripides writes in ErechtJieus : 

u Upon the plain spread with no couch they sleep, 

Nor in the streams of water lave their feet.” 

Archilochus having likewise said : 

“ But one with this and one with that 
His heart delights,” — 

in correspondence with the Homeric line : 

u For one in these deeds, one in those delights,” 5 — 

Euripides says in CEneus : 

“ But one in these ways, one in those, has more delight.” * 

And I have heard iEschylus saying : 

u He who is happy ought to stay at home ; 

There should he also stay, who speeds not well.” 

And Euripides, too, shouting the like on the stage : 

u Happy the man who, prosperous, stays at home.” 

Menander, too, on comedy, saying : 

1 Swig. So Livy, “ communis Mars ; ” and Cicero, 46 cum omnis belli 
Mars communis.” 

2 Iliad, xviii. 309. 

3 The text has : N (kyis dv6pZ)7roiai Ik TrstpctToc %s7-ca. In Iliad , vii. 
101, 102, we read : 

MVTc&p' vvriiispSiU, 

N t'xvig ntlpoiT* ’ixovret, h ccOcwcctoku 6idiatv . 

4 Iliad, xvi. 235. 5 Odyss. xiv. 22S. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

307 

“He ought at home to stay, and free remain, 

Or be no longer rightly happy.” 

Again, Theognis having said : 

“ The exile has no comrade dear and true,” — 

Euripides has written : 

“ Far from the poor flies every friend.” 

And Epicliarmus, saying : 

“ Daughter, woe worth the day ! 

Thee who art old I marry to a youth ; ” 1 

and adding : 

“ For the young husband takes some other girl, 

And for another husband longs the wife,” — 

Euripides 2 3 writes : 

“ ’Tis bad to yoke an old wife to a youth ; 

For he desires to share another’s bed. 

And she, by him deserted, mischief plots.” 

Euripides having, besides, said in the Medea : 

“ For no good do a bad man’s gifts,” — 

Sophocles in Ajax Flagellifer utters this iambic : 

“ For foes’ gifts are no gifts, nor any boon.” 2 

Solon having written : 

“For surfeit insolence begets, 

When store of wealth attends.” 

Theognis writes in the same way : 

“ For surfeit insolence begets, 

When store of wealth attends the bad.” 

Whence also Thucydides, in the Histories , says : u Many 
men, to whom in a great degree, and in a short time, un- 
looked-for prosperity comes, are wont to turn to insolence.” 
And Philistus 4 likewise imitates the same sentiment, express- 
ing himself thus : u And the many things which turn out 
prosperously to men, in accordance with reason, have an in- 

1 The text is corrupt and unintelligible. It has been restored as above. 

2 In some lost tragedy. 

3 Said by Ajax of the sword received from Hector, with which he killed 
himself. 

4 The imitator of Thucydides, said to be weaker but clearer than his 
model. He is not specially clear here, 

308 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

credibly dangerous 1 tendency to misfortune. For those who 
meet with unlooked success beyond their expectations, are for 
the most part wont to turn to insolence.” Again, Euripides 
having written : 

“ For children sprung of parents who have led 
A hard and toilsome life, superior are 

Critias writes : “For I begin with a man’s origin : how far 
the best and strongest in body will he be, if his father exer- 
cises himself, and eats in a hardy way, and subjects his body 
to toilsome labour ; and if the mother of the future child be 
strong in body, and give herself exercise.” 

Again, Homer having said of the Hephsestus-made shield : 

“ Upon it earth and heaven and sea he made, 

And Ocean’s rivers’ mighty strength portrayed,” — 

Plierecydes of Syros says : “ Zas makes a cloak large and 
beautiful, and works on it earth and Ogenus, and the palace 
of Ogenus.” 

And Homer having said : 

“ Shame, which greatly hurts a man or helps,” 2 — 
Euripides writes in Erechtheus : 

“ Of shame I find it hard to judge ; 

’Tis needed. ’Tis at times a great mischief.” 

Take, by way of parallel, such plagiarisms as the following, 
from those who flourished together, and were rivals of each 
other. From the Orestes of Euripides : 

“ Dear charm of sleep, aid in disease.” 

From the Eriphyle of Sophocles : 

“ Hie thee to sleep, healer of that disease.” 

And from the Antigone of Sophocles : 

“ Bastardy is opprobrious in name ; but the nature is equal;” 3 

1 The text has, dvfycihlGrspM 'za.pd km! KMKO’irpMyiMv ; for which 

Lowth reads, I'ziotpM^.toTspM ttdo; kcikott oMy lav , as translated above. 

2 Iliad , xxiv. Clement’s quotation differs somewhat from the passage 
as it stands in Homer. 

3 The text has ooA, which Stobseus has changed into 3’ "<?«, as above. 
Stobseus gives this quotation as follows : 

“ The bastard has equal strength with the legitimate; 

Each good thing has its nature legitimate.” 

309 

Book vi.] THE MISCELLANIES . 

And from the Aleucides of Sophocies : 

“ Each good thing has its nature equal.” 

Again, in the Ctimenus 1 of Euripides : 

“For him who toils. God helps ; ” 

And in the Minos of Sophocles : 

“ To those who act not, fortune is no ally; ” 

And from the Alexander of Euripides : 

“ But time will show ; and learning, by that test, 

I shall know whether thou art good or bad ; ” 

And from the Hipponos of Sophocles : 

“ Besides, conceal thou nought ; since Time, 

That sees all, hears all, all things will unfold.” 

But let us similarly run over the following; for Euinelus 
having composed the line, 

u Of Memory and Olympian Zeus the daughters nine,” 

Solon thus begins the elegy : 

“ Of Memory and Olympian Zeus the children bright.” 
Again, Euripides, paraphrasing the Homeric line : 

“ What, whence art thou? Thy city and thy parents, where?” 1 2 

employs the following iambics in AEgeus : 

“ What country shall we say that thou hast left 
To roam in exile, what thy land — the bound 
Of thine own native soil? W r ho thee begat? 

And of what father dost thou call thyself the son ? ” 

And what % Theognis 3 having said : 

“ Wine largely drunk is bad ; but if one use 
It with discretion, ’tis not bad, but good,” — 

does not Panyasis write ? 

. “ Above the gods’ best gift to men ranks wine, 

In measure drunk ; but in excess the worst.” 

1 As no play bearing this name is mentioned by any one else, various 
conjectures have been made as to the true reading ; among which are 
Clymene Temenos or Temenides. 

2 Odyssey , xiv. 187. 

3 In Theognis the quotation stands thus : 

O hov roi *7* tuttv rrovTiOU xctxov, qv Is rig avrcu 
Tiiuvj S'KioTcifASuoig, ov x,ezx,og ccAA’ olyoc66g. 
u To drink much wine is bad ; but if one drink 
It with discretion, ’tis not bad, but good.” 

310 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vj. 

Hesiod, too, saying: 

“ But for the fire to thee I’ll give a plague , 1 
For all men to delight themselves withal,” — 

Euripides writes : 

“And for the fire 

Another fire greater and unconquerable, 

Sprung up in the shape of women.” 2 

And in addition, Homer, saying : 

“ There is no satiating the greedy paunch, 

Baneful, which many plagues has caused to men.” 3 

Euripides says : 

“Dire need and baneful paunch me overcome; 

From which all evils come.” 

Besides, Callias the comic poet having written : 

“With madmen, all men must be mad, they say,” — 

Menander, in the Polonmenoi , expresses himself similarly, 
saying : 

“ The presence of wisdom is not always suitable : 

One sometimes must with others play 4 the fool.” 

And Antimaclius of Teos having said : 

“ From gifts, to mortals many ills arise,” — 

Augias composed the line : 

“For gifts men’s mind and acts deceive.” 

And Hesiod having said : 

“ Than a good wife, no man a better thing 
Ere gained ; than a bad wife, a worse,” — 

Simonides said : 

“ A better prize than a good wife no man 
Ere gained, than a bad one nought worse.” 

1 From Jupiter’s address (referring to Pandora) to Prometheus, after 
stealing fire from heaven. The passage in Hesiod runs thus : 

“ You rejoice at stealing fire and outwitting my mind ; 

But I will give you, and to future men, a great plague. 

And for the fire will give to them a bane in which 
All will delight their heart, embracing their own bane.” 

2 Translated as arranged by Grotius. 3 Odyss . 

4 <jv(ApctvYi'jcu is doubtless here the true reading, for which the text has 

cvpfiqi/cct. 

Book vi.] THE MISCELLANIES. 311 

Again, Epicharmas having said : 

“ As destined long to live, and yet not long, 

Think of thyself,” — 

Euripides writes : 

“Why ? seeing the wealth we have uncertain is, 

Why don’t we live as free from care, as pleasant 
As we may ? ” 

Similarly also, the comic poet Diphilus having said : 

“ The life of men is prone to change,” — 

Posidippus says : 

“No man of mortal mould his life has passed 
From suffering free. Nor to the end again 
Has continued prosperous.” 

Similarly 1 speaks to thee Plato, writing of man as a creature 
subject to change. 

Again, Euripides having said : 

“ Oh life to mortal men of trouble full, 

How slippery in everything art thou ! 

Now grow’st thou, and thou now decay’st away. 

And there is set no limit, no, not one, 

For mortals of their course to make an end, 

Except when Death’s remorseless final end 
Comes, sent from Zeus,” — 

Diphilus writes : 

u There is no life which has not its own ills’ 

Pains, cares, thefts, and anxieties, disease ; 

And Death, as a physician, coming, gives 
Eest to their victims in his quiet sleep.” 2 

Furthermore, Euripides having said : 

“ Many are fortune’s shapes, 

And many things contrary to expectation the gods perform,” — 
The tragic poet Theodectes similarly writes : 

“ The instability of mortals’ fates.” 

1 The text has tear uXhcc. And although Sylburgius very properly 
remarks, that the conjecture x.xruT^'hyfKoc instead is uncertain, it is so 
suitable to the sense here, that we have no hesitation in adopting it. 

2 The above is translated as amended by Grotius. 

312 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vx. 

And Bacchylides having said : 

“ To few 1 alone of mortals is it given 
To reach hoary age, being prosperous all the while, 

And not meet with calamities,” — 

Moschion, the comic poet, writes : 

“ But he of all men is most blest, 

Who leads throughout an equal life.” 

And you will find that, Theognis having said : 

“ For no advantage to a man grown old 
A young wife is, who will not, as a ship 
The helm, obey,” — 

Aristophanes, the comic poet, writes : 

“ An old man to a young wife suits but ill.” 

For Anacreon, having written : 

“ Luxurious love I sing, 

With flowery garlands graced, 

He is of gods the king, 

He mortal men subdues,” — 

Euripides writes : 

“For love not only men attacks, 

And women ; but disturbs 

The souls of gods above, and to the sea 

Descends.” 

But not to protract the discourse further, in our anxiety 
to show the propensity of the Gi’eeks to plagiarism in ex- 
pressions and dogmas, allow us to adduce the expi'ess testi- 
mony of Hippias, the sophist of Elea, who discourses on the 
point in hand, and speaks thus : “ Of these things some per- 
chance are said by Orpheus, some briefly by Musaaus ; some 
in one place, others in other places ; some by Hesiod, some 
by Homer, some by the rest of the poets ; and some in prose 
compositions, some by Greeks, some by Barbarians. And I 
from all these, placing together the things of most im- 
portance and of kindred character, will make the present 
discourse new and vai'ied.” 

And in order that we may see that philosophy and history, 
and even rhetoric, are not free of a like reproach, it is right 

1 -rwupoiat, “ few,” instead of vxp’ o7<n, and ‘Kpxaaovrxp instead of 
npuaaovTci, and oixig, “ calamities,” instead of oix, are adopted from 
Lyric Fragments. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

313 

to adduce a few instances from them. For Alcma3on of 
Crotona having said, “ It is easier to guard against a man 
who is an enemy than a friend,” Sophocles wrote in the 
Antigone : 

$ 

“ For what sore more grievous than a bad friend? ” 

And Xenophon said : u No man can injure enemies in any 
other way than by appearing to be a friend.” 

And Euripides having said in Telephus : 

“ Shall we Greeks be slaves to Barbarians? ” — 
Thrasymachus, in the oration for the Larissseans, says : 
“ Shall we be slaves to Archelaus — Greeks to a Barbarian % ” 
And Orpheus having said : 

“ Water is the change for soul, and death for water ; 

From Avater is earth, and Avhat comes from earth is again Avater, 
And from that, soul, which changes the Avhole ether 

and Heraclitus, putting together the expressions from these 
lines, writes thus : 

“ It is death for souls to become Avater, and death for Avater to become 
earth ; and from earth comes water, and from water soul.” 

And Athamas the Pythagorean having said, “ Thus Avas 
produced the beginning of the universe ; and there are four 
roots — fire, Avater, air, earth : for from these is the origina- 
tion of Avhat is produced,” — Empedocles of Agrigentum 
Avrote : 

“ The four roots of all things first do thou hear — 

Fire, Avater, earth, and ether’s boundless height: 

For of these all that Avas, is, shall be, comes.” 

And Plato having said, “ Wherefore also the gods, knoAving 
men, release sooner from life those they value most,” Menan- 
der Avrote : 

“ Whom the gods love, dies young.” 

And Euripides having Avritten in the (Enomcius : 

“We judge of things obscure from Avhat we see ; ” 
and in the Plicenix : 

“ By signs the obscure is fairly grasped,” — 

Hyperides says, “But AA r e must investigate things unseen by 
learning from signs and probabilities.” And Isocrates having 

314 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

said, “ We must conjecture the future by the past,” Ando- 
cides does not shrink from saying, “For we must make use 
of what has happened previously as signs in reference to what 
is to be.” Besides, Theognis having said : 

“ The evil of counterfeit silver and gold is not intolerable, 

0 Cyrnus, and to a wise man is not difficult of detection ; 

But if the mind of a friend is hidden in his breast, 

If he is false, 1 and has a treacherous heart within, 

This is the basest thing for mortals, caused by God, 

And of all things the hardest to detect,” — 

Euripides writes : 

“ Oh Zeus, why hast thou given to men clear tests 
Of spurious gold, while on the body grows 
No mark sufficing to discover clear 
The wicked man ? ” 

Hyperides himself also says, “There is no feature of the 
mind impressed on the countenance of men.” 

Again, Stasinus having composed the line : 

“ Fool, who, having slain the father, leaves the children,” — 
Xenophon 2 says, “For I seem to myself to have acted in 
like manner, as if one who killed the father should spare his 
children.” And Sophocles having written in the Antigone : 
“Mother and father being in Hades now, 

No brother ever can to me spring forth,” — 

Herodotus says, “ Mother and father being no more, I shall 
not have another brother.” In addition to these, Theo- 
pompus having written : 

“ Twice children are old men in very truth 
And before him Sophocles in Peleus : 

“Peleus, the son of iEacus, I, sole housekeeper, 

Guide, old as he is now, and train again, 

For the aged man is once again a child,” — 

Antipho the orator says, “For the nursing of the old is like 
the nursing of children.” Also the philosopher Plato says, 
“ The old man then, as seems, will be twice a child.” F urther, 

1 -Ivovog = ypvopo; — which, however, occurs nowhere but here — is 
adopted as preferable to tpehvog (bald), which yields no sense, or -J/vxpo;. 
Sylburgius MS. Paris ; Kulinlc reads ipvopos. 

2 A mistake for Herodotus. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

315 

Thucydides having said, “ We alone bore the brunt at Mara- 
thon,” 1 — Demosthenes said, “ By those who bore the brunt 
at Marathon.” Nor will I omit the following. Cratinus 
having said in the Pytine : 2 

“ The preparation perchance you know,” — 

Andocides the orator says, u The preparation, gentlemen of 
the jury, and the eagerness of our enemies, almost all of 
you know.” Similarly also Nicias, in the speech on the 
deposit, against Lysias, says, “ The preparation and the eager- 
ness of the adversaries, ye see, O gentlemen of the jury.” 
After him JEschines says, 11 You see the preparation, O men 
of Athens, and the line of battle.” Again, Demosthenes 
having said, “ What zeal and what canvassing, O men of 
Athens, have been employed in this contest, I think almost 
all of you are aware ; ” and Philinus similarly, “ What zeal, 
what forming of the line of battle, gentlemen of the jury, 
have taken place in this contest, I think not one of you is 
ignorant.” Isocrates, again, having said, “ As if she were 
related to his wealth, not him,” Lysias says in the Orpines, 
“ And he was plainly related not to the persons, but to the 
money.” Since Homer also having written : 

“ 0 friend, if in this war, by taking flight, 

We should from age and death exemption win, 

I would not fight among the first myself, 

Nor would I send thee to the glorious fray ; 

But now — for myriad fates of death attend 
In any case, which man may not escape 
Or shun — come on. To some one we shall bring 
Renown, or some one shall to us,” 3 — 

Theopompus writes, “For if, by avoiding the present danger, 
we were to pass the rest of our time in security, to show love 
of life would not be wonderful. But now, so many fatalities 
are incident to life, that death in battle seems preferable.” 
And what ? Chilo the sophist having uttered the apophthegm, 

1 Instead, of Mupu6uviTut, as in the text, we read from Thucydides 
TSlu.pa.6uvi t i. 

2 Uvrivv) (not, as in the text, Tlonivy), a flask covered with plaited 
osiers. The name of a comedy by Cratinus (Liddel and Scott’s Lexicon). 

3 Iliad , xii., Sarpedon to Glaucus. 

316 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

V “ Become surety, and mischief is at hand,” did not Epichar- 
mus utter the same sentiment in other terms, when he said, 
“ Suretyship is the daughter of mischief, and loss that of 
suretyship ?” 1 Further, Hippocrates the physician having 
written, “ You must look to time, and locality, and age, and 
disease,” Euripides says in Hexameters : 2 

“ Those who the healing art would practise well, 

Must study people’s modes of life, and note 
The soil, and the diseases so consider.” 

Homer, again, having written : 

“ I say no mortal man can doom escape,” — 

Archinus says, u All men are bound to die either sooner or 
later ; ” and Demosthenes, a To all men death is the end of 
life, though one should keep himself shut up in a coop.” 

And Herodotus, again, having said, in his discourse about 
Glaucus the Spartan, that the Pythian said, u In the case of 
the Deity, to say and to do are equivalent,” Aristophanes said : 

“ For to think and to do are equivalent.” 

And before him, Parmenides of Elea said : 

“ For thinking and being are the same.” 

And Plato having said, “ And we shall show, not absurdly 
perhaps, that the beginning of love is sight ; and hope dimi- 
nishes the passion, memory nourishes it, and intercourse pre- 
serves it ;” does not Philemon the comic poet write : 

“ First all see, then admire ; 

Then gaze, then come to hope ; 

And thus arises love ? ” 

Further, Demosthenes having said, “ For to all of us death 
is a debt,” and so forth, Phanocles writes in Loves , or The 
Beautiful : 

“ But from the Fates’ unbroken thread escape 
Is none for those that feed on earth.” 

You will also find that Plato having said, “For the first 

1 Grotius’ correction has been adopted, syyvx; os i^xyJcc, instead of 
hyyva os ^aytcc;. 

2 In the text before In Hexameters we have rnpyitni, which has occasioned 
much trouble to the critics. Although not entirely satisfactory, yet the 
most probable is the correction 6i\ov<u as above. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

317 

sprout of each plant, having got a fair start, according to the 
virtue of its own nature, is most powerful in inducing the 
appropriate end;” the historian writes, u Further, it is not 
natural for one of the wild plants to become cultivated, after 
they have passed the earlier period of growth ; ” and the 
following of Empedocles : 

“ For I already have been boy and girl, 

And bush, and bird, and mute fish in the sea,” — 

Euripides transcribes in Chrysippus : 

“ But nothing dies 

Of things that are ; but being dissolved, 

One from the other, 

Shows another form.” 

And Plato having said, in the Republic , that women were 
common, Euripides writes in the Protesilaus : 

“ For common, then, is woman’s bed.” 

Further, Euripides having written : 

“ For to the temperate enough sufficient is,” — 

Epicurus expressly says, “ Sufficiency is the greatest riches 
of all.” 

Again, Aristophanes having written : 

“ Life thou securely shalt enjoy, being just 
And free from turmoil, and from fear live well,” — 

Epicurus says, “ The greatest fruit of righteousness is tran- 
quillity .” 

Let these species, then, of Greek plagiarism of sentiments, 
being such, stand as sufficient for a clear specimen to him 
who is capable of perceiving. 

And not only have they been detected pirating and para- 
phrasing thoughts and expressions, as will be shown ; but 
they will also be convicted of the possession of what is 
entirely stolen. For stealing entirely what is the production 
of others, they have published it as their own ; as Eugamon 
of Cyrene did the entire book on the Thesprotians from 
Musaeus, and Pisander of Camirus the Heraclea of Pisinus 
of Lindus, and Panyasis of Halicarnassus, the capture of 
(Echalia from Cleophilus of Samos. 

You will also find that Homer, the great poet, took from 

318 THE MISCELLANIES. [Book yi. 

Orpheus, from the Disappearance of Dionysus, those words 
and what follows verbatim : 

“ As a man trains a luxuriant shoot of olive.” 1 
And in the Theogony , it is said by Orpheus of Kronos : 

“ He lay, his thick neck bent aside ; and him 
All-conquering Sleep had seized.” 

These Homer transferred to the Cyclops . 2 And Hesiod 
writes of Melampous : 

“ Gladly to hear, -what the immortals have assigned 

To men, the brave from cowards clearly marks ; ” 

and so forth, taking it word for word from the poet Musteus. 

And Aristophanes the comic poet has, in the first of the 
Tliesmoplioriazusce, transferred the words from the Empi- 
prameni of Cratinus. And Plato the comic poet, and 
Aristophanes in Dcedalus, steal from one another. Cocalus , 
composed by Araros , 3 the son of Aristophanes, was by the 
comic poet Philemon altered, and made into the comedy 
called Hypobolimceus. 

Eumelus and Acusilaus the historiographers changed the 
contents of Hesiod into prose,- and published them as their 
own. Gorgias of Leontium and Eudemus of Naxus, the 
historians, stole from Melesagoras. And, besides, there is Bion 
of Proconnesus, who epitomized and transcribed the writings 
of the ancient Cadmus, and Archilochus, and Aristocles, and 
Leandrus, and Hellanicus, and Hecatseus, and Androtion, 
and Philochorus. Dieucliidas of Megara transferred the 
beginning of his treatise from the Deucalion of Hellanicus. 
I pass over in silence Heraclitus of Ephesus, who took a very 
great deal from Orpheus. 

From Pythagoras Plato derived the immortality of the 
soul ; and he from the Egyptians. And many of the 
Platonists composed books, in which they show that the 
Stoics, as we said in the beginning, and Aristotle, took the 
most and principal of their dogmas from Plato. Epicurus 

1 Iliad, xvii. 53. 2 i.e. Polyphemus, Odyss. ix. 372. 

3 According to the correction of Casaubon, who, instead of clpaporu; 

of the text, reads ’A papas. Others ascribed the comedy to Aristophanes 
himself. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

319 

also pilfered his leading dogmas from Democritus. Let these 
things then be so. For life would fail me, were I to under- 
take to go over the subject in detail, to expose the selfish 
plagiarism of the Greeks, and how they claim the discovery of 
the best of their doctrines, which they have received from us. 

CHAPTER III. 

PLAGIARISM BY TIIE GREEKS OF THE MIRACLES RELATED 
IN THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE HEBREWS. 

And now they are convicted not only of borrowing doc- 
trines from the Barbarians, but also of relating as prodigies 
of Hellenic mythology the marvels found in our records, 
wrought through divine power from above, by those who 
led holy lives, while devoting attention to us. And we shall 
ask at them whether those things which they relate are true 
or false. But they will not say that they are false ; for 
they will not with their will condemn themselves of the very 
great silliness of composing falsehoods, but of necessity ad- 
mit them to be true. And how will the prodigies enacted 
by Moses and the other prophets any longer appear to them 
incredible? For the Almighty God, in His care for all men, 
turns some to salvation by commands, some by threats, some 
by miraculous signs, some by gentle promises. 

Well, the Greeks, when once a drought had wasted Greece 
for a protracted period, and a dearth of the fruits of the earth 
ensued, it is said, those that survived of them, having, because 
of the famine, come as suppliants to Delphi, asked the Pythian 
priestess how they should be released from the calamity. She 
announced that the only help in their distress was, that they 
should avail themselves of the prayers of JEacus. Prevailed 
on by them, Abacus, ascending the Hellenic hill, and stretch- 
ing out pure 1 hands to heaven, and invoking the common 2 
God, besought him to pity wasted Greece. And as he 

1 i.e. washed. 

8 Eusebius reads, “ invoking the common Father, God,” viz. Ha.<joa,/ r 
mos Zsvg, as Pausanias relates. 

320 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

prayed, thunder sounded, out of the usual course of things, 
and the whole surrounding atmosphere was covered with 
clouds. And impetuous and continued rains, bursting down, 
filled the whole region. The result was a copious and rich 
fertility wrought by the husbandry of the prayers of HCacus. 

“ And Samuel called on the Lord,” it is said, “ and the 
Lord gave forth His voice, and rain in the day of harvest.” 1 
Do you see that “ He who sendeth His rain on the just and 
on the unjust ” 2 by the subject powers is the one God? 
And the whole of our Scripture is full of instances of God, 
in reference to the prayers of the just, hearing and performing 
each one of their petitions. 

Again, the Greeks relate, that in the case of a failure once 
of the Etesian winds, Aristseus once sacrificed in Oeus to 
Isthmian Zeus. For there was great devastation, everything 
being burnt up with the heat in consequence of the winds, 
which had been wont to refresh the productions of the earth, 
not blowing, and he easily called them back. 

And at Delphi, on the expedition of Xerxes against Greece, 
the Pythian priestess having made answer : 

“ 0 Delphians, pray the winds, and it will be better,” — 

they having erected an altar and performed sacrifice to the 
winds, had them as their helpers. For, blowing violently 
around Gape Sepias, they shivered the whole preparations of 
the Persian expedition. Empedocles of Agrigentum was called 
“ Checker of Winds.” Accordingly it is said, that when, on 
a time, a wind blew from the mountain of Agrigentum, 
heavy and pestiferous for the inhabitants, and the cause also 
of barrenness to their wives, he made the wind to cease. 
Wherefore he himself writes in the lines : 

“ Thou shalt the might of the unwearied winds make still, 

Which rushing to the earth spoil mortals’ crops, 

And at thy will bring back the avenging blasts.” 

And they say that he was followed by some that used divina- 
tions, and some that had been long vexed by sore diseases . 3 

1 1 Sam. xi. 18. 2 Matt. v. 45. 

3 Instead of vowov athnpov, the sense requires that we should, with 
Sylburgius, read vovaotai on pay. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

321 

They plainly, then, believed in the performance of cures, and 
signs and wonders, from our Scriptures. For if certain 
powers move the winds and dispense showers, let them hear 
the psalmist : u How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of 
hosts !” 1 This is the Lord of powers, and principalities, and 
authorities, of whom Moses speaks ; so that we may be with 
Him. u And ye shall circumcise your hard heart, and 
shall not harden your neck any more. For He is Lord of 
lords and God of gods, the great God and strong,” 2 and so 
forth. And Isaiah says, u Lift your eyes to the height, and 
see who hath produced all these things.” 3 

And some say that plagues, and hail-storms, and tempests, 
and the like, are wont to take place, not alone in consequence 
of material disturbance, but also through anger of demons 
and bad angels. For instance, they say that the Magi at 
Cleone, watching the phenomena of the skies, when the clouds 
are about to discharge hail, avert the threatening of wrath 
by incantations and sacrifices. And if at any time there is 
the want of an animal, they are satisfied with bleeding their 
own finger for a sacrifice. The prophetess Diotima, by the 
Athenians offering sacrifice previous to the pestilence, effected 
a delay of the plague for ten years. The sacrifices, too, of 
Epimenides of Crete, put off the Persian war for an equal 
period. And it is considered to be all the same whether we 
call these spirits gods or angels. And those skilled in the 
matter of consecrating statues, in many of the temples have 
erected tombs of the dead, calling the souls of these Daemons, 
and teaching them to be worshipped by men ; as having, in 
consequence of the purity of their life, by the divine fore- 
knowledge, received the power of wandering about the space 
around the earth in order to minister to men. For they 
knew that some souls were by nature kept in the body. But 
of these, as the work proceeds, in the treatise on the angels, 
we shall discourse. 

Democritus, who predicted many things from observation 
of celestial phenomena, was called u Wisdom ” (Xofyia). On 
his meeting a cordial reception from his brother Damasus, he 
1 Ps. lxxxiv. 1. 2 Deut. x. 16, 17. 3 Isa. xl. 26. 

CLEM.— YOL. II. 

X 

322 

TI1E MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

predicted that there would be much rain, judging from cer- 
tain stars. Some, accordingly, convinced by him, gathered 
theii>erops ; for being in summer-time, they were still on the 
threshing-floor. But others lost all, unexpected and heavy 
showers having burst down. 

How then shall the Greeks any longer disbelieve the 
divine appearance on Mount Sinai, when the Are burned, 
consuming none of the things that grew on the mount ; and 
the sound of trumpets issued forth, breathed without instru- 
ments ? For that which is called the descent on the mount 
of God is the advent of divine power, pervading the whole 
world, and proclaiming u the light that is inaccessible.” 1 

For such is the allegory, according to the Scripture. But 
the fire was seen, as Aristobulus says, while the whole multi- 
tude, amounting to not less than a million, besides those under 
age, were congregated around the mountain, the circuit of 
the mount not being less than five days’ journey. Over the 
whole place of the vision the burning fire was seen by them 
all encamped as it were around ; so that the descent was not 
local. For God is everywhere. 

Now the compilers of narratives say that in the island of 
Britain there is a cave situated under a mountain, and a 
chasm on its summit ; and that, accordingly, when the wind 
falls into the cave, and rushes into the bosom of the cleft, a 
sound is heard like cymbals clashing musically. And often 
in the woods, when the leaves are moved by a sudden gust of 
wind, a sound is emitted like the song of birds. 

Those also who composed the Persies relate that in the 
uplands, in the country of the Magi, three mountains are 
situated on an extended plain, and that those who travel 
through the locality, on coming to the first mountain, hear a 
confused sound as of several myriads shouting, as if in battle 
array ; and on reaching the middle one, they hear a clamour 
louder and more distinct ; and at the end hear people singing 
a psean, as if victorious. And the cause, in my opinion, of the 
whole sound, is the smoothness and cavernous character of 
the localities ; and the air, entering in, being sent back and 

1 1 Tim. vi. 16. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

323 

going to the same point, sounds with considerable force. 
Let these things be so. But it is possible for God Almighty, 
even without a medium, to produce a voice and vision through 
the ear, showing that His greatness has a natural order be- 
yond what is customary, in order to the conversion of the 
hitherto unbelieving soul, and the reception of the command- 
ment given. But there being a cloud and a lofty mountain, 
how is it not possible to hear a different sound, the wind 
moving by the active cause ? Wherefore also the prophet 
says, “Ye heard the voice of words, and saw no similitude.” 1 
You see how the Lord’s voice, the Word, without shape, the 
power of the Word, the luminous word of the Lord, the truth 
from heaven, from above, coming to the assembly of the 
church, wrought by the luminous immediate ministry. 

CHAPTER IY. 

THE GREEKS DREW MANY OF THEIR PHILOSOPHICAL TENETS 
FROM THE EGYPTIAN AND INDIAN GYMNOSOPHISTS. 

We shall find another testimony in confirmation, in the fact 
that the best of the philosophers, having appropriated their 
most excellent dogmas from us, boast, as it were, of certain 
of the tenets which pertain to each sect being culled from 
other Barbarians, chiefly from the Egyptians — both other 
tenets, and that especially of the transmigration of the soul. 
For the Egyptians pursue a philosophy of their own. This 
is principally shown by their sacred ceremonial. For first 
advances the Singer, bearing some one of the symbols of 
music. For they say that he must learn two of the books of 
Hermes, the one of which contains the hymns of the gods, 
the second the regulations for the king’s life. And after the 
Singer advances the Astrologer , 2 with a horologe in his hand, 
and a palm, the symbols of astrology. He must have the 
astrological books of Hermes, which are four in number, 
always in his mouth. Of these, one is about the order of the 
1 Dent. iv. 12. 2 ' ClpoaKoirog, 

324 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

fixed stars that are visible, and another about the conjunc- 
tions and luminous appearances of the sun and moon ; and 
the rest respecting their risings. Next in order advances the 
sacred Sci’ibe, with wings on his head, and in his hand a book 
and rule, in which were writing ink and the reed, with which 
they write. And he must be acquainted with what are called 
hieroglyphics, and know about cosmography and geography, 
the position of the sun and moon, and about the five planets ; 
also the description of Egypt, and the chart of the Nile ; and 
the description of the equipment of the priests and of the 
places consecrated to them, and about the measures and the 
things in use in the sacred rites. Then the Stole-keeper fol- 
lows those previously mentioned, with the cubit of justice and' 
the cup for libations. He is acquainted with all points called 
Paedeutic (relating to training) and Moschophatic (sacrifi- 
cial). There are also ten books which relate to the honour 
paid by them to their gods, and containing the Egyptian 
worship ; as that relating to sacrifices, first-fruits, hymns, 
prayers, processions, festivals, and the like. And behind all 
walks the Prophet, with the water-vase carried openly in 
his arms ; who is followed by those who carry the issue of 
loaves. He, as being the governor of the temple, learns the 
ten books called u Hieratic ; ” and they contain all about the 
laws, and the gods, and the whole of the training of the 
priests. For the Prophet is, among the Egyptians, also over 
the distribution of the revenues. There are then forty-two 
books of Hermes indispensably necessary ; of which the six- 
and-thirty containing the whole philosophy of the Egyptians 
are learned by the forementioned personages ; and the other 
six, which are medical, by the Pastophoroi (image-bearers), — 
treating of the structure of the body, and of diseases, and 
instruments, and medicines, and about the eyes, and the 
last about women. Such are the customs of the Egyptians, 
to speak briefly. 

The philosophy of the Indians, too, has been celebrated. 
Alexander of Macedon, having taken ten of the Indian 
Gymnosophists, that seemed the best and most sententious, 
proposed to them problems, threatening to put to death him 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

325 

that did not answer to the purpose ; ordering one, who was 
the eldest of them, to decide. 

The first, then, being asked whether he thought that the 
living were more in number than the dead, said, The living ; 
for that the dead were not. The second, on being asked 
whether the sea or the land maintained larger beasts, said, 
The land; for the sea was part of it. And the third being- 
asked which was the most cunning of animals? The one, 
which has not hitherto been known, man. And the fourth 
being interrogated, For what reason they had made Sabba, 
who was their prince, revolt, answered, Because they wished 
him to live well rather than die ill. And the fifth bein£ 

o 

asked, Whether he thought that day or night was first, said, 
One day. For puzzling questions must have puzzling an- 
swers. And the sixth being posed with the query, How 
shall one be loved most ? By being most powerful ; in order 
that he may not be timid. And the seventh being asked, 
How any one of men could become God ? said, If he do 
what it is impossible for man to do. And the eighth being 
asked, Which is the stronger, life or death ? said, Life, which 
bears such ills. And the ninth being interrogated, Up to 
what point it is good for a man to live? said, Till he does 
not think that to die is better than to live. And on Alex- 
ander ordering the tenth to say something, for he was 
judge, he said, il One spake Avorse than another.” And on 
Alexander saying, Shall you not, then, die first, having given 
such a judgment? he said, And ho\\q O king, wilt thou 
prove true, after saying that thou Avouldest kill first the first 
man that answered very badly? 

And that the Greeks are called pilferers of all manner of 
Avriting, is, as I think, sufficiently demonstrated by abundant 
proofs. 

326 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

CHAPTER V. 

THE GREEKS HAD SOME KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUE GOD. 

And that the men of highest repute among the Greeks knew 
God, not by positive knowledge, hut by indirect expression , 1 
Peter says in the Preaching : “ Know then that there is one 
God, who made the bemnning of all things, and holds the 
power of the end ; and is the Invisible, who sees all things ; 
incapable of being contained, who contains all things ; need- 
ing nothing, whom all things need, and by whom they are ; 
incomprehensible, everlasting, unmade, who made all things 
by the c Word of His power,’ that is, according to the gnostic 
scripture, His Son.” 2 

Then he adds: “Worship this God not as the Greeks,” 
— signifying plainly, that the excellent among the Greeks 
worshipped the same God as we, but that they had not 
learned by perfect knowledge that which was delivered by 
the Son. “ Do not then worship,” he did not say, the God 
whom the Greeks worship, but “ as the Greeks,” — changing 
the manner of the worship of God, not announcing another 
God. What, then, the expression “ not as the Greeks ” 
means, Peter himself shall explain, as he adds : “Since they 
are carried away by ignorance, and know not God” (as we 
do, according to the perfect knowledge) ; “ but giving shape 
to the things 3 of which He gave them the power for use — 
stocks and stones, brass and iron, gold and silver — matter ; 
— and setting up the things which are slaves for use and 

1 "We have the same statement made, Stromata i. 19, Ante-Nieene Lib. 
p. 413, Potter 372 ; also v. 14, Ante-Nicene Lib. p. 298, Potter 730, — 
in all of which Lowth adopts mpiQpuaiv as the true reading, instead of 
TTspttyuGiv. In the first of these passages, Clement instances as one of 
the circumlocutions or roundabout expressions by which God was known 
to the Greek poets and philosophers, “ The Unknown God." Joannes 
Clericus proposes to read Txpxtpxaiv ( palpitatio ), touching, feeling after. 

2 i.e. “ The word of God’s power is His Son.” 

3 Instead of ijv . . . e%ow!us, as in the text, we read Z>v s^ovtuxu. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

327 

possession, worship them . 1 And what God hath given to 
them for food — the fowls of the air, and the fish of the sea, 
and the creeping things of the earth, and the wild beasts 
with the four-footed cattle of the field, weasels and mice, 
cats and dogs and apes, and their own proper food — they 
sacrifice as sacrifices to mortals ; and offering dead things to 
the dead, as to gods, are unthankful to God, denying His 
existence by these things.” And that it is said, that we and 
the Greeks know the same God, though not in the same way, 
he will infer thus : a Neither worship as the Jews ; for they, 
thinking that they only know God, do not know Him, ador- 
ing as they do angels and archangels, the month and the 
moon. And if the moon be not visible, they do not hold the 
Sabbath, which is called the first ; nor do they hold the 
new moon, nor the feast of unleavened bread, nor the feast, 
nor the great day .” 2 Then he gives the finishing stroke 
to the question : u So that do ye also, learning holily and 
righteously what we deliver to you; keep them, worship- 
ping God in a new way, by Christ.” For we find in the 
Scriptures, as the Lord says : “ Behold, I make with you a 
new covenant, not as I made with your fathers in Mount 
Horeb.” 3 He made a new covenant with us ; for what be- 
longed to the Greeks and Jews is old. But we, who worship 
Him in a new way, in the third form, are Christians. For 
clearly, as I think, he showed that the one and only God 
was known by the Greeks in a Gentile way, by the Jews 
Judaically, and in a new and spiritual way by us. 

And further, that the same God that furnished both the 
Covenants was the giver of Greek philosophy to the Greeks, 
by which the Almighty is glorified among the Greeks, he 
shows. And it is clear from this. Accordingly, then, from 
the Hellenic training, and also from that of the law, are 
gathered into the one race of the saved people those who 
accept faith: not that the three peoples are separated by time, so 

1 None of the attempts to amend this passage are entirely successful. 
The translation adopts the best suggestions made. 

2 i.e. of atonement. 3 Jer. xxxi. 31, 32 ; Heb. viii. 8-10. 

328 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vx. 

that one might suppose three natures, but trained in different 
Covenants of the one Lord, by the word of the one Lord. 
For that, as God wished to save the Jews by giving to 
them prophets, so also by raising up prophets of their own 
in their own tongue, as they were able to receive God’s 
beneficence, He distinguished the most excellent of the 
Greeks from the common herd, in addition to a Peter s 
Preaching ,” the Apostle Paul will show, saying : u Take also 
the Hellenic books, read the Sibyl, how it is shown that 
God is one, and how the future is indicated. And taking 
Hystaspes, read, and you will find much more luminously 
and distinctly the Son of God described, and how many kings 
shall draw up their forces against Christ, hating Him and 
those that bear His name, and His faithful ones, and His 
patience, and His coming.” Then in one word he asks us, 
u Whose is the world, and all that is in the world ? Are 
they not God’s ?” 1 Wherefore Peter says, that the Lord said 
to the apostles : a If any one of Israel, then, wishes to repent, 
and by my name to believe in God, his sins shall be forgiven 
him, after twelve years. Go forth into the world, that no 
one may say, We have not heard.” 

CHAPTER VI. 

TIIE GOSPEL WAS PREACHED TO JEWS AND GENTILES 

IN HADES. 

But as the proclamation [of the gospel] has come now at 
the fit time, so also at the fit time were the Law and the Pro- 
phets given to the Barbarians, and Philosophy to the Greeks, 
to fit their ears for the gospel. “ Therefore,” says the Lord 
who delivered Israel, “ in an acceptable time have I heard 
thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee. And I 
have given thee for a Covenant to the nations ; that thou 

1 Most likely taken from some apocryphal book bearing the name of 
Paul. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

329 

mightest inhabit the earth, and receive the inheritance of the 
wilderness ; saying to those that are in bonds, Come forth ; 
and to those that are in darkness, Show yourselves.” For 
if the “prisoners” are the Jews, of whom the Lord said, 
“ Come forth, ye that will, from your bonds,” — meaning the 
voluntary bound, and who have taken on them “ the burdens 
grievous to be borne 5,1 by human injunction, — it is plain that 
“ those in darkness” are they who have the ruling faculty of 
the soul buried in idolatry. 

For to those who were righteous according to the law, 
faith was wanting. Wherefore also the Lord, in healing 
them, said, “Thy faith hath saved thee.” 2 But to those that 
were righteous according to philosophy, not only faith in the 
Lord, but also the abandonment of idolatry, were necessary. 
Straightway, on the revelation of the truth, they also re- 
pented of their previous conduct. 

Wherefore the Lord preached the gospel to those in Hades. 
Accordingly the Scripture says, “ Hades says to Destruction, 
We have not seen His form, but we have heard His voice.” 3 
It is not plainly the place, which, the words above say, heard 
the voice, but those who have been put in Hades, and have 
abandoned themselves to destruction, as persons who have 
thrown themselves voluntarily from a ship into the sea. 
They, then, are those that hear the divine power and voice. 
For who in his senses can suppose the souls of the righteous 
and those of sinners in the same condemnation, charm no- 
Providence with injustice % 

But how % Do not [the Scriptures] show that the Lord 
preached 4 the gospel to those that perished in the flood, or 
rather had been chained, and to those kept “ in ward and 
guard % ” 5 And it has been shown also, 0 in the second book 

1 Matt, xxiii. 4 ; Luke xi. 47. 2 Matt. ix. 22, etc. 

3 The passage which seems to be alluded to here is Job xxviii. 22, 
“Destruction and Death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our 
ears.” 

4 evi 'lyyihiatoui used actively for ivccy/iT-Jacci, as also immediately after 

evYiyyehUTfiivoi for ivot,yyihiaa,pivQi. 

5 1 Pet. iii. 19, 20. 

s Potter, p. 452 ; Ante-Nicene Library, vol. ii. Clement , p. 28. 

330 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

of the Stromata, that the apostles, following the Lord, preached 
the gospel to those in Hades. For it was requisite, in my 
opinion, that as here, so also there, the best of the disciples 
should be imitators of the Master ; so that He should bring 
to repentance those belonging to the Hebrews, and they 
the Gentiles ; that is, those who had lived in righteousness 
according to the Law and Philosophy, who had ended life not 
perfectly, but sinfully. For it was suitable to the divine 
administration, that those possessed of greater worth in right- 
eousness, and whose life had been pre-eminent, on repenting 
of their transgressions, though found in another place, yet 
being confessedly of the number of the people of God 
Almighty, should be saved, each one according to his indivi- 
dual knowledge. 

And, as I think, the Saviour also exerts His might be- 
cause it is His work to save ; which accordingly He also did 
by drawing to salvation those who became willing, by the 
preaching [of the gospel], to believe on Him, wherever they 
were. If, then, the Lord descended to Hades for no other 
end but to preach the gospel, as He did descend ; it was ' 
either to preacli the gospel to all or to the Hebrews only. 
If, accordingly, to all, then all who believe shall be saved, 
although they may be of the Gentiles, on making their 
profession there ; since God’s punishments are saving and 
disciplinary, leading to conversion, and choosing rather the 
repentance than the death of a sinner ; x and especially since 
souls, although darkened by passions, when released from 
their bodies, are able to perceive more clearly, because of 
their being no longer obstructed by the paltry flesh. 

If, then, He preached only to the Jews, who wanted the 
knowledge and faith of the Saviour, it is plain that, since 
God is no respecter of persons, the apostles also, as here, so 
there, preached the gospel to those of the heathen who were 
ready for conversion. And it is well said by the Shepherd, 
u They went down with them therefore into the water, 
and again ascended. But these descended alive, and again 
ascended alive. But those who had fallen asleep, descended 
1 Ezek. xviii. 23, 32, xxxiii. 11, etc. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

331 

\ dead, but ascended alive .” 1 Further, the Gospel 2 says, “ that 
many bodies of those that slept arose,” — plainly as having 
been translated to a better state . 3 There took place, then, 
a universal movement and translation through the economy 
of the Savioui’. 

One righteous man, then, differs not, as righteous, from 
another righteous man, whether he be of the Law or a Greek. 
For God is not only Lord of the Jews, but of all men, and 
more nearly the Father of those who know Him. For if to 
live well and according to the law is to live, also to live 
rationally according to the law is to live ; and those who 
lived rightly before the Law were classed under faith , 4 and 
judged to be righteous, — it is evident that those, too, who 
were outside of the Law, having lived rightly, in consequence 
of the neculiar nature of the voice , 5 though tliev are in 
Hades and in ward , 0 on hearing the voice of the Lord, 
whether that of His own person or that acting through His 
apostles, with all speed turned and believed. For we remem- 
ber that the Lord is u the power of God,” 7 and power can 
never be weak. 

So I think it is demonstrated that the God being good, 
and the Lord powerful, they save with a righteousness and 
equality which extend to all that turn to Him, whether 
here or elsewhere. For it is not here alone that the active 
power of God is beforehand, but it is everywhere and is 
always at work. Accordingly, in the Preaching of Peter , the 
Lord says to the disciples after the resurrection, u I have 
chosen you twelve disciples, judging you worthy of me,” 
whom the Lord wished to be apostles, having judged them 
faithful, sending them into the world to the men on the 
earth, that they may know that there is one God, showing 

1 Hermas , book iii. chap. xvi. Ante-Nicene Library, 420. Quoted 
also in Stromata ii. Ante-Nicene Library, p. 218, from which the text 
here is corrected ; Potter, 452. 

2 Matt, xxvii. 52. 3 4 Rom. ix. 3. 

Apparently God’s voice to them. Sylburgius proposes to read < piatas 

instead of <paj% here. 

6 1 Pet. iii. 19. 

7 1 Cor. i. 29. 

332 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

clearly what would take place by the faith of Christ ; that 
they who heard and believed should be saved ; and that 
those who believed not, after having heard, should bear wit- 
ness, not having the excuse to allege, We have not heard. 

What then? Did not the same dispensation obtain in Hades, 
so that even there, all the souls, on hearing the proclamation, 
might either exhibit repentance, or confess that their punish- 
ment was just, because they believed not? And it were the 
exercise of no ordinary arbitrariness, for those who had departed 
before the advent of the Lord (not having the gospel preached 
to them, and having afforded no ground from themselves, in 
consequence of believing or not) to obtain either salvation or 
punishment. For it is not right that these should be con- 
demned without trial, and that those alone who lived after 
the advent should have the advantage of the divine right- 
eousness. But to all rational souls it was said from above, 
c: Whatever one of you has done in ignorance, without clearly 
knowing God, if, on becoming conscious, he repent, all his 
sins will be forgiven him.” 1 “For, behold,” it is said, “I 
have set before your face death and life, that ye may choose 
life.” 2 God says that He set, not that He made both, in order 
to the comparison of choice. And in another scripture He 
says, u If ye hear me, and be willing, ye shall eat the good 
of the land. But if ye hear me not, and are not willing, the 
sword shall devour you : for the mouth of the Lord hath 
spoken these things.” 3 

Again, David expressly (or rather the Lord in the per- 
son of the saint, and the same from the foundation of the 
world is each one who at different periods is saved, and shall 
be saved by faith) says, “ My heart was glad, and my tongue 
rejoiced, and my flesh shall still rest in hope. For Thou shalt 
not leave my soul in hell, nor wilt Thou give Thine holy one 
to see corruption. Thou hast made known to me the paths 
of life, Thou wilt make me full of joy in Thy presence.” 4 
As, then, the people was precious to the Lord, so also is the 

1 Alluding apparently to such passages as Acts iii. 17, 19, and xvii. 30. 

2 Deut. xxx. 15, 19. 3 Isa. i. 19, 20. 

4 Ps. xvi. 9-11 ; Acts ii. 20-28. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

333 

entire holy people ; he also who is converted from the 
Gentiles, who was prophesied under the name of proselyte, 
along with the Jew. For rightly the Scripture says, that 
“ the ox and the bear shall come together.” 1 For the Jew is 
designated by the ox, from the animal under the yoke being 
reckoned clean, according to the law ; for the ox both parts 
the hoof and chews the cud. And the Gentile is designated 
by the bear, which is an unclean and wild beast. And this 
animal brings forth a shapeless lump of flesh, which it shapes 
into the likeness of a beast solely by its tongue. For he who 
is converted from among the Gentiles is formed from a beast- 
like life to gentleness by the word ; and, when once tamed, is 
made clean, just as the ox. For example, the prophet says, 
“ The sirens, and the daughters of the sparrows, and all the 
beasts of the field, shall bless me .” 2 Of the number of 
unclean animals, the wild beasts of the field are known to be, 
that is, of the world ; since those who are wild in respect 
of faith, and polluted in life, and not purified by the right- 
eousness which is accoi’ding to the law, are called wild 
beasts. But changed from wild beasts by the faith of the 
Lord, they become men of God, advancing from the wish to 
change to the fact. For some the Lord exhorts, and to those 
who have already made the attempt he stretches forth His 
hand, and draws them up. “For the Lord dreads not the 
face of any one, nor will He regard greatness ; for He hath 
made small and great, and cares alike for all.” 3 And David 
says, “For the heathen are fixed in the destruction they 
have caused; their foot is taken in the snare which they 
hid .” 4 “But the Lord was a refuge to the poor, a help in 
season also in affliction.” 5 Those, then, that were in affliction 
had the gospel seasonably proclaimed. And therefore it said, 
“Declare among the heathen his pursuits ,” 6 that they may 
not be judged unjustly. 

If, then, He preached the gospel to those in the flesh that 
they might not be condemned unjustly, how is it conceivable 
that He did not for the same cause preach the gospel to 

1 Isa. xi. 7. 2 Isa. xliii. 20. 3 Wisd. vi.7. 

4 Ps. ix. 15. 6 Ps. ix. 9. 6 Ps. ix. 11. 

334 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

those who had departed this life before His advent? “For 
the righteous Lord lovetb righteousness: His countenance 
beholdeth uprightness.” 1 u But he that loveth wickedness 
hatetli his own soul .” 1 2 

If, then, in the deluge all sinful flesh perished, punishment 
having been inflicted on them for correction, we must first 
believe that the will of God, which is disciplinary and bene- 
ficent , 3 saves those who turn to Him. Then, too, the more 
subtle substance, the soul, could never receive any injury 
from the grosser element of water, its subtle and simple nature 
rendering it impalpable, called as it is incorporeal. But what- 
ever is gross, made so in consequence of sin, this is cast away 
along with the carnal spirit which lusts against the soul. 

Now also Valentinus, the Coryphaeus of those who herald 
community, in his book on The Intercourse of Friends, writes 
in these words : “ Many of the things that are written, though 
in common books, are found written in the church of God. 
For those sayings which proceed from the heart are vain. 
For the law written in the heart is the People 4 of the Beloved 
— loved and loving Him.” For whether it be the Jewish 
writings or those of the philosophers that he calls “ the Com- 
mon Books,” he makes the truth common. And Isidore, at 
once son and disciple to Basilides, in the first book of the 
Expositions of the Prophet Parchor, writes also in these 
words : “ The Attics say that certain things were intimated 
to Socrates, in consequence of a daemon attending on him. 
And Aristotle says that all men are provided with daemons, 
that attend on them during the time they are in the body, — 
having taken this piece of prophetic instruction and trans- 
ferred it to his own books, without acknowledging whence he 
had abstracted this statement.” And again, in the second 
book of his work, he thus writes : “ And let no one think that 
what we say is peculiar to the elect, was said before by any 
philosophers. For it is not a discovery of theirs. For having 

1 Ps. xi. 7. 2 Ps. xi. 6, Septuagint version. 

3 Sylburgius’ conjecture, evepytrixov, seems greatly preferable to the 

reading of the text, hipyr,rtx.6v. 

4 Grabe reads Ac'yo; for ~aug;, “ Word of the Beloved,” etc 

Book vk] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

335 

appropriated it from our prophets, they attributed it to him 
who is wise according to them.” Again, in the same : “For to 
me it appears that those who profess to philosophize, do so that 
they may learn what is the winged oak , 1 and the variegated 
robe on it, all of which Pherecydes has employed as theologi- 
cal allegories, having taken them from the prophecy of Cham. 

CHAPTER VII. 

WHAT TRUE PHILOSOPHY IS, AND WHENCE SO CALLED. 

As we have long ago pointed out, what we propose as our 
subject is not the discipline which obtains in each sect, but 
that which is really philosophy, strictly systematic Wisdom, 
which furnishes acquaintance with the things which pertain 
to life. And we define Wisdom to be certain knowledge, 
being a sure and irrefragable apprehension of things divine 
and human, comprehending the present, past, and future, 
which the Lord hath taught us, both by His advent and by 
the prophets. And it is irrefragable by reason, inasmuch 
as it has been communicated. And so it is wholly true 
according to [God’s] intention, as being known through 
means of the Son. And in one aspect it is eternal, and in 
another it becomes useful in time. Partly it is one and 
the same, partly many and indifferent — partly without any 
movement of passion, partly with passionate desire — partly 
perfect, partly incomplete. 

This wisdom, then — rectitude of soul and of reason, and 
purity of life — is the object of the desire of philosophy, which 
is kindly and lovingly disposed towards wisdom, and does 
everything to attain it. 

Now those are called philosophers, among us, who love 
Wisdom, the Creator and Teacher of all things, that is, the 
knowledge of the Son of God ; and among the Greeks, those 
who undertake arguments on virtue. Philosophy, then, con- 
sists of such dogmas found in each sect (I mean those of 

1 Grabe suggests, instead of Bp? here, opvoA, a kind of woodpecker, 
mentioned by Aristophanes. 

336 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

philosophy) as cannot he impugned, with a corresponding 
life, collected into one selection ; and these, stolen from the 
Barbarian God-given grace, have been adorned by Greek 
speech. For some they have borrowed, and others they have 
misunderstood. And in the case of others, what they have 
spoken, in consequence of being moved, they have not yet 
perfectly worked out ; and others by human conjecture and 
reasoning, in which also they stumble. And they think that 
they have hit the truth perfectly ; but as we understand 

them, only partially. They know, then, nothing more than 
this world. And it is just like geometry, which treats of 
measures and magnitudes and forms, by delineation on plain 
surfaces ; and just as painting appears to take in the whole 
field of view in the scenes represented. But it gives a false 
description of the view, according to the rules of the art, 
employing the signs that result from the incidence of the 
lines of vision. By this means, the higher and lower points 
in the view, and those between, are preserved ; and some 
objects seem to appear in the foreground, and others in the 
background, and others to appear in some other way, on the 
smooth and level surface. So also the philosophers copy the 
truth, after the manner of painting. And always in the case 
of each one of them, their self-love is the cause of all their 
mistakes. Wherefore one ought not, in the desire for the 
glory that terminates in men, to be animated by self-love ; 
but loving God, to become really holy with wisdom. If, 

then, one treats what is particular as universal, and regards 
that, which serves, as the Lord, he misses the truth, not 
understanding what was spoken by David by way of confes- 
sion : “I have eaten earth [ashes] like bread .” 1 Now, self- 
love and self-conceit are, in his view, earth and error. But 
if so, science and knowledge are derived from instruction. 
And if there is instruction, you must seek for the master. 
Cleanthes claims Zeno, and Metrodorus Epicurus, and Theo- 
phrastus Aristotle, and Plato Socrates. But if I come to 

1 Ps. cii. 9. The text reads, yviv a^ooov. Clement seems to have read 
in Ps. cii. 9 y~A'J and onoliy. The reading of the Septuagint may have 
crept into the text from the margin. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

337 

Pythagoras, ancl P here cycles, and Thales, and the first wise 
men, I come to a stand in my search for their teacher. 
Should you say the Egyptians, the Indians, the Babylonians, 
and the Magi themselves, I will not stop from asking their 
teacher. And I lead you up to the first generation of men ; 
and from that point I begin to investigate Who is their 
teacher. No one of men ; for they had not yet learned. 
Nor yet any of the angels : for in the way that angels, in 
virtue of being angels, speak, men do not hear ; nor, as we 
have ears, have they a tongue to correspond ; nor would any 
one attribute to the angels organs of speech, lips I mean, 
and the parts contiguous, throat, and windpipe, and chest, 
breath and air to vibrate. And God is far from calling; aloud 
in the unapproachable sanctity, separated as He is from even 
the archangels. 

And we also have already heard that angels learned the 
truth, and their rulers over them ; for they had a beginning. 
It remains, then, for us, ascending to seek their teacher. 
And since the unoriginated Being is one, the Omnipotent 
God; one, too, is the First-begotten, u by whom all things were 
made, and without whom not one thing ever was made.” 1 
“For one, in truth, is God, who formed the beginning of all 
things pointing out “ the first-begotten Son,” Peter writes, 
accurately comprehending the statement, “ In the beginning 
God made the heaven and the earth .” 2 And Pie is called 
Wisdom by all the prophets. This is He who is the Teacher 
of all created beings, the Fellow-counsellor of God, who 
foreknew all things ; and He from above, from the first 
foundation of the world, “ in many ways and many times,” 3 
trains and perfects ; whence it is rightly said, “ Call no man 
your teacher on earth.” 4 

You see whence the true philosophy has its handles ; 
though the Law be the image and shadow of the truth : for 
the Law is the shadow of the truth. But the self-love of the 
Greeks proclaims certain men as their teachers. As, then, 
the whole family runs back to God the Creator ; 5 so also all 

1 John i. 3. 2 Gen. i. 1. s Heb. i. 1. 

4 Matt, xxiii. 8-10. 5 Eph. iii. 14. 15. 

CLEM. — YOL. II. Y 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

338 

[Book vi. 

the teaching of good things, which justifies, does to the Lord, 
and leads and contributes to this. 

But if from any creature they received in any way what- 
ever the seeds of the Truth, they did not nourish them ; but 
committing them to a barren and rainless soil, they choked 
them with weeds, as the Pharisees revolted from the Law, 
by introducing human teachings, — the cause of these being 
not the Teacher, but those who chose to disobey. But those 
of them who believed the Lord’s advent and the plain 
teaching of the Scriptures, attain to the knowledge of the 
law ; as also those addicted to philosophy, by the teaching of 
the Lord, are introduced into the knowledge of the true 
philosophy: “For the oracles of the Lord are pure oracles, 
melted in the fire, tested in the earth , 1 purified seven 
times.” 2 Just as silver often purified, so is the just man 
brought to the test, becoming the Lord’s coin and receiving 
the royal image. Or, since Solomon also calls the “ tongue 
of the righteous man gold that has been subjected to fire,” 3 
intimating that the doctrine which has been proved, and is 
wise, is to be praised and received, whenever it is amply 
tried by the earth : that is, when the gnostic soul is in mani- 
fold ways sanctified, through withdrawal from earthy fires. 
And the body in which it dwells is purified, being appro- 
priated to the pureness of a holy temple. But the first 
purification which takes place in the body, the soul being 
first, is abstinence from evil things, which some consider 
perfection, and is, in truth, the perfection of the common 
believer — Jew and Greek. But in the case of the Gnostic, 
after that which is reckoned perfection in others, his right- 
eousness advances to activity in well-doing. And in whom- 
soever the increased force 4 of righteousness advances to the 
doing of good, in his case perfection abides in the fixed habit 
of weil-doino- after the likeness of God. For those who are 

O 

1 “Tried in a furnace of earth ; ” Jerome, “ tried in the lire, separated 
from earth.” 

2 Ps. xii. 6. 3 Prov. x. 20. 

4 The Latin translator appears to have read what seems the true 

reading, i-lrcc7ic, and not, as in the text, s^laraats. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

339 

the seed of Abraham, and besides servants of God, are “ the 
called and the sons of Jacob are the elect — they who have 
tripped up the energy of wickedness. 

If, then, we assert that Christ Himself is Wisdom, and that 
it was His working which showed itself in the prophets, by 
which the gnostic tradition may be learned, as He Himself 
taught the apostles during His presence ; then it follows that 
the gnosis, which is the knowledge and apprehension of things 
present, future, and past, which is sure and reliable, as being 
imparted and revealed by the Son of God, is wisdom. 

And if, too, the end of the wise man is contemplation, that 
of those who are still philosophers aims at it, but never attains 
it, unless by the process of learning it receives the prophetic 
utterance which has been made known, by which it grasps 
both the present, the future, and the past — how they are, 
were, and shall be. 

And the gnosis itself is that which has descended by trans- 
mission to a few, having been imparted unwritten by the 
apostles. Hence, then, knowledge or wisdom ought to be 
exercised up to the eternal and unchangeable habit of con- 
templation. 

CHAPTER YIII. 

PIIILOSOPHY IS KNOWLEDGE GIVEN BY GOD. 

For Paul too, in the epistles, plainly does not disparage 
philosophy; but deems it unworthy of the man who has 
attained to the elevation of the Gnostic, any more to go back 
to the Hellenic “philosophy,” figuratively calling it “the 
rudiments of this world,” 1 as being most rudimentary, and a 
preparatory training for the truth. Wherefore also, writing 
to the Hebrews, who were declining again from faith to the 
law, he says, “ Have ye not need again of one to teach you 
which are the first principles of the oracles of God, and are 
become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat?” 2 
So also to the Colossians, who were Greek converts, “Be- 
1 Col. ii. 8. 2 Heb. v. 12. 

340 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vr. 

ware lest any man spoil you by philosophy and vain deceit, 
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of this world, 
and not after Christ,” 1 — enticing them again to return to 
philosophy, the elementary doctrine. 

And should one say that it was through human under- 
standing that philosophy was discovered by the Greeks, still 
I find the Scriptures saying that understanding is sent by 
God. The psalmist, accordingly, considers understanding 
as the greatest free gift, and beseeches, saying, “I am Thy 
servant; give me understanding.” 2 And does not David, 
while asking the abundant experience of knowledge, write, 

“ Teach me gentleness, and discipline, and knowledge : for I 
have believed in Thy commandments ?” 3 He confessed the 
covenants to be of the highest authority, and that they were 
given to the more excellent. Accordingly the psalm again says 
of God, “He hath not done thus to any nation ; and He hath 
not shown His judgments to them.” 4 The expression “He 
hath not done so ” shows that He hath done, but not “ thus.” 
The “thus,” then, is put comparatively, with reference to the 
pre-eminence, which obtains in our case. The prophet might 
have said simply, “ He hath not done,” without the “ thus.” 

Further, Peter in the Acts says, “ Of a truth, I perceive 
that God is no respecter of persons ; but in every nation he 
that feareth Him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted by 
Him.” 5 

The absence of respect of persons in God is not then in 
time, but from eternity. Nor had His beneficence a begin- 
ning ; nor any more is it limited to places or persons. For 
His beneficence is not confined to parts. “ Open ye the gates 
of righteousness,” it is said ; “ entering into them, I will 
confess to the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord. The 
righteous shall enter by it.” 6 Explaining the prophet’s saying, 
Barnabas adds, “ There being many gates open, that which is - 
in righteousness is the gate which is in Christ, by which all 
who enter are blessed.” Bordering on the same meaning is 
also the following prophetic utterance : “ The Lord is on many 

1 Col. ii. 8. 2 Ps. cxix. 125. 3 Ps. cxix. G9. 

4 Ps. cxix. 20. 5 Acts x. 34, 35. G Ps. cxviii. 19, 20. 

Book vi.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

341 

waters 1 not the different covenants alone, but the modes 
of teaching, those among the Greek and those among the 
Barbarians, conducing to righteousness. And already clearly 
David, bearing testimony to the truth, sings, “ Let sinners be 
turned into Hades, and all the nations that forget God.” 2 
They forget, plainly, Iiim whom they formerly remembered, 
and dismiss Him whom they knew previous to forgetting 
Him. There was then a dim knowledge of God also among 
the nations. So much for those points. 

Now the Gnostic must be erudite. And since the Greeks 
say that Protagoras having led the way, the opposing of 
one argument by another was invented, it is fitting that 
something be said with reference to arguments of this sort. 
For Scripture says, “ He that says much, shall also hear in 
his turn.” 3 And who shall understand a parable of the Lord, 
but the wise, the intelligent, and he that loves his Lord ? 
Let such a man be faithful; let him be capable of uttering his 
knowledge ; let him be wise in the discrimination of words ; 
let him be dexterous in action ; let him be pure. u The greater 
he seems to be, the more humble should he be,” saj's Clement 
in the Epistle to the Corinthians, — “ such an one as is capable 
of complying with the precept, 1 And some pluck from the 
fire, and on others have compassion, making a difference.’” 4 

The pruning-hook is made, certainly, principally for prun- 
ing ; but with it we sepai’ate twigs that have got intertwined, 
cut the thorns which grow along with the vines, which it is 
not very easy to reach. And all these things have a reference 
to pruning. Again, man is made principally for the know- 
ledge of God ; but he also measures land, practises agricul- 
ture, and philosophizes ; of which pursuits, one conduces to 
life, another to living well, a third to the study of the things 
which are capable of demonstration. Further, let those who 
say that philosophy took its rise from the devil know this, 
that the Scripture says that u the devil is transformed into 
an angel of light.” J When about to do what? Plainly, when 
about to prophesy. But if he prophesies as an angel of light, 

1 Ps. xxix. 3. 2 Ps. ix. 17. 3 Job xi. 2. 

4 Jude 22, 25. 5 2 Cor. xi. 14. 

342 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

lie will speak what is true. And if lie prophesies what is 
angelical, and of the light, then he prophesies what is bene- 
ficial when he is transformed according to the likeness of the 
operation, though he be different with respect to the matter 
of apostasy. For how could he deceive any one, without 
drawing the lover of knowledge into fellowship, and so draw- 
ing him afterwards into falsehood? Especially he will be 
found to know the truth, if not so as to comprehend it, yet 
so as not to be unacquainted with it. 

Philosophy is not then false, though the thief and the liar 
speak truth, through a transformation of operation. Nor is 
sentence of condemnation to be pronounced ignorantly against 
what is said, on account of him who says it (which also is to 
be kept in view, in the case of those who are now alleged 
to prophesy) ; but what is said must be looked at, to see if 
it keep by the truth. 

And in general terms, we shall not err in alleging that all 
things necessary and profitable for life came to us from God, 
and that philosophy more especially was given to the Greeks, 
as a covenant peculiar to them — being, as it is, a stepping- 
stone to the philosophy which is according to Christ — although 
those who applied themselves to the philosophy of the Greeks 
shut their ears voluntarily to the truth, despising the voice 
of Barbarians, or also dreading the danger suspended over 
the believer, by the laws of the state. 

/ And as in the Barbarian philosophy, so also in the Hellenic, 
“ tares were sown ” by the proper husbandman of the tares ; 
whence also heresies grew up among us along with the produc- 
tive wheat ; and those who in the Hellenic philosophy preach 
the impiety and voluptuousness of Epicurus, and whatever 
other tenets are disseminated contrary to right reason, exist 
among the Greeks as spurious fruits of the divinely bestowed 
husbandry. This voluptuous and selfish philosophy the 
apostle calls “ the wisdom of this world ; ” in consequence of 
its teaching the things of this world and about it alone, and its 
consequent subjection, as far as respects ascendancy, to those 
who rule here. Wherefore also this fragmentary philosophy 
is very elementary, while truly perfect science deals with 

Book vi.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

343 

intellectual objects, which are beyond the sphere of the 
world, and with the objects still more spiritual than those 
which “eye saw not, and ear heard not, nor did it enter into 
the heart of men,” till the Teacher told the account of them 
to us ; unveiling the holy of holies ; and in ascending order, 
things still holier than these, to those who are truly and not 
spuriously heirs of the Lord’s adoption. For we now dare 
aver (for here is the faith that is characterized by know- 
ledge x ) that such an one knows all things, and comprehends 
all things in the exercise of sure apprehension, respecting 
matters difficult for us, and really pertaining to the true 
gnosis," such as were James, Peter, John, Paul, and the rest 
of the apostles. For prophecy is full of knowledge (gnosis), 
inasmuch as it was given by the Lord, and again explained 
by the Lord to the apostles. And is not knowledge ( gnosis ) 
an attribute of the rational soul, which trains itself for this, 
that by knowledge it may become entitled to immortality? 
For both are powers of the soul, both knowledge and im- 
pulse. And impulse is found to be a movement after an 
assent. For he who has an impulse towards an action, first 
receives the knowledge of the action, and secondly the im- 
pulse. Let us further devote our attention to this. For 
since learning is older than action ; (for naturally, he who 
does what he wishes to do learns it first ; and knowledge 
comes from learning, and impulse follows knowledge; after 
which comes action ;) knowledge turns out the beginning and 
author of all rational action. So that rightly the peculiar 
nature of the rational soul is characterized by this alone ; 
for in reality impulse, like knowledge, is excited by existing 
objects. And knowledge ( gnosis ) is essentially a contempla- 
tion of existences on the part of the soul, either of a certain 
thing or of certain things, and when perfected, of all together. 
Although some say that the wise man is persuaded that there 
are some things incomprehensible, in such wise as to have 
respecting them a kind of comprehension, inasmuch as he 

1 yvoiazix.ii. 

2 yvuazixuv, for which Hervetus, reading yvuartx.6 v, has translated, “qui 
vere est cognitione prseditus.” This is suitable and easier, but doubtful. 

344 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

comprehends that things incomprehensible are incompre- 
hensible; which is common, and pertains to those who are 
capable of perceiving little. For such a man affirms that 
there are some things incomprehensible. 

But that Gnostic of whom I speak, himself comprehends 
what seems to be incomprehensible' to others; believing that 
nothing is incomprehensible to the Son of God, whence nothing 
incapable of being taught. For He who suffered out of His 
love for us, would have suppressed no element of knowledge 
requisite for our instruction. Accordingly this faith be- 
comes sure demonstration ; since truth follows what has been 
delivered by God. But if one desires extensive knowledge, 
“he knows things ancient, and conjectures things future; 
he understands knotty sayings, and the solutions of enigmas. 
The disciple of wisdom foreknows signs and omens, and the 
issues of seasons and of times.” 1 

CHAPTER IX. 

THE GNOSTIC FREE OF ALL PERTURBATIONS OF THE SOUL. 

The Gnostic is such, that he is subject only to the affections 
that exist for the maintenance of the body, such as hunger, 
thirst, and the like. But in the case of the Saviour, it were 
ludicrous [to suppose] that the body, as a body, demanded the 
necessary aids in order to its duration. For He ate, not for 
the sake of the body, which was kept together by a holy 
energy, but in order that it might not enter into the minds of 
those who were with Him to entertain a different opinion of 
Him ; in like manner as certainly some afterwards supposed 
that He appeared in a phantasmal shape (So/ojcret). But He 
was entirely impassible ( airaQr ]^ ) ; inaccessible to any move- 
ment of feeling — either pleasure or pain. While the apostles, 
having most gnostically mastered, through the Lord’s teach- 
ing, anger, and fear, and lust, were not liable even to such 
of the movements of feeling, as seem good, courage, zeal, 
joy, desire, through a steady condition of mind, not cliang- 

1 Wisd. vii. 17, 13. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

345 

ing a whit ; but ever continuing unvarying in a state of 
training after the resurrection of the Lord. 

And should it be granted that the affections specified 
above, when produced rationally, are good, yet they are 
nevertheless inadmissible in the case of the perfect man, 
who is incapable of exercising courage : for neither does he 
meet what inspires fear, as he regards none of the things 
that occur in life as to be dreaded ; nor can ausdit dislodge 
him from this — the love he has towards God. Nor does he 
need cheerfulness of mind; for he does not fall into pain, 
being persuaded that all things happen well. Nor is he 
angry ; for there is nothing to move him to anger, seeing he 
ever loves God, and is entirely turned towards Him alone, 
and therefore hates none of God’s creatures. No more does 
lie envy ; for nothing is wanting to him, that is requisite 
to assimilation, in order that he may be excellent and good. 
Nor does he consequently love any one with this common 
affection, but loves the Creator in the creatures. Nor, conse- 
quently, does he fall into any desire and eagerness ; nor does 
he want, as far as respects his soul, aught appertaining to 
others, now that he associates through love with the Beloved 
One, to whom he is allied by free choice, and by the habit 
which results from training, approaches closer to Him, and is 
blessed through the abundance of good things. 

So that on these accounts he is compelled to become like 
his Teacher in impassibility. For the Word of God is in- 
tellectual, according as the image of mind is seen 1 in man 
alone. Thus also the good man is godlike in form and sem- 
blance as respects his soul. And, on the other hand, God is 
like man. For the distinctive form of each one is the mind 
by which we are characterized. Consequently, also, those 
who sin against man are unholy and impious. For it were 
ridiculous to say that the gnostic and perfect man must not 
eradicate anger and courage, inasmuch as without these he 
will not struggle against circumstances, or abide what is 
terrible. But if we take from him desire, he will be quite 

1 Adopting the various reading y.al)' o', and the conjecture 6 par at. in- 
stead of x-ud' ou and 6pa.au in the text, as suggested by Sylburgius. 

346 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

overwhelmed by troubles, and therefore depart from this life 
very basely. Unless possessed of it, as some suppose, he 
will not conceive a desire for what is like the excellent and 
the good. If, then, all alliance with what is good is accom- 
panied with desire, how, it is said, does he remain impassible 
who desires what is excellent ? 

But these people know not, as appears, the divinity of 
love. For love is not desire on the part of him who loves ; 
but is a relation of affection, restoring the Gnostic to the 
unity of the faith, — independent of time and place. But he 
who by love is already in the midst of that in which he is 
destined to be, and has anticipated hope by knowledge, does 
not desire anything, having, as far as possible, the very thing 
desired. Accordingly, as to be expected, he continues in the 
exercise of gnostic love, in the one unvarying state. 

Nor will he, therefore, eagerly desire to be assimilated to 
what is beautiful, possessing, as he does, beauty by love. 
What more need of courage and of desire to him, who has 
obtained the affinity to the impassible God which arises from 
love, and by love has enrolled himself anions; the friends 
of God ? 

We must therefore rescue the gnostic and perfect man 
from all passion of the soul. For knowledge {gnosis) produces 
practice, and practice habit or disposition ; and such a state 
as this produces impassibility, not moderation of passion. 
And the complete eradication of desire reaps as its fruit im- 
passibility. But the Gnostic does not share either in those 
affections that are commonly celebrated as good, that is, the 
good things of the affections which are allied to the passions : 
such, I mean, as gladness, which is allied to pleasure ; and 
dejection, for this is conjoined with pain ; and caution, for it 
is subject to fear. Nor yet does he share in high spirit, for 
it takes its place alongside of wrath ; although some say that 
these are no longer evil, but already good. For it is impos- 
sible that he who has been once made perfect by love, and 
feasts eternally and insatiably on the boundless joy of con- 
templation, should delight in small and grovelling things. 
For what rational cause remains any more to the man 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

347 

who has gained u the light inaccessible,” 1 for reverting to 
tlie good things of the world? Although not yet true as to 
time and place, yet by that gnostic love through which the 
inheritance and perfect restitution follow, the giver of the 
reward makes good by deeds what the Gnostic, by gnostic 
choice, had grasped by anticipation through love. 

For by going away to the Lord, for the love he bears Him, 
though his tabernacle be visible on earth, he does not withdraw 
himself from life. For that is not permitted to him. But he 
has withdrawn his soul from the passions. For that is granted 
to him. And on the other hand he lives, having put to death 
his lusts, and no longer makes use of the body, but allows it the 
use of necessaries, that he may not give cause for dissolution. 

How, then, has he any more need of fortitude, who is not 
in the midst of dangers, being not present, but already wholly 
with the object of love? And what necessity for self-restraint 
to him who has not need of it? For to have such desires, 
as require self-restraint in order to their control, is charac- 
teristic of one who is not yet pure, but subject to passion. 
Now, fortitude is assumed by reason of fear and cowardice. 
For it were no longer seemly that the friend of God, whom 
11 God hath fore-ordained before the foundation of the world ” 2 
to be enrolled in the highest u adoption,” should fall into 
pleasures or fears, and be occupied in the repression of the 
passions. For I venture to assert, that as he is predestinated 
through what he shall do, and what he shall obtain, so also 
has he predestinated himself by reason of what ho knew 
and whom he loved; not having the future indistinct, as 
the multitude live, conjecturing it, but having grasped by 
gnostic faith what is hidden from others. And through love, 
the future is for him already present. For he has believed, 
through prophecy and the advent, on God who lies not. 
And what he believes he possesses, and keeps hold of the pro- 
mise. And He who hath promised is truth. And through the 
trustworthiness of Him who has promised, he has firmly laid 
hold of the end of the promise by knowledge. And he, who 
knows the sure comprehension of the future which there is 
1 1 Tim. vi. 16. 2 Eph. i. 4, 5. 

348 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vx. 

in the circumstances, in which he is placed, by love goes to 
meet the future. So he, that is persuaded that he will obtain 
the things that are really good, will not pray to obtain what is 
here, but that he may always cling to the faith which hits the 
mark and succeeds. And besides, he will pray that as many 
as possible may become like him, to the glory of God, which 
is perfected through knowledge. For he who is made like 
the Saviour is also devoted to saving ; performing unerringly 
the commandments as far as the human nature may admit 
of the image. And this is to worship God by deeds and 
knowledge of the true righteousness. The Lord will not 
wait for the voice of this man in prayer. “ Ask, 5 ’ He says, 
u and I will do it ; think, and I will give.” 1 

For, in fine, it is impossible that the immutable should 
assume firmness and consistency in the mutable. But the rul- 
ing faculty being in perpetual change, and therefore unstable, 
the force of habit is not maintained. For how can he who 
is perpetually changed by external occurrences and accidents, 
ever possess habit and disposition, and in a word, grasp of scien- 
tific knowledge (eVio-r^/a^) ? Further, also, the philosophers 
regard the virtues as habits, dispositions, and sciences. And as 
knowledge ( gnosis ) is not born with men, but is acquired , 2 and 
the acquiring of it in its elements demands application, and 
training, and progress ; and then from incessant practice it 
passes into a habit ; so, when perfected in the mystic habit, 
it abides, being infallible through love. For not only has he 
apprehended the first Cause, and the Cause produced by it, and 
is sure about them, possessing firmly firm and irrefragable 
and immoveable reasons ; but also respecting what is good and 
what is evil, and respecting all production, and to speak com- 
prehensively, respecting all about which the Lord has spoken, 
he has learned, from the truth itself, the most exact truth 
from the foundation of the world to the end. Not preferring 
to the truth itself what appears plausible, or, according to 
Hellenic reasoning, necessary; but what has been spoken by 

1 Quoted afterwards, p. 3G2, and Stromata , book vii. p. 743, Paris ed. 

2 The text has which on account of its harshness has been 

rejected by the authorities for sttiktyitos. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

349 

the Lord he accepts as clear and evident, though concealed 
from others ; and he has already received the knowledge of 
all things. And the oracles we possess give their utterances 
respecting what exists, as it is; and respecting what is future, 
as it shall be ; and respecting what is past, as it was. 

In scientific matters, as being alone possessed of scientific 
knowledge, he will hold the pre-eminence, and will discourse 
on the discussion respecting the good, ever intent on in- 
tellectual objects, tracing out his procedure in human affairs 
from the archetypes above ; as navigators direct the ship 
according to the star ; prepared to hold himself in readiness 
for every suitable action ; accustomed to despise all difficulties 
and dangers when it is necessary to undergo them ; never 
doing anything precipitate or incongruous either to himself 
or the common weal ; foreseeing ; and inflexible by pleasures 
both of waking hours and of dreams. For, accustomed to 
spare living and frugality, he is moderate, active, and grave ; 
requiring few necessaries for life ; occupying himself with 
nothing superfluous. But desiring not even these things as 
chief, but by reason of fellowship in life, as necessary for his 
sojourn in life, as far as necessary. 

CHAPTER X. 

THE GNOSTIC AVAILS HIMSELF OF THE HELP OF ALL 
HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 

Foil to him knowledge ( gnosis ) is the principal thing. Con- 
sequently, therefore, he applies to the subjects that are a 
training for knowledge, taking from each branch of study its 
contribution to the truth. Prosecuting, then, the proportion 
of harmonies in music ; and in arithmetic noting the increas- 
ing and decreasing of numbers, and their relations to one an- 
other, and how the most of things fall under some proportion 
of numbers ; studying geometry, which is abstract essence, 
he perceives a continuous distance, and an immutable essence 
which is different from these bodies. And by astronomy, 
again, raised from the earth in his mind, he is elevated along 

350 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

with heaven, and will revolve with its revolution ; studying 
ever divine things, and their harmony with each other ; from 
which Abraham starting, ascended to the knowledge of Him 
who created them. Further, the Gnostic will avail himself 
of dialectics, fixing on the distinction of genera into species, 
and will master 1 the distinction of existences, till he come to 
what are primary and simple. 

But the multitude are frightened at the Hellenic philo- 
sophy, as children are at masks, being afraid lest it lead them 
astray. But if the faith (for I cannot call it knowledge) 
which they possess be such as to be dissolved by plausible 
speech, let it be by all means dissolved , 2 and let them confess 
that they will not retain the truth. For truth is immoveable ; 
but false opinion dissolves. We choose, for instance, one 
purple by comparison with another purple. So that, if one 
confesses that he has not a heart that has been made right, he 
has not the table of the money-changers or the test of words . 3 
And how can he be any longer a money-changer, who is not 
able to test and distinguish spurious coin, even offhand? 

Now David cried, “ The righteous shall not be shaken for 
ever ;” 4 neither, consequently, by deceptive speech nor by 
erring pleasure. Whence he shall never be shaken from his 
own heritage. “He shall not be afraid of evil tidings ;” 5 
consequently neither of unfounded calumny, nor of the false 
opinion around him. No more will he dread cunning words, 
who is capable of distinguishing them, or of answering rightly 
to questions asked. Such a bulwark are dialectics, that truth 
cannot be trampled under foot by the Sophists. u For it be- 
hoves those who praise in the holy name of the Lord,” accord- 

1 Our choice lies between the reading of the text, ttpogUstou ; that of 
Hervetus, TrpoaotcrsToit ; the conjecture of Sylburgius, 'TTpotnlciTou, or xpo- 
(jyiasrou, used a little after in the phrase TTpoa^asrut tyiv dT^r^uccu. 

2 There is some difficulty in the sentence as it stands. Hervetus omits 
in his translation the words rendered here, “ let it be by all means dis- 
solved.” We have omitted ltd rovrovg, which follows immediately after, 
but which is generally retained and translated u by these,” i.e. philo- 
sophers. 

3 tZu Sylburgius ; roV Koyov is the reading of the text. 

4 Ps. cxii. 6. 5 Ps. cxii. 7. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

351 

Book vi.] 

ing to the prophet, u to rejoice in heart, seeking the Lord. 
Seek then Him, and he strong. Seek His face continually 
in every way.” 1 u For, having spoken at sundry times and in 
divers manners,” 2 it is not in one way only that He is known. 

It is, then, not by availing himself of these as virtues that 
our Gnostic will be deeply learned. But by using them as 
helps in distinguishing what is common and what is peculiar, 
he will admit the truth. For the cause of all error and false 
opinion, is inability to distinguish in what respect things are 
common, and in what respects they differ. For unless, in 
things that are distinct, one closely watch speech, he will 
inadvertently confound what is common and what is peculiar. 
And where this takes place, he must of necessity fall into 
pathless tracts and error. 

The distinction of names and things also in the Scriptures 
themselves produces great light in men’s souls. For it is neces- 
sary to understand expressions which signify several things, 
and several expressions when they signify one thing. The 
result of which is accurate answering. But it is necessary to 
avoid the great futility which occupies itself in irrelevant 
matters; since the Gnostic avails himself of branches of learn- 
ing as auxiliary preparatory exercises, in order to the accurate 
communication of the truth, as far as attainable and with as 
little distraction as possible, and for defence against reason- 
ings that plot for the extinction of the truth. He will not 
then be deficient in what contributes to proficiency in the 
curriculum of studies and the Hellenic philosophy ; but not 
principally, but necessarity, secondarily, and on account of 
circumstances. For what those labouring; in heresies use 
wickedly, the Gnostic will use rightly. 

Therefore the truth that appears in the Hellenic philo- 
sophy, being partial, the real truth, like the sun glancing 
on the colours both white and black, shows what like each 
of them is. So also it exposes all sophistical plausibility. 
Rightly, then, was it proclaimed also by the Greeks : 

“ Truth the queen is the beginning of great virtue .” 3 

1 Ps. cv. 3, 4 . 

2 Heb. i. 1. 

3 Pindar. 

352 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

CHAPTER XL 

THE MYSTICAL MEANINGS IN THE PROPORTIONS OF 
NUMBERS, GEOMETRICAL RATIOS, AND MUSIC. 

As then in astronomy we have Abraham as an instance, so 
also in arithmetic we have the same Abraham. “For, hear- 
ing that Lot was taken captive, and having numbered his 
own servants, born in his house, 318 (r m/ 1 ),” he defeats a 
very great number of the enemy. 

They say, then, that the character representing 300 is, as to 
shape, the type of the Lord’s sign, 2 and that the Iota and the 
Eta indicate the Saviour’s name; that it was indicated, accord- 
ingly, that Abraham’s domestics were in salvation, who having 
fled to the Sign and the Name became lords of the captives, 
and of the very many unbelieving nations that followed them. 

Now the number 300 is, 3 by 100. Ten is allowed to be 
the perfect number. And 8 is the first cube, which is equality 
in all the dimensions — length, breadth, depth. “ The days of 
men shall be.” it is said, “ 120 (p/e') years.” 3 And the sum is 
made up of the numbers from 1 to 15 added together. 4 And 
the moon at 15 days is full. 

On another principle, 120 is a triangular 5 number, and 
consists of the equality 0 of the number 64, [which consists of 

1 Gen. xiv. 14. In Greek numerals. 

2 Tlie Lord’s sign is the cross, whose form is represented by T ; In 
(the other two letters of r in, 318) are the first two letters of the name 
'InaoZ; (Jesus). 

3 Gen. vi. 5. 

4 The sum of the numbers from 1 to 15 inclusive is 120. 

5 “ Triangular numbers are those which can be disposed in a triangle, 

x - - 4 - x » 

as 3 6 • • , etc., being represented by the formula — — (Liddel 

and Scott’s Lexicon ). Each side of the triangle of course contains an 
equal number of units, the sum of which amounts to the number. 

G This number is called equality, because it is composed of eight 
numbers, an. even number ; as fifty-six is called inequality, because it is 
composed of seven numbers, an odd number. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

353 

eight of the odd numbers beginning with unity], 1 the addition 
of which (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15) in succession generates 
squares; 2 and of the inequality of the number 56, consisting 
of seven of the even numbers beginning with 2 (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 
12, 14), which pi’oduce the numbers that are not squares." 

Again, according to another way of indicating, the number 
120 consists of four numbers — of one triangular, 15 ; of 
another, a square, 25 ; of a third, a pentagon, 35 ; and of a 
fourth, a hexagon, 45. The 5 is taken according to the same 
ratio in each mode. For in triangular numbers, from the 
unity 5 comes 15 ; and in squares, 25 ; and of those in succes- 
sion, proportionally. Now 25, which is the number 5 from 
unity, is said to be the symbol of the Levitical tribe. And 
the number 35 depends also on the arithmetic, geometric, 
and harmonic scale of doubles — 6, 8, 9, 12 ; the addition 
of which makes 35. In these days, the Jews say that seven 
months’ children are formed. And the number 45 depends 
on the scale of triples — 6, 9, 12, 18 — the addition of which 
makes 45 ; and similarly, in these days they say that nine 
months’ children are formed. 

Such, then, is the style of the example in arithmetic. And 
let the testimony of geometry be the tabernacle that was con- 
structed, and the ark that was fashioned, — constructed in most 
regular proportions, and through divine ideas, by the gift of 
understanding, which leads us from things of sense to intellec- 
tual objects, or rather from these to holy things, and to the holy 
of holies. For the squares of wood indicate that the square 
form, producing right angles, pervades all, and points out 
security. And the length of the structure was three hundred 
cubits, and the breadth fifty, and the height thirty ; and above, 

1 The clause within brackets has been suggested by Hervetus to com- 
plete the sense. 

2 That is, 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + 9 + 11 + 13 + 15 = 120 ; and 1 + 3 
= 4 + 5 = 9 + 7 = 16 + 9 = 25 + 11 = 36 + 13 = 49 + 15 = 64, 
giving us the numbers 4, 9, 1G, 25, 3G, 49, 64, the squares of 2, 3, 4, 
5, G, 7, 8. 

3 hipo/uyicsi;, the product of two unequal factors, i.e. 2 +4 + 6 + 
8 4- 10 + 12 + 14 = 5G ; and 2 + 4 = 6= 8x2, 0 + 4 = 10 = 5x2, 
and so on. 

CLEM. — YOL. II. 

Z 

354: 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vr. 

the ark ends in a cubit, narrowing to a cubit from the broad 
base like a pyramid, the symbol of those who are purified 
and tested by fire. And this geometrical proportion has a 
place, for the transport of those holy abodes, whose differences 
are indicated by the differences of the numbers set down below. 

An d the numbers introduced are six-fold, as three hundred 
is six times fifty ; and ten-fold, as three hundred is ten times 
thirty ; and containing one and two-thirds (e7nSi/x.otpo£), for 
fifty is one and two-thirds of thirty. 

Now there are some who say that three hundred cubits are 
the symbol of the Lord’s sign ; 1 and fifty, of hope and of the 
remission given at Pentecost; and thirty, or as in some, 
twelve, they say points out the preaching [of the gospel] ; 
because the Lord preached in His thirtieth year; and the 
apostles were twelve. And the structure’s terminating in a 
cubit is the symbol of the advancement of the righteous to 
oneness and to “ the unity of the faith.” 2 * 

And the table which was in the temple was six cubits ; ° 
and its four feet were about a cubit and a half. 

They add, then, the twelve cubits, agreeably to the revolu- 
tion of the twelve months, in the annual circle, during which 
the earth produces and matures all things ; adapting itself 
to the four seasons. And the table, in my opinion, exhibits 
the image of the earth, supported as it is on four feet, 
summer, autumn, spring, winter, by which the year travels. 
Wherefore also it is said that the table has “ wavy chains ; ” 4 
either because the universe . revolves in the circuits of the 
times, or perhaps it indicated the earth surrounded with 
ocean’s tide. 

Further, as an example of music, let us adduce David, 
playing at once and prophesying, melodiously praising God. 
Now the Enarmonic 5 suits best the Dorian harmony, and the 

1 The cross. 2 Eph. iv. 13. 

3 Ex. xxv. 23. The table is said to be two cubits in length, a cubit 

in breadth, and a cubit and a half in height ; therefore it was six cubits 

round. 4 Ex. xxv. 24. 

5 The three styles of Greek music were the tvupp.ovix.iv, huzovov, and 
■ympuztxiv. 

Book vi.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

855 

Diatonic the Phrygian, as Aristoxenus says. The harmony, 
therefore, of the Barbarian psaltery, which exhibited gravity 
of strain, being the most ancient, most certainly became a 
model for Terpander, for the Dorian harmony, who sings the 
praises of Zeus thus : 

“ 0 Zeus, of all things the Beginning, Ruler of all ; 

0 Zeus, I send thee this beginning of hymns.” 

The lyre, according to its primary signification, may by the 
psalmist be used figuratively for the Lord ; according to its 
secondary, for those who continually strike the chords of 
their souls under the direction of the Choir-master, the Lord. 
And if the people saved be called the lyre, it will be under- 
stood to be in consequence of their giving glory musically, 
through the inspiration of the Word and the knowledge of 
God, being struck by the Word so as to produce faith. You 
may take music in another way, as the ecclesiastical symphony 
at once of the law and the pi’ophets, and the apostles along 
with the gospel, and the harmony which obtained in each 
prophet, in the transitions of the persons. 

But, as seems, the most of those who are inscribed with 
the Name , 1 like the companions of Ulysses, handle the word 
unskilfully, passing by not the Sirens, but the rhythm and 
the melody, stopping their ears with ignorance ; since they 
know that, after lending their ears to Hellenic studies, they 
will never subsequently be able to retrace their steps. 

But he who culls what is useful for the advantage of the 
catechumens, and especially when they are Greeks (and the 
earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof 2 ), must not abstain 
from erudition, like irrational animals ; but he must collect 
as many aids as possible for his hearers. But he must by 
no means linger over these studies, except solely for the 
advantage accruing from them ; so that, on grasping and 
obtaining this, he may be able to take his departure home 
to the true philosophy, which is a strong cable for the soul, 
providing security from everything. 

Music is then to be handled for the sake of the embellish- 
1 i.e. of Christ. 2 1 Cor. x. 26, etc. 

356 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vr. 

ment and composure of manners. For instance, at a banquet 
we pledge eacli other while the music is playing ; 1 soothing by 
song the eagerness of our desires, and glorifying God for the 
copious gift of human enjoyments, for His perpetual supply 
of the food necessary for the growth of the body and of the 
soul. But we must reject superfluous music, which enervates 
men’s souls, and leads to variety, — now mournful, and then 
licentious and voluptuous, and then frenzied and frantic. 

The same holds also of astronomy. For treating of the 
description of the celestial objects, about the form of the 
universe, and the revolution of the heavens, and the motion 
of the stars, leading the soul nearer to the creative power, 
it teaches to quickness in perceiving the seasons of the year, 
the changes of the air, and the appearance of the stars ; 
since also navigation and husbandry derive from this much 
benefit, as architecture and building from geometry. This 
branch of learning, too, makes the soul in the highest degree 
observant, capable of perceiving the true and detecting the 
false, of discovering correspondences and proportions, so as 
to hunt out for similarity in things dissimilar ; and conducts 
us to the discovery of length without breadth, and super- 
ficial extent without thickness, and an indivisible point, and 
transports to intellectual objects from those of sense. 

The studies of philosophy, therefore, and philosophy itself, 
are aids in treating of the truth. For instance, the cloak 
was once a fleece ; then it was shorn, and became warp and 
woof ; and then it was woven. Accordingly the soul must 
be prepared and variously exercised, if it would become in 
the highest degree good. For there is the scientific and the 
practical element in truth ; and the latter flows from the 
speculative ; and there is need of great practice, and exercise, 
and experience. 

But in speculation, one element relates to one’s neighbours 
and another to one’s self. Wherefore also training ought 
to be so moulded as to be adapted to both. He, then, who 
has acquired a competent acquaintance with the subjects 

1 -^aKhovri; is substituted by Lowtli for -^/oCKKuv of the text ; h ru 
■tya.Kkuv has also been proposed. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

357 

which embrace the principles which conduce to scientific 
knowledge (gnosis), may stop and remain for the future in 
quiet, directing his actions in conformity with his theory. 

But for the benefit of one’s neighbours, in the case of those 
who have proclivities for writing, and those who set them- 
selves to deliver the word, both is other culture beneficial, 
and the reading of the Scriptures of the Lord is necessary, 
in order to the demonstration of what is said, and especially 
if those who hear are accessions from Hellenic culture. 

Such David describes the church: “The queen stood on 
thy right hand, enveloped in a golden robe, variegated;” 1 and 
with Hellenic and superabundant accomplishments, “ clothed 
variegated with gold-fringed garments.” 2 And the Truth says 
by the Lord, “For who had known Thy counsel, hadst Thou 
not given wisdom, and sent Thy Holy Spirit from the Highest; 
and so the ways of those on earth were corrected, and men 
learned Thy decrees, and were saved by wisdom? ” For the 
Gnostic knows things ancient by the Scripture, and conjectures 
things future: he understands the involutions of words and the 
solutions of enigmas. He knows beforehand signs and won- 
ders, and the issues of seasons and periods, as we have said 
already. Seest thou the fountain of instructions that takes its 
rise from wisdom ? But to those who object, What use is 
there in knowing the causes of the manner of the sun’s motion, 
for example, and the rest of the heavenly bodies, or in having 
studied the theorems of geometry or logic, and each of the 
other branches of study ? — for these are of no service in the 
discharge of duties, and the Hellenic philosophy is human 
wisdom, for it is incapable of teaching 3 the truth — the fol- 
lowing remarks are to be made. First, that they stumble in 
reference to the highest of things — namely, the mind’s free 
choice. “ For they,” it is said, “ who keep holy holy things, 
shall be made holy ; and those who have been taught will 
find an answer.” 4 For the Gnostic alone will do liolily, in 

1 Ps. xlv. 10. 2 Ps. xlv. 14, 15. 

3 oSctxTtx.'J}v, proposed by Sylburgius, seems greatly preferable to the 
reading of the text, oioxxrS, and has been adopted above. 

4 Wisd. vi. 10. 

358 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

accordance with reason all that has to be done, as he hath 
learned through the Lord’s teaching, received through men. 

Again, on the other hand, we may hear: “For in His 
hand, that is, in His power and wisdom, are both we and 
our •words, and all wisdom and skill in works ; for God loves 
nothing but the man that dwells with wisdom.” 1 And again, 
they have not read what is said by Solomon ; for, treating of 
the construction of the temple, he says expressly, “And it 
was Wisdom as artificer that framed it ; and Thy providence, 
O Father, governs throughout.” 2 And how irrational, to 
regard philosophy as inferior to architecture and shipbuild- 
ing ! And the Lord fed the multitude of those that reclined 
on the grass opposite to Tiberias with the two fishes and the 
five barley loaves, indicating the preparatory training of the 
Greeks and Jews previous to the divine grain, which is the 
food cultivated by the law. For barley is sooner ripe for 
the harvest than wheat ; and the fishes signified the Hellenic 
philosophy that was produced and moved in the midst of 
the Gentile billow, given, as they were, for copious food to 
those lying on the ground, increasing no more, like the 
fragments of the loaves, but having partaken of the Lord’s 
blessing, had breathed into them the resurrection of God- 
head 3 through the power of the Word. But if you are 
curious, understand one of the fishes to mean the curriculum 
of study, and the other the philosophy which supervenes. 
The gatherings 4 point out the word of the Lord. 

“ And the choir of mute fishes rushed to it,” 

says "the Tragic Muse somewhere. 

“ I must decrease,” said the prophet John, 5 and the Word 
of the Lord alone, in which the law terminates, “ increase.” 
Understand now for me the mystery of the truth, granting 
pardon if I shrink from advancing further in the treatment 

1 Wisd. vii. 18. 2 Wisd. xiv. 2, 3. 

3 That is, resurrection effected by divine power. 

4 Such seems the only sense possible of this clause, — obtained, however, 

by substituting for ovvtx.'hoyot "Koyov , x.r.A., avXMyoi Koyov, x.r.'K. 

5 John iii. 30. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

359 

of it, by announcing this alone : “ All things were made by 
Him, and without Him was not even one thing.” 1 Certainly 
He is called 11 the chief corner stone ; in whom the whole 
building, fitly joined together, groweth into an holy temple 
of God,” 2 according to the divine apostle. 

I pass over in silence at present the parable which says 
in the Gospel : “ The kingdom of heaven is like a man who 
cast a net into the sea ; and out of the multitude of the fishes 
caught, makes a selection of the better ones.” 3 

And now the wisdom which we possess announces the four 
virtues 4 in such a way as to show that the sources of them 
were communicated by the Hebrews to the Greeks. This 
may be learned from the following : u And if one loves justice, 
its toils are virtues. For temperance and prudence teach 
justice and fortitude ; and than these there is nothing more 
useful in life to men.” 

Above all, this ought to be known, that by nature we are 
adapted for virtue ; not so as to be possessed of it from our 
birth, but so as to be adapted for acquiring it. 

CHAPTER XII. 

HUMAN NATURE POSSESSES AN ADAPTATION FOR PERFEC- 
TION ; THE GNOSTIC ALONE ATTAINS IT. 

By which consideration 5 is solved the question propounded 
to us by the heretics, Whether Adam was created perfect or 
imperfect? Well, if imperfect, how could the work of a 
perfect God — above all, that work being man — be imperfect? 
And if perfect, how did he transgress the commandments ? 
For they shall hear from us that he w 7 as not perfect in his 
creation, but adapted to the reception of virtue. For it is of 
great importance in regard to virtue to be made fit for its 

1 John i. 3. 2 Eph. ii. 20, 21. 3 Matt. xiii. 47, 48. 

4 Prudence, fortitude, justice, temperance. 

5 i.e. that mentioned in the last sentence of chap, xi., which would 
more appropriately be transferred to chap. xii. 

360 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

attainment. And it is intended that we should be saved by 
ourselves. This, then, is the nature of the soul, to move of 
itself. Then, as we are rational, and philosophy being rational, 
we have some affinity with it. Now an aptitude is a move- 
ment towards virtue, not virtue itself. All, then, as I said, 
are naturally constituted for the acquisition of virtue. 

But one man applies less, one more, to learning and train- 
ing. Wherefore also some have been competent to attain 
to perfect virtue, and others have attained to a kind of it. 
And some, on the other hand, through negligence, although in 
other respects of good dispositions, have turned to the opposite. 
Now much more is that knowledge which excels all branches 
of culture in greatness and in truth, most difficult to acquire, 
and is attained with much toil. “ But, as seems, they know not 
the mysteries of God. For God created man for immortality, 
and made him an image of His own nature ;” 1 according to 
which nature of Him who knows all, he who is a Gnostic, 
and righteous, and holy with prudence, hastes to reach the 
measure of perfect manhood. For not only are actions and 
thoughts, hut words also, pure in the case of the Gnostic : 
“ Thou hast proved mine heart ; Thou hast visited me by 
night,” it is said; “Thou hast subjected me to the fire, and 
unrighteousness was not found in me : so that my mouth 
shall not speak the works of men.” 2 

And why do I say the works of men? He recognises sin 
itself, which is not brought forward in order to repentance 
(for this is common to all believers) ; but what sin is. Nor 
does he condemn this or that sin, but simply all sin ; nor is 
it what one has done ill that he brings up, but what ought 
not to be done. Whence also repentance is twofold : that 
which is common, on account of having transgressed; and 
that which, from learning the nature of sin, persuades, in the 
first instance, to keep from sinning, the result of which is 
not sinning. 

Let them not then say, that he who does wrong and sins 
transgresses through the agency of demons; for then he 
would be guiltless. But by choosing the same things as 
1 Wisd. ii. 22, 25. 2 Ps. xvii. 3, 4. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

3G1 

demons, by sinning, being unstable, and light, and fickle in 
bis desires, like a demon, he becomes a demoniac man. Now 
he who is bad, having become, through evil, sinful by nature, 
becomes depraved, having what he has chosen ; and being 
sinful, sins also in his actions. And again, the good man 
does right. Wherefore we call not only the virtues, but also 
right actions, good. And of things that are good we know 
that some are desirabl e for themselves, as knowledge ; for we 
hunt for nothing from it when we have it, but only [seek] that 
it be with us, and that we be in uninterrupted contemplation, 
and strive to reach it for its own sake. But other things are 
desirable for other considerations, such as faith, for escape 
from punishment, and the advantage arising from reward, 
which accrue from it. For, in the case of many, fear is the 
cause of their not sinning ; and the promise is the means of 
pursuing obedience, by which comes salvation. Knowledge, 
then, desirable as it is for its own sake, is the most perfect 
good ; and consequently the things which follow by means 
of it are good. And punishment is the cause of correction 
to him who is punished ; and to those who are able to see 
before them he becomes an example, to prevent them falling 
into the like. 

Let us then receive knowledge, not desiring its results, 
but embracing itself for the sake of knowing. For the first 
advantage is the habit of knowledge (7 vgmtti/o]), which fur- 
nishes harmless pleasures and exultation both for the present 
and the future. And exultation is said to be gladness, being 
a reflection of the virtue which is according to truth, through 
a kind of exhilaration and relaxation of soul. And the acts 
which partake of knowledge are good and fair actions. For 
abundance in the actions that are according to virtue, is the 
true riches, and destitution in decorous 1 desires is poverty. 
For the use and enjoyment of necessaries are not injurious 
in quality, but in quantity, when in excess. Wherefore the 
Gnostic circumscribes his desires in reference both to posses- 

1 Sylburgius proposes xoapua;, worldly, instead of xoa/nlxg, decorous ; 
in which case the sentence would read : “ and [true] poverty, destitution 
in worldly desires.” 

362 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

sion and to enjoyment, not exceeding tlie limit of necessity. 
Therefore, regarding life in this world as necessary for the 
increase of science (emcr rrffir)) and the acquisition of know- 
ledge (ywwcrt?), he will value highest, not living, but living well. 
He will therefore prefer neither children, nor marriage, nor 
parents, to love for God, and righteousness in life. To such 
an one, his wife, after conception, is as a sister, and is judged 
as if of the same father ; then only recollecting her husband, 
when she looks on the children ; as being destined to become 
a sister in reality after putting off the flesh, which separates 
and limits the knowledge of those who are spiritual by the 
peculiar characteristics of the sexes. For souls, themselves 
by themselves, are equal. Souls are neither male nor female, 
when they no longer marry nor are given in marriage. And 
is not woman translated into man, when she is become equally 
unfeminine, and manly, and perfect? Such, then, was the 
laughter of Sarah 1 when she received the good news of the 
birth of a son ; not, in my opinion, that she disbelieved the 
angel, but that she felt ashamed of the intercourse by means 
of which she was destined to become the mother of a son. 

And did not Abraham, when he was in danger on account 
of Sarah’s beauty, with the king of Egypt, properly call her 
sister, being of the same father, but not of the same mother ? 2 

To those, then, who have repented and not firmly believed, 
God grants their requests through their supplications. But 
to those who live sinlessly and gnostically, He gives, when 
they have but merely entertained the thought. For example, 
to Anna, on her merely conceiving the thought, conception 
was vouchsafed of the child Samuel . 3 “ Ask,” says the Scrip- 
ture, “and I will do. Think, and I will give.” For we 
have heard that God knows the heart, not judging 4 the soul 

1 Gen. xviii. 12. 

2 The reading of the text has, “not of the same mother, much less 
of the same father,” which contradicts Gen. xx. 12, and has been there- 
fore amended as above. 

3 1 Sam. i. 13. 

4 Or, “ judging from the motion of the soul; ” the text reading here 

ov LvxN, for which, as above, is proposed, owe sk ku r^uct-os 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

3G3 

from [external] movement, as we men ; nor yet from the 
event. For it is ridiculous to think so. Nor was it as the 
architect praises the work when accomplished that God, on 
making the light and then seeing it, called it good. But He, 
knowing before He made it what it would be, praised that 
which was made, He having potentially made good, from the 
first by His purpose that had no beginning, what was destined 
to be good actually. Now that which was future He already 
said beforehand was good, the phrase concealing the truth 
by hyperbaton. Therefore the Gnostic prays in thought 
during" every hour, being by love allied to God. And first 
he will ask forgiveness of sins; and after, that he may sin no 
more ; and further, the power of well-doing and of compre- 
hending the whole creation and administration by the Lord, 
that, becoming pure in heart through the knowledge, which 
is by the Son of God, he may be initiated into the beatific 
vision face to face, having heard the scripture which says, 

11 Fasting with prayer is a good thing.” 1 

Now fastings signify abstinence from all evils whatsoever, X 
both in action and in word, and in thought itself. As appears, 
then, righteousness is quadrangular ; 2 on all sides equal and 
like in word, in deed, in abstinence from evils, in beneficence, 
in gnostic perfection ; nowhere, and in no respect halting, so 
that he does not appear unjust and unequal. As one, then, 
is righteous, so certainly is he a believer. But as he is a 
believer, he is not yet also righteous — I mean according to 
the righteousness of progress and perfection, according to 
which the Gnostic is called righteous. 

For instance, on Abraham becoming a believer, it was 
reckoned to him for righteousness, he having advanced to the 
greater and more perfect degree of faith. For he who 
merely abstains from evil conduct is not just, unless he also 
attain besides beneficence and knowledge ; and for this rea- 
son some things are to be abstained from, others are to be 
done. u By the armour of righteousness on the right hand 

1 Tob. xii. 8. 

2 Metaphorical expression for perfect-. The phrase “a quadrangular 
man ” is found in Plato and Aristotle. 

364: 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

and on the left,” 1 the apostle says, the righteous man is sent 
on to the inheritance above, — by some [arms] defended, by 
others putting forth his might. For the defence of his 
panoply alone, and abstinence from sins, are not sufficient 
for perfection, unless he assume in addition the work of 
righteousness — activity in doing good. 

Then our dexterous man and Gnostic is revealed in 
righteousness already even here, as Moses, glorified in the 
face of the soul , 2 as we have formerly said, the body bears 
the stamp of the righteous soul. For as the mordant of 
the dyeing process, remaining in the wool, produces in it a 
certain quality and diversity from other wool ; so also in the 
soul the pain is gone, but the good remains ; and the sweet is 
left, but the base is wiped away. For these are two qualities 
characteristic of each soul, by which is known that which is 
glorified, and that which is condemned. 

And as in the case of Moses, from his righteous conduct, 
and from his uninterrupted intercourse with God, who spoke 
to him, a kind of glorified hue settled on his face ; so also a 
divine power of goodness clinging to the righteous soul in 
contemplation and in prophecy, and in the exercise of the 
function of governing, impresses on it something, as it were, 
of intellectual radiance, like the solar ray, as a visible sign 
of righteousness, uniting the soul with light, through un- 
broken love, which is God-bearing and God-borne. Thence 
assimilation to God the Saviour arises to the Gnostic, as far 
as permitted to human nature, he being made perfect “as 
the Father who is in heaven.” 3 

It is He Himself who says, “Little children, a little 
while I am still with you .” 4 Since also God Himself re- 
mains blessed and immortal, neither molested nor molesting 
another ; 5 not in consequence of being by nature good, but 
in consequence of doing good in a manner peculiar to Him- 
self. God being essentially, and proving Himself actually, 

1 2 Cor. v. 1, 7. 2 Ex. xxxiv. 29. 

3 Matt. v. 48. 4 John xiii. 33. 

r ' This is cited by Diogenes Laertius as the first dictum of Epicurus. 
It is also referred to as such by Cicero, De Natu.ra Deorurn, and others. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

365 

both Father and good, continues immutably in the self-same 
goodness. For what is the use of good that does not act 
and do good ? 

CHAPTER XIII. 

DEGREES OF GLORY IN HEAVEN CORRESPONDING WITH THE 
DIGNITIES OF THE CHURCH BELOW. 

He, then, who has first moderated his passions and trained 
himself for impassibility, and developed to the beneficence 
of gnostic perfection, is here equal to the angels. Luminous 
already, and like the sun shining in the exercise of benefi- 
cence, he speeds by righteous knowledge through the love of 
God to the sacred abode, like as the apostles. Not that they 
became apostles through being chosen for some distinguished 
peculiarity 1 of nature, since also Judas was chosen along 
with them. But they were capable of becoming apostles on 
being chosen by Him who foresees even ultimate issues. 
Matthias, accordingly, who was not chosen along with them, 
on showing himself worthy of becoming an apostle, is substi- 
tuted for Judas. 

Those, then, also now, who have exercised themselves in 
the Lord’s commandments, and lived perfectly and gnosti- 
cally according to the gospel, may be enrolled in the chosen 
body of the apostles. Such an one is in reality a presbyter 
of the church, and a true minister (deacon) of the will of 
God, if he do and teach what is the Lord’s ; not as being 
ordained 2 by men, nor regarded righteous because a pres- 
byter, but enrolled in the presbyterate 3 because righteous. 
And although here upon earth he be not honoured with the 

1 In opposition to the heretical opinion, that those who are saved have 
an innate original excellence, on account of which they are saved. 

2 Or, “ elected ” — xuporo'jovy.ivdg. Acts xiv. 23, “ And when they had 
ordained (xsipoTovvircivTti) them elders in every church.” A different 
verb (xxOlaTvifii) is used in Tit. i. 5. 

3 Presbytery or eldership. 

366 

TEE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

chief seat, 1 he will sit down on the four-and-twenty thrones, 2 
judging the people, as John says in the Apocalypse. 

For, in truth, the covenant of salvation, reaching down 
to us from the foundation of the world, through different 
generations and times, is one, though conceived as different 
in respect of gift. For it follows that there is one unchange- 
able gift of salvation given by one God, through one Lord, 
benefiting in many ways. For which cause the middle wall 3 
which separated the Greek from the Jew is taken away, in 
order that there might be a peculiar people. And so both 
meet in the one unity of faith ; and the selection out of both 
is one. And the chosen of the chosen are those who by 
reason of perfect knowledge are culled [as the best] from the 
church itself, and honoured with the most august glory — 
the judges and rulers — four-and-twenty (the grace being 
doubled) equally from Jews and Greeks. Since, according 
to my opinion, the grades 4 here in the church, of bishops, 
presbyters, deacons, are imitations of the angelic glory, and 
of that economy which, the Scriptures say, awaits those who, 
following the footsteps of the apostles, have lived in per- 
fection of righteousness according to the gospel. For these 
taken up in the clouds, the apostle 0 writes, will first minister 
[as deacons], then be classed in the presbyterate, by promo- 
tion in glory (for glory differs 6 from glory) till they grow 
into a a perfect man.” 7 

CHAPTER XI Y. 

DEGREES OF GLORY IN HEAVEN. 

Such, according to David, “ rest in the holy hill of God,” 8 
in the church far on high, in which are gathered the philoso- 
phers of God, u who are Israelites indeed, who are pure in 

1 TrparoKcifiioctci, Mark xii. 39, Luke xx. 46. 

2 Rev. iv. 4, xi. 16. 3 Eph. ii. 14, 15, 16, iv. 13. 

i vpoxovu. 1 . 5 1 Thess. iv. 17. 6 1 Cor. xv. 41. 

7 Eph. iv. 13. 8 Ps. xv. 1. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

367 

heart, in whom there is no guile 1 who do not remain in 
the seventh seat, the place of rest, but are promoted, through 
the active beneficence of the divine likeness, to the heritage 
of beneficence which is the eighth grade; devoting them- 
selves to the pure vision 2 of insatiable contemplation. 

11 And other sheep there are also,” saith the Lord, u which 
are not of this fold” 3 — deemed worthy of another fold and 
mansion, in proportion to their faith. “ But my sheep hear 
my voice ,” 4 understanding gnostically the commandments. 
And this is to be taken in a magnanimous and worthy accep- 
tation, along with also the recompense and accompaniment 
of works. So that when we hear, u Thy faith hath saved 
thee ,” 5 we do not understand Him to say absolutely that 
those who have believed in any way whatever shall be saved, 
unless also works follow. But it was to the Jews alone that 
He spoke this utterance, who kept the law and lived blame- 
lessly, who wanted only faith in the Lord. No one, then, 
can be a believer and at the same time be licentious ; but 
though he quit the flesh, he must put off the passions, so as 
to be capable of reaching his own mansion. 

Now to know is more than to believe, as to be dignified 
with the highest honour after being saved is a greater thing 
than being saved. Accordingly the believer, through great 
discipline, divesting himself of the passions, passes to the 
mansion which is better than the former one, viz. to the ,/ 
greatest torment, taking with him the characteristic of repent- 
ance from the sins he has committed after baptism. He is 
tortured then still more — not yet or not quite attaining what 
he sees others to have acquired. Besides, he is also ashamed 
of his transgressions. The greatest torments, indeed, are 
assigned to the believer. For God’s righteousness is good, 
and His goodness is righteous. And though the punishments 
cease in the course of the completion of the expiation and 
purification of each one, yet those have very great and per- 

1 John i. 47 ; Matt. v. 8. 

2 mitt/*, the third and highest grade of initiation of the Eleusinian 
mysteries (Liddel and Scott’s Lexicon). 

3 John x. 16. 4 John x. 28. 

5 Mark v. 34, etc. 

368 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

manent grief who 1 are found worthy of the other fold, on 
account of not being along with those that have been glori- 
fied through righteousness. 

Tor instance, Solomon, calling the Gnostic, wise, speaks 
thus of those who admire the dignity of his mansion : “For 
they shall see the end of the wise, and to what a degree the 
Lord has established him .” 2 And of his glory they will say, 
“ This was he whom we once held up to derision, and made 
a byword of reproach ; fools that we were ! We thought 
his life madness, and his end dishonourable. How is he 
reckoned among the sons of God, and his inheritance among 
the saints ? ” 3 

Not only then the believer, but even the heathen, is judged 
most righteously. For since God knew in virtue of His pre- 
science that he would not believe, He nevertheless, in order 
that he might receive his own perfection, gave him philo- 
sophy, but gave it him previous to faith. And He gave the 
sun, and the moon, and the stars to be worshipped ; “ which 
God,” the Law says , 4 made for the nations, that they might 
not become altogether atheistical, and so utterly perish. But 
they, also in the instance of this commandment, having 
become devoid of sense, and addicting themselves to graven 
images, are judged unless they repent ; some of them be- 
cause, though able, they would not believe God ; and others 
because, though willing, they did not take the necessary pains 
to become believers. There were also, however, those who, 
from the worship of the heavenly bodies, did not return to the 
Maker of them. For this was the way given to the nations 
to rise up to God, by means of the worship of the heavenly 
bodies. But those who would not abide by those heavenly 
bodies assigned to them, but fell away from them to stocks 
and stones, “ were counted,” it is said, “ as chaff-dust and as a 
drop from a jar,” 5 beyond salvation, cast away from the body. 

1 The text here has on, for which has been substituted (Potter and 

Sylb.) ot, as above ; ryu after (fold) requires to be omitted also in 

rendering the sentence as we have done. 

2 Wisd. iv. 17. 3 IVisd. v. 3-5. 

4 Deut. iv. 19. 5 Isa. xl. 15. 

Book vi.] 

TI-IE MISCELLANIES. 

369 

As, then, to be simply saved is the result of medium 1 
actions, but to be saved rightly and becomingly is right 
action, so also all action of the Gnostic may be called right 
action ; that of the simple believer, intermediate action, not 
yet perfected according to reason, not yet made right accord- 
ing to knowledge ; but that of every heathen again is sinful. 
For it is not simply doing well, but doing actions with a cer- 
tain aim, and acting according to reason, that the Scriptures 
exhibit as requisite . 2 

As, then, lyres ought not to be touched by those who are 
destitute of skill in playing the lyre, nor flutes by those who 
are unskilled in flute-playing, neither are those to put their 
hand to affairs who have not kncnvledge, and know not how 
to use them in the whole 3 of life. 

The struggle for freedom, then, is waged not alone by the 
athletes of battles in wars, but also in banquets, and in bed, 
and in the tribunals, by those who are anointed by the word, 
who are ashamed to become the captives of pleasures. 

“ I would never part with virtue for unrighteous gain.” 
But plainly, unrighteous gain is pleasure and pain, toil and 
fear ; and, to speak comprehensively, the passions of the soul, 
the present of which is delightful, the future vexatious. 
“For what is the profit,” it is said, “if you gain the world 
and lose the soul ? ” 4 It is clear, then, that those who 
do not perform good actions, do not know what is for their 
own advantage. And if so, neither are they capable of 

1 The author reckons three kinds of actions, the first of which is 

xctropOapa, right or perfect action, which is characteristic of the perfect 
man and Gnostic alone, and raises him ( si$ r vtv civoiTUTOi to the 

height of glory. The second is the class of rav pdcau, medium, or inter- 
mediate actions, which are done by less perfect believers, and procure 
a lower grade of glory. In the third place he reckons sinful actions 
(k/xxotyitiicx;), which are done by those who fall away from salvation 
(Potter). 

2 To produce this sense, x.u.6tixsv of the text is by Potter changed into 

XCtd'/]X,itV. 

3 On the authority of one of the ms. Sylburgius reads oMv instead of 
Lyo'j in the text. 

4 Matt. viii. 26 ; Mark viii. 36 ; Luke ix. 25. 

CLEM. — YOL. II. 2 A 

870 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

praying aright, so as to receive from God good things ; nor, 
should they receive them, will they be sensible of the boon ; 
nor, should they enjoy them, will they enjoy worthily what 
they know not ; both from their want of knowledge how to 
use the good things given them, and from their excessive 
stupidity, being ignorant of the way to avail themselves of 
the divine gifts. 

Now stupidity is the cause of ignorance. And it appears 
to me that it is the vaunt of a boastful soul, though of one 
with a good conscience, to exclaim against what happens 
through circumstances : 

“ Therefore let them do what they may : 1 
For it shall be well with me ; and Right 
Shall be my ally, and I shall not be caught doing evil.” 

But such a good conscience preserves sanctity towards 
God and justice towards men ; keeping the soul pure with 
grave thoughts, and pure words, and just deeds. By thus 
receiving the Lord’s power, the soul studies to be God ; re- 
garding nothing bad but ignorance, and action contrary to 
right reason. And giving thanks always for all things to 
God, by righteous hearing and divine reading, by true inves- 
tigation, by holy oblation, by blessed prayer ; lauding, hymn- 
ing, blessing, praising, such a soul is never at any time sepa- 
rated from God. Rightly then is it said, “ And they who 
trust in Him shall understand the truth, and those faithful 
in love shall abide by Him.” 2 You see what statements 
Wisdom makes about the Gnostics. 

Conformably, therefore, there are various abodes, accord- 
ing to the worth of those who have believed. To the point 
Solomon says, u For there shall be given to him the choice 
grace of faith, and a more pleasant lot in the temple of the 
Lord.” 3 For the comparative shows that there are lower 
parts in the temple of God, which is the whole church. And 
the superlative remains to be conceived, where the Lord is. 

1 From the Acharneis of Aristophanes, quoted also by Cicero ; with 
various readings in each. Heinsius substitutes vu.’Ku.p.u.a&av for Trcihxci- 
uoQou of the text. 

2 Wisd. iv. 9. 

3 Wisd. iv. 14. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

371 

These chosen abodes, which are three, are indicated by the 
numbers in the Gospel — the thirty, the sixty, the hundred. 1 
And the perfect inheritance belongs to those who attain to 
“a perfect man,” according to the image of the Lord. And 
the likeness is not, as some imagine, that of the human form; 
for this consideration is impious. Nor is the likeness to the 
first cause that which consists in virtue. For this utterance 
is also impious, being that of those who have imagined that 
virtue in man and in the sovereign God is the same. “ Thou 
hast supposed iniquity,” He says, “ [in imagining] that I 
will be like to thee.” 2 But “ it is enough for the disciple 
to become as the Master,” 3 saith the Master. To the like- 
ness of God, then, he that is introduced into adoption and 
the friendship of God, to the just inheritance of the lords 
and gods is brought ; if he be perfected, according to the 
Gospel, as the Lord Himself taught. 

CHAPTER XV. 

DIFFERENT DEGREES OF KNOWLEDGE. 

The Gnostic, then, is impressed with the closest likeness, that 
is, with the mind of the Master ; which He being possessed 
of, commanded and recommended to His disciples and to the 
prudent. Comprehending this, as He who taught wished, and 
receiving it in its grand sense, he teaches worthily “ on the 
house-tops ” 4 those capable of being built to a lofty height ; 
and begins with the doing of what is spoken, in accordance 
with the example of life. For He enjoined what is possible. 
And, in truth, the kingly man and Christian ought to be 
ruler and leader. For we are commanded to be lords over / 
not only the wild beasts without us, but also over the wild 
passions within ourselves. 

Through the knowledge, then, as appears, of a bad and 
good life is the Gnostic saved, understanding and executing 
“more than the scribes and Pharisees.” 5 “Exert thyself, 

1 Matt. xiii. 8. 2 Ps. 1. 27. * Matt. xxv. 10. 

4 Matt. x. 27 ; Luke xii. 3. 6 Matt. v. 20. 

372 

TILE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

and prosper, and reign,” writes David, “because of truth, 
and meekness, and righteousness ; and thy right hand shall 
guide thee marvellously,” 1 that is, the Lord. “ Who then 
is the wise ? and he shall understand these things. Prudent ? 

« O 

and he shall know them. For the ways of the Lord are 
right,” 2 says the prophet, showing that the Gnostic alone is 
able to understand and explain the things spoken by the 
Spirit obscurely. “ And he who understands in that time 
shall hold his peace,” 3 says the Scripture, plainly in the way 
of declaring them to the unworthy. For the Lord says, “ He 
that hath ears to hear, let him hear,” 4 declaring that hearing 
and understanding belong not to all. To the point David 
writes : “ Dark water is in the clouds of the skies. At the 
gleam before Him the clouds passed, hail and coals of fire ;” 5 
showing that the holy words are hidden. He intimates that 
transparent and resplendent to the Gnostics, like the innocu- 
ous hail, they are sent down from God ; but that they are 
dark to the multitude, like extinguished coals out of the fire, 
which, unless kindled and set on fire, will not give forth fire 
or light. “ The Lord, therefore,” it is said, “ gives me the 
tongue of instruction, so as to know in season when it is 
requisite to speak a word ; ” 6 not in the way of testimony 
alone, but also in the way of question and answer. “ And 
the instruction of the Lord opens my mouth.” 7 It is the 
prerogative of the Gnostic, then, to know how to make use 
of speech, and when, and how, and to whom. And already 
the apostle, by saying, “ After the rudiments of the world, 
and not after Christ,” 8 makes the asseveration that the 
Hellenic teaching is elementary, and that of Christ perfect, 
as we have already intimated before. 

“ Now the wild olive is inserted into the fatness of the 
olive,” 9 and is indeed of the same species as the cultivated 
olives. For the graft uses as soil the tree in which it is 
engrafted. Now. all the plants sprouted forth simultane- 
ously in consequence of the divine order. Wherefore also, 

1 Ps. xlv. 4. 2 Hos. xiv. 9. 3 Amos v. 13. 

4 Matt. xi. 15. 5 Ps. xviii. 11, 12. 0 Isa. 1. 4. 

7 Isa. 1. 5. 8 Col. ii. 8. 9 Rom. xi. 17. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

373 

though the wild olive be wild, it crowns the Olympic victors. 
And the elm teaches the vine to be fruitful, by leading it up 
to a height. Now we see that wild trees attract more nutri- 

O 

ment, because they cannot ripen. The wild trees, therefore, 
have less power of secretion than those that are cultivated. 
And the cause of their wildness is the want of the power of 
secretion. The engrafted olive accordingly receives more 
nutriment from its growing in the wild one ; and it gets 
accustomed, as it were, to secrete the nutriment, becoming 
thus assimilated 1 to the fatness of the cultivated tree. 

So also the philosopher, resembling the wild olive, in having 
much that is undigested, on account of his devotion to the 
search, his propensity to follow, and his eagerness to seize 
the fatness of the truth ; if he get besides the divine power, 
through faith, by being transplanted into the good and mild 
knowledge, like the wild olive, engrafted in the truly fair 
and merciful Word, he both assimilates the nutriment that 
is supplied, and becomes a fair and good olive tree. For en- 
grafting makes worthless shoots noble, and compels the barren 
to be fruitful by the art of culture and by gnostic skill. 

Different modes of engrafting illustrative of different lands of 

conversion. 

They say that engrafting is effected in four modes: one, that 
in which the graft must be fitted in between the wood and the 
bark ; resembling the way in which we instruct plain people 
belonging to the Gentiles, who receive the word superficially. 
Another is, when the wood is cleft, and there is inserted in it 
the cultivated branch. And this applies to the case of those 
who have studied philosophy; for on cutting through their 
dogmas, the acknowledgment of the truth is produced in them. 
So also in the case of the Jews, by opening up the Old 
Testament, the new and noble plant of the olive is inserted. 
The third mode of engrafting applies to rustics and heretics, 

1 i.e. the graft is assimilated; so the Latin translator. But in the 
text we have ovi/s%o/Aotovfiit>7h dative, agreeing with fatness, which seems 
to be a mistake. 

374 

T11E MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

who are brought by force to the truth. For after smoothing 
off both suckers with a sharp pruning-hook, till the pith is 
laid bare, but not wounded, they are bound together. And 
the fourth is that form of engrafting; called budding. For a 
bud (eye) is cut out of a trunk of a good sort, a circle being 
drawn round in the bark along with it, of the size of the 
palm. Then the trunk is stripped, to suit the eye, over an 
equal circumference. And so the graft is inserted, tied 
round, and daubed with clay, the bud being kept uninjured 
and unstained. This is the style of gnostic teaching, which 
is capable of looking into things themselves. This mode is, 
in truth, of most service in the case of cultivated trees. 
And “the engrafting into the good olive” mentioned by the 
apostle, may be [engrafting into] Christ Himself ; the un- 
cultivated and unbelieving nature being transplanted into 
Cln’ist — that is, in the case of those who believe in Christ. 
But it is better [to understand it] of the engrafting 1 of each \ 
one’s faith in the soul itself. For also the Holy Spirit is thus 
somehow transplanted by distribution, according to the circum- 
scribed capacity of each one, but without being circumscribed. 

Knowledge and love. 

Now, discoursing on knowledge, Solomon speaks thus : 
“For wisdom is resplendent and fadeless, and is easily 
beheld bv those who love her. She is beforehand in making 
herself known to those who desire her. He that rises early 
for her shall not toil wearily. For to think about her is the 
perfection of good sense. And he that keeps vigils for her 
shall quickly be relieved of anxiety. For she goes about, 
herself seeking those worthy of her (for knowledge belongs 
not to all) ; and in all ways she benignly shows herself to 
them .” 2 Now the paths are the conduct of life, and the 
variety that exists in the covenants. Presently he adds : 

“ And in every thought she meets them,” 3 being variously 
contemplated, that is, by all discipline. Then he subjoins, 
adducing love, which perfects by syllogistic l’easoning and 

1 Or inoculation (svctpdcO.ta/u.o;'). 

8 Wisd. vi. 12-15. • 8 Wisd. vi. 16. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

375 

true propositions, drawing thus a most convincing and true 
inference, “For the beginning of her is the truest desire of 
instruction,” that is, of knowledge ; “ prudence is the love of 
instruction, and love is the keeping of its laws ; and attention 
to its laws is the confirmation of immortality ; and immor- 
tality causes nearness to God. The desire of wisdom leads, 
then, to the kingdom.” 1 

For he teaches, as I think, that true instruction is desire 
for knowledge; and the practical exercise of instruction 
produces love of knowledge. And love is the keeping of 
the commandments which lead to knowledge. And the keep- 
ing of them is the establishment of the commandments, from 
which immortality results. “ And immortality brings us 
near to God.” 

True hioivledge found in the teaching of Christ alone. 

If, then, the love of knowledge produces immortality, and 
leads the kingly man near to God the King, knowledge 
ought to be sought till it is found. Now seeking is an 
effort at grasping, and finds the subject by means of certain 
signs. And discovery is the end and cessation of inquiry, 
which has now its object in its grasp. And this is know- 
ledge. And this discovery, properly so called, is knowledge, 
which is the apprehension of the object of search. And they 
say that a proof is either the antecedent, or the coincident, 
or the consequent. The discovery, then, of what is sought 
respecting God, is the teaching through the Son ; and the 
proof of our Saviour being the very Son of God is the 
prophecies which preceded His coming, announcing Him; 
and the testimonies regarding Him which attended His birth 
in the world ; in addition, His powers proclaimed and openly 
shown after His ascension. 

The proof of the truth being with us, is the fact of the 
Son of God Himself having taught us. For if in every in- 
quiry these universal are found, a person and a subject, that 
which is truly the truth is shown to be in our hands alone. 
For the Son of God is the person of the truth which is 

1 Wisd. vi. 17-20. 

376 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

exhibited ; and the subject is the power of faith, which pre- 
vails over the opposition of every one whatever, and the 
assault of the whole world. 

But since this is confessedly established by eternal facts 
and reasons, and each one who thinks that there is no Pro- 
vidence has already been seen to deserve punishment and 
not contradiction, and is truly an atheist, it is our aim to dis- 
cover what doing, and in what manner living, we shall reach 
the knowledge of the sovereign God, and how, honouring 
the Divinity, we may become authors of our own salvation. 
Knowing and learning, not from the Sophists, but from 
God Himself, what is well-pleasing to Him, we endeavour 
to do what is just and holy. Now it is well-pleasing to Him 
that we should be saved ; and salvation is effected through 
both well-doing and knowledge, of both of which the Lord 
is the teacher. 

If, then, according to Plato, it is only possible to learn the 
truth either from God or from the progeny of God, with 
reason we, selecting testimonies from the divine oracles, 
boast of learning the truth by the Son of God, prophesied at 
fix’st, and then explained. 

Philosophy and heresies , aids in discovering the truth. 

But the things which co-operate in the discovery of truth 
are not to be rejected. Philosophy, accordingly, which pro- 
claims a Providence, and the recompense of a life of felicity, 
and the punishment, on the other hand, of a life of misery, 
teaches theology comprehensively ; but it does not preserve 
accuracy and particular points; for neither respecting the 
Son of God, nor respecting the economy of Providence, does 
it treat similarly with us ; for it did not know the worship 
of God. 

Wherefore also the heresies of the Barbarian philosophy, 
although they speak of one God, though they sing the praises 
of Christ, speak without accuracy, not in accordance with 
truth ; for they discover another God, and receive Christ 
not as the prophecies deliver. But their false dogmas, while 
they oppose the conduct that is according to the truth, 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

377 

are against us. For instance, Paul circumcised Timothy 
because of the Jews who believed, in order that those who 
had received their training from the law might not revolt 
from the faith through his breaking such points of the law 
as were understood more carnally, knowing right well that 
circumcision does not justify ; for he professed that “ all 
things were for all ” by conformity, preserving those of the 
dogmas that were essential, “ that he might gain all .” 1 And 
Daniel, under the king of the Persians, wore “ the chain,” 2 
though he despised not the affliction of the people. 

The liars, then, in reality are not those who for the sake of 
the scheme of salvation conform, nor those who err in minute 
points, but those who are wi’ong in essentials, and reject the 
Lord, and as far as in them lies deprive the Lord of the true 
teaching; who do not quote or deliver the Scriptures in a 
manner worthy of God and of the Lord; for the deposit 
rendered to God, according to the teaching of the Lord by 
His apostles, is the understanding and the practice of the godly 
tradition. “And what ye hear in the ear” — that is, in a hidden 
manner, and in a mystery (for such things are figuratively said 
to be spoken in the ear ) — u proclaim,” He says, “ on the house- 
tops,” understanding them sublimely, and delivering them in a 
lofty strain, and according to the canon of the truth explaining 
the Scriptures ; for neither prophecy nor the Saviour Himself 
announced the divine mysteries simply so as to be easily appre- 
hended by all and sundry, but expressed them in parables. 
The apostles accordingly say of the Lord, that “ He spake all 
things in parables, and without a parable spake He nothing 
unto them ; ” 3 and if “ all things were made by Him, and 
without Him was not anything made that was made,” 4 con- 
sequently also prophecy and the law were by Him, and were 
spoken by Him in parables. “But all things are right,” 
says the Scripture , 5 “ before those who understand,” that 
is, those who receive and observe, according to the ecclesias- 
tical rule, the exposition of the Scriptures explained by Him; 
and the ecclesiastical rule is the concord and harmony of 

1 1 Cor. ix. 19. 2 Dan. v. 7, 29. 3 Matt. xiii. 34. 

4 John i. 3. 3 Prov. viii. 9. 

378 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

tlie law and the prophets in the covenant delivered at the 
coming of the Lord. Knowledge is then followed by prac- 
tical wisdom, and practical wisdom by self-control : for it 
may be said that practical wisdom is divine knowledge, and 
exists in those who are deified ; but that self-control is mor- 
tal, and subsists in those who philosophize, and are not yet 
wise. But if virtue is divine, so is also the knowledge of it ; 
while self-control is a sort of imperfect wisdom which aspires 
after wisdom, and exerts itself laboriously, and is not con- 
templative. As certainly righteousness, being human, is, as 
being a common thing, subordinate to holiness, which sub- 
sists through the divine righteousness ; 1 for the righteousness 
of the perfect man does not rest on civil contracts, or on the 
prohibition of law, but flows from his own spontaneous action 
and his love to God. 

Reasons for the meaning of Scripture being veiled . 

For many reasons, then, the Scriptui’es hide the sense. 
First, that we may become inquisitive, and be ever on the 
watch for the discovery of the words of salvation. Then it 
was not suitable for all to understand, so that they might 
not receive harm in consequence of taking in another sense 
the things declared for salvation by the Holy Spirit. Where- 
fore the holy mysteries of the prophecies are veiled in the 
parables — preserved for chosen men, selected to knowledge 
in consequence of their faith ; for the style of the Scriptures 
is parabolic. Wherefore also the Lord, who was not of the 
world, came as one who was of the world to men. For He 
was clothed with all virtue ; and it was His aim to lead 
man, the foster-child of the world, up to the objects of intel- 
lect, and to the most essential truths by knowledge, from one 
world to another. 

Wherefore also He employed metaphorical description ; 

1 Heinsius, in a note, remarks that Plato regarded oaioryi; and oizxiccrLri 
as identical, while others ascribe the former to the immortals (as also 
6: ft-il ) ; gV/o'tjj?, as the greater, comprehends Iikcuoo vvn. He also amends 
the text. Instead of xoiuov he reads up xotvov t /, supplies xktm before 
Oiictv otx.citoGuvT,v, and changes v^xp-^ovax v into vvxpxoinr/j. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

379 

for sucli is the parable, — a narration based on some subject 
which is not the principal subject, but similar to the principal 
subject, and leading him who understands to what is the true 
and principal thing ; or, as some say, a mode of speech pre- 
senting with vigour, by means of other circumstances, what 
is the principal subject. 

And now also the whole economy which prophesied of the 
Lord appears indeed a parable to those who know not the 
truth, when one speaks and the rest hear that the Son of God 
— of Him who made the universe — assumed flesh, and was 
conceived in the virgin’s womb (as His material body was 
produced), and subsequently, as was the case, suffered and 
rose again, being “to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the 
Greeks foolishness,” as the apostle says. 

But on the Scriptures being opened up, and declaring the 
truth to those who have ears, they proclaim the very suffer- 
ing endured by the flesh, which the Lord assumed, to be 
“ the power and wisdom of God.” And finally, the parabolic 
style of Scripture being of the greatest antiquity, as we have 
shown, abounded most, as was to be expected, in the pro- 
phets, in order that the Holy Spirit might show that the 
philosophers among the Greeks, and the wise men among the 
Barbarians besides, were ignorant of the future coming of the 
Lord, and of the mystic teaching that was to be delivered by 
Him. Rightly then, prophecy, in proclaiming the Lord, in 
order not to seem to some to blaspheme while speaking what 
was beyond the ideas of the multitude, embodied its declara- 
tions in expressions capable of leading to other conceptions. 
Now all the prophets who foretold the Lord’s coming, and 
the holy mysteries accompanying it, were persecuted and 
killed. As also the Lord Himself, in explaining the Scrip- 
tures to them, and His disciples who preached the word like 
Him, and subsequently to His life used parables . 1 Whence 
also Peter, in his Preaching , speaking of the apostles, says : 

1 par ccvrou ro tlu psfidi’hovTo: The translation of Hervetus, which 
we have followed, supposes the reading ccvrov instead of ccvrov, Others, 
retaining the latter, translated ro t^viu 'xapifiochovro (sacrificed life). But 
the former is most to the author’s purpose. 

380 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

“But we, unrolling the books of the prophets which we 
possess, who name Jesus Christ, partly in parables, partly in 
enigmas, partly expressly and in so many words, find His 
coming and death, and cross, and all the rest of the tortures 
which the Jews inflicted on Him, and His resurrection and 
assumption to heaven previous to the capture 1 of Jerusalem. 
As it is written, These things are all that He behoved to suffer , 
and what should be after Him. Recognising them, therefore, 
we have believed in God in consequence of what is written 
respecting Him.” 

And after a little again he draws the inference that the 
Scriptures owed their origin to the divine providence, assert- 
ing as follows : “ For we know that God enjoined these 
things, and we say nothing apart from the Scriptures.” 

Now the Hebrew dialect, like all the rest, has certain pro- 
perties, consisting in a mode of speech which exhibits the 
national character. Dialect is accordingly defined as a style 
of speech produced by the national character. But prophecy 
is not marked by those dialects. For in the Hellenic writ- 
ings, what are called changes of figures purposely produce 
obscurations, deduced after the style of our prophecies. But 
this is effected through the voluntary departure from direct 
speech which takes place in metrical or offhand diction. A 
figure, then, is a form of speech transferred from what is 
literal to what is not literal, for the sake of the composition, 
and on account of a diction useful in speech. 

But prophecy does not employ figurative forms in the ex- 
pressions for the sake of beauty of diction. But from the fact 
that truth appertains not to all, it is veiled in manifold ways, 
causing the light to arise only on those who are initiated into 
knowledge, who seek the truth through love. The proverb, 
according to the Barbarian philosophy, is called a mode of pro- 
phecy, and the parable is so called, and the enigma in addition. 
Further also, they are called “wisdom and again, as some- 
thing different from it, “ instruction and words of prudence,” 

1 If we retain the reading of the text, we must translate “ founding,” 
and understand the reference to be to the descent of the new Jerusalem. 
But it seems better to change the reading as above. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

381 

and “turnings of words/’ and “true righteousness;” and 
again, “ teaching to direct judgment/’ and “ subtlety to the 
simple,” which is the result of training, “ and perception and 
thought,” with which the young catechumen is imbued . 1 
“ He who hears these prophets, being wise, will be wiser. 
And the intelligent man will acquire rule, and will under- 
stand a parable and a dark saying, the words and enigmas of 
the wise .” 2 

And if it was the case that the Hellenic dialects received 
their appellation from Hellen, the son of Zeus, surnamed 
Deucalion, from the chronology which we have already 
exhibited, it is comparatively easy to perceive by how many 
generations the dialects that obtained among the Greeks are 
posterior to the language of the Hebrews. 

But as the work advances, we shall in each section, noting 
the figures of speech mentioned above by the prophet , 3 
exhibit the gnostic mode of life, showing it systematically 
according to the rule of the truth. 

Did not the Power also, that appeared to Hermas in the 
Vision, in the form of the Church, give for transcription the 
book which she wished to be made known to the elect % And 
this, he says, he transcribed to the letter, without finding how 
to complete the syllables. And this signified that the Scrip- 
ture is clear to all, when taken according to the bare read- 
ing ; and that this is the faith which occupies the place of 
the rudiments. Wherefore also the figurative expression is 
employed, “ reading according to the letter ; ” while we 
understand that the gnostic unfolding of the Scriptures, when 
faith has already reached an advanced state, is likened to 
reading according to the syllables. 

Further, Esaias the prophet is ordered to take “ a new book, 
and write in it ” 4 certain things : the Spirit prophesying that 
through the exposition of the Scriptures there would come 
afterwards the sacred knowledge, which at that period was 
still unwritten, because not yet known. For it was spoken 
from the beginning to those only who understand. Now that 

1 Prov. i. 1-4. 2 Prov. i. 5, 6. 

3 i.e. Solomon. 4 Isa. viii. 1. 

382 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book vi. 

the Saviour has taught the apostles, the unwritten rendering 
of the written [Scripture] has been handed down also to us, 
inscribed by the power of God on hearts new, according to 
the renovation of the book. Thus those of highest repute 
among the Greeks, dedicate the fruit of the pomegranate to 
Hermes, who they say is speech, on account of its interpreta- 
tion. For speech conceals much. Rightly, therefore, Jesus 
the son of Nave saw Moses, when taken up [to heaven], 
double, — one Moses with the angels, and one on the moun- 
tains, honoured with burial in their ravines. And Jesus saw 
this spectacle below, being elevated by the Spirit, along also 
with Caleb. But both do not see similarly. But the one 
descended with greater speed, as if the weight he carried 
was great; while the other, on descending after him, sub- 
sequently related the glory which he beheld, being able to 
perceive more than the other, as having grown purer ; the 
narrative, in my opinion, showing that knowledge is not the 
privilege of all. Since some look at the body of the Scrip- 
tures, the expressions and the names as to the body of Moses ; 
while others see through to the thoughts and what is signified 
by the names, seeking the Moses that is with the angels. 

Many also of those who called to the Lord said, u Son of 
David, have mercy on me.” 1 A few, too, knew Him as the 
Son of God ; as Peter, whom also He pronounced blessed, 
u for flesh and blood revealed not the truth to him, but His 
Father in heaven,” 2 — showing that the Gnostic recognises the 
Son of the Omnipotent, not by His flesh conceived in the 
womb, but by the Father’s own power. That it is therefore 
not only to those who read simply that the acquisition of the 
truth is so difficult, but that not even to those whose preroga- 
tive the knowledge of the truth is, is the contemplation of it 
vouchsafed all at once, the history of Moses teaches, until, 
accustomed to gaze, as the Hebrews on the glory of Moses, 
and the prophets of Israel on the visions of angels, so we 
also become able to look the splendours of truth in the face. 

1 Mark x. 48, etc. etc. 2 Matt. xvi. 17. 

Book vi.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

383 

CHAPTER XVI. 

GNOSTIC EXPOSITION OF THE DECALOGUE. 

Let the Decalogue be set forth cursorily by us as a specimen 
for gnostic exposition. 

The number 11 Ten.” 

That ten is a sacred number, it is superfluous to say now. Ji 
And if the tables that were written were the work of God, 
they will be found to exhibit physical creation. For by the 
“ finger of God ” is understood the power of God, by which 
the creation of heaven and earth is accomplished ; of both of 
which the tables will be understood to be symbols. For the 
writing and handiwork of God put on the table is the crea- 
tion of the world. 

And the Decalogue, viewed as an image of heaven, 
embraces sun and moon, stars, clouds, light, wind, water, 
air, darkness, fire. This is the physical Decalogue of the 
heaven. 

And the representation of the earth contains men, cattle, 
reptiles, wild beasts ; and of the inhabitants of the water, 
fishes and whales ; and again, of the winged tribes, those 
that are carnivorous, and those that use mild food ; and of 
plants likewise, both fruit-bearing and barren. This is the 
physical Decalogue of the earth. 

And the ark which held them 1 will then be the knowledge 
of divine and human thino-s and wisdom . 2 

O 

And perhaps the two tables themselves may be the pro- 
phecy of the two covenants. They were accordingly mysti- 
cally renewed, as ignorance along with sin abounded. The 
commandments are written, then, doubly, as appears, for 

] i.e. the Commandments. 

2 For perfect wisdom, which is knowledge of things divine and human, 
which comprehends all that relates to the oversight of the flock of men, 
becomes, in reference to life, art (. Instructor , book ii. chap. ii. ; Clem. 
Alex. vol. i. 204, Ante-Nicene Library). 

384 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

twofold spirits, the ruling and the subject. “ For the flesh 
lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh .” 1 

And there is a ten in man himself : the five senses, and 
the power of speech, and that of reproduction ; and the 
eighth is the spiritual principle communicated at his crea- 
tion ; and the ninth the ruling faculty of the soul ; and 
tenth, there is the distinctive characteristic of the Holy 
Spirit, which comes to him through faith. 

Besides, in addition to these ten human parts, the law 
appears to give its injunctions 2 to sight, and hearing, and 
smell, and touch, and taste, and to the organs subservient to 
these, which are double — the hands and the feet. For such 
is the formation of man. And the soul is introduced, and 
previous to it the ruling faculty, by which we reason, not 
produced in procreation ; so that without it there is made up 
the number ten, of the faculties by which all the activity of 
man is carried out. For in order, straightway on man’s 
entering existence, his life begins with sensations. We accord- 
ingly assert that rational and ruling power is the cause of 
the constitution of the living creature; also that this, the 
irrational part, is animated, and is a part of it. Now the 
vital force, in which is comprehended the power of nutrition 
and growth, and generally of motion, is assigned to the car- 
nal spirit, which has great susceptibility of motion, and passes 
in all directions through the senses and the rest of the body, 
and through the body is the primary subject of sensations. 
But the power of choice, in which investigation, and study, 
and knowledge, reside, belongs to the ruling faculty. But all 
the faculties are placed in relation to one — the ruling faculty : 
it is through that man lives, and lives in a certain way. 

Through the corporeal spirit, then, man perceives, desires, 
rejoices, is angry, is nourished, grows. It is by it, too, that 
thoughts and conceptions advance to actions. And when it 
masters the desires, the ruling faculty reigns. 

The commandment, then, u Thou shalt not lust,” says, 

1 Gal. v. 17. 

2 The text reads iuro'Kcug, ■which, however, Hervetus, Heinsius, and 
Sylburgius, all concur in changing to the nominative, as above. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

385 

thou shalt not serve the carnal spirit, but shalt rule over it ; 
“ for the flesh lusteth against the Spirit,” 1 and excites to 
disorderly conduct against nature ; u and the Spirit against 
the flesh ” exercises sway, in order that the conduct of the 
man may be according to nature. 

Is not man, then, rightly said “ to have been made in the 
image of God?” — not in the form of his [corporeal] structure ; 
but inasmuch as God creates all things by the Word (\6<ya), 
and the man v 7 ho has become a Gnostic performs good actions 
by the faculty of reason (tco Xoyitcaj), properly therefore 
the two tables are also said to mean the commandments that 
■were given to the twofold spirits, — those communicated be- 
fore the law to that which -was created, and to the ruling 
faculty ; and the movements of the senses are both copied in 
the mind, and manifested in the activity which proceeds from 
the body. For apprehension results from both combined. 
Again, as sensation is related to the world of sense, so is 
thought to that of intellect. And actions are twofold — those 
of thought, those of act. 

The First Commandment. 

The first commandment of the Decalogue shows that there 
is one only Sovereign God; 2 who led the people from the 
land of Egypt through the desert to their fatherland ; that 
they might apprehend His power, as they w T ere able, by 
means of the divine works, and withdraw from the idolatry 
of created things, putting all their hope in the true God. 

The Second Commandment. 

The second word 3 intimated that men ought not to take and 
confer the august pow'er of God (wdiich is the name, for this 
alone were many even yet capable of learning), and transfer 
His title to things created and vain, which human artificers 
have made, among w'hich “ He that is ” is not ranked. For 
in His uncreated identity, “ He that is ” is absolutely alone. 

1 Gal. v. 17. 2 Ex. xx. 2, 3. 

3 i.e. commandment. The Decalogue is in Hebrew called “the ten 
words.” 

2 B 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

386 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vr. 

The Fourth Commandment. 

And the fourth 1 word is that which intimates that the 
world was created by God, and that He gave us the seventh 
day as a rest, on account of the trouble that there is in life. 
For God is incapable of weariness, and suffering, and want. 
But we who bear flesh need rest. The seventh day, there- 
fore, is proclaimed a rest — abstraction from ills — preparing 
for the Primal Day , 2 our true rest ; which, in truth, is the 
first creation of light, in which all things are viewed and 
possessed. From this day the first wisdom and knowledge 
illuminate us. For the light of truth — a light true, casting 
no shadow, is the Spirit of God indivisibly divided to all, 
who are sanctified by faith, holding the place of a luminary, 
in order to the knowledge of real existences. By following 
Him, therefore, through our whole life, we become impas- 
sible ; and this is to rest. 

Wherefore Solomon also says, that before heaven, and 
earth, and all existences, Wisdom had arisen in the Almighty; 
the participation of which — that which is by power, I mean, 
not that by essence — teaches a man to know by apprehension 
things divine and human. Having reached this point, we must 
mention these things by the way; since the discourse has 
turned on the seventh and the eighth. For the eighth may 
possibly turn out to be properly the seventh, and the seventh 
manifestly the sixth, and the latter properly the Sabbath, 
and the seventh a day of work. For the creation of the 
world was concluded in six days. For the motion of the sun 
from solstice to solstice is completed in six months — in the 
course of which, at one time the leaves fall, and at another 
plants bud and seeds come to maturity. And they say that 
the embryo is perfected exactly in the sixth month, that is, 
in one hundred and eighty days in addition to the two and a 
half, as Polybus the physician relates in his book On the 

1 The text has rpi roj, but Sylburgius reads rkctpro;, the third being 
either omitted, or embraced in what is said of the second. The next 
mentioned is the fifth. 

2 i.e. Christ. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

387 

Eighth Month , and Aristotle the philosopher in his book On 
Nature. Hence the Pythagoreans, as I think, reckon six 
the perfect number, from the creation of the world, accord- 
ing to the prophet, and call it Meseuthys 1 and Marriage, 
from its being the middle of the even numbers, that is, of 
ten and two. For it is manifestly at an equal distance from 
both. 

And as marriage generates from male and female, so six 
is generated from the odd number three, which is called the 
masculine number, and the even number two, which is con- 
sidered the feminine. For twice three are six. 

Such, again, is the number of the most general motions, 
according to which all origination takes place — up, down, to 
the right, to the left, forward, backward. Rightly, then, 
they reckon the number seven motherless and childless, in- 
terpreting the Sabbath, and figuratively expressing the nature 
of the rest, in which “ they neither marry nor are given in 
marriage any more .” 2 For neither by taking from one 
number and adding to another of those within ten is seven 
produced ; nor when added to any number within the ten 
does it make up any of them. 

And they call eight a cube, counting the fixed sphere 
along with the seven revolving ones, by which is produced 
“ the great year,” as a kind of period of recompense of what 
has been promised. 

Thus the Lord, who ascended the mountain, the fourth , 3 
becomes the sixth, and is illuminated all round with spiritual 
light, by laying bare the power proceeding from Him, as far 
as those selected to see were able to behold it, by the Seventh, 
the Voice, proclaimed to be the Son of God ; in order that 
they, persuaded respecting Him, might have rest ; while He 
by His birth, which was indicated by the six conspicuously 
marked, becoming the eighth, might appear to be God in a 
tody of flesh, by displaying His power, being numbered 

1 fiicrsvSvg fiLo; and evdug, between the even ones, applied by the Pytha- 
goreans to 6, a half-way between 2 and 10, the first and the last even 
lumbers of the dinary scale. 

2 Luke xx. 35. 3 i.e. with the three disciples. 

38S 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

indeed as a man, but being concealed as to who He was. 
For six is reckoned in the order of numbers, but the succes- 
sion of the letters acknowledges the character which is not 
written. In this case, in the numbers themselves, each 
unit is preserved in its order up to seven and eight. But 
in the number of the characters, Zeta becomes six and Eta 
seven. 

And the character 1 having somehow slipped into writing, 
should we follow it out thus, the seven became six, and the 
eight seven. 

Wherefore also man is said to have been made on the 
sixth day, who became faithful to Him who is the sign (rco 
eVtu^yao) 2 ), so as straightway to receive the rest of the Lord’s 
inheritance. Some such thing also is indicated by the sixth 
hour in the scheme of salvation, in which man was perfected. 
F urther, of the eight, the intermediates are seven ; and of 
the seven, the intervals are shown to be six. For that is 
another ground, in which seven glorifies eight, and “ the 
heavens declare to the heavens the glory of God .” 3 

The sensible types of these, then, are the sounds we 
pronounce. Thus the Lord Himself is called “ Alpha and 
Omega, the beginning and the end ,” 4 “ by whom all things 
were made, and without whom not even one thing was 
made .” 5 God’s resting is not, then, as some conceive, that 
God ceased from doing. For, being good, if He should ever 
cease from doing good, then would He cease from being 
God, which it is sacrilege even to say. The resting is, there- 
fore, the ordering that the order of created things should be 
preserved inviolate, and that each of the creatures should 
cease from the ancient disorder. For the creations on the 
different days followed in a most important succession ; so 
that all things brought into existence might have honour 
from priority, created together in thought, but not being of 

1 The numeral = 6. This is said to be the Digamma in its original 
place in the alphabet, and afterwards used in mss. and old editions as a 
short form of or (Liddel and Scott’s Lexicon). 

2 That is, Christ, who answers to the numeral six. 

8 Ps. xix. 1. 4 Rev. xxi. 6. 

5 John i. 3. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

389 

equal worth. Nor was the creation of each signified by 
the voice, inasmuch as the creative work is said to have 
made them at once. For something must needs have been 
named first. Wherefore those things were announced first, 
from which came those that were second, all things being 
originated together from one essence by one power. For the 
will of God was one, in one identity. And how could creation 
take place in time, seeing time was born along with the things 
which exist ? 

And now the whole world of creatures born alive, and 
things that grow, revolves in sevens. The first-born princes 
of the angels, who have the greatest power, are seven. The 
mathematicians also say that the planets, which perform 
their course around the earth, are seven ; by which the 
Chaldeans think that all which concerns mortal life is effected 
through sympathy, in consequence of which they also under- 
take to tell things respecting the future. 

And of the fixed stars, the Pleiades are seven. And the 
Bears, by the help of which agriculture and navigation are 
carried through, consist of seven stars. And in periods 
of seven days the moon undergoes its changes. In the first 
week she becomes half moon ; in the second, full moon ; 
and in the third, in her wane, again half moon ; and in the 
fourth she disappears. Further, as Seleucus the mathema- 
tician lays down, she has seven phases. First, from being 
invisible she becomes crescent-shaped, then half moon, then 
gibbous and full; and in her wane again gibbous, and in 
like manner half moon and crescent-shaped. 

“ On a seven-stringed lyre we shall sing new hymns,” 

writes a poet of note, teaching us that the ancient lyre was 
seven-toned. The organs of the senses situated on our face 
are also seven — two eyes, two passages of hearing, two nos- 
trils, and the seventh the mouth. 

And that the changes in the periods of life take place by 
sevens, the Elegies of Solon teach thus : 

“ The child, while still an infant, in seven years, 

Produces and puts forth its fence of teeth ; 

390 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

And when God seven years more completes, 

He shows of puberty’s approach the signs ; 

And in the third, the beard on growing cheek 
With down o’erspreads the bloom of changing skin ; 

And in the fourth septenniad, at his best 
In strength, of manliness he shows the signs ; 

And in the fifth, of marriage, now mature, 

And of posterity, the man bethinks ; 

Nor does he yet desire vain works to see. 

The seventh and eighth septenniads see him now 
In mind and speech mature, till fifty years ; 

And in the ninth he still has vigour left, 

But strength and body are for virtue great 

Less than of yore ; when, seven years more, God brings 

To end, then not too soon may he submit to die.” 

Again, in diseases the seventh day is that of the crisis ; and 
the fourteenth, in which nature struggles against the causes of 
the diseases. And a myriad such instances are adduced by 
Hermippus of Berytus, in his book On the Number Seven , re- 
garding it as holy. And the blessed David delivers clearly to 
those who know the mystic account of seven and eight, praising 
thus : “ Our years were exercised like a spider. The days of 
our years in them are seventy years ; but if in strength, eighty 
years. And that will be to reign.” 1 That, then, we may be 
taught that the world was originated, and not suppose that 
God made it in time, prophecy adds : “ This is the book of 
the generation : also of the things in them, when they were 
created in the day that God made heaven and earth.” 2 For 
the expression “when they were created” intimates an in- 
definite and dateless production. But the expression “in 
the day that God made,” that is, in and by which God made 
“ all things,” and “ without which not even one thing was 
made,” points out the activity exerted by the Son. As David 
says, “ This is the day which the Lord hath made ; let us be 
glad and rejoice in it ;” 3 that is, in consequence of the know- 
ledge imparted by Him, let us celebrate the divine festival ; 
for the Word that throws light on things hidden, and by 
whom each created thing came into life and being, is called 
day. 

1 Ps. xc. 9, 10. 2 Gen. ii. 4. 8 Ps. exviii. 24. 

Book. vi. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

391 

And, in fine, the Decalogue, by the letter Iota, 1 signifies 
the blessed name, presenting Jesus, who is the Word. 

The Fifth Commandment 

Now the fifth in order is the command on the honour of 
father and mother. And it clearly announces God as Father 
and Lord. Wherefore also it calls those who know Him 
sons and gods. The Creator of the universe is their Lord 
and Father; and the mother is not, as some say, the essence 
from which we sprang, nor, as others teach, the church, but 
the divine knowledge and wisdom, as Solomon says, when * 
he terms wisdom u the mother of the just,” and says that it 
is desirable for its own sake. And the knowledge of all, 
again, that is lovely and venerable, proceeds from God 
through the Son. 

The Seventh Commandment. 

This is followed by the command respecting adultery. 
Now it is adultery, if one, abandoning the ecclesiastical and 
true knowledge, and the persuasion respecting God, accedes 
to false and incongruous opinion, either by deifying any 
created object, or by making an idol of anything that exists 
not, so as to overstep, or rather step from, knowledge. And 
to the Gnostic false opinion is foreign, as the true belongs 
to him, and is allied with him. Wherefore the noble apostle 
calls one of the kinds of fornication, idolatry , 2 3 in following 
the prophet, who says : “ [My people] hath committed forni- 
cation with stock and stone. They have said to the stock, 
Thou art my father ; and to the stone, Thou hast begotten 

The Sixth Commandment. 

Then follows the command about murder. Now murder 
is a sure destruction. He, then, that wishes to extirpate the 

1 The first letter of the name of Jesus, and used as the sign of ten. 

2 In close conjunction with idolatry, fornication is mentioned, Col. iii. 
5, Gal. v. 20, 1 Pet. iv. 3. 

3 Jer. iii. 9. 

392 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

true doctrine of God and of immortality, in order to intro- 
duce falsehood, alleging either that the universe is not under 
Providence, or that the world is uncreated, or affirming any- 
thing against true doctrine, is most pernicious. 

The Eighth Commandment. 

And after this is the command respecting theft. As, then, 
he that steals what is another’s, doing great wrong, rightly 
incurs ills suitable to his deserts ; so also does he, who arro- 
• gates to himself divine works by the art of the statuary or the 
painter, and pronounces himself to be the maker of animals 
and plants. Likewise those, too, who mimic the true philo- 
sophy are thieves. Whether one be a husbandman or the 
father of a child, he is an agent in depositing seeds. But 
it is God who, ministering the growth and perfection of all 
things, brings the things produced to what is in accordance 
with their nature. But the most, in common also with the 
philosophers, attribute growth and changes to the stars as the 
primary cause, robbing the Father of the universe, as far as 
in them lies, of His tireless might. 

The elements, however, and the stars — that is, the admini- 
strative powers — are ordained for the accomplishment of what 
is essential to the administration, and are influenced and 
moved by what is commanded to them, in the way in which 
the Word of the Lord leads, since it is the nature of the 
divine power to work all things secretly. He, accordingly, 
who alleges that he has conceived or made anything which 
pertains to creation, will suffer the punishment of his impious 
audacity. 

The Tenth Commandment. 

And the tenth is the command respecting all lusts. As, 
then, he who entertains unbecoming desires is called to 
account ; in the same way he is not allowed to desire 
things false, or to suppose that, of created objects, those 
that are animate have power of themselves, and that inani- 
mate things can at all save or hurt. And should one say 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

393 

that an antidote cannot heal or hemlock kill, he is unwit- 
tingly deceived. For none of these operates except one 
makes use of the plant and the drug ; just as the axe does 
not without one to cut with it, or a saw without one sawing 
with it. And as they do not work by themselves, but have 
certain physical qualities which accomplish their proper work 
by the exertion 6f the artisan ; so also, by the universal pro- 
vidence of God, through the medium of secondary causes, 
the operative power is propagated in succession to individual 
objects. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

PHILOSOPHY CONVEYS ONLY AN IMPERFECT KNOWLEDGE 

OF GOD. 

But, as appears, the philosophers of the Greeks, while 
naming God, do not know Him. But their philosophical 
speculations, according to Empedocles, 11 as passing over the 
tongue of the multitude, are poured out of mouths that know 
little of the whole.” For as art changes the light of the 
sun into fire by passing it through a glass vessel full of 
water, so also philosophy, catching a spark from the divine 
Scripture, is visible in a few. Also, as all animals breathe 
the same air, some in one way, others in another, and to a 
different purpose ; so also a considerable number of people 
occupy themselves with the truth, or rather with discourse 
concerning the truth. For they do not say aught respecting 
God, but expound Him by attributing their own affections to 
God. For they spend life in seeking the probable, not the 
true. But truth is not taught by imitation, but by instruc- 
tion. For it is not that we may seem good 1 that we believe 
in Christ, as it is not alone for the purpose of being seen, 
while in the sun, that we pass into the sun. But in the one 
case for the purpose of being warmed ; and in the other, we 
are compelled to be Christians in order to be excellent and 
1 a yxdol it; are supplied here to complete. 

394 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vt. 

good. For the kingdom belongs pre-eminently to the violent, 
who, from investigation, and study, and discipline, reap this 
fruit, that they become kings. 

He, then, who imitates opinion shows also preconception. 
When then one, having got an inkling of the subject, kindles 
it within in his soul by desire and study, he sets everything 
in motion afterwards in order to know it. For that which 
one does not apprehend, neither does he desire it, nor does 
he embrace the advantage flowing from it. Subsequently, 
therefore, the Gnostic at last imitates the Lord, as far as 
allowed to men, having received a sort of quality akin to the 
Lord Himself, in order to assimilation to God. But those 
who are not proficient in knowledge cannot judge the truth 
by rule. It is not therefore possible to share in the gnostic 
contemplations, unless we empty ourselves of our previous 
notions. For the truth in regard to every object of intellect 
and of sense is thus simply universally declared. For 
instance, we may distinguish the truth of painting from that 
which is vulgar, and decorous music from licentious. There 
is, then, also a truth of philosophy as distinct from the other 
philosophers, and a true beauty as distinct from the spurious. 
It is not then the partial truths, of which truth is predicated, 
but the truth itself, that we are to investigate, not seeking to 
learn names. For what is to be investigated respecting God 
is not one thing, but ten thousand. There is a difference 
between declaring God, and declaring things about God. 
And to speak generally, in everything the accidents are to be 
distinguished from the essence. 

Suffice it for me to say, that the Lord of all is God ; and 
I say the Lord of all absolutely, nothing being left by way 
of exception. 

Since, then, the forms of truth are two — the names and 
the things — some discourse of names, occupying themselves 
with the beauties of words : such are the philosophers among 
the Greeks. But we who are Barbarians have the things. 
Now it was not in vain that the Lord chose to make use of 
a mean form of body ; so that no one praising the grace 
and admiring the beauty might turn his back on what 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

395 

was said, and attending to what ought to be abandoned, might 
be cut off from what is intellectual. We must therefore 
occupy ourselves not with the expression, but the meaning. 

To those, then, who are not gifted 1 with the pow r er of 
apprehension, and are not inclined to knowledge, the word is 
not entrusted ; since also the ravens imitate human voices, 
having no understanding of the thing which they say. And 
intellectual apprehension depends on faith. Thus also Homer 
said : 

“ Father of men and gods,” 2 — 

knowing not who the Father is, or how He is Father. 

And as to him who has hands it is natural to grasp, and 
to him who has sound eyes to see the light ; so it is the 
natural prerogative of him who has received faith to appre- 
hend knowledge, if he desires, on “ the foundation” laid, to 
work, and build up “gold, silver, precious stones .” 3 

Accordingly he does not profess to wish to participate, but 
begins to do so. Nor does it belong to him to intend, but to 
be regal, and illuminated, and gnostic. Nor does it appertain 
to him to wish to grasp things in name, but in fact. 

For God, being good, on account of the principal part of 
the whole creation, seeing He wishes to save it, was induced 
to make the rest also ; conferring on them at the beginning 
this first boon, that of existence. For that to be is far better 
than not to be, will be admitted by every one. Then, accord- 
ing to the capabilities of their nature, each one was and is 
made, advancing to that which is better. 

So there is no absurdity in philosophy having been given 
by Divine Providence as a preparatory discipline for the per- 
fection which is by Christ ; unless philosophy is ashamed at 
learning from Barbarian knowledge how to advance to truth. 
But if “the very hairs are numbered, and the most insig- 
nificant motions,” how shall not philosophy be taken into 
account? For to Samson power was given in his hair, in 
order that he might perceive that the worthless arts that 
refer to the things in this life, which lie and remain on 

1 ova ci’jrt?,ri7TTiaol; is substituted here for ccvtiA/ivto7s of the text. 

2 Iliad, i. 544. 3 1 Cor. iii. 12. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

396 

[Book vl 

the ground after the departure of the soul, were not given 
without divine power. 

But it is said Providence, from above, from what is of 
prime importance, as from the head, reaches to all, “ as the 
ointment,” it is said, “ which descends to Aaron’s beard, and 
to the skirt of his garment ” 1 (that is, of the great High 
Priest, u by whom all things were made, and without whom 
not even one thing was made” 2 ) ; not to the ornament of the 
body ; for Philosophy is outside of the People, like raiment . 3 
The philosophers, therefore, who, trained to their own pecu- 
liar power of perception by the spirit of perception, when 
they investigate, not a part of philosophy, but philosophy 
absolutely, testify to the truth in a truth-loving and humble 
spirit ; if in the case of good things said by those even who 
are of different sentiments they advance to understanding, 
through the divine administration, and the ineffable Good- 
ness, which always, as far as possible, leads the nature of 
existences to that which is better. Then, by cultivating the 
acquaintance not of Greeks alone, but also of Barbarians, 
from the exercise common to their proper intelligence, they 
are conducted to Faith. And when they have embraced the 
foundation of truth, they receive in addition the power of 
advancing further to investigation. And thence they love to 
be learners, and aspiring after knowledge, haste to salvation. 

Thus Scripture says, that u the spirit of perception ” was 
given to the artificers from God . 4 And this is nothing else 
than Understanding, a faculty of the soul, capable of study- 
ing existences, — of distinguishing and comparing what suc- 
ceeds as like and unlike, — of enjoining and forbidding, and 
of conjecturing the future. And it extends not to the arts 
alone, but even to philosophy itself. 

Why, then, is the serpent called wise ? Because even in 
its wiles there may be found a connection, and distinction, 
and combination, and conjecturing of the future. And so 

1 Ps. cxxxiii. 2. 2 John i. 3. 

3 i.e. the body is the Jewish people, and philosophy is something ex- 

ternal to it, like the garment. 

4 Ex. xxviii. 3. 

Booe vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

397 

very many crimes are concealed ; because the wicked arrange 
for themselves so as by all means to escape punishment. 

And Wisdom being manifold, pervading the whole world, 
and all human affairs, varies its appellation in each case. 
When it applies itself to first causes, it is called Understand- 
ing (i>o??<u5). When, however, it confirms this by demon- 
strative reasoning, it is termed Knowledge, and Wisdom, and 
Science. When it is occupied in what pertains to piety, and 
receives without speculation the primal Word 1 in consequence 
of the maintenance of the operation in it, it is called Faith. 
In the sphere of things of sense, establishing that which 
appears as being truest, it is Right Opinion. In operations, 
again, performed by skill of hand, it is Art. But when, on 
the other hand, without the study of primary causes, by the 
observation of similarities and by transposition, it makes any 
attempt or combination, it is called Experiment. But belong- 
ing to it, and supreme and essential, is the Holy Spirit, which 
above all he who, in consequence of [divine] guidance, has 
believed, receives after strong faith. Philosophy, then, par- 
taking of a more exquisite perception, as has been shown 
from the above statements, participates in Wisdom. 

Logical discussion, then, of intellectual subjects, with selec- 
tion and assent, is called Dialectics; wdiich establishes, by 
demonstration, allegations respecting truth, and demolishes 
the doubts brought forward. 

Those, then, who assert that philosophy did not come hither 
from God, all but say that God does not know each particular 
thing, and that He is not the cause of all good things; if, 
indeed, each of these belongs to the class of individual things. 
But nothing that exists could have subsisted at all, had God 
not willed. And if He willed, then philosophy is from God, 
He having willed it to be such as it is, for the sake of 
those who not otherwise than by its means would abstain 
from what is evil. For God knows all things — not those 
only which exist, but those also which shall be — and how each 
thing shall be. And foreseeing the particular movements, 
“ He surveys all things, and hears all things,” seeing the 

1 Christ. 

398 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

soul naked within; and possesses from eternity the idea of each 
thing individually. And what applies to theatres, and to the 
parts of each object, in looking at, looking round, and taking 
in the whole in one view,, applies also to God. For in one 
glance He views all things together, and each thing by 
itself ; but not all things, by w r ay of primary intent. 

Now, then, many things in life take their rise in some 
exercise of human reason, having received the kindling spark 
from God. For instance, health by medicine, and soundness 
of body through gymnastics, and wealth by trade, have their 
origin and existence in consequence of Divine Providence 
indeed, but in consequence, too, of human co-operation. 
Understanding also is from God. 

But God’s will is especially obeyed by the free-will of good 
men. Since many advantages are common to good and bad 
men : yet they are nevertheless advantageous only to men 
of goodness and probity, for whose sake God created them. 
For it was for the use of good men that the influence which 
is .in God’s gifts w r as originated. Besides, the thoughts of 
virtuous men are produced through the inspiration 1 of God ; 
the soul being disposed in the w r ay it is, and the divine will 
being conveyed to human souls, particular divine ministers 
contributing to such services. For regiments of angels are 
distributed over the nations and cities . 2 And, perchance, 
some are assigned to individuals . 3 

The Shepherd, then, cares for each of his sheep ; and his 
closest inspection is given to those who are excellent in their 
natures, and are capable of being most useful. Such are 
those fit to lead and teach, in whom the action of Provi- 
dence is conspicuously seen ; whenever either by instruction, 

1 Wt'zvoiot.v, preferred by Sylburgius and the Latin translator to the 
reading k^iuotuv. 

2 “ When the Most High divided the nations, as He separated the sons 
of Adam, He set the bounds of the nations according to the angels of 
God” (Deut. xxxii. 8, Sept.). The Hebrew and the Latin and A. V. 
have, “ according to the number of the children of Israel.” 

3 Lowth proposes to read xuroi t ovg \k\ pcspov; instead of xxl tux, etc.; 
and Montfaucon, instead of ’E utoig^ oiuotg for ocuSpcoTroig. But the sense 
is, in any case, as given above. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

399 

or government, or administration, God wishes to benefit. 
But He wishes at all times. Wherefore He moves those 
who are adapted to useful exertion in the things which per- 
tain to virtue, and peace, and beneficence. But all that is 
characterized by virtue proceeds from virtue, and leads back 
to virtue. And it is given either in order that men may 
become good, or that those who are so may make use of 
their natural advantages. For it co-operates both in what 
is general and what is particular. How absurd, then, is it, 
in those who attribute disorder and wickedness to the devil, 
to make him the bestower of philosophy, a virtuous thing ! 
For he is thus all but made more benignant to the Greeks, 
in respect of making men good, than the divine providence 
and mind. 

Again, I reckon it is the part of law and of right reason 
to assign to each one what is appropriate to him, and belongs 
to him, and falls to him. For as the lyre is only for the 
harper, and the flute for the flute-player ; so good things are 
the possessions of good men. As the nature of the beneficent 
is to do good, as it is of the fire to warm, and the light to 
give light, and a good man will not do evil, or light pro- 
duce darkness, or fire cold ; so, again, vice cannot do aught 
virtuous. For its activity is to do evil, as that of darkness 
to dim the eyes. 

Philosophy is not, then, the product of vice, since it makes 
men virtuous ; it follows, then, that it is the work of God, 
whose work it is solely to do good. And all things given by 
God are given and received well. 

Further, if the practice of philosophy does not belong to 
the wicked, but was accorded to the best of the Greeks, it is 
clear also from what source it was bestowed — manifestly 
from Providence, which assigns to each what is befitting in 
accordance with his deserts. 

Rightly, then, to the Jews belonged the Law, and to the 
Greeks Philosophy, until the Advent ; and after that came 
the universal calling to be a peculiar people of righteous- 
ness, through the teaching which flows from faith, brought 
together by one Lord, the only God of both Greeks and Bar- 

400 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

barians, or rather of the whole race of men. We have often 
called by the name philosophy that portion of truth attained 
through philosophy, although but partial. 

Now, too, what is good in the arts as arts, 1 have their 
beginning from God. For as the doing of anything ar- 
tistically is embraced in the rules of art, so also acting saga- 
ciously is classed under the head of sagacity (< ppovrjaa ). 
Now sagacity is virtue, and it is its function to know other 
things, but much more especially what belongs to itself. And 
Wisdom ( %o(f)la ) being power, is nothing but the knowledge 
of good things, divine and human. 

But “the earth is God’s, and the fulness thereof,” 2 says 
the Scripture, teaching that good things come from God to 
men ; it being through divine power and might that the dis- 
tribution of them comes to the help of man. 

Now the modes of all help and communication from one 
to another are three. One is, by attending to another, as the 
master of gymnastics, in training the boy. The second is, 
by assimilation, as in the case of one who exhorts another to 
benevolence by practising it before. The one co-operates 
with the learner, and the other benefits him who receives. 
The third mode is that by command, when the gymnastic 
master, no longer training the learner, nor showing in his 
own person the exercise for the boy to imitate, prescribes the 
exercise by name to him, as already proficient in it. 

The Gnostic, accordingly, having received from God the 
power to be of service, benefits some by disciplining them, by 
bestowing attention on them ; others, by exhorting them, by 
assimilation ; and others, by training and teaching them, by 
command. And certainly he himself is equally benefited by 
the Lord. Thus, then, the benefit that comes from God to 
men becomes known — angels at the same time lending en- 
couragement. For by angels, whether seen or not, the divine 
power bestows good things. Such was the mode adopted 
in the advent of the Lord. And sometimes also the power 
“breathes” in men’s thoughts and reasonings, and “puts in” 

1 For o>; iv t(x«cu; it is proposed to read a; uv at re^voii. 

2 Ps. xxiv. 1 ; 1 Cor. x. 26. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

401 

their hearts “ strength” and a keener perception, and fur- 
nishes “prowess” and “boldness of alacrity ” 1 both for 
researches and deeds. 

But exposed for imitation and assimilation are truly ad- 
mirable and holy examples of virtue in the actions put on 
record. Further, the department of action is most conspi- 
cuous both in the testaments of the Lord, and in the laws in 
force among the Greeks, and also in the precepts of philosophy. 

And to speak comprehensively, all benefit appertaining to 
life, in its highest reason, proceeding from the Sovereign 
God, the Father .who is over all, is consummated by the 
Son, who also on this account “ is the Saviour of all men,” 
says the apostle, “ but especially of those who believe .” 2 But 
in respect of its immediate reason, it is from those next to 
each, in accordance with the command and injunction of 
Him who is nearest the First Cause, that is, the Lord. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE USE OF PHILOSOPHY TO THE GNOSTIC. 

Greek philosophy the recreation of the Gnostic. 

Now our Gnostic always occupies himself with the things of 
highest importance. But if at any time he has leisure and 
time for relaxation from what is of prime consequence, he 
applies himself to Hellenic philosophy in preference to other 
recreation, feasting on it as a kind of dessert at supper. 
Not that he neglects what is superior ; but that he takes this 
in addition, as long as proper, for the reasons I mentioned 
above. But those who give their mind to the unnecessary 
and superfluous points of philosophy, and addict themselves 

1 “ Blue-eyed Athene inspired him with prowess.” — Iliad , x. 482. 

“ And put excessive boldness in his breast.” — Iliad , xvii. 570. 

“ To Diomede son of Tydeus Pallas Athene gave strength and 
boldness.” — Iliad , v. 1, 2. 

2 1 Tim. iv. 10. 

2 C 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

402 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book. vr. 

to wrangling sophisms alone, abandon what is necessary and 
most essential, pursuing plainly the shadows of words. 

It is well indeed to know all. But the man whose soul is 
destitute of the ability to reach to acquaintance with many 
subjects of study, will select the principal and better sub- 
jects alone. For real science {eTnaTypy, which we affirm the 
Gnostic alone possesses) is a sure comprehension (/caTaA/^i?), 
leading up through true and sure reasons to the knowledge 
(yvcocns) of the cause. And he, who is acquainted with 
what is true respecting any one subject, becomes of course 
acquainted with what is false respecting it. 

Philosophy necessary. 

For truly it appears to me to be a proper point for dis- 
cussion, Whether we ought to philosophize : for its terms 
are consistent. 

But if we are not to philosophize, what then? (For no 
one can condemn a thing without first knowing it) : the con- 
sequence, even in that case, is that we must philosophize . 1 

First of all , idols are to he rejected. 

Such, then, being the case, the Greeks ought by the Law 
and the Prophets to learn to worship one God only, the 
only Sovereign ; then to he taught by the apostle, u but to 
us an idol is nothing in the world ,” 2 since nothing among 
created things can be a likeness of God ; and further, to be 
taught that none of those images which they worship can be 
similitudes: for the race of souls is not in form such as the 
Greeks fashion their idols. For souls are invisible; not only 
those that are rational, but those also of the other animals. 
And their bodies never become parts of the souls them- 
selves, but organs — partly as seats, partly as vehicles — and 
in other cases possessions in various ways. But it is not 

1 The author’s meaning is, that it is only by a process of philosophical 
reasoning that you can decide whether philosophy is possible, valid, or 
useful. You must philosophize in order to decide whether you ought 
or ought not to philosophize. 

2 1 Cor. viii. 4. 

Book vr.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

403 

possible to copy accurately even the likenesses of the organs ; 
since, were it so, one might model the sun, as it is seen, and 
take the likeness of the rainbow in colours. 

After abandoning idols, then, they will hear the Scrip- 
ture, “ Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness 
of the scribes and Pharisees ” 1 (who justified themselves 
in the way of abstinence from what was evil), — so as, along 
with such perfection as they evinced, and “ the loving of 
your neighbour,” to be able also to do good, — you shall not 
u be kingly .” 2 

For intensification of the righteousness which is accord- 
ing to the law shows the Gnostic. So one who is placed in 
the head, which is that which rules its own body — and who 
advances to the summit of faith, which is the knowledge 
(gnosis) itself, for which all the organs of perception exist — 
will likewise obtain the highest inheritance. 

The primacy of knowledge the apostle shows to those 
capable of reflection, in writing to those Greeks of Corinth, 
in the following terms : u But having hope, when your faith 
is increased, that we shall be magnified in you according to 
our rule abundantly, to preach the gospel beyond you.” 3 
He does not mean the extension of his preaching locally : 
for he says also that in Achaia faith abounded; and it is 
related also in the Acts of the Apostles that he preached the 
word in Athens . 4 But he teaches that knowledge (gnosis), 
which is the perfection of faith, goes beyond catechetical 
instruction, in accordance with the magnitude of the Lord’s 
teaching and the rule of the church. Wherefore also he 
proceeds to add, “ And if I am rude in speech, yet I am not 
in knowledge.” 5 

Whence is the knowledge of truth ? 

But let those who vaunt on account of having apprehended 
the truth tell us from whom they boast of having heard it. 
They will not say from God, but will admit that it was 
from men. And if so, it is either from themselves that they 

1 Matt. v. 20 ; Jas. ii. 8. 2 fixat'hix.ot, Jas. ii. 8 (royal law). 

3 2 Cor. x. 15, 16. 4 Acts xvii. 5 2 Cor. xi. 6. 

404 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vi. 

have learned it lately, as some of them arrogantly boast, or 
from others like them. But human teachers, speaking of 
God, are not reliable, as men. For he that is man cannot 
speak worthily the truth concerning God : the feeble and 
mortal [cannot speak worthily] of the Unoriginated and In- 
corruptible — the work, of the Workman. Then he who is 
incapable of speaking what is true respecting himself, is he 
not much less reliable in what concerns God? For just as 
far as man is inferior to God in power, so much feebler is 
man’s speech than Him ; although he do not declare God, 
but only speak about God and the divine word. For human 
speech is by nature feeble, and incapable of uttering God. 
I do not say His name. For to name it is common, not to 
philosophers only, but also to poets. Nor [do I say] His 
essence ; for this is impossible, but the power and the works 
of God. 

Those even who claim God as their teacher, with difficulty 
attain to a conception of God, grace aiding them to the 
attainment of their modicum of knowledge ; accustomed as 
they are to contemplate the will [of God] by the will, and 
the Holy Spirit by the Holy Spirit. u For the Spirit searches 
the deep things of God. But the natural man receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit.” 1 

The only wisdom, therefore, is the God-taught wisdom 
we possess ; on which depend all the sources of wisdom, 
which make conjectures at the truth. 

Intimations of the Teacher s advent . 

Assuredly of the coming of the Lord, who has taught us, 
to men, there were a myriad indicators, heralds, preparers, 
precursors, from the beginning, from the foundation of the 
world, intimating beforehand by deeds and words, prophesy- 
ing that He would come, and where, and how, what should 
be the signs. From afar certainly Law and Prophecy kept 
Him in view beforehand. And then the precursor pointed 
Him out as present. After whom the heralds point out by 
their teaching the virtue of His manifestation. 

1 1 Cor. ii. 10, 14. 

Book vi.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

405 

Universal diffusion of the gospel a contrast to philosophy . 

The philosophers, however, chose to [teach philosophy] to 
the Greeks alone , 1 and not even to all of them ; but Socrates 
to Plato, and Plato to Xenocrates, Aristotle to Theophrastus, 
and Zeno to Cleanthes, who persuaded their own followers 
alone. 

But the word of our Teacher remained not in Judea 
alone, as philosophy did in Greece ; but was diffused over 
the whole world, over every nation, and village, and town, 
bringing already over to the truth whole houses, and each 
individual of those who heard it by him himself, and not a 
few of the philosophers themselves. 

And if any one ruler whatever prohibit the Greek philo- 
sophy, it vanishes forthwith. But our doctrine on its very/ 
first proclamation was prohibited by kings and tyrants to- 
gether, as well as particular rulers and governors, with all 
their mercenaries, and in addition by innumerable men, 
warring against us, and endeavouring as far as they could 
to exterminate it. But it flourishes the more. For it dies 
not, as human doctrine dies, nor fades as a fragile gift. For 
no gift of God is fragile. But it remains unchecked, though 
prophesied as destined to be persecuted to the end. Thus 
Plato writes of poetry : “ A poet is a light and a sacred 
thing, and cannot write poetry till he be inspired and lose 
his senses.” And Democritus similarly : a Whatever things 
a poet writes with divine afflatus, and with a sacred spirit, are 
very beautiful.” And we know what sort of things poets say. 
And shall no one be amazed at the prophets of God Almighty 
becoming the organs of the divine voice ? 

Having then moulded, as it were, a statue of the Gnostic, 
we have now shown who he is ; indicating in outline, as it \ 
were, both the greatness and beauty of his character. What 
he is as to the study of physical phenomena shall be shown 
afterwards, when we begin to treat of the creation of the 
world. 

1 Following Hervetus, the Latin translator, who interpolates into the 
text here, as seems necessary, oi (pi'hoooQoi rols'"E'A^nai. 

BOOK TIL 

CHAPTER I. 

THE GNOSTIC A TRUE WORSHIPPER OF GOD, AND UNJUSTLY 
CALUMNIATED BY UNBELIEVERS AS AN ATHEIST. 

T is now time to show the Greeks that the Gnostic 
alone is truly pious ; so that the philosophers, 
learning of what description the true Christian is, 
may condemn their own stupidity in x’ashly and 
inconsiderately persecuting the [Christian] name, and with- 
out reason calling those impious who -know the true God. 
And clearer arguments must be employed, I reckon, with the 
philosophers, so that they may be able, from the exercise 
they have already had through their own training, to under- 
stand, although they have not yet shown themselves worthy 
to partake of the power of believing. 

The prophetic sayings we shall not at present advert to, 
as we are to avail ourselves of the Scriptures subsequently 
at the proper places. But we shall point out summarily the 
points indicated by them, in our delineation of Christianity, 
so that by taking the Scriptures at once (especially as they 
do not yet comprehend their utterances), we may not inter- 
rupt the continuity of the discourse. But after pointing out 
the things indicated, proofs shall be shown in abundance to 
those who have believed. 

But if the assertions made by us appear to certain of the 
multitude to be different from the Scriptures of the Lord, 
let it be known that it is from that source that they have 

406 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

407 

breath and life ; and taking their rise from them, they pro- 
fess to adduce the sense only, not the words. For further 
treatment, not being seasonable, will rightly appear super- 
fluous. Thus, not to look at what is urgent would be 
excessively indolent and defective ; and u blessed, in truth, 
are they who, investigating the testimonies of the Lord, shall 
seek Him with their whole heart.” 1 And the law and the 
prophets witness of the Lord. 

It is, then, our purpose to prove that the Gnostic alone is 
holy and pious, and worships the true God in a manner 
worthy of Him ; and that worship meet for God is followed 
by loving and being loved by God. He accordingly judges 
all excellence to be honourable according to its worth ; and 
judges that among the objects perceived by our senses, we 
are to esteem rulers, and parents, and every one advanced 
in years ; and among subjects of instruction, the most ancient 
philosophy and primeval prophecy ; and among intellectual 
ideas, what is oldest in origin, the timeless and unoriginated 
First Principle, and Beginning of existences — the Son — from 
whom we are to learn the remoter Cause, the Father of the 
universe, the most ancient and the most beneficent of all ; 
not capable of expi’ession by the voice, but to be reverenced 
with reverence, and silence, and holy wonder, and supremely 
venerated ; declared by the Lord, as far as those who learned 
were capable of comprehending, and understood by those 
chosen by the Lord to knowledge ; u whose senses,” says the 
apostle, u were exercised.” 2 

The service of God, then, in the case of the Gnostic, is his 
soul’s continual study 3 and occupation, bestowed on the Deity 
in ceaseless love. For of the service bestowed on men, one 
kind is that whose aim is impi’ovement, the other ministerial. 
The improvement of the body is the object of the medical 
art, of the soul of philosophy. Ministerial service is rendered 
to parents by children, to rulers by subjects. 

Similarly, also, in the church, the elders attend to the 

1 Ps. cxix. 2. 2 Heb. v. 14. 

3 Or, as rendered by the Latin translator, “ continual care for his 
soul and occupation, bestowed on the Deity,” etc. 

408 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

department which has improvement for its object ; and the 
deacons to the ministerial. In both these ministries the 
angels serve God, in the management of earthly affairs ; 
and the Gnostic himself ministers to God, and exhibits to 
men the scheme of improvement, in the way in which he 
has been appointed to discipline men for their amendment. 
For he is alone pious that serves God rightly and unblame- 
ably in human affairs. For as that treatment of plants is 
best through which their fruits are produced and gathered 
in, through knowledge and skill in husbandry, affording men 
the benefit accruing from them ; so the piety of the Gnostic, 
taking to itself the fruits of the men who by his means have 
believed, when not a few attain to knowledge and are saved 
by it, achieves by his skill the best harvest. And as godli- 
ness (0eo7rpe7reia) is the habit which preserves what is be- 
coming to God, the godly man is the only lover of God. 
And such will he be who knows what is becoming, both in 
respect of knowledge and of the life which must be lived 
by him, who is destined to be divine (#ea>), and is already 
being assimilated to God. So then he is in the first place 
a lover of God. For as he who honours his father is a 
lover of his father, so he who honours God is a lover of 
God. 

Thus also it appears to me that there are three effects of 
gnostic power : the knowledge of things ; second, the per- 
formance of whatever the Word suggests; and the third, 
the capability of delivering, in a way suitable to God, the 
secrets veiled in the truth. 

He, then, who is persuaded that God is omnipotent, and 
has learned the divine mysteries from His only-begotten Son, 
how can he be an atheist (a#eo?)? For he is an atheist who 
thinks that God does not exist. And he is superstitious who 
dreads the demons ; who deifies all things, both wood and 
stone ; and reduces to bondage spirit, and man who possesses 
the life of reason . 1 

1 Potter’s text has x.ct'rctbihov'Aapivov — which Lowth changes into 
r.uTu'dioovXayAvog, nominative ; and this has been adopted in the trans- 
lation. The thought is the same as in vol. i. p. 23. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

400 

CHAPTEK II. 

THE SON THE RULER AND SAVIOUR OF ALL. 

To know 1 God is, then, the first step of faith ; then, through 
confidence in the teaching of the Saviour, to consider the 
doing of wrong in any way as not suitable to the knowledge 
of God. 

So the best thing on earth is the most pious man ; and the 
best thing in heaven, the nearer in place and purer, is an 
angel, the partaker of the eternal and blessed life. But the 
nature of the Son, which is nearest to Him who is alone the 
Almighty One, is the most perfect, and most holy, and most 
potent, and most princely, and most kingly, and most bene- 
ficent. This is the highest excellence, which orders all things 
in accordance with the Father’s will, and holds the helm of 
the universe in the best way, with unwearied and tireless 
power, working all things in which it operates, keeping in 
view its hidden designs. For from Ilis own point of view 
the Son of God is never displaced ; not being divided, not 
severed, not passing from place to place ; being always every- 
where, and being contained nowhere ; complete mind, the 
complete paternal light ; all eyes, seeing all things, hearing 
all things, knowing all things, by His power scrutinizing the 
powers. To Him is placed in subjection all the host of angels 
and gods; He, the paternal Word, exhibiting 2 the holy admi- 
nistration for Him who put [all] in subjection to Him. % 

Wherefore also all men are His ; some through knowledge, 
and others not yet so ; and some as friends, some as faithful 
servants, some as servants merely. This is the Teacher, who 
trains the Gnostic by mysteries, and the believer by good 
hopes, and the hard of heart by corrective discipline through 

1 This sentence has been thus rendered by Sylburgius and by Bp. 

Kaye. Lowth, however, suggests the supplying of Ivspysl, or something 
similar, to govern confidence. 

2 ’ Ai/cc^stypiiva. Instead of this, dvc^i'htyyAva, “ having received,” 
has been suggested by Sylburgius. 

410 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

sensible operation. Tlience His providence is in private, in 
public, and everywhere. 

And that He whom we call Saviour and Lord is the Son 
of God, the prophetic Scriptures explicitly prove. So the 
Lord of all, of Greeks and of Barbarians, persuades those 
who are willing. For 'He does not compel him 1 who (through 
choosing and fulfilling, from Him, what pertains to laying 
hold of it the hope) is able to receive salvation from Him. 

It is He who also gave philosophy to the Greeks by means 
of the inferior angels. For by an ancient and divine order 
the angels are distributed among the nations . 2 But the glory 
of those who believe is “ the Lord’s portion.” For either the 
Lord does not care for all men ; and this is the case either 
because He is unable (which is not to be thought, for it would 
be a proof of weakness), or because He is unwilling, which is 
not the attribute of a good being. And He who for our sakes 
assumed flesh capable of suffering, is far from being luxuri- 
ously indolent. Or He does care for all, which is befitting 
for Him w'ho has become Lord of all. For He is Saviour ; 
not [the Saviour] of some, and of others not. But in pro- 
portion to the adaptation possessed by each, He has dispensed 
His beneficence both to Greeks and Barbarians, even to those 
of them that were predestinated, and in due time called, the 
faithful and elect. Nor can He who called all equally, and 
assigned special honours to those who have believed in a 
specially excellent way, ever envy any. Nor can He who is 
the Lord of all, and serves above all the will of the good and 
almighty Father, ever be hindered by another. But neither 
does envy touch the Lord, who without beginning w'as im- 
passible ; nor are the things of men such as to be envied by 
the Lord. But it is another, he whom passion hath touched, 
who envies. And it cannot be said that it is from ignorance 
that the Lord is not willing to save humanity, because He 

1 By omitting “ him” (rov), as Sylburgius does, the translation would 
run thus: “For He compels nb one to receive salvation from Him, 
because he is able to choose and fulfil from himself what pertains to 
the laying hold of the hope.” 

2 Deut. xxxii. 8, 9, Septuagint, quoted already more than once. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

411 

knows not how each one is to be cared for. For ignorance 
applies not to the God who, before the foundation of the 
world, was the counsellor of the Father. For He was the 
Wisdom a in which” the Sovereign God “delighted .” 1 For 
the Son is the power of God, as being the Father’s most 
ancient Word before the production of all things, and His 
Wisdom. He is theiy properly called the Teacher of the 
beings .formed by Him. Nor does He ever abandon care 
for men, by being drawn aside from pleasure, who, having 
assumed flesh, which by nature is susceptible of suffering, 
trained it to the condition of impassibility. 

And how is He Saviour and Lord, if not the Saviour and 
Lord of all ? But He is the Saviour of those who have 
believed, because of their wishing to know ; and the Lord of 
those who have not believed, till, being enabled to confess 
Him, they obtain the peculiar and appropriate boon which 
comes by Him. 

Now the energy of the Lord has a reference to the 
Almighty; and the Son is, so to speak, an energy of the 
Father. Therefore, a hater of man, the Saviour can never 
be ; who, for His exceeding love to human flesh, despising 
not its susceptibility to suffering, but investing Himself with 
it, came for the common salvation of men ; for the faith of 
those who have chosen it, is common. Nay more, He will 
never neglect His own work, because man alone of all the 
other living creatures was in his creation endowed with a 
conception of God. Nor can there be any other better and 
more suitable government for men than that which is ap- 
pointed by God. 

It is then always proper for the one who is superior by 
nature to be over the inferior, and for him who is capable of 
managing aught well to have the management of it assigned 
to him. Now that which truly rules and presides is the Divine 
Word and His providence, which inspects all things, and de- 
spises the care of nothing belonging to it. 

Those, then, who choose to belong to Him, are those who 
are perfected through faith. He, the Son, is, by the will 

1 Prov. viii. 30. 

412 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

> 

of the Almighty Father, the cause of all good things, being 
the first efficient cause of motion — a power incapable of being 
apprehended by sensation. For what He was, was not seen 
by those who, through the weakness of the flesh, were in- 
capable of taking in [the reality]. But, having assumed 
— sensitive flesh, He came to show man what was possible 
through obedience to the commandments. Being, then, the 
Father’s power, He easily prevails in what He wishes, leaving 
not even the minutest point of His administration unattended 
to. For otherwise the whole would not have been well 
executed by Him. 

But, as I think, characteristic of the highest power is the ac- 
curate scrutiny of all the parts, reaching even to the minutest, 
terminating in the first Administrator of the universe, who 
by the will of the Father directs the salvation of all ; some 
overlooking, who are set under others, who are set over them, 
till you come to the great High Priest. For on one original 
first Principle, which acts according to the [Father’s] will, 
the first and the second and the third depend. Then at the 
highest extremity of the visible world is the blessed band 
of angels ; and down to ourselves there are ranged, some 
under others, those who, from One and by One, both are 
saved and save. 

As, then, the minutest particle of steel is moved by the 
spirit of the Heraclean stone , 1 when diffused 2 over many 
steel rings ; so also, attracted by the Holy Spirit, the virtuous 
are added by affinity to the first abode, and the others in 
succession down to the last. But those who are bad from 
infirmity, having fallen from vicious insatiableness into a 
depraved state, neither controlling nor controlled, rush round 
and round, whirled about by the passions, and fall down to 
the ground. 

For this was the law from the first, that virtue should be 
the object of voluntary choice. Wherefore also the com- 
mandments, according to the Law, and before the Law, not 

1 The magnet. 

2 Lowth here reads sxretvofiiua, 
exTstvofttyn, as in the Oxford text. 

agreeing with 

7vivy.ctTt, instead of 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

413 

given to the upright (for the law is not appointed for a 
righteous man 1 ), ordained that he should receive eternal life 
and the blessed prize, who chose them. 

But, on the other hand, they allowed him who had been 
delighted with vice to consort with the objects of his choice ; 
and, on the other hand, that the soul, which is ever improv- 
ing in the acquisition 2 of virtue and the increase of right- 
eousness, should obtain a better place in the universe, as 
tending in each step of advancement towards the habit of 
impassibility, till “it come to a perfect man ,” 3 to the excel- 
lence at once of knowledge and of inheritance. 

These salutary revolutions, in accordance with the order 
of change, are distinguished both by times, and places, and 
honours, and cognitions, and heritages, and ministries, ac- 
cording to the particular order of each change, up to the 
transcendent and continual contemplation of the Lord in 
eternity. 

Now that which is lovable leads, to the contemplation of 
itself, each one who, from love of knowledge, applies him- 
self entirely to contemplation. Wherefore also the Lord, 
drawing the commandments, both the first which He gave, 
and the second, from one fountain, neither allowed those 
who were before the law to be without law, nor permitted 
those who were unacquainted with the principles of the 
Barbarian philosophy to be without restraint. For, having 
furnished the one with the commandments, and the other 
with philosophy, He shut up unbelief to the Advent. Whence 4 
every one who believes not is without excuse. For by a 
different process of advancement, both Greek and Barbarian, 
He leads to the perfection which is by faith. 

And if any one of the Greeks, passing over the preliminary 
training of the Hellenic philosophy, proceeds directly to the 

1 1 Tim. i. 9. 

2 Instead of the corrupt reading of the text, WUr-Aaiv (as 

above), Wihoaiv, and i% > k^rtynatv have been proposed. 

3 Eph. iv. 13. 

4 The text has ore, but the sense seems to require, as Sylburgius sug- 
gests, ohu or a art. 

414 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vix. 

true teaching, he distances others, though an unlettered man, 
by choosing 1 the compendious process of salvation by faith 
to perfection. 

Evei'ything, then, which did not hinder a man’s choice 
from being fi'ee, He made and rendered auxiliary to virtue, 
in order that there might be revealed somehow or other, even 
to those capable of seeing but dimly, the one only almighty, 
good God — from eternity to eternity saving by His Son. 

And, on the other hand, He is in no respect whatever the 
cause of evil. For all things are arranged with a view to 
the salvation of the universe by the Lord of the universe, 
both generally and particularly. It is then the function of 
the righteousness of salvation to improve everything as far 
as practicable. For even minor matters are ai'ranged with 
a view to the salvation of that which is better, and for an 
abode suitable for people’s character. Now everything that 
is virtuous changes for the better ; having as the proper 2 
cause of change the fi'ee choice of knowledge, which the 
soul has in its own power. But necessary corrections, thi'ough 
the goodness of the great overseeing Judge, both by the 
attendant angels, and by various acts of anticipative judg- 
ment, and by the perfect judgment, compel egregious sinners 
to repent. 

CHAPTER III. 

THE GNOSTIC AIMS AT THE NEAREST LIKENESS POSSIBLE 
TO GOD AND HIS SON. 

Now I pass over other things in silence, gloi’ifying the Lord. 
But I affirm that gnostic souls, that sui'pass in the grandeur 
of contemplation the mode of life of each of the holy ranks, 
among whom the blessed abodes of the gods are allotted by 

1 Instead of ihofievog, Sylburgius proposes M.dusyoc, making a leap by 
faith to perfection. 

2 The reading varies here. For oUfoet; of the text, Heinsius and the 
Latin translator adopt o Udctv, which, on the whole, seems preferable to 
otKYiaiv or Ytxovarig. 

Book vii.] 

TI1E MISCELLANIES. 

415 

distribution, reckoned holy among the holy, transferred en- 
tire from among the entire, reaching places better than the 
better places, embracing the divine vision not in mirrors or 
by means of mirrors, but in the transcendently clear and 
absolutely pure insatiable vision which is the privilege of in- 
tensely loving souls, holding festival through endless ages, 
remain honoured with the identity of all excellence. Such 
is the vision attainable by “ the pure in heart .” 1 This is the 
function of the Gnostic, who has been perfected, to have con- 
verse with God through the great High Priest, being made 
like the Lord, up to the measure of his capacity, in the whole 
service of God, which tends to the salvation of men, through 
care of the beneficence which has us for its object; and on 
the other side through worship, through teaching and through 
beneficence in deeds. The Gnostic even forms and creates 
himself; and besides also, he, like to God, adorns those who 
hear him ; assimilating as far as possible the moderation 
which, arising from practice, tends to impassibility, to Him 
who by nature possesses impassibility ; and especially having 
uninterrupted converse and fellowship with the Lord. Mild- 
ness, I think, and philanthropy, and eminent piety, are the 
rules of gnostic assimilation. I affirm that these virtues 
“are a sacrifice acceptable in the sight of God ;” 2 Scrip- 
ture alleging that “ the humble heart with right knowledge 
is the holocaust of God ;” 3 each man who is admitted to 
holiness being illuminated in order to indissoluble union. 

For “to bring themselves into captivity,” and to slay 
themselves, putting to death “ the old man, who is through 
lusts corrupt,” and raising the new man from death, “ from 
the old conversation,” by abandoning the passions, and be- 
coming free of sin, both the Gospel and the apostle enjoin . 4 

It was this, consequently, which the Law intimated, by 
ordering the sinner to be cut off, and translated from death 
to life, to the impassibility that is the result of faith ; which 
the teachers of the Law, not comprehending, inasmuch as they 
regarded the law as contentious, they have given a handle to 

1 Matt. v. 8. 2 Phil. iv. 18. 3 Ps. li. 17, 19. 

4 Rom. vi. 6, 7 ; 2 Cor. x. 5 ; Eph. v. 22-24 ; Col. iii. 8, 9, etc. 

416 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book yii. 

those who attempt idly to calumniate the Law. And for 
this reason we rightly do not sacrifice to God, who, needing 
nothing, supplies all men with all things ; hut we glorify 
Him who gave Himself in sacrifice for us, we also sacrificing 
ourselves; from that which needs nothing to that which 
needs nothing, and to that which is impassible from that 
which is impassible. For in our salvation alone God delights. 
We do not therefore, and with reason too, offer sacrifice to 
Him who is not overcome by pleasures, inasmuch as the 
fumes of the smoke stop far beneath, and do not even x’each 
the thickest clouds ; but those they reach are far from them. 
The Deity neither is, then, in want of aught, nor loves plea- 
sure, or gain, or money, being full, and supplying all things 
to everything that has received being and has wants. And 
neither by sacrifices nor offerings, nor on the other hand by 
glory and honour, is the Deity won over; nor is He influenced 
by any such things ; but He appears only to excellent and 
good men, who will never betray justice for threatened fear, 
nor by the promise of considerable gifts. 

But those who have not seen the self-determination of the 
human soul, and its incapability of being treated as a slave 
in what respects the choice of life, being disgusted at what is 
done through rude injustice, do not think that there is a God. 
On a par with these in opinion, are they who, falling into 
licentiousness in pleasures, and grievous pains, and unlooked- 
for accidents, and bidding defiance to events, say that there 
is no God, or that, though existing, He does not oversee all 
things. And others there are, who are persuaded that those 
they reckon gods are capable of being prevailed upon by sacri- 
fices and gifts, favouring, so to speak, their profligacies ; and 
will not believe that He is the only true God, who exists in 
the invariableness of righteous goodness. 

The Gnostic, then, is pious, who cares first for himself, 
then for his neighbours, that they may become very good. 
For the son gratifies a good father, by showing himself good 
and like his father; and in like manner the subject, the 
governor. For believing and obeying are in our own power. 

But should any one suppose the cause of evils to be the 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

417 

weakness of matter, and the involuntary impulses of igno- 
rance, and (in his stupidity) irrational necessities; he who 
has become a Gnostic has through instruction superiority 
over these, as if they were wild beasts ; and in imitation of 
the divine plan, he does good to such as are willing, as far as 
he can. And if ever placed in authority, like Moses, he will 
rule for the salvation of the governed ; and will tame wildness 
and faithlessness, by recording honour for the most excellent, 
and punishment for the wicked, in accordance with reason for 
the sake of discipline. 

For pre-eminently a divine image, resembling God, is the 
soul of a righteous man ; in which, through obedience to the 
commands, as in a consecrated spot, is enclosed and enshrined 
the Leader of mortals and of immortals, King and Parent of 
what is good, who is truly law, and right, and eternal Word, 
being the one Saviour individually to each, and in common 
to all. 

He is the true Only-begotten, the express image of the 
glory of the universal King and Almighty Father, who 
impresses on the Gnostic the seal of the perfect contempla- 
tion, according to His own image ; so that there is now a 
third divine image, made as far as possible like the Second 
Cause, the Essential Life, through which we live the true 
life; the Gnostic, as we regard him, being described as mov- 
ing amid things sure and wholly immutable. 

Puling, then, over himself and what belongs to him, and- 
possessing a sure grasp of divine science, he makes a genuine 
approach to the truth. For the knowledge and apprehen- 
sion of intellectual objects must necessarily be called certain 
scientific knowledge, whose function in reference to divine 
things is to consider what is the First Cause, and what 
that u by whom all things were made, and without whom 
nothing was made;” 1 and what things, on the other hand, 
are as pervasive, and what as comprehensive ; what con- 
joined, what disjoined ; and what is the position which each 
one of them holds, and what power and what service each 
contributes. And again, among human things, what man 

CLEM. — YOL. II. 

418 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vir. 

himself is, and what he has naturally or preternaturally ; and 
how, again, it becomes him to do or to suffer; and what are 
bis virtues and what his vices ; and about things good, bad, 
and indifferent; also about fortitude, and prudence, and self- 
restraint, and the virtue which is in all respects complete, 
namely, righteousness. 

F urther, he employs prudence and righteousness in the ac- 
quisition of wisdom, and fortitude, not only in the endurance 
of circumstances, but also in restraining 1 pleasure and desire, 
grief and anger ; and, in general, to withstand 2 everything 
which either by any force or fraud entices us. For it is not 
necessary to endure vices and virtues, but it is to be per- 
suaded to bear things that inspire fear. 

Accordingly, pain is found beneficial in the healing art, and in 
discipline, and in punishment; and by it men’s manners are cor- 
rected to their advantage. Forms of fortitude are endurance, 
magnanimity, high spirit, liberality, and grandeur. And for 
this reason he neither meets with the blame or the bad opinion 
of the multitude ; nor is he subjected to opinions or flatteries. 
But in the endurance of toils and at the same time 3 in the dis- 
charge of any duty, and in his manly superiority to all circum- 
stances, he appears truly a man (avrjp) among the rest of human 
beings. And, on the other hand, maintaining prudence, he 
exercises moderation in the calmness of his soul ; receptive of 
what is commanded, as of what belongs to him, entertaining 
aversion to what is base, as alien to him ; become decorous 
and supramundane , 4 he does everything with decorum and in 
order, and transgresses in no respect, and in nothing. Bich 
he is in the highest degree in desiring nothing, as having 
few wants ; and being in the midst of abundance of all good 
through the knowledge of the good. For it is the first effect 
of his righteousness, to love to spend his time and associate 

1 x.pc&Tth is here supplied to complete the sense. 

2 duTiTty-aaevdeu is suggested instead of d.vTiTu.ooi-<x.t of the text. 

3 cl/^oc. is here, on the authority of a MS., and with the approval of 
Sylburgius, to be substituted for d-K^a.. 

4 mg/mo; Kod inrepx.d<r/iuos. The author plays on the double meaning of 
x.c 'oftos, world or order. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

419 

with those of his own race both in earth and heaven. So also 
he is liberal of what he possesses. And being a lover of men, 
he is a hater of the wicked, entertaining a perfect aversion to 
all villany. He must consequently learn to be faithful both to 1 
himself and to his neighbours, and obedient to the command- 
ments. For he is the true servant of God who spontaneously 
subjects himself to His commands. And he who already, not 
through the commandments, but through knowledge itself, is 
pure in heart, is the friend of God. For neither are we born by 
nature possessing virtue, nor after we are boi’n does it grow 
naturally, as certain parts of the body ; since then it would 
neither be voluntary nor praiseworthy. Nor is virtue, like 
speech, perfected by the practice that results from every-day 
occurrences (for this is very much the way in which vice ori- ’ 
ginates). For it is not by any art, either those of acquisition, 
or those which relate to the care of the body, that knowledge 
is attained. No more is it from the curriculum of instruction. 
For that is satisfied if it can only prepare and sharpen the 
soul. For the laws of the state are perchance able to re- 
strain bad actions ; but persuasive words, which but touch the 
surface, cannot produce a scientific permanence of the truth. 

Now the Greek philosophy, as it were,* purges the soul, 
and prepares it beforehand for the reception of faith, on 
which the Truth builds up the edifice of knowledge. 

This is the true athlete — he who in the great stadium, the 
fair world, is crowned for the true victory over all the pas- 
sions. For He who prescribes the contest is the Almighty 
God, and He who awards the prize is the only-begotten Son 
of God. Angels and gods are spectators ; and the contest, 
embracing all the varied exercises, is “ not against flesh and 
blood,” 1 but against the spiritual powers of inordinate pas- 
sions that work~tlifbugh the flesh. He who obtains the 
mastery in these struggles, and overthrows the tempter, 
menacing, as it were, with certain contests, wins immortality. 
For the sentence of God in most righteous judgment is in- 
fallible. The spectators 2 are summoned to the contest, and the 

1 Eph. vi. 12. 

2 to diccrpo v used for the place, the spectacle, and the spectators. 

420 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

athletes contend in the stadium ; the one, who has obeyed 
the directions of the trainer, wins the day. For to all, all 
rewax’ds proposed by God are equal ; and He Himself is 
unimpeachable. And he who has power receives mercy, and 
he that has exercised will is mighty. 

So also we have received mind, that we may know what 
we do. And the maxim “Know thyself” means here to 
know for what we are born. And we are born to obey the 
commandments, if we choose to be willing to be saved. Such 
is the Nemesis , 1 through which there is no escaping from 
God. Man’s duty, then, is obedience to God, who has pro- 
claimed salvation manifold by the commandments. And 
confession is thanksgiving. For the beneficent first begins 
to do good. And he who on fitting considerations readily 
receives and keeps the commandments, is faithful (Tncnos) ; 
and he who by love requites benefits as far as he is able, is 
already a friend. One recompense on the part of men is of 
paramount importance — the doing of what is pleasing to God. 
As being His own production, and a result akin to Himself, 
the Teacher and Saviour receives acts of assistance and of 
improvement on the part of men as a personal favour and 
honour; as also He regards the injuries inflicted on those 
who believe on Him as ingratitude and dishonour to Him- 
self. For what other dishonour can touch God ? Wherefore 
it is impossible to render a recompense at all equivalent to the 
boon received from the Lord. 

And as those who maltreat property insult the owners, and 
those who maltreat soldiers insult the commander, so also the 
ill-usage of His consecrated ones is contempt for the Lord. 

For, just as the sun not only illumines heaven and the 
whole world, shining over land and sea, but also through 
windows and small chinks sends his beams into the inner- 
most recesses of houses, so the Word diffused everywhere 
casts His eye-glance on the minutest circumstances of the 
actions of life. 

1 ' A'opxrjrax, a name given to Nemesis, said to be from an altar 
erected to her by Adrastus ; but as used here, and when employed as an 
adjective qualifying Nemesis, it has reference to ot'opxay.u. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

421 

CHAPTER IV. 

THE HEATHENS MADE GODS LIKE THEMSELVES, WHENCE 

SPRINGS ALL SUPERSTITION. 

* 

Now, as the Greeks represent the gods as possessing human 
forms, so also do they as possessing human passions. And as 
each of them depict their forms similar to themselves, as Xeno- 
phanes says, “ Ethiopians as black and apes, the Thracians 
ruddy and tawny so also they assimilate their souls to those 
who form them : the Barbarians, for instance, who make them 
savage and wild ; and the Greeks, who make them more 
civilised, yet subject to passion. 

Wherefore it stands to reason, that the ideas entertained 
of God by wicked men must be bad, and those by good men 
most excellent. And therefore he who is in soul truly kingly 
and gnostic, being likewise pious and free from superstition, 
is persuaded that He who alone is God is honourable, vene- 
rable, august, beneficent, the doer of good, the author of all 
good things, but not the cause of evil. And respecting the 
Hellenic superstition we have, as I think, shown enough in 
the book entitled by us The Exhortation, availing ourselves 
abundantly of the history bearing on the point. There is no 
need, then, again to make a long story of what has already 
been clearly stated. But in as far as necessity requires to be 
pointed out on coming to the topic, suffice it to adduce a few 
out of many considerations in proof of the impiety of those 
who make the Divinity resemble the worst men. For either 
those gods of theirs are injured by men, and are shown to be 
inferior to men on being injured by us ; or, if not so, how is 
it that they are incensed at those by whom they are not 
injured, like a testy old wife roused to wrath? 

As they say that Artemis was enraged at the ^Etolians on 
account of CEneus . 1 For how, being a goddess, did she not 
consider that he had neglected to sacrifice, not through con- 
tempt, but out of inadvertence, or under the idea that he had 
sacrificed ? 

1 Iliad , x. 929. 

422 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

And Latona , 1 arguing her case with Athene, on account of 
the latter being incensed at her for having brought forth in 
the temple, says : 

“ Man-slaying spoils 

Torn from tlje dead you love to see. And these 
To you are not unclean. But you regard 
My parturition here a horrid thing, 

Though other creatures in the temple do 
No harm by bringing forth their young.” 

It is natural, then, that having a superstitious dread of those 
irascible [gods], they imagine that all events are signs and 
causes of evils. If a mouse bore through an altar built of 
clay, and for want of something else gnaw through an oil 
flask ; if a cock that is being fattened crow in the evening, 
they determine this to be a sign of something. 

Of such a one Menander gives a comic description in 
The Superstitious Man : 

“ A. Good luck be mine, ye honoured gods! 

Tying my right shoe’s string, 

I broke it.” 

“ B. Most likely, silly fool, 

For it was rotten, and you, niggard, you 
Would not buy new ones.” 2 

It was a clever remark of Antiphon, who (when one regarded 
it as an ill omen that the sow had eaten her pigs), on seeing 
her emaciated through the niggardliness of the person that 
kept her, said, Congratulate yourself on the omen that, being 
so hungry, she did not eat your own children. 

u And what wonder is it,” says Bion, “ if the mouse, find- 
ing nothing to eat, gnaws the bag ? ” F or it were wonderful if 
(as Ajrcesilaus argued in fun) “ the bag had eaten the mouse.” 

Diogenes accordingly remarked well to one who wondered 
at finding a serpent coiled round a pestle : “ Don’t wonder ; 
for it would have been more surprising if you had seen the 
pestle coiled round the serpent, and the serpent straight.” 

1 The text has ' H uvt% which is plainly unsuitable ; hence the sugges- 
tion Ayjto). 

2 These lines are quoted by Theodoret, and have been amended and 
arranged by Sylburgius and Grotius. The text has ’Aycctiov n ; Theodoret 
and Grotius omit ri as above. 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

423 

Book vii.] 

t 

For the irrational creatures must run, and scamper, and 
fight, and breed, and die ; and these things being natural to 
them, can never be unnatural to us. 

“ And many birds beneath the sunbeams walk.” 1 

And the comic poet Philemon treats such points in comedy : 

‘ 1 When I see one who watches who has sneezed, 

Or who has spoke; or looking, who goes on, 

I straightway in the market sell him off. 

Each one of us walks, talks, and sneezes too, 

For his own self, not for the citizens: 

According to their nature things turn out.” 

Then by the practice of temperance men seek health ; and 
by cramming themselves, and wallowing in potations at feasts, 
they attract diseases. 

There are many, too, that dread inscriptions set up. Very 
cleverly Diogenes, on finding in the house of a bad man the 
inscription, “ Hercules, for victory famed, dwells here ; let 
nothing bad enter,” remarked, u And how shall the master 
of the house go in?” 

The same people, who worship every stick and greasy 
stone, as the saying is, dread tufts of tawny wool, and lumps 
of salt, and torches, and squills, and sulphur, bewitched by 
sorcerers, in certain impure rites of expiation. But God, the 
true God, recognises as holy only the character of the right- 
eous man, — as unholy, wrong and wickedness. 

You may see the eggs , 2 taken from those who have been 
purified, hatched if subjected to the necessary warmth. But 
this could not take place if they had had transferred to 
them the sins of the man that had undergone purification. 
Accordingly the comic poet Diphilus facetiously writes, in 
comedy, of sorcerers, in the following w r ords : 

“ Purifying Prcetus’ daughters, and their father 
Proetus Abantades, and fifth, an old wife to boot, 

So many people’s persons with one torch, one squill, 

With sulphur and asphalt of the loud-sounding sea, 

From the placid-flowing, deep-flowing ocean. 

1 Odyss. i. 181. 

2 Which were used in lustrations, u». The text has on a.. 

424 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

But blest air through the clouds send Anticyra 
That I may make this bug into a drone.” 

For well Menander remarks : l 

“ Had you, 0 Phidias, any real ill, 

You needs must seek for it areal cure ; 

Now ’tis not so. And for the unreal ill 
I’ve found an unreal cure. Believe that it 
Will do thee good. Let women in a ring 
Wipe thee, and from three fountains water bring. 

Add salt and lentils ; sprinkle then thyself. 

Each one is pure, who’s conscious of no sin.” 

For instance, the tragedy says : 

Menelaus. “ What disease, Orestes, is destroying thee?” 

Orestes. “ Conscience. For horrid deeds I know I’ve done.” 2 

For in reality there is no other purity but abstinence from 
sins. Excellently then Epicharmus says : 

“ If a pure mind thou hast, 

In thy whole body thou art pure.” 

Now also we say that it is requisite to purify the soul from 
corrupt and had doctrines by right reason ; and so there- 
after to the recollection of the principal heads of doctrine. 
Since also before the communication of the mysteries they 
think it right to apply certain purifications to those who are 
to be initiated ; so it is requisite for men to abandon impious 
opinion, and thus turn to the true tradition. 

CHAPTER V. 

THE HOLY SOUL A MORE EXCELLENT TEMPLE THAN ANY 
EDIFICE BUILT BY MAN. 

For is it not the case that rightly and truly we do not cir- 
cumscribe in any place that which cannot be circumscribed ; 
nor do we shut up in temples made with hands that which 
contains all things? What work of builders, and stone- 
cutters, and mechanical art can be holy ? Superior to these 
are not they who think that the air, and the enclosing space, 

1 Translated as arranged and amended by Grotius. 

2 Euripides, Orestes, v. 477. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

425 

or rather the whole world and the universe, are meet for 
the excellency of God ? 

It were indeed ridiculous, as the philosophers themselves 
say, for man, the plaything 1 of God, to make God, and for 
God to be the plaything 2 of art ; since what is made is 
similar and the same to that of which it is made, as that 
which is made of ivory is ivory, and that which is made of 
gold golden. Now the images and temples constructed by 
mechanics are made of inert matter; so that they too are 
inert, and material, and profane ; and if you perfect the art, 
they partake of mechanical coarseness. Works of art cannot 
then be sacred and divine. 

And what can be localized, there being nothing that is not 
localized ? Since all things are in a place. And that which 
is localized having been formerly not localized, is localized 
by something. If, then, God is localized by men, He was 
once not localized, and did not exist at all. For the non- 
existent is what is not localized ; since whatever does not 
exist is not localized. And what exists cannot be localized 
by what does not exist; nor by another entity. For it is 
also an entity. It follows that it must be by itself. And 
how shall anything generate itself ? Or how shall that 
which exists place itself as to being? Whether, being for- 
merly not localized, has it localized itself ? But it was not 
in existence ; since what exists not is not localized. And its 
localization being supposed, how can it afterwards make 
itself what it previously was ? 

But how can He, to whom the things that are belong, 
need anything? But were God possessed of a human form, 
He would need, equally with man, food, and shelter, and 
house, and the attendant incidents. Those who are like in 
form and affections will require similar sustenance. And if 
sacred (to iepov) has a twofold application, designating both 
God Himself and the structure raised to His honour , 3 how 

1 A Platonic phrase : vxiyviov ®eov. 

2 So Sylburgius, who, instead of Trxtoiu; of the text, reads 

Tdibixv Tiy,vri;. 

3 God Himself is iipog, and everything dedicated to Him. 

426 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

shall we not with propriety call the church holy, through 
knowledge, made for the honour of God, sacred ( lepov ) to 
God, of great value, and not constructed by mechanical art, 
nor embellished by the hand of an impostor, but by the will 
of God fashioned into a temple ? For it is not now the place, 
but the assemblage of the elect , 1 that I call the church. 
This temple is better for the reception of the greatness of 
the dignity of God. For the living creature which is of 
high value, is made sacred by that which is worth all, or 
rather which has no equivalent, in virtue of the exceeding 
sanctity of the latter. Now this is the Gnostic, who is of 
great value, who is honoured by God, in whom God is en- 
shrined, that is, the knowledge respecting God is consecrated. 
Here, too, we shall find the divine likeness and the holy image 
in the righteous soul, when it is blessed in being purified and 
performing blessed deeds. Here also we shall find that which 
is localized, and that which is being localized, — the former in 
the case of those who are already Gnostics, and the latter in 
the case of those capable of becoming so, although not yet 
worthy of receiving the knowledge of God. For every being 
destined to believe is already faithful in the sight of God, 
and set up for His honour, an image, endowed with virtue, 
dedicated to God. 

CHAPTER VI. 

PRATERS AND PRAISE FROM A PURE MIND, CEASELESSLY 
OFFERED, FAR BETTER THAN SACRIFICES. 

As, then, God is not circumscribed by place, neither is ei T er 
represented by the form of a living creature ; so neither has 
He similar passions, nor has He wants like the creatures, so 
as to desire sacrifice, from hunger, by way of food. Those 
creatures which are affected by passion are all mortal. And 
it is useless to bring food to one who is not nourished. 

1 Montacutius suggests Ikk/.y-Z-j, from its connection with ’Ekk^wix, 
instead of InhiKTav. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

427 

And that comic poet Pherecrates, in The Fugitives , face- 
tiously represents the gods themselves as finding fault with 
men on the score of their sacred rites : 

“ When to the gods you sacrifice, 

Selecting what our portion is, 

’Tis shame to tell, do ye not take, 

And both the thighs, clean to the groins, 

The loins quite bare, the backbone, too, 

Clean scrape as with a file, 

Them swallow, and the remnant give 
To us as if to dogs? And then, 

As if of one another ’shamed, 

With heaps of salted barley hide.” 1 

And Eubulus, also a comic poet, thus writes respecting 
sacrifices : 

“ But to the gods the tail alone 
And thigh, as if to peederasts you sacrifice.” 

And introducing Dionysus in Semele, he represents him dis- 
puting : 

“ First if they offer aught to me, there are 
Who offer blood, the bladder, not the heart 
Or caul. For I no flesh do ever eat 
That’s sweeter than the thigh.” 2 

And Menander writes : 

u The end of the loin, 

The bile, the bones uneatable, they set' 

Before the gods ; the rest themselves consume.” 

For is not the savour of the holocausts avoided by the beasts? 
And if in reality the savour is the guerdon of the gods of the 
Greeks, should they not first deify the cooks, who are digni- 
fied with equal happiness, and worship the chimney itself, 
which is closer still to the much-prized savour? 

And Hesiod says that Zeus, cheated in a division of flesh 
by Prometheus, received the white bones of an ox, concealed 
with cunning art, in shining fat : 

c< Whence to the immortal gods the tribes of men 
The victim’s white bones on the altars burn.” 

1 Translated as arranged by Grotius. 

2 These lines are translated as arranged by Grotius, who differs in 
some parts from the text. 

428 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vir. 

But they will by no means say that the Deity, enfeebled 
through the desire that springs from want, is nourished. 
Accordingly, they will represent Him as nourished without 
desire like a plant, and like beasts that burrow. They say 
that these grow innoxiously, nourished either by the density 
in the air, or from the exhalations proceeding from their own 
body. Though if the Deity, though needing nothing, is 
according to them nourished, what necessity has He for 
food, wanting nothing 1 ? But if, by nature needing nothing, 
He delights to be honoured, it is not without reason that we 
honour God in prayer ; and thus the best and holiest sacrifice 
with righteousness we bring, presenting it as an offering to 
the most righteous Word, by whom we receive knowledge, 
giving glory by Him for what 1 we have learned. 

The altar, then, that is with us here, the terrestrial one, is 
the congregation of those who devote themselves to prayers, 
having as it were one common voice and one mind. 

Now, if nourishing substances taken in by the nostrils are 
diviner than those taken in by the mouth, yet they infer 
respiration. What, then, do they say of God ? Whether 
does He exhale like the tribe of oaks ? 2 Or does He only 
inhale, like the aquatic animals, by the dilatation of their 
gills? Or does He breathe all round, like the insects, by 
the compression of the section by means of their wings? 
But no one, if he is in his senses, will liken God to any of 
these. 

And the creatures that breathe by the expansion of the 
lung towards the thorax draw in the air. Then if they 
assign to God viscera, and arteries, and veins, and nerves, 
and parts, they will make Him in nothing different from 
man . 3 

Now breathing together ( avfnrvoia ) is properly said of the 
church. For the sacrifice of the church is the word breath- 
ing as incense from holy souls, the sacrifice and the whole 

1 olV, substituted by Lowtli for x in the text. 

2 ^pvZv, a probable conjecture of Gataker for the reading of the text, 
Zctipcovau. 

3 dLvdpuTrov supplied by Lowtli. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

429 

mind being at tlie same time unveiled to God. Now the 
very ancient altar in Delos they celebrated as holy ; which 
alone, being undefiled by slaughter and death, they say 
Pythagoras approached. And will they not believe us when 
we say that the righteous soul is the truly sacred altar, and 
that incense arising from it is holy prayer ? But I believe 
sacrifices were invented by men to be a pretext for eating 
flesh. But without such idolatry he who wished might have 
partaken of flesh. 

For the sacrifices of the Law express figui’atively the piety 
which we practise, as the turtle-dove and the pigeon offered for 
sins point out that the cleansing of the irrational part of the 
soul is acceptable to God. But if any one of the righteous 
does not burden his soul by the eating of flesh, he has the 
advantage of a rational reason, not as Pythagoras and his 
followers dream of the transmigration of the soul. 

Now Xenocrates, treating by himself of “ the food derived 
from animals,” and Polemon in his work On Life according 
to Nature , seem clearly to say that animal food is unwholesome, 
inasmuch as it has already been elaborated and assimilated 
to the souls of the irrational creatures. 

So also, in particular, the Jews abstain from swine’s flesh 
on the ground of this animal being unclean ; since more than 
the other animals it roots up, and destroys the productions of 
the ground. But if they say that the animals were assigned 
to men — and we agree with them — yet it was not entirely 
for food. Nor was it all animals, but such as do not work. 
Wherefore the comic poet Plato says not badly in the drama 
of The Feasts : 

“ For of the quadrupeds we should not slay 
In future aught but swine. For these have flesh 
Most toothsome ; and about the pig is nought 
For us, excepting bristles, mud, and noise.” 

Whence iEsop said not badly, that “swine squeaked out 
very loudly, because, when they were dragged, they knew 
that they were good for nothing but for sacrifice.” 

Wherefore also Cleanthes says, u that they have soul 1 in- 
1 animal life. 

430 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vn. 

stead of salt,” that theif flesh may not putrefy. Some, then, 
eat them as useless, others as destructive of fruits. And 
others do not eat them, because the animal has a strong 
propensity for coition. 

So, then, the law sacrifices not the goat, except in the sole 
case of the banishment of sins ; x since pleasure is the metro- 
polis of vice. It is to the point also that it is said that the 
eating of goat’s flesh contributes to epilepsy. And they say 
that the greatest increase is produced by swine’s flesh. 
Wherefore it is beneficial to those who exercise the body ; 
but to those who devote themselves to the development of 
the soul it is not so, on account of the hebetude that results 
from the eating of flesh. Perchance also some Gnostic-will 
abstain from the eating of flesh for the sake of training, and 
in order that the flesh may not grow wanton in amorousness. 
“For wine,” says Androcydes, “ and gluttonous feeds of flesh 
make the body strong, but the soul more sluggish.” Accord- 
ingly such food, in order to clear understanding, is to be 
rejected. 

Wherefore also the Egyptians, in the purifications prac- 
tised among them, do not allow the priests to feed on 
flesh ; but they use chickens, as lightest ; and they do not 
touch fish, on account of certain fables, but especially on 
account of such food making the flesh flabby. But now 
terrestrial animals and birds breathe the same air as our 
vital spirits, being possessed of a vital principle cognate with 
the air. But it is said that fishes do not breathe this air, 
but that which was mixed with the water at the instant of 
its first creation, as well as with the rest of the elements, 
which is also a sign of the permanence of matter . 2 

Wherefore we ought to offer to God sacrifices not costly, 
but such as He loves. And that compounded incense which 
is mentioned in the Law, is that which consists of many 
tongues and voices in prayer, or rather of different nations 
and natures, prepared by the gift vouchsafed in the dispen- 

1 i.e. in the institution of the scape-goat. 

2 Or, of water. For instead of v'h ixy; in the text, it is proposed to read 
vhctTixqg. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

431 

sation for u the unity of the faith,” and brought together in 
praises, with a pure mind, and just and right conduct, from 
holy works and righteous prayer. For 

“ Who is so great a fool,” 

in the elegant language of poetry, 

“ And among men 
So very easy of belief, as think 
The gods, with fraud of fleshless bones and bile 
All burnt, not fit for hungry dogs to eat, 

Delighted are, and take this as their prize, 

And favour show to those who treat them thus,” 

though they happen to be tyrants and robbers ? 

But we say that the fire sanctifies 1 not flesh, but sinful 
souls ; meaning not the all-devouring vulgar fire, but that of 
wisdom, which pervades the soul which passes through the fire. 

CHAPTER Y II. 

WHAT SORT OF PRAYER THE GNOSTIC EMPLOYS, AND HOW 
IT IS HEARD BY GOD. 

Now we are commanded to reverence and to honour the 
same one, being persuaded that He is Word, Saviour, and 
Leader, and by Him, the Father, not on special days, as 
some others, but doing this continually in our whole life, 
and in every way. Certainly the elect race justified by the 
precept says, u Seven times a day have I praised Thee.” 2 
Whence not in a specified place, or selected temple, or at 
certain festivals and on appointed days, but during his whole 
life, the Gnostic in every place, even if he be alone by him- 
self, and wherever he has any of those who have exercised 
the like faith, honours God, that is, acknowledges his grati- 
tude for the knowledge of the way to live. 

And if the presence of a good man, through the respect 

1 Consult Matt. iii. 11 ; Luke iii. 16 ; Heb. iv. 12. 

2 Ps. cxix. 164. 

432 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vir. 

and reverence which he inspires, always improves him with 
whom he associates, with much more reason does not he who 
always holds uninterrupted converse with God by knowledge, 
life, and thanksgiving, grow at every step superior to himself 
in all respects — in conduct, in words, in disposition ? Such 
an one is persuaded that God is ever beside him, and does 
not suppose that he is confined in certain limited places ; so 
that under the idea that at times he is without him, he may 
indulge in excesses night and day. 

Holding festival, then, in our whole life, persuaded that 
God is altogether on every side present, we cultivate our 
fields, praising ; we sail the sea, hymning ; in all the rest of 
our conversation we conduct ourselves according to rule. The 
Gnostic, then, is very closely allied to God, being at once 
grave and cheerful in all things, — grave on account of the 
bent of his soul towards the Divinity, and cheerful on account 
of his consideration of the blessings of humanity which God 
hath given us. 

Now the excellence of knowledge is evidently presented by 
the prophet when he says, 11 Benignity, and instruction, and 
knowledge teach me,” 1 magnifying the supremacy of perfec- 
tion by a climax. 

He is, then, the truly kingly man ; he is the sacred high 
priest of God. And this is even now observed among the 
most sagacious of the Barbarians, in advancing the sacerdotal 
caste to the royal power. He, therefore, never surrenders 
himself to the rabble that rules supreme over the theatres, 
and gives no admittance even in a dream to the things which 
are spoken, done, and seen for the sake of alluring pleasure ; 
neither, therefore, to the pleasures of sight, nor the various 
pleasures which are found in other enjoyments, as costly 
incense and odours, which bewitch the nostrils, or prepara- 
tions of meats, and indulgences in different wines, which 
ensnare the palate, or fragrant bouquets of many flowers, 
which through the senses effeminate the soul. But always 
tracing up to God the grave enjoyment of all things, he 
offers the first-fruits of food, and drink, and unguents to the 

1 Ps. cxix. 66. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

433 

Giver of all, acknowledging his thanks in the gift and in the 
use of them by the Word given to him. He rarely goes to 
convivial banquets of all and sundry, unless the announce- 
ment to him of the friendly and harmonious character of the 
entertainment induce him to go. For he is convinced that 
God knows and perceives all things — not the words only, but 
also the thought; since even our sense of hearing, which 
acts through the passages of the body, has the apprehension 
[belonging to it] not through corporeal power, but through a 
psychical perception, and the intelligence which distinguishes 
significant sounds. God is not, then, possessed of human 
form, so as to hear ; nor needs He senses, as the Stoics have 
decided, “ especially hearing and sight ; for He could never 
otherwise apprehend.” But the susceptibility of the air, and 
the intensely keen perception of the angels, and the power 
which reaches the soul’s consciousness, by ineffable power and 
without sensible hearing, know all things at the moment of 
thought. And should any one say that the voice does not 
reach God, but is rolled downwards in the air, yet the 
thoughts of the saints cleave not the air only, but the whole 
world. And the divine power, with the speed of light, sees 
through the whole soul. Well ! Do not also volitions speak 
to God, uttering their voice ? And are they not conveyed 
hy conscience ? And what voice shall He wait for, who, ac- 
cording to His purpose, knows the elect already, even before 
his birth, knows what is to be as already existent 1 ? Does not 
the light of power shine down to the very bottom of the whole 
soul ; “ the lamp of knowledge,” as the Scripture says, search- 
ing u the recesses?” God is all ear and all eye, if we may 
be permitted to use these expressions. 

In general, then, an unworthy opinion of God preserves no 
piety, either in hymns, or discourses, or writings, or dogmas, 
but diverts to grovelling and unseemly ideas and notions. 
Whence the commendation of the multitude differs nothing 
from censui'e, in consequence of their ignorance of the truth. 
The objects, then, of desires and aspirations, and, in a word, 
of the mind’s impulses, are the subjects of prayers. Where- 
fore no man desires a draught, but to drink what is drinkable; 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 2 E 

434 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

and no man desires an inheritance, but to inherit. And in 
like manner no man desires knowledge, but to know ; or a 
right government, but to take part in the government. The 
subjects of our prayers, then, are the subjects of our requests, 
and the subjects of requests are the objects of desires. Prayer, 
then, and desire, follow in order, with the view of possessing 
the blessings and advantages offered. 

The Gnostic, then, who is such by possession, makes his 
prayer and request for the truly good things which appertain 
to the soul, and prays, lie himself also contributing his efforts 
to attain to the habit of goodness, so as no longer to have the 
things that are good as certain lessons belonging to him, but 
to be good. 

Wherefore also it is most incumbent on such to pray, 
knowing as they do the Divinity rightly, and having the 
moral excellence suitable to him ; who know what things are 
really good, and what are to be asked, and when and how in 
each individual case. It is the extremest stupidity to ask of 
them wdio are no gods, as if they were gods ; or to ask those 
things which are not beneficial, begging evils for themselves 
under the appearance of good things. 

Whence, as is right, there being only one good God, that 
some good things be given from Him alone, and that some 
remain, we and the angels pray. But not similarly. For 
it is not the same thing to pray that the gift remain, and to 
endeavour to obtain it for the first time. 

The averting of evils is a species of prayer; but such 
prayer is never to be used for the injury of men, except 
that the Gnostic, in devoting attention to righteousness, may 
make use of this petition in the case of those who are past 
feeling. 

Prayer is, then, to speak more boldly, converse with God. 
Though whispering, consequently, and not opening the lips we 
speak in silence, yet we cry inwardly: For God hears con- 
tinually all the inward converse. So also we raise the head 
and lift the hands to heaven, and set the feet in motion at 
the closing utterance of the prayer, following the eagerness 
of the spirit directed towards the intellectual essence ; and 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

435 

endeavouring to abstract the body from the earth, along with 
the discourse, raising the soul aloft, winged with longing for 
better things, we compel it to advance to the region of holi- 
ness, magnanimously despising the chain of the flesh. For 
we know right well, that the Gnostic willingly passes over the 
whole world, as the Jews certainly did over Egypt, showing 
clearly, above all, that he will be as near as possible to God. 

Now, if some assign definite hours for prayer — as, for 
example, the third, and sixth, and ninth — yet the Gnostic 
prays throughout his whole life, endeavouring by prayer to 
have fellowship with God. And, briefly, having reached to 
tlus^ lrc~ieavies behind him all that is of no service, as having 
now received the perfection of the man that acts by love. But 
the distribution of the hours into a threefold division, honoured 
with as many prayers, those are acquainted with, who know 
the blessed triad of the holy abodes. 

Having got to this point, I recollect the doctrines about 
there being no necessity to pray, introduced by certain of 
the heterodox, that is, the followers of the heresy of Prodi- 
cus. That they may not then be inflated with conceit about 
this godless wisdom of theirs, as if it were strange, let them 
learn that it was embraced before by the philosophers called 
Cyrenaics. Nevertheless, the unholy knowledge ( gnosis ) of 
those falsely called [Gnostics] shall meet with confutation 
at a fitting time ; so that the assault on them, by no means 
brief, may not, by being introduced into the commentary, 
break the discourse in hand, in which we are showing that 
the only really holy and pious man is he who is truly a Gnostic 
according to the rule of the church, to whom alone the peti- 
tion made in accordance with the will of God is granted , 1 on 
asking and on thinking. For as God can do all that He (/y- 
wishes, so the Gnostic receives all that he asks. For, univer- 
sally, God knows those who are and those who are not worthy 
of good things ; whence He gives to each what is suitable. 
Wherefore to those that are unworthy, though they ask often, 

He will not give ; but He will give to those who are worthy. 

1 According to Heinsius’ reading, who substitutes dToueviftYifitvYi for 

CC'TTOI/SUSfCYlfCiUU. 

436 THE MISCELLANIES. [Book vii. 

Nor is petition superfluous, though good things are given 
without claim. 

Now thanksgiving and request for the conversion of our 
neighbours is the function of the Gnostic ; as also the Lord 
prayed, giving thanks for the accomplishment of His ministry, 
praying that as many as possible might attain to knowledge ; 
that in the saved, by salvation, through knowledge, God might 
be glorified, and He who is alone good and alone Saviour 
might be acknowledged through the Son from age to age. 
But also faith, that one will receive, is a species of prayer 
gnostically laid up in store. 

But if any occasion of converse with God becomes prayer, 
no opportunity of access to God ought to be omitted. With- 
out doubt, the holiness of the Gnostic, in union with [God’s] 
blessed Providence, exhibits in voluntary confession the per- 
fect beneficence of God. For the holiness of the Gnostic, and 
the reciprocal benevolence of the friend of God, are a kind of 
corresponding movement of providence. For neither is God 
involuntarily good, as the fire is warming ; but in Him the 
imparting of good things is voluntary, even if He receive 
the request previously. Nor shall he who is saved be saved 
against his will, for he is not inanimate ; but he will above 
all voluntarily and of free choice speed to salvation. Where- 
fore also man received the commandments in order that he 
might be self-impelled, to whatever he wished of things to 
be chosen and to be avoided. Wherefore God does not do 
good by necessity, but from His free choice benefits those 
who spontaneously turn. For the Providence which extends 
to us from God is not ministerial, as that service which pro- 
ceeds from inferiors to superiors. But in pity for our weak- 
ness, the continual dispensations of Providence work, as the 
care of shepherds towards the sheep, and of a king towards 
his subjects; we ourselves also conducting ourselves obediently 
towards our superiors, who take the management of us, as 
appointed, in accordance with the commission from God with 
which they are invested. 

Consequently those who render the most free and kingly 
service, which is the result of a pious mind and of knowledge, 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

437 

are servants and attendants of tlie Divinity. Each place, 
then, and time, in which we entertain the idea of God, is in 
reality sacred. 

When, then, the man who chooses what is right, and is at 
the same time of thankful heart, makes his request in prayer, 
he contributes to the obtaining of it, gladly taking hold in 
prayer of the thing desired. For when the Giver of good 
things perceives the susceptibility on our part, all good things 
follow at once the conception of them. Certainly in prayer 
the character is sifted, how it stands with respect to duty. 

But if voice and expression are given us, for the sake of 
understanding, how can God not hear the soul itself, and 
the mind, since assuredly soul hears soul, and mind, mind ? 
Whence God does not wait for loquacious tongues, as inter- 
preters among men, but knows absolutely the thoughts of 
all ; and what the voice intimates to us, that our thought, 
which even before the creation He knew would come into our 
mind, speaks to God. Prayer, then, may be uttered without 
the voice, by concentrating the whole spiritual nature within 
on expression by the mind, in undistracted turning towards 
God. 

And since the dawn is an image of the day of birth, and 
from that point the light which has shone forth at first from 
the darkness increases, there has also dawned on those in- 
volved in darkness a day of the knowledge of truth. In 
correspondence with the manner of the sun’s rising, prayers 
are made looking; towards the sunrise in the east. Whence 
also the most ancient temples looked towards the west, that 
people might be taught to turn to the east when facing the 
images. u Let my prayer be directed before Thee as incense, 
the uplifting of my hands as the evening sacrifice,” 1 say the 
Psalms. 

In the case of wicked men, therefore, prayer is most 
injurious, not to others alone, but to themselves also. If, 
then, they should ask and receive what they call pieces of 
good fortune, these injure them after they receive them, 
being ignorant how to use them. For they pray to possess 

1 Ps. cxli. 2. 

438 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

what they have not, and they ask things which seem, but 
are not, good things. But the Gnostic will ask the per- 
manence of the things he possesses, adaptation for what is 
to take place, and the eternity of those things which he shall 
receive. And the things which are really good, the things 
which concern the soul, he prays that they may belong to 
him, and remain with him. And so he desires not anything 
that is absent, being content with what is present. For he is 
not deficient in the good things which are proper to him ; being 
already sufficient for himself, through divine grace and know- 
ledge. But having become sufficient in himself, he stands 
in no want of other things. But knowing the sovereign will, 
and possessing as soon as he prays, being brought into close 
contact with the almighty power, and earnestly desiring to be 
spiritual, through boundless love, he is united to the Spirit. 

Thus he, being magnanimous, possessing, through know- 
ledge, what is the most precious of all, the best of all, 
being quick in applying himself to contemplation, retains 
in his soul the permanent energy of the objects of his 
contemplation, that is the perspicacious keenness of know- 
ledge. And this power lie strives to his utmost to acquire, 
by obtaining command of all the influences which war 
against the mind ; and by applying himself without inter- 
mission to speculation, by exercising himself in the training 
of abstinence from pleasures, and of right conduct in what 
he does; and besides, furnished with great experience both in 
study and in life, he has freedom of speech, not the power of a 
babbling tongue, but a power which employs plain language, 
and which neither for favour nor fear conceals aught of the 
things which may be worthily said at the fitting time, in which 
it is highly necessary to say them. He, then, having re- 
ceived the things respecting God from the mystic choir of 
the truth itself, employs language which urges the magnitude 
of virtue in accordance with its worth ; and shows its results 
with an inspired elevation of prayer, being associated gnosti- 
cally, as far as possible, with intellectual and spiritual objects. 

Whence he is always mild and meek, accessible, affable, 
long-suffering, grateful, endued with a good conscience. 

Book vii.J 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

439 

Such a man is rigid, not alone so as not to be corrupted, but 
so as not to be tempted. For he never exposes his soul to 
submission, or capture at the hands of Pleasure and Pain. 
If the Word, who is Judge, call; he, having grown inflexible, 
and not indulging a whit the passions, walks unswervingly 
where justice advises him to go ; being very well persuaded 
that all things are managed consummately well, and that pro- 
gress to what is better goes on in the case of souls that have 
chosen virtue, till they come to the Good itself, to the Father’s 
vestibule, so to speak, close to the great High Priest. Such is 
our Gnostic, faithful, persuaded that the affairs of the universe 
are managed in the best way. Particularly, he is w T ell pleased 
with all that happens. In accordance with reason, then, he asks 
for none of those things in life required for necessary use; being 
persuaded that God, who knows all things, supplies the good 
with whatever is for their benefit, even though they do not ask. 

For my view is, that as all things are supplied to the man 
of art according to the rules of art, and to the Gentile in a 
Gentile way, so also to the Gnostic all things are supplied 
gnostically. And the man who turns from among the Gen- 
tiles will ask for faith, while he that ascends to knowledge will 
ask for the perfection of love. And the Gnostic, who has 
reached the summit, will pray that contemplation may grow 
and abide, as the common man will for continual good health. 

Nay, he will pray that he may never fall from virtue ; 
giving his most strenuous co-operation in order that he may 
become infallible. For he knows that some of the angels, 
through carelessness, were hurled to the earth, not having 
yet quite reached that state of oneness, by extricating them- 
selves from the propensity to that of duality. 

But him, who from this has trained himself to the summit 
of knowledge and the elevated height of the perfect man, all 
things relating to time and place help on, now that he has 
made it his choice to live infallibly, and subjects himself to 
training in order to the attainment of the stability of know- 
ledge on each side. But in the case of those in whom there 
is still a heavy corner, leaning downwards, even that part 
which has been elevated by faith is dragged down. In him, 

440 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book vii. 

then, who by gnostic training has acquired virtue which 
cannot be lost, habit becomes nature. And just as weight 
in a stone, so the knowledge of such an one is incapable of 
being lost. Not without, but through the exercise of will, 
and by the force of reason, and knowledge, and Providence, 
is it brought to become incapable of being lost. Through 
care it becomes incapable of being lost. He will employ 
caution so as to avoid sinning, and consideration to prevent 
the loss of virtue. 

Now knowledge appears to produce consideration, by 
teaching to perceive the things that are capable of contri- 
buting to the permanence of virtue. The highest thing is, 
then, the knowledge of God ; wherefore also by it virtue is 
so preserved as to be incapable of being lost. And he who 
knows God is holy and pious. The Gnostic has consequently 
been demonstrated by us to be the only pious man. 

He l’ejoices in good things present, and is glad on account 
of those promised, as if they were already present. For they 
do not elude his notice, as if they were still absent, because 
he knows by anticipation what sort they are. Being then 
persuaded by knowledge how each future thing shall be, he 
possesses it. For want and defect are measured with refer- 
ence to what appertains to one. If, then, he possesses wisdom, 
and wisdom is a divine thing, he who partakes of what has 
no want will himself have no want. For the imparting of 
wisdom does not take place by activity and receptivity moving 
and stopping each other, or by aught being abstracted or 
becoming defective. Activity is therefore shown to be un- 
diminished in the act of communication. So, then, our 
Gnostic possesses all good things, as far as possible ; but not 
likewise in number ; since otherwise he would be incapable of 
changing his place through the due inspired stages of ad- 
vancement and acts of administration. 

Him God helps, by honouring him with closer oversight. 
For were not all things made for the sake of good men, for 
their possession and advantage, or rather salvation ? He will 
not then deprive, of the things which exist for the sake of 
virtue, those for whose sake they were created. For, evi- 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

441 

dently in honour of their excellent nature and their holy 
choice, he inspires those who have made choice of a good 
life with strength for the rest of their salvation ; exhorting 
some, and helping others, who of themselves have become 
worthy. For all good is capable of being produced in the i 
Gnostic ; if indeed it is his aim to know and do everything 
intelligently. And as the physician ministers health to those 
who co-operate with him in order to health, so also God 
ministers eternal salvation to those who co-operate for the 
attainment of knowledge and good conduct ; and since what 
the commandments enjoin are in our own power, along with 
the performance of them, the promise is accomplished. 

And what follows seems to me to be excellently said by 
the Greeks. An athlete of no mean reputation among those 
of old, having for a long time subjected his body to thorough 
training in order to the attainment of manly strength, on 
going tap to the Olympic games, cast his eye on the statue of 
the Pisaean Zeus, and said : 11 0 Zeus, if all the requisite 
preparations for the contest have been made by me, come, 
give me the victory, as is right.” For so, in the case of the 
Gnostic, who has unblameably and with a good conscience 
fulfilled all that depends on him, in the direction of learning, 
and training, and well-doing, and pleasing God, the whole 
contributes to carry salvation on to perfection. From us, 
then, are demanded the things which are in our own power, 
and of the things which pertain to us, both present and absent, 
the choice, and desire, and possession, and use, and permanence. 

Wherefore also he who holds converse with God must have 
his soul immaculate and stainlessly pure, it being essential 
to have made himself perfectly good. 

But also it becomes him to make all his prayers gently 
along with the good. For it is a dangerous thing to take 
part in others’ sins. Accordingly the Gnostic will pray 
along with those who have more recently believed, for those 
things in respect of which it is their duty to act together. 
And his whole life is a holy festival. His sacrifices are 
prayers, and praises, and readings in the Scriptures before 
meals, and psalms and hymns during meals and before bed, 

442 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vir. 

and prayers also again during night. By these he unites 
himself to the divine choir, from continual recollection, en- 
gaged in contemplation which has everlasting remembrance. 

And what? Does he not also know the other kind of 
sacrifice, which consists in the giving both of doctrines and 
of money to those who need ? Assuredly. But he does not 
use wordy prayer by his mouth ; having learned to ask of the 
Lord what is requisite. In every place, therefore, but not 
ostensibly and visibly to the multitude, he will pray. But 
while engaged in walking, in conversation, while in silence, 
while engaged in reading and in works according to reason, 
he in every mood prays. If he but form the thought in the 
secret chamber of his soul, and call on the Father “with 
unspoken groanings,” 1 He is near, and is at his side, while 
yet speaking. Inasmuch as there are but three ends of all 
action, he does everything for its excellence and utility ; but 
doing aught for the sake of pleasure, 2 he leaves to those who 
pursue the common life. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE GNOSTIC SO ADDICTED TO TRUTH AS NOT TO NEED 
TO USE AN OATH. 

The man of proved character in such piety is far from 
being apt to lie and to swear. For an oath is a decisive 
affirmation, with the taking of the divine name. For how 
can he, that is once faithful, show himself unfaithful, so as 
to require an oath ; and so that his life may not be a sure 
and decisive oath? He lives, and walks, and shows the 
trustworthiness of his affirmation in an unwavering and 

1 Rom. viii. 26. 

2 to os \%nihiiv Oici rov Swow tov xotuov fiiov is tlie reading of the text ; 
which Potter amends, so as to bring out what is plainly the idea of the 
author, the reference to pleasure as the third end of actions, and the 
end pursued by ordinary men, by changing into which is simple, 
and leaves Ivaoiarov (intolerable) to stand. Sylburgius notes that the 
Latin translator renders as if he read §/« tvj qiSoi/qy, which is adopted 
above. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

443 

sure life and speech. And if the wrong lies in the judg- 
ment of one who does and says [something], and not in the 
suffering of one who has been wronged , 1 he will neither lie 
nor commit perjury so as to wrong the Deity, knowing that 
it by nature is incapable of being harmed. Nor yet will he 
lie or commit any transgression, for the sake of the neighbour 
whom he has learned to love, though he be not on terms of 
intimacy. Much more, consequently, will he not lie or per- 
jure himself on his own account, since he never with his will 
can be found doing wrong to himself. 

But he does not even swear, preferring to make averment, ,* 
in affirmation by u yea,” and in denial by u nay.” For it is 
an oath to swear, or to produce 2 anything from the mind in 
the way of confirmation in the shape of an oath. It suffices 
then, with him, to add to an affirmation or denial the expres- 
sion u I say truly,” for confirmation to those who do not 
perceive the certainty of his answer. For he ought, I think, 
to maintain a life calculated to inspire confidence towards 
those without, so that an oath may not even be asked ; and 
towards himself and those with whom he associates , 3 good 
feeling, which is voluntary righteousness. 

The Gnostic swears truly, but is not apt to swear, having 
rarely recourse to an oath, just as we have said. And his 
speaking truth on oath arises from his accord with the truth. 
This speaking truth on oath, then, is found to be the result 
of correctness in duties. Where, then, is the necessity for 
an oath to him who lives in accordance with the extreme of 
truth ? He, then, that does not even swear will be far from 
perjuring himself. And he who does not transgress in what 
is ratified by compacts, will never swear ; since the ratification 
of the violation and of the fulfilment is by actions ; as cer- 
tainly lying and perjury in affirming and swearing are con- 
trary to duty. But he who lives justly, transgressing in none 

1 Or, “ persecuted ; ” for dotxcvyJi/ov (Lowtli) and (Potter 

and Latin translator) have been both suggested instead of the reading 
of the text, jjtxxovovftevov. 

2 vpooCpspio&c&i and ttj oo(ptp£<s&ou are both found here. 

s avud trrus, and (Sylburgius) avviovTii;. 

444 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vir. 

of his duties, when the judgment of truth is scrutinized, 
swears truth by his acts. Accordingly, testimony by the 
tongue is in his case superfluous. 

Therefore, persuaded always that God is everywhere, and 
fearing not to speak the truth, and knowing that it is un- 
worthy of him to lie, he is satisfied with the divine conscious- 
ness and his own alone. And so he lies not, nor does ought 
contrary to his compacts. And so he swears not even when 
asked for his oath ; nor does he ever deny, so as to speak 
falsehood, though he should die by tortures. 

CHAPTER IX. 

THOSE WHO TEACH OTHERS, OUGHT TO EXCEL IN VIRTUES. 

The gnostic dignity is augmented and increased by him 
who has undertaken the first place in the teaching of others, 
and received the dispensation by word and deed of the greatest 
good on earth, by which he mediates contact and fellowship 
with the Divinity. And as those who worship terrestrial 
things pray to them as if they heard, confirming compacts 
before them ; so, in men who are living images, the true 
majesty of the Word is received by the trustworthy teacher; 
and the beneficence exerted towards them is carried up to 
the Lord, after whose image he who is a true man by instruc- 
tion creates and harmonizes, renewing to salvation the man 
who receives instruction. For as the Greeks called steel 
Ares , and wine Dionysus , on account of a certain relation ; 
so the Gnostic, considering the benefit of his neighbours as 
his own salvation, may he called a living image of the Lord, 
not as respects the peculiarity of form, but the symbol of 
power and similarity of preaching. 

Whatever, therefore, he has in his mind, he bears on his 
tongue, to those who are worthy to hear, speaking as well as 
living from assent and inclination. For he both thinks and 
speaks the truth ; unless at any time, medicinally, as a physi- 
cian for the safety of the sick, he may lie or tell an untruth, 
according to the Sophists. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

445 

For instance, the noble apostle circumcised Timothy, though 
loudly declaring and writing that circumcision made with 
hands profits nothing . 1 But that he might not, by dragging 
all at once away from the law to the circumcision of the 
heart through faith those of the Hebrews who were reluctant 
listeners, compel them to break away from the synagogue, he, 
“accommodating himself to the Jews, became a Jew that 
he might gain all .” 2 He, then, who submits to accommodate 
himself merely for the benefit of his neighbours, for the sal- 
vation of those for whose sake he accommodates himself, not 
partaking in any dissimulation through the peril impending 
over the just from those who envy them, such an one by no 
means acts with compulsion . 3 But for the benefit of his neigh- 
bours alone, he will do things which would not have been done 
by him primarily, if he did not do them on their account. 
Such an one gives himself for the Church, for the disciples 
whom he has begotten in faith ; for an example to those who 
are capable of receiving the supreme economy of the philan- 
thropic and God-loving Instructor, for confirmation of the 
truth of his words, for the exercise of love to the Lord. 
Such an one is unenslaved by fear, true in word, enduring 
in labour, never willing to lie by uttered word, and in it 
always securing sinlessness ; since falsehood, being spoken 
with a certain deceit, is not an inert word, but operates to 
mischief. 

On every hand, then, the Gnostic alone testifies to the 
truth in deed and word. For he always does rightly in all 
things, both in word and action, and in thought itself. 

Such, then, to speak cursorily, is the piety of the Chris- 
tian. If, then, he does these things according to duty and 
right reason, he does them piously and justly. And if such 
be the case, the Gnostic alone is really both pious, and just, 
and God-fearinc;. 

The Christian is not impious. For this was the point in- 
cumbent on us to demonstrate to the philosophers ; so that he 

1 Bom. ii. 25 ; Eph. ii. 11. 2 1 Cor. ix. 19, etc. 

3 This sentence is obscure, and has been construed and amended 
variously. 

446 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

will never in any way do aught bad or base (which is unjust). 
Consequently, therefore, he is not impious; but he alone fears 
God, holily and dutifully worshipping the true God, the uni- 
versal Ruler, and King, and Sovereign, with the true piety. 

CHAPTER X. 

STEPS TO PERFECTION. 

For knowledge (gnosis), to speak generally, a perfecting of 
man as man, is consummated by acquaintance with divine 
things, in character, life, and word, accordant and conform- 
able to itself and to the divine Word. For by it faith is 
perfected, inasmuch as it is solely by it that the believer 
becomes perfect. Faith is an internal good, and without 
searching for God, confesses His existence, and glorifies Him 
as existent. Whence by starting from this faith, and being 
developed by it, through the grace of God, the knowledge 
respecting Him is lo be acquired as far as possible. 

Now we assert that knowledge ( gnosis ) differs from the 
wisdom (aocfiLa), which is the result of teaching. For as far 
as anything is knowledge, so far is it certainly wisdom ; but 
in as far as aught is wisdom, it is not certainly knowledge. 
For the term wisdom appears only in the knowledge of the 
uttered word. 

But it is not doubting in reference to God, but believing, 
that is the foundation of knowledge. Bul£Christ)is both the 
foundation and the superstructure, by whom are both the 
beginning and the ends. And the extreme points, the be- 
ginning and the end — I mean faith and love — are not taught. 
But knowledge, conveyed from communication through the 
grace of God as a deposit, is entrusted to those who show 
themselves worthy of it ; and from it the worth of love beams 
forth from light to light. For it is said, “To him that hath 
shall be given:” 1 to faith, knowledge; and to knowledge, 
love ; and to love, the inheritance. 

1 Luke xix. 26. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

447 

And this takes place, whenever one hangs on the Lord 
by faith, by knowledge, by love, and ascends along with 
Him to where the God and guard of our faith and love is. 
Whence at last (on account of the necessity for very great 
preparation and previous training in order both to hear what 
is said, and for the composure of life, and for advancing 
intelligently to a point beyond the righteousness of the law) 
it is that knowledge is committed to those fit and selected for 
it. It leads us to the endless and perfect end, teaching us 
beforehand the future life that we shall lead, according to 
God, and with gods ; after we are freed from all punishment 
and penalty which we undergo, in consequence of our sins, 
for salutary discipline. After which redemption the reward 
and the honours are assigned to those who have become per- 
fect ; when they have got done with purification, and ceased 
from all service, though it be holy service, and among saints. 
Then become pure in heart, and near to the Lord, there 
awaits them restoration to everlasting contemplation ; and 
they are called_by the appellation of gods, being destined to 
sit on thrones with the other gods that have been first put 
in their places by the Saviour. 

Knowledge is therefore quick in purifying, and fit for 
that acceptable transformation to the better. Whence also 
with ease it removes [the soul] to what is akin to the soul, 
divine and holy, and by its own light conveys man through 
the mystic stages of advancement ; till it restores the pure in 
heart to the crowning place of rest ; teaching to gaze on God, 
face to face, with knowledge and comprehension. For in 
this consists the perfection of the gnostic soul, in its being 
with the Lord, where it is in immediate subjection to Him, 
after rising above all purification and service. 

Faith is then, so to speak, a comprehensive knowledge of 
the essentials ; and knowledge is the strong and sure demon- 
stration of what is received by faith, built upon faith by 
the Lord’s teaching, conveying [the soul] on to infallibility, 
science, and comprehension. And, in my view, the first 
saving change is that from heathenism to faith, as I said 
before; and the second, that from faith to knowledge. And 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

/ na 

448 

the latter terminating in love, thereafter gives the loving to 
the loved, that which knows to that which is known. And, 
perchance, such an one has already attained the condition of 
“ being equal to the angels .” 1 Accordingly, after the highest 
excellence in the flesh, changing always duly to the better, 
he urges his flight to the ancestral hall, through the holy 
septenniad [of heavenly abodes] to the Lord’s own mansion ; ^ | 
to be a light, steady, and continuing eternally, entirely and 
in every part immutable. 

The first mode of the Lord’s operation mentioned by us is 
an exhibition of the recompense resulting from piety. Of 
the very great number of testimonies that there are, I shall 
adduce one, thus summarily expressed by the prophet David : 

“ Who shall ascend to the hill of the Lord, or who shall 
stand in His holy place % He who is guiltless in his hands, 
and pure in his heart; who hath not lifted up his soul to 
vanity, or sworn deceitfully to his neighbour. He shall 
receive blessing from the Lord, and mercy from God his 
Saviour. This is the generation of them that seek the Lord, 
that seek the face of the God of Jacob.” 2 The prophet has, 
in my opinion, concisely indicated the Gnostic. David, as 
appears, has cursorily demonstrated the Saviour to be God, 
by calling Him “ the face of the God of Jacob,” who 
preached and taught concerning the Spirit. Wherefore also 
the apostle designates as “ the express image (^apaKrfjpa) of 
the glory of the Father ” 3 the Son, who taught the truth re- 
specting God, and expressed the fact that the Almighty is the 
one and only God and Father, u whom no man knoweth but 
the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal Him .” 4 That 
God is one is intimated by those u who seek the face of the God 
of Jacob;” whom being the only God, our Saviour and God 
characterizes as the Good Father. And u the generation of 
those that seek Him” is the elect race, devoted to inquiry 
after knowledge. Wherefore also the apostle says, u I shall 
profit you nothing, unless I speak to you, either by revela- 
tion, or by knowledge, or by prophecy, or by doctrine.” 5 

1 Luke xx. 36. 2 Ps. xxiv. 3-6. 3 Heb. i. 3. 

4 Matt. xi. 27. 6 1 Cor. xiv. 6. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

449 

Although even by those who are not Gnostics some things 
are done rightly, yet not according to reason ; as in the case 
of fortitude. For some who are naturally high-spirited, and 
have afterwards without reason fostered this disposition, rush 
to many things, and act like brave men, so as sometimes to 
succeed in achieving the_ same things; just as endurance 
is easy for mechanics. But it is not from the same cause, 
or with the same object ; not were they to give their whole 
body. 11 For they have not love,” according to the apostle . 1 

All th enaction, then, of a man possessed of knowledge is 
right action ; and that done by a man not possessed of know- 
ledge is wrong action, though he observe a plan ; since it is 
not from reflection that he acts bravely, nor does he direct 
his action in those things which proceed from virtue to virtue, 
to any useful purpose. 

The same holds also with the other virtues. So too the 
analogy is preserved in religion. Our Gnostic, then, not only 
is such in reference to holiness ; but corresponding to the 
piety of knowledge are the commands respecting the rest of 
the conduct of life. For it is our purpose at present to 
describe the life of the Gnostic, not to present the system of 
dogmas, which we shall afterwards explain at the fitting time, 
preserving the order of topics. 

CHAPTER XI. 

DESCRIPTION OF THE GNOSTIC’S LIFE. 

Respecting the universe, he conceives truly and grandly in 
virtue of his reception of divine teaching. Beginning, then, 
with admiration of the Creation, and affording of himself a 
proof of his capability for receiving knowledge, he becomes a 
ready pupil of the Lord. Directly on hearing of God and 
Providence, he believed in consequence of the admiration he 
entertained. Through the power of impulse thence derived 
he devotes his energies in every way to learning, doing all 
those things by means of which he shall be able to acquire 

1 1 Cor. xiii. 3. 

2 F 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

450 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

the knowledge of what he desires. And desire blended with 
inquiry arises as faith advances. And this is to become 
worthy of speculation, of such a character, and such import- 
ance. So shall the Gnostic taste of the will of God. For 
it is not his ears, but his soul, that he yields up to the things 
signified by what is spoken. Accordingly, apprehending 
essences and things through the words, he brings his soul, as 
is fit, to what is essential ; apprehending [e.y.] in the peculiar 
way in which they are spoken to the Gnostic, the commands, 
u Do not commit adultery,” u Do not kill;” and not as they 
are understood by other people. Training himself, then, in 
scientific speculation, he proceeds to exercise himself in larger 
generalizations and grander propositions ; knowing right well 
that “ He that teacheth man knowledge,” according to the 
prophet, is the Lord, the Lord acting by man’s mouth. So 
also He assumed flesh. 

As is right, then, he never prefers the pleasant to the use- 
ful; not even if a beautiful woman were to entice him, when 
overtaken by circumstances, by wantonly urging him : since 
Joseph’s master’s wife was not able to seduce him from his 
stedfastness ; but as she violently held his coat, divested him- 
self of it, — becoming bare of sin, but clothed with seemliness 
of character. For if the eyes of the master — the Egyptian, 
I mean — saw not Joseph, yet those of the Almighty looked 
on. For we hear the voice, and see the bodily forms; but 
God scrutinizes the thing itself, from which the speaking and 
the looking proceed. 

Consequently, therefore, though disease, and accident, and 
what is most terrible of all, death, come upon the Gnostic, 
he remains inflexible in soul, — knowing that all such things 
are a necessity of creation, and that, also by the power of 
God, they become the medicine of salvation, benefiting by 
discipline those who are difficult to reform ; allotted according 
to desert, by Providence, which is truly good. 

Using the creatures, then, when the Word prescribes, and 
to the extent it prescribes, in the exercise of thankfulness to 
the Creator, he becomes master of the enjoyment of them. 

He never cherishes resentment or harbours a grudge 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

451 

against any one, though deserving of hatred for his conduct. 
For he worships the Maker, and loves him, who shares life, 
pitying and praying for him on account of his ignorance. 
He indeed partakes of the affections of the body, to which, 
susceptible as it is of suffering by nature, he is bound. But 
in sensation he is not the primary subject of it. 

Accordingly, then, in involuntary circumstances, by with- 
drawing himself from troubles to the things which really 
belong to him, he is not carried away with what is foreign to 
him. And it is only to things that are necessary for him 
that he accommodates himself, in so far as the soul is pre- 
served unharmed. For it is not in supposition or seeming 
that he wishes to be faithful ; but in knowledge and truth, 
that is, in sure deed and effectual word. Wherefore he not 
only praises what is noble, but endeavours himself to be 
noble ; changing by love from a good and faithful servant 
into a friend, through the perfection of habit, which he has 
acquired in purity from true instruction and great discipline. 

Strivingptlfen, to attain to the summit of knowledge 
(gnosis)-, decorous in character; composed in mien; possessing 
all those advantages which belong to the true Gnostic; fixing 
his eye on fair models, on the many patriarchs who have lived 
rightly, and on very manyprophets and angels reckoned without 
number, and above all, on the Lord, who taught and showed it 
to be possible for him to attain that highest life of all, — he 
therefore loves not all the good things of the world, which 
are within his grasp, that he may not remain on the ground, 
but the things hoped for, or rather already known, being 
hoped for so as to be appi'ehended. 

So then he undergoes toils, and trials, and afflictions, not 
as those among the philosophers who are endowed with 
manliness, in the hope of present troubles ceasing, and of 
sharing again in what is pleasant ; but knowledge has in- 
spired him with the firmest persuasion of receiving the hopes 
of the future. Wherefore he contemns not alone the pains 
of this world, but all its pleasures. 

They say, accordingly, that the blessed Peter, on seeing his 
wife led to death, rejoiced on account of her call and con- 

452 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

veyance home, and called very encouragingly and comfort- 
ingly, addressing her by name, “ Remember thou the Lord.” 
Such was the marriage of the blessed, and their perfect dis- 
position towards those dearest to them. 

Thus also the apostle says, “that he who marries should 
be as though he married not,” and deem his marriage free 
of inordinate affection, and inseparable from love to the 
Lord ; to which the true husband exhorted his wife to cling 
on her departure out of this life to the Lord. 

Was not then faith in the hope after death conspicuous in 
the case of those who gave thanks to God even in the very ex- 
tremities of their punishments? For firm, in my opinion, was 
the faith they possessed, which was followed by works of faith. 

In all circumstances, then, is the soul of the Gnostic strong, 
in a condition of extreme health and strength, like the body 
of an athlete. 

For he is prudent in human affairs, in judging what ought 
to be done by the just man ; having obtained the principles 
from God from above, and having acquired, in order to the 
divine resemblance, moderation in bodily pains and pleasures. 
And he struggles against fears boldly, trusting in God. Cer- 
tainly, then, the gnostic soul, adorned with perfect virtue, is 
the earthly image of the divine power,; its development being 
the joint result of nature, of training, of reason, all together. 
This beauty of the soul becomes a temple of the Holy Spirit, 
when it acquires a disposition in the whole of life corre- 
sponding to the gospel. Such an one consequently with- 
stands all fear of everything terrible, not only of death, but 
also poverty and disease, and ignominy, and things akin to 
these; being unconquered by pleasure, and lord over irrational 
desires. For he well knows what is and what is not to be 
done ; being perfectly aware what things are really to be 
dreaded, and what not. Whence he bears intelligently what 
the Word intimates to him to be requisite and necessary; in- 
telligently discriminating what is really safe (that is, good), 
from what appears so ; and things to be dreaded from what 
seem so, such as death, disease, and poverty ; which are 
rather so in opinion than in truth. 

Book vii.] 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

453 

This is the really good man, who is without passions ; 
having, through the habit or disposition of a soul endued 
with virtue, transcended the whole life of passion. He has 
everything dependent on hirnself for the attainment of the 
end. For those accidents which are called terrible are not 
formidable to the good man, because they are not evil. And 
those which are really to be dreaded are foreign to the 
gnostic Christian, being diametrically opposed to what is 
good, because evil; and it is impossible for contraries to meet 
in the same person at the same time. He, then, who fault- 
lessly acts the^drama of life which God has given him to play, 
Snows Foth what is to be done and what is to be endured. 

Is it not then from ignorance of what is and what is not 
to be dreaded that cowardice arises ? Consequently the only 
man of courage is the Gnostic, who knows both present 
and future good things ; along with these, knowing, as I have 
said, also the things which are in reality not to be dreaded. 
Because, knowing vice alone to be hateful, and destructive of 
what contributes to knowledge, protected by the armour of 
the Lord, he makes war against it. 

For if anything is caused thi’ough folly, and the operation 
or rather co-operation of the devil, this thing is not straight- 
way the devil or folly. For no action is wisdom. For 
wisdom is a habit. And no action is a habit. The action, 
then, that arises from ignorance, is not already ignorance, 
but an evil through ignorance, but not ignorance. For 
neither perturbations of mind nor sins are vices, though pro- 
ceeding from vice. 

No one, then, who is irrationally brave is a Gnostic ; since 
one might call children brave, who, through ignorance of 
what is to be dreaded, undergo things that are frightful. So 
they touch fire even. And the wild beasts that rush close on 
the points of spears, having a brute courage, might be called 
valiant. And such people might perhaps call jugglers valiant, 
who tumble on swords with a certain dexterity, practising 
a mischievous art for sorry gain. But he who is truly brave, 
with the peril arising from the bad feeling of the multitude 
before his eyes, courageously awaits whatever comes. In 

454 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

this way he is distinguished from others that are called mar- 
tyrs, inasmuch as some furnish occasions for themselves, and 
rush into the heart of dangers, I know not how (for it is 
right to use mild language) ; while they, in accordance with 
right reason, protect themselves; then, on God really calling 
them, promptly surrender themselves, and confirm the call, 
from being conscious of no precipitancy, and present the 
man to be tested in the exercise of true rational fortitude. 
Neither, then, enduring lesser dangers from fear of greater, 
like other people, nor dreading censure at the hands of their 
equals, and those of like sentiments, do they continue in the 
confession of their calling; but from love to God t hey w ill- 
ingly obey the call, with no other aim in view than pleasing 
God, and not for the sake of the reward of their toils. 

For some suffer from love of glory, and others from fear 
of some other sharper punishment, and others for the sake 
of pleasures and delights after death, being children in faith ; 
blessed indeed, but not yet become men in love to„God, asbhe 
Gnostic is. For there are, as in the gymnastic contests, so also 
in the Church, crowns for men and for children. But Jove 
is to be chosen forJtself, and for nothing else. Therefore in 
the Gnostic, along with knowledge, the perfection of fortitude 
is developed from the discipline of life, he having always 
studied to acquire mastery over the passions. 

Accordingly, Jove makes its own athlete fearless and daunt- 
less, and confident in the Lord, anointing and training him ; 
as righteousness secures for him truthfulness in his whole 

O 

life. For it was a compendium of righteousness to say, “ Let 
your yea be yea ; and your nay, nay.” 

And the same holds with self-control. For it is neither 
for love of honour, as the athletes for the sake of crowns and 
fame ; nor, on the other hand, for love of money, as some 
pretend to exercise self-control, pursuing what is good with 
terrible suffering. Nor is it from love of the body for the 
sake of health. Nor any more is any man who is temperate 
from rusticity, who has not tasted pleasures, truly a man of 
self-control. Certainly those who have led a laborious life, 
on tasting pleasures, forthwith break down the inflexibility of 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

455 

temperance into pleasures. Such are they who are restrained 
by law and fear. For on finding a favourable opportunity 
they defraud the law, by giving what is good the slip. But 
self-control, desirable for its own sake, perfected through 
knowledge, abiding ever, makes the man lord and master of 
himself; so that the Gnostic is temperate and passionless, 
incapable of being dissolved by pleasures and pains, as they 
say adamant is by fire. 

- ^he cause of these, then, is love, of all science the most 
sacred and most sovereign. ^ 

"For hy the service of wli'at is best and most exalted, which 
is characterized by unity, it renders the Gnostic at once 
friend and son, having in truth grown u a perfect man, up 
to the measure of full stature.” 1 

Further, agreement in the same thing is consent. But 
what is the same is one. And friendship is consummated in 
likeness ; the community lying in oneness. The Gnostic, 
consequently, in virtue of being a lover of the one true God, 
is the really perfect man and friend of God, and is placed in 
the rank of son. For these are names of nobility and know- 
ledge, and perfection in the contemplation of God ; which 
crowning step of advancement the gnostic soul receives, when 
it has become quite pure, reckoned worthy to behold ever- 
lastingly God Almighty, a face,” it is said, a to face.” For 
having become wholly spiritual, and having in the spiritual 
Church gone to what is of kindred nature, it abides in the 
rest of God. 

CHAPTER XII. 

THE TEUE GNOSTIC IS BENEFICENT, CONTINENT, AND 
DESPISES WOKLDLY THINGS. 

Let these things, then, be so. 

And such being the attitude of the Gnostic towards the 
body and the soul — towards his neighbours, whether it be a 

1 Eph. iv. 13. 

456 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

domestic, or a lawful enemy, or whosoever — he is found 
equal and like. For he does not “ despise his brother,” who, 
according to the divine law, is of the same father and mother. 
Certainly he relieves the afflicted, helping him with consola- 
tions, encouragements, and the necessaries of life ; (giving to 
all that need, though not similarly, but justly , according to 
desert ; furthermore, to him who persecutes and hates, even 
if he need it ; caring little for those who say to him that 
he has given out of fear, if it is not out of fear that he does 
so, but to give help. For how much more are those, who 
towards their enemies are devoid of love of money, and are 
haters of evil, animated with love to those who belong to 
them ? 

Such an one from this proceeds to the accurate knowledge 
of whom he ought chiefly to give to, and how much, and 
when, and how. 

And who could with any reason become the enemy of a 
man who gives no cause for enmity in any way? And is it 
not just as in the case of God ? We say that God is the 
adversary of no one, and the enemy of no one (for He is 
the Creator of all, and nothing that exists is what He wills 
it not to be ; but we assert that the disobedient, and those 
who walk not according to His commandments, are enemies 
to Him, as being those who are hostile to His covenant). 
We shall find the very same to be the case with the Gnostic, 
for he can never in any way become an enemy to any one ; 
but those may be regarded enemies to him who turn to the 
contrary path. 

In particular, the habit of liberality which prevails among 
us is called “ righteousness but the power of discriminating 
according to desert, as to greater and less, with reference to 
those who are proper subjects of it, is a form of the very 
highest righteousness. 

There are things practised in a vulgar style by some people, 
such as control over pleasures. For as, among the heathen, 
there are those who, from the impossibility of obtaining what 
one sees , 1 and from fear of men, and also for the sake of 
1 op a. ; or, desires, ip cl, as Sylburgius suggests. 

Book vii.] 

TEE MISCELLANIES. 

457 

greater pleasures, abstain from the delights that are before 
them ; so also, in the case of faith, some practise self-restraint, 
either out of regard to the promise or from fear of God. 
Well, such self-restraint is the basis of knowledge, and an 
approach to something better, and an effort after perfection. 
For “ the fear of the Lord,” it is said, “ is the beginning of 
wisdom.” 1 But the perfect man, out of love, “ beareth all 
things, endureth all things ,” 2 “as not pleasing man, but 
God .” 3 Although praise follows him as a consequence, it is 
not for his own advantage, but for the imitation and benefit 
of those who praise him. 

According to another view, it is not he who merely controls 
his passions that is called a continent man, but he who has 
also achieved the mastery over good things, and has acquired 
surely the great accomplishments of science, from Avhich he 
produces as fruits the activities of virtue. Thus the Gnostic 
is never, on the occurrence of an emergency, dislodged from 
the habit peculiar to him. For the scientific possession of 
what is good is firm and unchangeable, being the knowledge of 
things divine and human. Knowledge, then, never becomes 
ignoi’ance ; nor does good change into evil. Wherefore also 
he eats, and drinks, and marries, not as principal ends of exist- 
ence, but as necessary. I name marriage even, if the Word 
prescribe, and as is suitable. For having become perfect, he 
has the apostles for examples; and one is not really shown to 
be a man in the choice of single life ; but he surpasses men, 
who, disciplined by marriage, procreation of children, and 
care for the house, without pleasure or pain, in his solicitude 
for the house has been inseparable from God’s love, and 
withstood all tempation arising through children, and wife, 
and domestics, and possessions. < But he that has no family 
is in a great degree free of temptation. Caring, then, for 
himself alone, he is surpassed by him who is inferior, as 
far as his own personal salvation is concerned, but who is 
superior in the conduct of life, preserving certainly, in his 
care for the truth, a minute image. 

But we must as much as possible subject the soul to 
1 Prow i. 7. 2 1 Cor. xiii. 7. 3 2 Thess. ii. 4. 

458 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

varied preparatory exercise, that it may become susceptible 
to the reception of knowledge. Do you not see how wax is 
softened and copper purified, in order to receive the stamp 
applied to it? Just as death is the separation of the soul 
from the body, so is knowledge as it were the rational death 
urging the spirit away, and separating it from the passions, 
and leading it on to the life of well-doing, that it may then 
say with confidence to God, “ 1 live as Thou wishest.” For 
he who makes it his purpose to please men cannot please God, 
since the multitude choose not what is profitable, but what is 
pleasant. But in pleasing God, one as a consequence gets 
the favour of the good among men. How, then, can what 
relates to meat, and drink, and amorous pleasure, be agree- 
able to such an one ? since he views with suspicion even a 
word that produces pleasure, and a pleasant movement and 
act of the mind. “For no one can serve two masters, God 
and Mammon,” 1 it is said ; meaning not simply money, but 
the resources arising from money bestowed on various 
pleasures. In reality, it is not possible for him who mag- 
nanimously and truly knows God, to serve antagonistic 
pleasures. 

There is one alone, then, who from the beginning was 
free of concupiscence — the philanthropic Lord, who for us 
became man. And whosoever endeavour to be assimilated 
to the impress given by Him, strive, from exercise, to 
become free of concupiscence. For he who has exercised 
concupiscence and then restrained himself, is like a widow 
who becomes again a virgin by continence. Such is the 
reward of knowledge, rendered to the Saviour and Teacher, 
which He Himself asked for, — abstinence from what is evil, 
activity in doing good, by which salvation is acquired. 

As, then, those who have learned the arts procure their 
living by what they have been taught, so also is the Gnostic 
saved, procuring life by what he knows. For he who has 
not formed the wish to extirpate the passion of the soul, 
kills himself. But, as seems, ignorance is the starvation of 
the soul, and knowledge its sustenance. 

1 Matt. vi. 24 ; Luke vi. 13. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

459 

Such are the gnostic souls, which the Gospel likened to the 
consecrated virgins who wait for the Lord. For they are 
virgins, in respect of their abstaining from what is evil. 
And in respect of their waiting out of love for the Lord, and 
kindling their light for the contemplation of things, they are 
wise souls, saying, “ Lord, for long we have desired to receive 
Thee ; we have lived according to what Thou hast enjoined, 
transgressing none of Thy commandments. Wherefore also 
we claim the promises. And we pray for what is beneficial, 
since it is not requisite to ask of Thee what is most excellent. 
And we shall take everything for good ; even though the 
exercises that meet us, which Thine arrangement brings to 
us for the discipline of our stedfastness, appear to be evil.” 

The Gnostic, then, from his exceeding holiness, is better 
prepared to fail when he asks, than to get when he does not 
ask. 

His whole life is prayer and converse with God. And if 
he be pure from sins, he will by all means obtain what he 
wishes. For God says to the righteous man, “Ask, and I 
will give thee ; think, and I will do.” If beneficial, he will 
receive it at once ; and if injurious, he will never ask it, and 
therefore he will not receive it. So it shall be as he wishes. 

But if one say to us, that some sinners even obtain ac- 
cording to their requests, [we should say] that this rarely takes 
place, by reason of the righteous goodness of God. And it 
is granted to those who are capable of doing others good. 
Whence the gift is not made for the sake of him that asked 
it ; but the divine dispensation, foreseeing that one would 
be saved by his means, reftders the boon again l’ighteous. 
And to those who are worthy, things which are really good 
are given, even without their asking. 

Whenever, then, one is righteous, not from necessity or 
out of fear or hope, but from free choice, this is called the 
royal road, which the royal race travel. But the byways 
are slippery and precipitous. If, then, one take away fear 
and honour, I do not know if the illustrious among the 
philosophers, who use such freedom of speech, will any longer 
endure afflictions. 

460 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

Now lusts and other sins are called u briars and thorns.” 
Accordingly the Gnostic labours in the Lord’s vineyard, 
planting, pruning, watering ; being the divine husbandman 
of what is planted in faith. Those, then, who have not done 
evil, think it right to receive the wages of ease. But he 
who has done good out of free choice, demands the recom- 
pense as a good workman. He certainly shall receive double 
wages — both for what he has not done, and for what good he 
has done. 

Such a Gnostic is tempted by no one except with God’s 
permission, and that for the benefit of those who are with 
him ; and he strengthens them for faith, encouraging them 
by manly endurance. And assuredly it was for this end, for 
the establishment and confirmation of the churches, that the 
blessed apostles were brought into trial and to martyrdom. 

The Gnostic, then, hearing a voice ringing in his ear, which 
says, u Whom I shall strike, do thou pity,” beseeches that those 
who hate him may repent. For the punishment of malefac- 
tors, to be consummated in the highways, is for children to 
witness ; 1 for there is no possibility of the Gnostic, who has 
from choice trained himself to be excellent and good, ever 
being instructed or delighted with such spectacles. 2 And so, 
having become incapable of being softened by pleasures, and 
never falling into sins, he is not corrected by the examples 
of other men’s sufferings. And far from being pleased with 
earthly pleasures and spectacles is he who has shown a noble 
contempt for the prospects held out in this world, although 
they are divine. 

“ Not every one,” therefore, “ that says Lord, Lord, shall 
enter into the kingdom of God ; but he that doeth the will 
of God.” 3 Such is the gnostic labourer, who has the 
mastery of worldly^desires even while still in the flesh ; and 

1 According to the text, instead of “to witness,” as above, it would 
be “not to witness.” Lowth suggests the omission of “not” (y.I). 
Retaining it, and translating “ is not even for children to witness,” the 
clause yields a suitable sense. 

2 vt:6 toiovtu’j is here substituted by Heinsius for vtzo ray uvruy. 

3 Matt. vii. 21. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

4G1 

who, in regard to things future and still invisible, which he 
knows, has a sure persuasion, so that he regards them as more 
present than the things within reach. This able workman 
rejoices in what he knows, but is cramped on account of his 
being involved in the necessities of life ; not yet deemed 
worthy of the active participation in what he knows. So he 
uses this life as if it belonged to another, — so far, that is, as 
is necessary. 

He knows also the enigmas of the fasting of those days — 
I mean the Fourth and the Preparation. For the one has 
its name from Hermes, and the other from Aphrodite. He 
fasts in his life, in respect of covetousness and voluptuous- 
ness, from which all the vices grow. For we have already 
often above shown the three varieties of fornication, accord- 
ing to the apostle — love of pleasure, love of money, idolatry. 
He fasts, then, according to the Law, abstaining from bad 
deeds, and, according to the perfection of the Gospel, from 
evil thoughts. Temptations are applied to him, not for his 
purification, but, as we have said, for the good of his neigh- 
bours, if, making trial of toils and pains, he has despised 
and passed them by. 

The same holds of pleasure. For it is the highest achieve- 
ment for one who has had trial of it, afterwards to abstain. 
For what great thing is it, if a man restrains himself in what 
he knows not? He, in fulfilment of the precept, according 
to the Gospel, keeps the Lord’s day, when he abandons an 
evil disposition, and assumes that of the Gnostic, glorifying 
the Lord’s resurrection in himself. Further also, when he 
has received the comprehension of scientific speculation, he 
deems that he sees the Lord, directing his eyes towards things 
invisible, although he seems to look on what he does not 
wish to look on ; chastising the faculty of vision, when he 
perceives himself pleasurably affected by the application of 
his eyes ; since he wishes to see and hear that alone which 
concerns him. 

In the act of contemplating the souls of the brethren, he 
beholds the beauty of the flesh also, with the soul itself, 
which has become habituated to look solely upon that which is 

462 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

good, without carnal pleasure. And they are really brethren ; 
inasmuch as, by reason of their elect creation, and their 
oneness of character, and the nature of their deeds, they 
do, and think, and speak the same holy and good works, in 
accordance with the sentiments with which the Lord wished 
them as elect to be inspired. 

For faith shows itself in their making choice of the same 
things ; and knowledge, in learning and thinking the same 
things ; and hope, in desiring 1 the same things. 

And if, through the necessity of life, he spend a small por- 
tion of time about his sustenance, he thinks himself defrauded, 
being diverted by business. Thus not even in dreams does 
he look on aught that is unsuitable to an elect man. For 
thoroughly 2 a stranger and sojourner in the whole of life is 
every such one, who, inhabiting the city, despises the things 
in the city which are admired by others, and lives in the 
city as in a desert, so that the place may not compel him, 
but his mode of life show him to be just. 

This Gnostic, to speak compendiously, makes up for the 
absence of the apostles, by the rectitude of his life, the 
accuracy of his knowledge, by benefiting his relations, by 
“ removing the mountains ” of his neighbours, and putting 
away the irregularities of their soul. Although each of us is 
his 3 own vineyard and labourer. 

He, too, while doing the most excellent things, wishes 
to elude the notice of men, persuading the Lord along 
with himself that he is living in accordance with the com- 
mandments, preferring these things from believing them to 
exist. “For where any one’s mind is, there also is his 
treasure.” 4 

He impoverishes himself, in order that he may never over- 
look a brother who has been brought into affliction, through 

1 vo 6uv suggested by Lowth instead of votth. 

2 drew adopted instead of dzs^vug of the text, and transferred to 
the beginning of this sentence from the close of the preceding, where it 
appears in the text. 

3 Matt. xxi. 21 ; Mark xi. 23 ; 1 Cor. xiii. 2, etc. etc. 

4 Referring to Matt. vi. 21. 5 Or His, i.e. the Lord's. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

463 

the perfection that is in love, especially if he know that he 
will bear want himself easier than his brother. He con- 
siders, accordingly, the other’s pain his own grief ; and if, by 
contributing from his own indigence in order to do good, he 
suffer any hardship, he does not fret at this, but augments 
his beneficence still more. For he possesses in its sincerity 
the faith which is exercised in reference to the affairs of life, 
and praises the gospel in practice and contemplation. And, 
in truth, he wins his praise “ not from men, but from God,” 1 
by the performance of what the Lord has taught. 

He, attracted by his own hope, tastes not the good things 
that are in the world, entertaining a noble contempt for all 
things here ; pitying those that are chastised after death, who 
through punishment unwillingly make confession ; having a 
clear conscience with reference to his departure, and being 
always ready, as “ a stranger and pilgrim,” with regard to the 
inheritances here ; mindful only of those that are his own, 
and regarding all things here as not his own ; not only ad- 
miring the Lord’s commandments, but, so to speak, being by 
knowledge itself partaker of the divine will ; a truly chosen 
intimate of the Lord and His commands in virtue of beincr 

O 

righteous ; and princely and kingly as being a Gnostic ; de- 
spising all the gold on earth and under the earth, and 
dominion from shore to shore of ocean, so that he may 
cling to the sole service of the Lord. Wherefore also, in 
eating, and drinking, and marrying (if the Word enjoin), 
and even in seeing dreams, he does and thinks what is 
holy. 

So is he always pure for prayer. He also prays in the 
society of angels, as being already of angelic rank, and he 
is never out of their holy keeping; and though he pray 
alone, he has the choir of the saints 2 standing with him. 

He recognises a twofold [element in faith], both the 
activity of him who believes, and the excellence of that which 
is believed according to its worth; since also righteousness 
is twofold, that which is out of love, and that from fear. 

1 Rom. ii. 29. 

2 aytav, as in the best authorities ; or ciyyi\av, as in recent editions. 

464 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

Accordingly it is said, “ The fear of the Lord is pure, re- 
maining for ever and ever.” 1 For those that from fear turn 
to faith and righteousness, remain for ever. Now fear works 
abstinence from what is evil ; but love exhorts to the doing 
of good, by building up to the point of spontaneousness ; that 
one may hear from the Lord, “ I call you no longer servants, 
but friends,” and may now with confidence apply himself to 
prayer. 

And the form of his prayer is thanksgiving for the past, 
for the present, and for the future as already through faith 
present. This is preceded by the reception of knowledge. 
And he asks to live the allotted life in the flesh as a Gnostic, 
as free from the flesh, and to attain to the best things, and 
flee from the worse. He asks, too, relief in those things in 
which we have sinned, and conversion to the acknowledgment 
of them. 

He follows, on his departure, Him who calls, as quickly, 
so to speak, as He who goes before calls, hasting by reason 
of a good conscience to give thanks ; and having got there 
with Christ, shows himself worthy, through his purity, to 
possess, by a process of blending, the power of God com- 
municated by Christ. For he does not wish to be warm by 
participation in heat, or luminous by participation in flame, 
but to be wholly light. 

He knows accurately the declaration, “ Unless ye hate 
father and mother, and besides your own life, and unless 
ye bear the sign [of the cross].” 2 For he hates the inordi- 
nate affections of the flesh, which possess the powerful spell 
of pleasure ; and entertains a noble contempt for all that 
belongs to the creation and nutriment of the flesh. He also 
withstands the corporeal 3 soul, putting a bridle-bit on the 
restive irrational spirit : “ For the flesh lusteth against the 
Spirit.” 4 And “ to bear the sign of [the cross] ” is to bear 
about death, by taking farewell of all things while still alive ; 

1 Ps. xix. 9. 2 Luke xiv. 26, 27. 

3 i.e. The sentient soul, which he calls the irrational spirit, in contrast 

with the rational soul. 

4 Gal. v. 17. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

465 

since there is not equal love in u having sown the flesh,” 1 
and in having formed the soul for knowledge. 

He having acquired the habit of doing good, exercises 
beneficence well, quicker than speaking ; praying that he may 
get a share in the sins of his brethren, in order to confession 
and conversion on the part of his kindred ; and eager to 
give a share to those dearest to him of his own good things. 
And so these are to him, friends. Promoting, then, the 
growth of the seeds deposited in him, according to the hus- 
bandry enjoined by the Lord, he continues free of sin, and 
becomes continent, and lives in spirit with those who are like 
him, among the choirs of the saints, though still detained on 
earth. 

He, all day and night, speaking and doing the Lord’s 
commands, rejoices exceedingly, not only on rising in the 
morning and at noon, but also when walking about, when 
asleep, when dressing and undressing ; and he teaches his 
son, if he has a son. He is inseparable from the command- 
ment and from hope, and is ever giving thanks to God, like 
the living creatures figuratively spoken of by Esaias, and 
submissive in every trial, he says, “ The Lord gave, and the 
Lord hath taken away.” 2 For such also was Job ; who after 
the spoiling of his effects, along with the health of his body, 
resigned all through love to the Lord. For “ he was,” it is 
said, u just, holy, and kept apart from all wickedness .” 3 Now 
the word u holy ” points out all duties toward God, and the 
entire course of life. Knowing which, he was a Gnostic. For 
we must neither cling too much to such things, even if they are 
good, seeing they are human, nor on the other hand detest 
them, if they are bad ; but we must be above both [good and 
bad], trampling the latter under foot, and passing on the 
former to those who need them. But the Gnostic is cautious 
in accommodation, lest he be not perceived, or lest the accom- 
modation become disposition. 

1 In allusion to Gal. vi. 8, where, however, the apostle speaks of sow- 
ing to the flesh. 

2 Job i. 21. 3 Job i. 1. 

2 G 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

4G6 

IRE MISCELLANIES. 

[Boos VTI. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

DESCRIPTION OF THE GNOSTIC CONTINUED. 

Hf. never remembers those who have sinned against him, but 
forgives them. Wherefore also he righteously prays, saying, 
£: Forgive us: for we also forgive.” ' For this also is one of 
the things which God wishes, to covet nothing, to hate no 
one. For all men are the work of one will. And is it not 
the Saviour, who wishes the Gnostic to be perfect as “ the 
heavenly Father." ' that is. Himself, who says, “Come. ye 
children, hear from me the fear of the Lord ?'" 0 He wishes 
him no longer to stand in need of help by angels, but to 
receive it from Himself, having become worthv. and to have 
protection from Himself by obedience. 

Such an one demands from the Lord, and does not merely 
ask. And in the case of his brethren in want, the Gnostic 
will not ask himself for abundance of wealth to bestow, but 
will pray that the supply of what they need may be furnished 
to them. For so the Gnostic gives his prayer to those who 
are in need, and by his prayer they are supplied, without his 
knowledge, and without vanitv. 

Penury and disease, and such trials, are often sent for 
admonition, for the correction of the past, and for care for the 
future. Such an one prays for relief from them, in virtue 
of possessing the prerogative of knowledge, not out of vain- 
glory; but from the very fact of his being a Gnostic, he 
works beneficence, having become the instrument of the 
goodness of God. 

They say in the traditions that Matthew the apostle con- 
stantly said, that “ if the neighbour of an elect man sin, the 
elect man has sinned. For had he conducted himself as the 
Word prescribes, his neighbour also would have been filled 
with such reverence for the life he led as not to sin.” 

What, then, shall we say of the Gnostic himself? “Know 
ye not,” says the apostle, “ that ye are the temple of God ?” 4 

1 Matt, vi. 12 ; Luke xi. 4. 2 Matt. v. 48. 

3 Ps. xxxiv. 11 . 4 1 Cor. iii. 16. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

467 

The Gnostic is consequently divine, and already holy, God- 
bearing, and God-borne. Now the Scripture, showing that 
sinning is foreign to him, sells those who have fallen away 
to strangers, saying, “ Look not on a strange woman, to lust,” 1 
plainly pronounces sin foreign and contrary to the nature of 
the temple of God. Now the temple is great, as the Church, 
and it is small, as the man who preserves the seed of 
Abraham. He, therefore, who has God resting in him will 
not desire aught else. At once leaving all hindrances, and 
despising all matter which distracts him, he cleaves the 
heaven by knowledge. And passing through the spiritual 
Essences, and all rule and authority, he touches the highest 
thrones, hasting to that alone for the sake of which alone he 
knew. 

Mixing, then, “ the serpent with, the dove,” 2 he lives at 
once perfectly and with a good conscience, mingling faith 
with hope, in order to the expectation of the future. For he 
is conscious of the boon he has received, having become 
worthy of obtaining it ; and is translated from slavery to 
adoption, as the consequence of knowledge ; knowing God, 
or rather known of Him, for the end, he puts forth energies 
corresponding to the worth of grace. For works follow 
knowledge, as the shadow the body. 

Rightly, then, he is not disturbed by anything which hap- 
pens ; nor does he suspect those things, which, through divine 
arrangement, take place for good. Nor is he ashamed to 
die, having a good conscience, and being fit to be seen by 
the Powers. Cleansed, so to speak, from all the stains of 
the soul, he knows right well that it will be better with him 
after his departure. 

Whence he never prefers pleasure and profit to the divine 
arrangement, since he trains himself by the commands, that 
in all things he may be well pleasing to the Lord, and 
praiseworthy in the sight of the world, since all things de- 
pend on the one Sovereign God. The Son of God, it is 

1 These words are not found in Scripture. Solomon often warns 
against strange women, and there are our Lord’s words in Matt. v. 28. 

2 Matt. x. 16. 

468 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book yii. 

said, came to His own, and His own received Him not. 
Wherefore also in the use of the things of the world he not 
only gives thanks and praises the creation, but also, while 
using them as is right, is praised ; since the end he has in 
view terminates in contemplation by gnostic activity in 
accordance with the commandments. 

Thence now, by knowledge collecting materials to be the 
food of contemplation, having embraced nobly the magnitude 
of knowledge, he advances to the holy recompense of trans- 
lation hence. For he has heard the Psalm which says : 
“ Encircle Zion, and encompass it, tell upon its towers.” 1 
For it intimates, I think, those who have sublimely embraced 
the Word, so as to become lofty towers, and to stand firmly 
in faith and knowledge. 

Let these statements concerning the Gnostic, containing the 
germs of the matter in as brief terms as possible, be made to 
the Greeks. But let it be known that if the [mere] believer 
do rightly one or a second of these things, yet he will not do 
so in all nor with the highest knowledge, like the Gnostic. 

CHAPTER XI Y. 

DESCRIPTION OF THE GNOSTIC FURNISHED BY AN 
EXPOSITION OF 1 COR. VI. 1, ETC. 

Now, of what I may call the passionlessness which we 
attribute to the Gnostic (in which the perfection of the be- 
liever, “advancing by love, comes to a perfect man, to the 
measure of full stature ,” 2 bv being assimilated to God, and 
by becoming truly angelic), many other testimonies from the 
Scripture occur to me to adduce. But I think it better, on 
account of the length of the discourse, that such an honour 
should be devolved on those who wish to take pains, and 
leave it to them to elaborate the dogmas by the selection of 
scriptures. 

One passage, accordingly, I shall in the briefest terms 
advert to, so as not to leave the topic unexplained. 

1 Ps. xlviii. 12. 2 Epb. iv. 13. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

469 

For in the first Epistle to the Corinthians the divine 
apostle says : u Dare any of you, having a matter against 
the other, go to law before the unrighteous, and not before 
the saints? Know ye not that the saints shall judge the 
world?” 1 and so on. 

The section being very lengthy, we shall exhibit the mean- 
ing of the apostle’s utterance by employing such of the 
apostolic expressions as are most pertinent, and in the briefest 
language, and in a sort of cursory way, interpreting the dis- 
course in which he describes the perfection of the Gnostic. 
For he does not merely instance the Gnostic as characterized 
by suffering wrong rather than do wrong ; but he teaches 
that he is not mindful of injuries, and does not allow him 
even to pray against the man who has done him wrong. For 
he knows that the Lord expressly enjoined “ to pray for 
enemies.” 2 

To say, then, that the man who has been injured goes 
to law before the unrighteous, is nothing else than to say that 
he shows a wish to retaliate, and a desire to injure the second 
in return, which is also to do wrong likewise himself. 

And his saying, that he wishes “ some to go to law before 
the saints,” points out those who ask by prayer that those who 
have done wrong should suffer retaliation for their injustice, 
and intimates that the second are better than the former ; 
but they are not yet obedient, 3 if they do not, having become 
entirely free of resentment, pray even for their enemies. 

It is well, then, for them to receive right dispositions from 
repentance, which results in faith. For if the truth seems to 
get enemies who entertain bad feeling, yet it is not hostile to 
any one. “For God makes His sun to shine on the just and 
on the unjust,” 4 and sent the Lord Himself to the just and 
the unjust. And he that earnestly strives to be assimilated to 
God, in the exercise of great absence of resentment, forgives 
seventy times seven times, as it were all his life through, and 

1 1 Cor. vi. 1, 2. 2 Matt. v. 44. 

3 einrei6ets here substituted by Sylburgius for xTreidtig. May not the 

true reading be ukmOus, as the topic is ? 

4 Matt. v. 45. 

470 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

in all his course in this world (that being indicated by the 
enumeration of sevens) shows clemency to each and any one ; 
if any during the whole time of his life in the flesh do the 
Gnostic wrong. F or he not only deems it right that the good 
man should resign his property alone to others, being of the 
number of those who have done him wrong ; but also wishes 
that the righteous man should ask of those judges forgive- 
ness for the offences of those who have done him wrong. 
And with reason, if indeed it is only in that which is ex- 
ternal and concerns the body, though it go to the extent of 
death even, that those who attempt to wrong him take ad- 
vantage of him ; none of which truly belong to the Gnostic. 

And how shall one “ judge” the apostate “angels,” who 
has become himself an apostate from that forgetfulness of 
injuries, which is according to the -Gospel? “Why do ye 
not rather suffer wrong? ” he says; “ why are ye not rather 
defrauded? Yea, ye do wrong and defraud,” 1 manifestly 
by praying against those who transgress in ignorance, and 
deprive of the philanthropy and goodness of God, as far as 
in you lies, those against whom you pray, “ and these your 
brethren,” — not meaning those in the faith only, but also the 
proselytes. For whether he who now is hostile shall after- 
wards believe, we know not as yet. From which the conclusion 
follows clearly, if all are not yet brethren to us, they ought 
to be regarded in that light. And now it is only the man of 
knowledge who recognises all men to be the work of one God, 
and invested with one image in one nature, although some may 
be more turbid than others ; and in the creatures he recognises 
the operation, by which again he adores the will of God. 

“ Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the 
kingdom of God ? ” 2 He acts unrighteously who retaliates, 
whether by deed or word, or by the conception of a wish, 
which, after the training of the Law, the Gospel rejects. 

“ And such were some of you ” — such manifestly as those 
still are whom you do not forgive; “ but ye are washed,” 3 not 
simply as the rest, but with knowledge ; ye have cast off the 
passions of the soul, in oi'der to become assimilated, as far as 

1 1 Cor. vi. 7, 8. 2 1 Cor. vi. 9. 3 1 Cor. vi. 9. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

471 

possible, to the goodness of God’s providence by long-suffer- 
ing, and by forgiveness “ towards the just and the unjust,” 
casting on them the gleam of benignity in word and deeds, 
as the sun. 

The Gnostic will achieve this either by greatness of mind, 
or by imitation of what is better. And that is a third cause. 
“ Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you;” the commandment, 
as it were, compelling to salvation through superabundance 
of goodness. 

“But ye are sanctified.” For he who has come to this 

«/ 

state is in a condition to be holy, falling into none of the 
passions in any way, but as it were already disembodied and 
already grown holy without 1 this earth. 

“ Wherefore,” he says, “ ye are justified in the name of 
the Lord.” Ye are made, so to speak, by Him to be right- 
eous as He is, and are blended as far as possible with the 
Holy Spirit. For “are not all things lawful to me? yet I 
will not be brought under the power of any,” 2 so as to do, or 
think, or speak aught contrary to the gospel. “Meats for 
the belly, and the belly for meats, which God shall destroy,” 3 
— that is, such as think and live as if they were made for 
eating, and do not eat that they may live as a consequence, 
and apply to knowledge as the primary end. And does he 
not say that these are, as it were, the fleshy parts of the holy 
body? As a body, the church of the Lord, the spiritual 
and holy choir, is symbolized. Whence those, who are 
merely called, but do not live in accordance with the word, 
are the fleshy parts. “ Now ” this spiritual “ body,” the 
holy Church, “ is not for fornication.” Nor are those things 
which belong to heathen life to be adopted by apostasy from 
the gospel. For he who conducts himself lieathenishly in 
the Church, whether in deed, or word, or even in thought, 
commits fornication with reference to the Church and his 
own body. He who in this way “is joined to the harlot,” 
that is, to conduct contrary to the Covenant, becomes another 
“ body,” not holy, “ and one flesh,” and has a heathenish life 
and another hope. “ But he that is joined to the Lord in 
1 oLviv ; or above, oLvu. 2 1 Cor. vi. 12. 3 1 Cor. vi. 13. 

472 THE MISCELLANIES. [Book vii. 

spirit ” becomes a spiritual body by a different kind of con- 
junction. 

Such an one is wholly a son, an holy man, passionless, 
gnostic., perfect, formed by the teaching of the Lord; in 
order that in deed, in word, and in spirit itself, being brought 
close to the Lord, he may receive the mansion that is due to 
him who has reached manhood thus. 

Let the specimen suffice to those who have ears. For it is 
not required to unfold the mystery, but only to indicate what 
is sufficient for those who are partakers in knowledge to 
bring it to mind ; who also will comprehend how it was said 
by the Lord, “Be ye perfect as your Father, perfectly ,” 1 
by forgiving sins, and forgetting injuries, and living in 
the habit of passionlessness. For as we call a physician 
perfect, and a philosopher perfect, so also, in my view, do we 
call a Gnostic perfect. But not one of those points, although 
of the greatest importance, is assumed in order to the like- 
ness of God. For we do not say, as the Stoics do most 
impiously, that virtue in man and God is the same. Ought 
we not then to be perfect, as the Father wills % F or it is 
utterly impossible for any one to become perfect as God is. 
Now the Father wishes us to be perfect by living blame- • 
lessly, according to the obedience of the gospel. 

If, then, the statement being elliptical, we understand 
what is wanting, in order to complete the section for those 
who are incapable of understanding what is left out, we shall 
both know the will of God, and shall walk at once piously and 
magnanimously, as befits the dignity of the commandment. 

CHAPTER XY. 

THE OBJECTION TO JOIN THE CHURCH ON ACCOUNT OF THE 
DIVERSITY OF HERESIES ANSWERED. 

Since it comes next to reply to the objections alleged against 
us by Greeks and Jews ; and since, in some of the questions 
previously discussed, the sects also who adhere to other teach- 
1 Matt. v. ; sic. tsAs/o/ t zKuosg. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

473 

ing give their help, it will be well first to clear away the 
obstacles before us, and then, prepared thus for the solution 
of the difficulties, to advance to the succeeding Miscellany. 

First, then, they make this objection to us, saying, that 
they ought not to believe on account of the discord of the 
sects.- For the truth is warped when some teach one set of 
dogmas, others another. 

To whom we say, that among you who are Jews, and 
among the most famous of the philosophers among the 
Greeks, very many sects have sprung up. And yet you do 
not say that one ought to hesitate to philosophize or Judaize, 
because of the want of agreement of the sects among you 
between themselves. And then, that heresies should be sown 
among the truth, as “ tares among the wheat,” was fore- 
told by the Lord; and what was predicted to take place 
could not but happen. And the cause of this is, that every- 
thing that is fair is followed by a foul blot. If one, then, 
violate his engagements, and go aside from the confession 
which he makes before us, are we not to stick to the truth 
because he has belied his profession ? But as the good man 
must not prove false or fail to ratify what he has promised, 
although others violate their engagements ; so also are we 
bound in no way to transgress the canon of the church. And 
especially do we keep our profession in the most important 
points, while they traverse it. 

Those, then, are to be believed, who hold firmly to the 
truth. And we may broadly make use of this reply, and say 
to them, that physicians holding opposite opinions according 
to their own schools, yet equally in point of fact treat patients. 
Does one, then, who is ill in body and needing treatment, 
not have recourse to a physician, on account of the different 
schools in medicine? No more, then, may he who in soul is 
sick and full of idols, make a pretext of the heresies, in refer- 
ence to the recovery of health and conversion to God. 

Further, it is said that it is on account of “ those that are 
approved that heresies exist .” 1 [The apostle] calls “ap- 
proved,” either those who in reaching faith apply to the 

1 1 Cor. xi. 19. 

474 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

teaching of the Lord with some discrimination (as those are 
called skilful 1 money-changers, who distinguish the spurious 
coin from the genuine by the false stamp), or those who have 
already become approved both in life and knowledge. 

For this reason, then, we require greater attention and con- 
sideration in order to investigate how precisely we ought to 
live, and what is the true piety. For it is plain that, from the 
very reason that truth is difficult and arduous of attainment, 
questions arise from which spring the heresies, savouring of 
self-love and vanity, of those who have not learned or appre- 
hended truly, but only caught up a mere conceit of knowledge. 
With the greater care, therefore, are we to examine the real 
truth, which alone has for its object the true God. And the 
toil is followed by sweet discovery and reminiscence. 

On account of the heresies, therefore, the toil of discovery 
must be undertaken; but we must not at all abandon [the 
truth]. For, on fruit being set before us, some real and 
ripe, and some made of wax, as like the real as possible, we 
are not to abstain from both on account of the resemblance. 
But by the exercise of the apprehension of contemplation, 
and by reasoning of the most decisive character, we must 
distinguish the true from the seeming. 

And as, while there is one royal highway, there are many 
others, some leading to a precipice, some to a rushing river 
or to a deep sea, no one will shrink from travelling by reason 
of the diversity, but will make use of the safe, and royal, and 
frequented way ; so, though some say this, some that, con- 
cerning the truth, we must not abandon it ; but must seek 
out the most accurate knowledge respecting it. Since also 
among garden-grown vegetables weeds also spring up, are 
the husbandmen, then, to desist from gardening? 

Having then from nature abundant means for examining 
the statements made, we ought to discover the sequence of the 
truth. Wherefore also we are rightly condemned, if we do not 
assent to what we ought to obey, and do not distinguish what 
is hostile, and unseemly, and unnatural, and false, from what 
is true, consistent, and seemly, and according to nature. 

1 loKi'fiovs, same word as above translated “approved.” 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

475 

And these means must be employed in order to attain to the 
knowledge of the real truth. 

This pretext is then, in the case of the Greeks, futile ; for 
those who are willing may find the truth. But in the case 
of those who adduce unreasonable excuses, their condemna- 
tion is unanswerable. For whether do they deny or admit 
that there is such a thing as demonstration % I am of opinion 
that all will make the admission, except those who take away 
the senses. There being demonstration, then, it is necessary 
to condescend to questions, and to ascertain by way of 
demonstration by the Scriptures themselves how the heresies 
erred, and how in the truth alone and in the ancient church 
is both the exactest knowledge, and the truly best set of 
principles (atpecrt?). 

Now, of those who diverge from the truth, some attempt to 
deceive themselves alone, and some also their neighbours. 
Those, then, who are called (So|ocro^)ot) wise in their own 
opinions, who think that they have found the truth, but have 
no true demonstration, deceive themselves in thinking that 
they have reached a resting-place. And of whom there is no 
inconsiderable multitude, who avoid investigations for fear of 
refutations, and shun instruction for fear of condemnation. 
But those w T ho deceive those who seek access to them are 
very astute ; who, aware that they know nothing, yet darken 
the truth with plausible arguments. 

But, in my opinion, the nature of plausible arguments is of 
one character, and that of true arguments of another. And 
we know that it is necessary that the appellation of the 
heresies should be expressed in contradistinction to the truth; 
from which the Sophists, drawing certain things for the de- 
struction of men, and burying them in human arts invented 
by themselves, glory rather in being at the head of a School 
than presiding over the Church. 

476 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

SCRIPTURE THE CRITERION BY WHICH TRUTH AND HERESY 
ARE DISTINGUISHED. 

But those who are ready to toil in the most excellent pursuits, 
will not desist from the search after truth, till they get the 
demonstration from the Scriptures themselves. 

There are certain criteria common to men, as the senses ; 
and others that belong to those who have employed their wills 
and energies in what is true, — the methods which are pursued 
by the mind and reason, to distinguish between true and false 
propositions. 

Now, it is a very great thing to abandon opinion, by taking 
one’s stand between accurate knowledge and the l’ash wisdom 
of opinion, and to know that he who hopes for everlasting 
rest knows also that the entrance to it is toilsome “ and 
strait.” And let him who has once received the gospel, even 
in the very hour in which he has come to the knowledge of 
salvation, “ not turn back, like Lot’s wife,” as is said ; and let 
him not go back either to his former life, which adheres to the 
things of sense, or to heresies. For they form the character, 
not knowing the true God. “For he that loveth father or 
mother more than me,” the Father and Teacher of the truth, 
who regenerates and creates anew, and nourishes the elect soul, 
“ is not worthy of me ” — He means, to be a son of God and 
a disciple of God, and at the same time also to be a friend, 
and of kindred nature. “For no man who looks back, and 
puts his hand to the plough, is fit for the kingdom of God.” 1 

But, as appears, many even down to our own time regard 
Mary, on account of the birth of her child, as having been 
in the puerperal state, although she was not. For some say 
that, after she brought forth, she was found, when examined, 
to be a virgin. 

Now such to us are the Scriptures of the Lord, which 
give birth to the truth and continue virgin, in the conceal- 

1 Luke ix. G2. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

477 

ment of the mysteries of the truth. u And she brought 
forth, and yet brought not forth ,” 1 says the Scripture ; as 
having conceived of herself, and not from conjunction. 
Wherefore the Scriptures have conceived to Gnostics ; but 
the heresies, not having learned them, dismiss them as not 
having conceived. 

Now all men, having the same judgment, some, following 
the Word speaking, frame for themselves proofs ; while 
others, giving themselves up to pleasures, wrest Scripture, 
in accordance with their lusts. And the lover of truth, as I 
think, needs force of soul. For those who make the greatest 
attempts must fail in things of the highest importance; unless, 
receiving from the truth itself the rule of the truth, they cleave 
to the truth. But such people, in consequence of falling away 
from the right path, err in most individual points ; as you 
might expect from not having the faculty for judging of what 
is true and false, strictly trained to select what is essential. 
For if they had, they would have obeyed the Scriptures. 

As, then, if a man should, similarly to those drugged by 
Circe, become a beast ; so he, who has spurned the ecclesias- 
tical tradition, and darted off to the opinions of heretical men, 
has ceased to be a man of God and to remain faithful to the 
Lord. But he who has returned from this deception, on 
hearing the Scriptures, and turned his life to the truth, is, as 
it were, from being a man made a God. 

For we have, as the source of teaching, the Lord, both by 
the prophets, the Gospel, and the blessed apostles, “ in divers 
manners and at sundry times ,” 2 leading from the beginning 
of knowledge to the end. But if one should suppose that 
another origin was required, then no longer truly could an 
origin be preserved. 

He, then, who of himself believes the Scripture and voice 
of the Lord, which by the Lord acts to the benefiting of 
men, is rightly [regarded] reliable. Certainly we use it as 

1 Tertullian, who treats of the above-mentioned topic, attributes these 
words to Ezekiel ; hut they are sought for in vain in Ezekiel, or in any 
other part of Scripture. 

2 Heb. i. 1. 

478 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

a criterion in the discovery of things. What is subjected to 
criticism is not believed till it is so subjected ; so that what 
needs criticism cannot be a first principle. Therefore, as is 
reasonable, grasping by faith the indemonstrable first prin- 
ciple, and receiving in abundance, from the first principle itself, 
demonstrations in reference to the first principle, we are by the 
voice of the Lord trained up to the knowledge of the truth. 

For we may not give our adhesion to men on a bare state- 
ment by them, who might equally state the opposite. But 
if it is not enough merely to state the opinion, but if what is 
stated must be confirmed, we do not wait for the testimony of 
men, but we establish the matter that is in question by the 
voice of the Lord, which is the surest of all demonstrations, 
or rather is the only demonstration ; in which knowledge 
those who have merely tasted the Scriptures are believers ; 
while those who, having advanced further, and become correct 
expounders of the truth, are Gnostics. Since also, in what 
pertains to life, craftsmen are superior to ordinary people, and 
model what is beyond common notions ; so, consequently, we 
also, giving a complete exhibition of the Scriptures from the 
Scriptures themselves, from faith persuade by demonstration. 

And if those also who follow heresies venture to avail them- 
selves of the prophetic Scriptures ; in the first place they will 
not make use of all the Scriptures, and then they will not quote 
them entire, nor as the body and texture of pi'ophecy prescribe. 
But, selecting ambiguous expressions, they wrest them to 
their own opinions, gathering a few expressions here and 
there ; not looking to the sense, but making use of the mere 
words. For in almost all the quotations they make, you will 
find that they attend to the names alone, while they alter 
the meanings ; neither knowing, as they affirm, nor using 
the quotations they adduce, according to their true nature. 

But the truth is not found by changing the meanings (for 
so people subvert all true teaching), but in the considera- 
tion of what perfectly belongs to and becomes the Sovereign 
God, and in establishing each one of the points demonstrated 
in the Scriptures again from similar Scriptures. Neither, 
then, do they want to turn to the truth, being ashamed to 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

479 

abandon the claims of self-love ; nor are they able to manage 
their opinions, by doing violence to the Scriptures. But 
having first promulgated false dogmas to men ; plainly fight- 
ing against almost the whole Scriptures, and constantly con- 
futed by us who contradict them ; for the rest, even now partly 
they hold out against admitting the prophetic Scriptures, and 
partly disparage us as of a different nature, and incapable of 
understanding what is peculiar to them. And sometimes 
even they deny their own dogmas, when these are confuted, 
being ashamed openly to own what in private they glory in 
teaching. For this may be seen in all the heresies, when 
you examine the iniquities of their dogmas. For when they 
are overturned by our clearly showing that they are opposed 
to the Scriptures, one of two things may be seen to have 
been done by those who defend the dogma. For they either 
despise the consistency of their own dogmas, or despise the 
prophecy itself, or rather their own hope. And they invari- 
ably prefer what seems to them to be more evident to what 
has been spoken by the Lord through the prophets and by the 
Gospel, and, besides, attested and confirmed by the apostles. 

Seeing, therefore, the danger that they are in (not in respect 
of one dogma, but in reference to the maintenance of the here- 
sies) of not discovering the truth ; for while reading the books 
we have ready at hand, they despise them as useless, but in their 
eagerness to surpass common faith, they have diverged from 
the truth. For, in consequence of not learning the mysteries 
of ecclesiastical knowledge, and not having capacity for the 
grandeur of the truth, too indolent to descend to the bottom 
of things, reading superficially, they have dismissed the Scrip- 
tures. Elated, then, by vain opinion, they are incessantly 
wrangling, and plainly care more to seem than to be philo- 
sophers. Not laying as foundations the necessary first prin- 
ciples of things ; and influenced by human opinions, then 
making the end to suit them, by compulsion ; on account of 
being confuted, they spar with those who are engaged in 
the prosecution of the true philosophy, and undergo every- 
thing, and, as they say, ply every oar, even going the length 
of impiety, by disbelieving the Scriptures, rather than be 

480 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

removed from the honours of the heresy and the boasted 
first seat in their churches ; on account of which also they 
eagerly embrace that convivial couch of honour in the Agape, 
falsely so called. 

The knowledge of the truth among us from 'what is already 
believed, produces faith in what is not yet believed ; which 
[faith] is, so to speak, the essence of demonstration. But, as 
appears, no heresy has at all ears to hear what is useful, but 
opened only to what leads to pleasure. Since also, if one of 
them would only obey the truth, he would be healed. 

Now the cure of self-conceit (as of every ailment) is three- 
fold : the ascertaining of the cause, and the mode of its re- 
moval ; and thirdly, the training of the soul, and the accus- 
toming it to assume a right attitude to the judgments come to. 
For, just like a disordered eye, so also the soul that has been 
darkened by unnatural dogmas cannot perceive distinctly the 
light of truth, but even overlooks what is before it. 

They say, then, that in muddy water eels are caught by 
being blinded. And just as knavish boys bar out the teacher, 
so do these shut out the prophecies from their church, regard- 
ing them with suspicion by reason of rebuke and admonition. 
In fact, they stitch together a multitude of lies and figments, 
that they may appear acting in accordance with reason in not 
admitting the Scriptures. So, then, they are not pious, inas- 
much as they are not pleased with the divine commands, that 
is, with the Holy Spirit. And as those almonds are called empty 
in which the contents are worthless, not those in which there is 
nothing ; so also we call those heretics empty, who are destitute 
of the counsels of God and the traditions of Christ ; bitter, in 
truth, like the wild almond, their dogmas originating with 
themselves, with the exception of such truths as they could 
not, by reason of their evidence, discard and conceal. 

As, then, in war the soldier must not leave the post which 
the commander has assigned him, so neither must we desert 
the post assigned by the Word, whom we have received as 
the guide of knowledge and of life. But the most have 
not even inquired, if there is one that we ought to follow, 
and who this is, and how he is to be followed. F or as is the 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

481 

Word, such also must the believer’s life be, so as to be able 
to follow God, who brings all things to end from the begin- 
ning by the right course. 

But when one has transgressed against the Word, and 
thereby against God ; if it is through becoming powerless in 
consequence of some impression being suddenly made, he 
ought to see to have the impressions of reasons at hand. And 
if it is that he has become “common,” as the Scripture 1 says, 
in consequence of being overcome by the habits which formerly 
had sway over him, the habits must be entirely put a stop 
to, and the soul trained to oppose them. And if it appears 
that conflicting dogmas draw some away, these must be taken 
out of the way, and recourse is to be had to those who re- 
concile dogmas, and subdue by the charm of the Scriptures 
such of the untutored as are timid, by explaining the truth 
by the connection of the Testaments. 

But, as appears, we incline to ideas founded on opinion, 
though they be contrary, rather than to the truth. For it is 
austere and grave. Now, since there are three states of the 
soul — ignorance, opinion, knowledge — those who are in igno- 
rance are the Gentiles, those in knowledge, the true Church, 
and those in opinion, the Heretics. Nothing, then, can be 
more clearly seen than those, who know, making affirmations 
about what they know’, and the others respecting what they 
hold on the strength of opinion, as far as respects affirmation 
without proof. 

They accordingly despise and laugh at one another. And 
it happens that the same thought is held in the highest esti- 
mation by some, and by others condemned for insanity. And, 
indeed, we have learned that voluptuousness, which is to be 
attributed to the Gentiles, is one thing; and wrangling, which 
is preferred among the heretical sects, is another ; and joy, 
which is to be appropriated to the church, another ; and de- 
light, which is to be assigned to the true Gnostic, another. And 
as, if one devote himself to Ischomachus, he will make him 
a farmer ; and to Lampis, a mariner ; and to Charidemus, a 
military commander ; and to Simon, an equestrian ; and to 
1 Ab apocryphal scripture probably. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 2 H 

482 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

Perdices, a trader ; and to Crobylus, a cook ; and to Arche- 
laus, a dancer ; and to Homer, a poet ; and to Pyrrho, a 
wrangler ; and to Demosthenes, an orator ; and to Chrysippus, 
a dialectician ; and to Aristotle, a naturalist ; and to Plato, a 
philosopher : so he who listens to the Lord, and follows the 
prophecy given by Him, will be formed perfectly in the like- 
ness of the teacher — made a god going about in flesh. 

Accordingly, those fall from this eminence who follow not 
God whither He leads. And He leads us in the inspired 
Scriptures. 

Though men’s actions are ten thousand in number, the 
sources of all sin are but two, ignorance and inability. And 
both depend on ourselves; inasmuch as we will not learn, 
nor, on the other hand, restrain lust. And of these, the one 
is that, in consequence of which people do not judge well, 
and the other that, in consequence of which they cannot 
comply with right judgments. For neither will one who is 
deluded in his mind be able to act rightly, though perfectly 
able to do what he knows ; nor, though capable of judging 
what is requisite, will he keep himself free of blame, if desti- 
tute of power in action. Consequently, then, there are 
assigned two kinds of correction applicable to both kinds of 
sin : for the one, knowledge and clear demonstration from 
the testimony of the Scriptures ; and for the other, the train- 
ing according to the Word, which is regulated by the dis- 
cipline of faith and fear. And both develope into perfect 
love. For the end of the Gnostic here is, in my judgment, 
twofold, — partly scientific contemplation, partly action. 

Would, then, that these heretics would learn and be set 
right by these notes, and turn to the sovereign God ! But 
if, like the deaf serpepts, they listen not to the song called 
new, though very old, may they be chastised by God, and 
undergo paternal admonitions previous to the Judgment, till 
they become ashamed and repent, but not rush through head- 
long unbelief, and precipitate themselves into judgment. 

For there are partial corrections, which are called chastise- 
ments, which many of us who have been in transgression incur, 
by falling away from the Lord’s people. But as children 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

483 

are chastised by their teacher, or their father, so are we by 
Providence. But God does not punish ; for punishment is 
retaliation for evil. He chastises, however, for good to those 
who are chastised, collectively and individually. 

I have adduced these things from a wish to avert those, 
who are eager to learn, from the liability to fall into heresies, 
and out of a desire to stop them from superficial ignorance, 
or stupidity, or bad disposition, or whatever it should be 
called. And in the attempt to persuade and lead to the 
truth those who are not entirely incurable, I have made use 
of these words. For there are some who cannot bear at all 
to listen to those who exhort them to turn to the truth ; and 
they attempt to trifle, pouring out blasphemies against the 
truth, claiming for themselves the knowledge of the greatest 
things in the universe, without having learned, or inquired, 
or laboured, or discovered the consecutive train of ideas, — 
whom one should pity rather than hate for such perversity. 

But if one is curable, able to bear (like fire or steel) the 
outspokenness of the truth, which cuts away and burns their 
false opinions, let him lend the ears of the soul. And this 
will be the case, unless, through the propensity to sloth, they 
push truth away, or through the desire of fame, endeavour 
to invent novelties. For those are slothful who, having it in 
their power to provide themselves with proper proofs for the 
divine Scriptures from the Scriptures themselves, select only 
what contributes to their own pleasures. And those have 
a craving for glory who voluntarily evade, by arguments 
of a diverse sort, the things delivered by the blessed apostles 
and teachers, which are wedded to inspired words ; oppos- 
ing the divine tradition by human teachings, in order to 
establish the heresy. For, in truth, what remained to be said 
— in ecclesiastical knowledge I mean — by such men, Marcion, 
for example, or Prodicus, and such like, who did not walk 
in the right way? For they could not have surpassed 
their predecessors in wisdom, so as to discover anything in 
addition to what had been uttered by them ; for they would 
have been satisfied had they been able to learn the things 
laid down before. 

484 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

Our Gnostic then alone, having grown old in the Scrip- 
tures, and maintaining apostolic and ecclesiastic orthodoxy- 
in doctrines, lives most correctly in accordance with the 
gospel, and discovers the proofs, for which he may have 
made search (sent forth as he is by the Lord), from the 
law and the prophets. For the life of the Gnostic, in my 
view, is nothing but deeds and words corresponding to 
the tradition of the Lord. But “ all have not knowledge. 
For I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren,” says 
the apostle, “ that all were under the cloud, and partook of 
spiritual meat and drink ;”' 1 clearly affirming that all who 
heard the word did not take in the magnitude of know- 
ledge in deed and word. Wherefore also he added : “ But 
with all of them He was not well pleased.” Who is this ? 
He who said, “ Why do ye call me Lord, and do not the 
will of my Father ?” 2 That is the Saviour’s teaching, 
which to us is spiritual food, and drink that knows no 
thirst, the water of gnostic life* Further it is said, know- 
ledge is said “ to puff up.” To whom we say : Perchance 
seeming knowledge is said to puff up, if one 3 suppose the 
expression means “ to be swollen up.” But if, as is rather 
the case, the expression of the apostle means, “ to entertain 
great and true sentiments,” the difficulty is solved. Follow- 
ing, then, the Scriptures, let us establish what has been said : 
“ Wisdom,” says Solomon, “ has inflated her children.” For 
the Lord did not work conceit by the particulars of His 
teaching ; but He produces trust in the truth and expansion 
of mind, in the knowledge that is communicated by the 
Scriptures, and contempt for the things which drag into sin, 
which is the meaning of the expression “ inflated.” It 
teaches the magnificence of the wisdom implanted in her 
children by instruction. Now the apostle says, “ I will know 
not the speech of those that are puffed up, but the power ;” 4 
if ye understand the Scriptures magnanimously (which means 
truly ; for nothing is greater than truth). For in that lies 
the power of the children of wisdom who are puffed up. He 

1 1 Cor. x. 1, 3, 4. 2 Luke vi. 46, combined with Matt. vii. 21. 

& ti tis instead of jjt/j. 4 1 Cor. iv. 19. 

Booe vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

485 

says, as it were, I shall know if ye rightly entertain great 
thoughts respecting knowledge. “For God,” according to 
David, “ is known in Judea,” that is, those that are Israelites 
according to knowledge. For Judea is interpreted “ Con- 
fession.” It is, then, rightly said by the apostle, “ This, 
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou 
shall not covet ; and if there be any other commandment, it 
is comprehended in this word, Thou shall love thy neighbour 
as thyself .” 1 

For we must never, as do those who follow the heresies, 
adulterate the truth, or steal the canon of the church, by 
gratifying our own lusts and vanity, by defrauding our 
neighbours ; whom above all it is our duty, in the exercise 
of love to them, to teach to adhere to the truth. It is 
accordingly expressly said, “ Declare among the heathen His 
statutes,” that they may not be judged, but that those who 
have previously given ear may be converted. But those who 
speak treacherously with their tongues have the penalties that 
are on record. 

CHAPTER XVII. 

THE TRADITION OF THE CHURCH PRIOR TO THAT OF THE 

HERESIES. 

Those, then, that adhere to impious words, and dictate them 
to others, inasmuch as they do not make a right but a per- 
verse use of the divine words, neither themselves enter into 
the kingdom of heaven, nor permit those whom they have 
deluded to attain the truth. But not having the key of 
entrance, but a false (and as the common phrase expresses 
it), a counterfeit key (dvr tickets), by which they do not enter 
in as we enter in, through the tradition of the Lord, by draw- 
ing aside the curtain ; but bursting through the side-door, and 
digging clandestinely through the wall of the church, and 
stepping over the truth, they constitute themselves the Mys- 
tagogues 2 of the soul of the impious. 

1 Rom. xiii. 9. 2 Those who initiate into the mysteries. 

486 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

For that the human assemblies which they held were pos- 
terior to the Catholic Church, requires not many words to show. 

For the teaching of our Lord at His advent, beginning 
with Augustus and Tiberius, was completed in the middle 
of the times of Tiberius . 1 

And that of the apostles, embracing the ministry of Paul, 
ends with Nero. It was later, in the times of Adrian the 
king, that those who invented the heresies arose ; and they 
extended to the age of Antoninus the elder, as, for instance, 
Basilides, though he claims (as they boast) for his master, 
Glaucias, the interpreter of Peter. 

Likewise they allege that Valentinus was a hearer of 
Theudas . 2 And he was the pupil of Paul. For Marcion, 
who arose in the same age with them, lived as an old man 
with the younger 3 [heretics]. And after him Simon heard 
for a little the preaching of Peter. 

1 'H piv yex.p rov Kvpi'ov xctroL tviv Trctpovtn'ctv dihxorza'hioi, oLko Kvyova- 

tov xoil Tffisplov Kcciactpog pcsaovurcju rav A vyovarov %p6vc*)v 

TfouovTui. In the translation, the change recommended, on high autho- 
rity, of Avyovarov into Tifisplov in the last clause, is adopted, as on the 
whole the best way of solving the unquestionable difficulty here. If we 
retain Avyovcrov, the clause must then be made parenthetical, and the 
sense would be : “ For the teaching of the Lord on His advent, begin- 
ning with Augustus and Tiberius (in the middle of the times of Augus- 
tus), was completed.” The objection to this (not by any means con- 
clusive) is, that it does not specify the end of the period. 

The first 15 years of the life of our Lord were the last 15 of the reign 
of Augustus ; and in the 15th year of the reign of his successor 
Tiberius our Lord was baptized. Clement elsewhere broaches the 
singular opinion, that our Lord’s ministry lasted only a year, and con- 
sequently that He died in the year in which He was baptized. As 
Augustus reigned, according to one of the chronologies of Clement, 43, 
and according to the other 46 years 4 months 1 day, and Tiberius 22 
or 26 years 6 months 19 days, the period of the teaching of the gospel 
specified above began during the reign of Augustus, and ended during 
the reign of Tiberius. 

2 d>cn>cotuui is the reading, which eminent authorities (Bentley, 
Grabe, etc.) have changed into (diolot (or 0st^£) 'biuwKosvut. 

3 Much learning and ingenuity have been expended on this sentence, 
which, read as it stands in the text, appears to state that Marcion was 
an old man while Basilides and Valentinus were young men ; and that 
Simon (Magus) was posterior to them in time. Marcion was certainly 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

487 

Such being the case, it is evident, from the high antiquity 
and perfect truth of the church, that these later heresies, and 
those yet subsequent to them in time, were new inventions 
falsified [from the truth]. 

From what has been said, then, it is my opinion that the 
true Church, that which is really ancient, is one, and that in it 
those who according to God’s purpose are just, are enrolled. 
For from the very reason that God is one, and the Lord one, 
that which is in the highest degree honourable is lauded in 
consequence of its singleness, being an imitation of the one 
first principle. In the nature of the One, then, is associated 
in a joint heritage the one Church, which they strive to cut 
asunder into many sects. 

Therefore in substance and idea, in origin, in pre-emi- 
nence, we say that the ancient and universal Church is alone, 
collecting as it does into the unity of the one faith — which 
results from the peculiar Testaments, or rather the one Tes- 
tament in different times by the will of the one God, 
through one Lord — those already ordained, whom God pre- 
destinated, knowing before the foundation of the world that 
they would be righteous. 

But the pre-eminence of the Church, as the principle of 
union, is, in its oneness, in this surpassing all things else, and 
having nothing like or equal to itself. But of this afterwards. 

Of the heresies, some receive their appellation from a 
[person’s] name, as that which is called after Valentinus, 
and that after Marcion, and that after Basilides, although 
they boast of adducing the opinion of Matthew [without 
truth] ; for as the teaching, so also the tradition of the 
apostles was one. Some take their designation from a place, 
as the Peratici ; some from a nation, as the [heresy] of the 

not an old man when Valentinus and Basilides were young men, as they 
flourished in the first half of the second century, and he was born about' 
the beginning of it. The difficulty in regard to Simon is really best got > 
over by supposing that Clement, speaking of these heresiarchs in ascend- 
ing order, describes Marcion as further back in time ; which sense 
ov of course will bear, although it does seem somewhat harsh, as 
“ after” thus means “ before.” 

483 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vii. 

Phrygians ; some from an action, as that of the Encratites ; 
and some from peculiar dogmas, as that of the Docetae, and 
that of the Haematites ; and some from suppositions, and from 
individuals they have honoured, as those called Cainists, and 
the Ophians ; and some from nefarious practices and enor- 
mities, as those of the Simonians called Entychites. 

CHAPTEK XVIII. 

THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN CLEAN AND UNCLEAN ANIMALS 
IN THE LAW SYMBOLICAL OF THE DISTINCTION BE- 
TWEEN THE CHURCH, AND JEWS, AND HERETICS. 

After showing a little peep-hole to those who love to con- 
template the Church from the law of sacrifices respecting 
clean and unclean animals (inasmuch as thus the common 
Jews and the heretics are distinguished mystically from the 
divine church), let us bring the discourse to a close. 

For such of the sacrifices as part the hoof, and ruminate, 
the Scripture represents as clean and acceptable to God ; 
since the just obtain access to the Father and to the Son 
by faith. For this is the stability of those who part the 
hoof, those who study the oracles of God night and day, 
and ruminate them in the soul’s receptacle for instructions ; 
which gnostic exercise the Law expresses under the figure of 
the rumination of the clean animal. But such as have neither 
the one nor the other of those qualities it separates as unclean. 

Now those that ruminate, but do not part the hoof, indi- 
cate the majority of the Jews, who have indeed the oracles 
of God, but have not faith, and the step which, resting on 
the truth, conveys to the Father by the Son. Whence also 
this kind of cattle are apt to slip, not having a division in the 
foot, and not resting on the twofold support of faith. For 
“ no man,” it is said, “ knoweth the Father, but he to whom 
the Son shall reveal Him.” 1 

And again, those also are likewise unclean that part the 
hoof, but do not ruminate. For these point out the heretics, 
who indeed go upon the name of the Father and the Son, 

1 Luke x. 22. 

Book vii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

489 

but are incapable of triturating and grinding down the clear 
declaration of the oracles, and who, besides, perform the 
works of righteousness coarsely, and not with precision, if 
they perform them at all. To such the Lord says, “ Why 
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say ?” 1 

And those that neither part the hoof nor chew the cud are 
entirely unclean. 

“ But ye Megareans,” says Theognis, “ are neither third, nor fourth, 
Nor twelfth, neither in reckoning nor in number,” 

u but as chaff which the wind drives away from the face of 
the earth ,” 2 “ and as a drop from a vessel .” 3 

These points, then, having been formerly thoroughly 
treated, and the department of ethics having been sketched 
summarily in a fragmentary way, as we promised; and having 
here and there interspersed the dogmas which are the germs 
of true knowledge, so that the discovery of the sacred tradi- 
tions may not be easy to any one of the uninitiated, let us 
proceed to what we promised. 

Now the Miscellanies are not like parks laid out, planted 
in regular order for the delight of the eye, but rather like an 
umbrageous and shaggy hill, planted with laurel, and ivy, 
and apples, and olives, and figs ; the planting being purposely 
a mixture of fruit-bearing and fruitless trees, since the com- 
position aims at concealment, on account of those that have 
the daring to pilfer and steal the ripe fruits ; from which, 
however, the husbandmen, transplanting shoots and plants, 
will adorn a beautiful park and a delightful grove. 

The Miscellanies, then, study neither arrangement nor 
diction ; since there are even cases in which the Greeks on 
purpose wish that ornate diction should be absent, and im- 
perceptibly cast in the seed of dogmas, not according to the 
truth, rendering such as may read laborious and quick at 
discovery. For many and various are the baits for the 
various kinds of fishes. 

And now, after this seventh Miscellany of ours, we shall 
give the account of what follows in order from another 
commencement. 

1 Luke vi. 46. 

2 Ps. i. 4. 

3 Isa. xl. 15. 

BOOK YIII. 

CHAPTER I. 

THE OBJECT OF PHILOSOPHICAL AND THEOLOGICAL 
INQUIRY — THE DISCOVERY OF TRUTH. 

UT the most ancient of the philosophers were not 
carried away to disputing and doubting, much less 
are we, who are attached to the really true philo- 
sophy, on whom the Scripture enjoins examination 
and investigation. For it is the more recent of the Hellenic 
philosophers who, by empty and futile love of fame, are led 
into useless babbling in refuting and wrangling. But, on 
the contrary, the Barbarian philosophy, expelling all conten- 
tion, said, u Seek, and ye shall find ; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you ; ask, and it shall be given you.” 1 

Accordingly, by investigation, the point proposed for 
inquiry and answer knocks at the door of truth, according 
to what appears. And on an opening being made through 
the obstacle in the process of investigation, there results 
scientific contemplation. To those who thus knock, accord- 
ing to my view, the subject under investigation is opened. 

And to those who thus ask questions, in the Scriptures, 
there is given from God (that at which they aim) the gift of 
the God-given knowledge, by way of comprehension, through 
the true illumination of logical investigation. For it is im- 
possible to find, without having sought ; or to have sought, 
without having examined ; or to have examined, without 
1 Matt. vii. 7 ; Luke xi. 9. 

490 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

491 

having unfolded and opened up the question by interroga- 
tion, to produce distinctness ; or again, to have gone through 
the whole investigation, without thereafter receiving as the 
prize the knowledge of the point in question. 

But it belongs to him who has sought, to find ; and to 
him to seek, who thinks previously that he does not know. 
Hence drawn by desire to the discovery of what is good, he 
seeks thoughtfully, without love of strife or glory, asking, 
answering, and besides considering the statements made. 
For it is incumbent, in applying ourselves not only to the 
divine Scriptures, but also to common notions, to institute 
investigations, the discovery ceasing at some useful end. 

For another place and crowd await turbulent people, and 
forensic sophistries. But it is suitable for him, who is at once 
a lover and disciple of the truth, to be pacific even in investi- 
gations, advancing by scientific demonstration, without love 
of self, but with love of truth, to comprehensive knowledge. 

CHAPTER II. 

THE NECESSITY OF PERSPICUOUS DEFINITION. 

What better or clearer method, for the commencement of 
instruction of this nature, can there be than discussion of the 
term advanced, so distinctly, that all who use the same lan- 
guage may follow it? Is the term for demonstration of such 
a kind as the word Blityri, which is a mere sound, signifying 
nothing % But how is it that neither does the philosopher, nor 
the orator, — no more does the judge, — adduce demonstration 
as a term that means nothing ; nor is any of the contending 
parties ignorant of the fact, that the meaning does not exist ? 

Philosophers, in fact, present demonstration as having a 
substantial existence, one in one way, another in another. 
Therefore, if one would treat aright of each question, he 
cannot carry back the discourse to another more generally 
admitted fundamental principle than what is admitted to be 
signified by the term by all of the same nation and language. 

492 

TIIE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book vm. 

Then, starting from this point, it is necessary to inquire if 
the proposition has this signification or not. And next, if it is 
demonstrated to have, it is necessary to investigate its nature 
accurately, of what kind it is, and whether it ever passes 
over the class assigned. And if it suffices not to say, abso- 
lutely, only that which one thinks (for one’s opponent may 
equally allege, on the other side, what he likes) ; then what is 
stated must be confirmed. If the decision of it be carried 
back to what is likewise matter of dispute, and the decision 
of that likewise to another disputed point, it will go on ad 
infinitum , and will be incapable of demonstration. But if 
the belief of a point that is not admitted be carried back to 
one admitted by all, that is to be made the commencement 
of instruction. Every term, therefore, advanced for discus- 
sion is to be converted into an expression that is admitted by 
those that are parties in the discussion, to form the starting 
point for instruction, to lead the way to the discovery of 
the points under investigation. For example, let it be the 
term “ sun ” that is in question. Now the Stoics say that 
it is “ an intellectual fire kindled from the waters of the 
sea.” Is not the definition, consequently, obscurer than the 
term, requiring another demonstration to prove if it be true ? 
It is therefore better to say, in the common and distinct form 
of speech, u that the brightest of the heavenly bodies is 
named the sun.” For this expression is more credible and 
clearer, and is likewise admitted by all. 

CHAPTER III. 

DEMONSTRATION DEFINED. 

I 

Similarly, also, all men will admit that demonstration is 
discourse , 1 agreeable to reason, producing belief in points 
disputed, from points admitted. 

1 It is necessary to read "Koyov here, though not in the text, on account 
of iKTropii^ovrcc which follows ; and as ev'hoyov (Tvctt "Koyov occurs after- 
wards, it seems better to retain sv'hoyov than to substitute 'hoyov for it. 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

493 

Now, not only demonstration and belief and knowledge, 
but foreknowledge also, are used in a twofold manner. There 
is that which is scientific and certain, and that which is merely 
based on hope. 

In strict propriety, then, that is called demonstration which 
produces in the souls of learners scientific belief. The other 
kind is that which merely leads to opinion. As also, both he 
that is really a man, possessing common judgment, and he 
that is savage and brutal, — each is a man. Thus also the 
Comic poet said that “ man is graceful, so long as he is 
man.” The same holds with ox, horse, and dog, according 
to the goodness or badness of the animal. For by looking to 
the perfection of the genus, we come to those meanings that 
are strictly proper. For instance, we conceive of a physician 
who is deficient in no element of the power of healing, and a 
Gnostic who is defective in no element of scientific knowledge. 

Now demonstration differs from syllogism ; inasmuch as 
the point demonstrated is indicative of one thing, being one 
and identical ; as we say that to be with child is the proof of 
being no longer a virgin. But what is apprehended by 
syllogism, though one thing, follows from several ; as, for 
example, not one but several proofs are adduced of Pytho 
having betrayed the Byzantines, if such was the fact. And 
to draw a conclusion from what is admitted is to syllogize ; 
while to draw a conclusion from what is true is to demon- 
strate. 

So that there is a compound advantage of demonstra- 
tion : from its assuming, for the proof of points in question, 
true premisses, and from its drawing the conclusion that 
follows from them. If the first have no existence, but the 
second follow from the first, one has not demonstrated, but 
syllogized. For, to draw the proper conclusion from the 
premisses, is merely to syllogize. But to have also each of the 
premisses true, is not merely to have syllogized, but also to 
have demonstrated. 

And to conclude, as is evident from the word, is to bring to 
the conclusion. And in every train of reasoning, the point 
sought to be determined is the end, which is also called the 

494 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

conclusion. But no simple and primary statement is termed 
a syllogism, although true; but it is compounded of three 
such, at the least, — of two as premisses, and one as conclusion. 

Now, either all things require demonstration, or some of 
them are self-evident. But if the first, by demanding the 
demonstration of each demonstration we shall go on ad 
infinitum ; and so demonstration is subverted. But if the 
second, those things which are self-evident will become the 
starting points [and fundamental grounds] of demonstration. 

In point of fact, the philosophers admit that the first prin- 
ciples of all things are indemonstrable. So that if there is 
demonstration at all, there is an absolute necessity that there 
be something that is self-evident, which is called primary and 
indemonstrable. 

Consequently all demonstration is traced up to indemon- 
strable faith. 

It will also turn out that there are other starting points for 
demonstrations, after the source which takes its rise in faith, — 
the things which appear clearly to sensation and understand- 
ing. For the phenomena of sensation are simple, and incapable 
of being decompounded; but those of understanding are simple, 
rational, and primary. But those produced from them are 
compound, but no less clear and reliable, and having more to 
do with the reasoning faculty than the first. For therefore 
the peculiar native power of reason, which we all have by 
nature, deals with agreement and disagreement. If, then, 
any argument be found to be of such a kind, as from 
points already believed to be capable of producing belief in 
what is not yet believed, we shall aver that this is the very 
essence of demonstration. 

Now it is affirmed that the nature of demonstration, as 
that of belief, is twofold : that which produces in the souls 
of the hearers persuasion merely, and that which produces 
knowledge. 

If, then, one begins with the things which are evident to 
sensation and understanding, and then draw the proper con- 
clusion, he truly demonstrates. But if [he begin] with things 
which are only probable and not primary, that is evident 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

495 

neither to sense nor understanding, and if he draw the right 
conclusion, he will syllogize indeed, but not produce a scien- 
tific demonstration ; but if [he draw] not the right conclusion, 
he will not syllogize at all. 

Now demonstration differs from analysis. For each one 
of the points demonstrated, is demonstrated by means of 
points that are demonstrated; those having been previously 
demonstrated by others ; till we get back to those which are 
self-evident, or to those evident to sense and to understand- 
ing; which is called Analysis. But demonstration is, when the 
point in question reaches us through all the intermediate steps. 
The man, then, who practises demonstration, ought to give 
great attention to the truth, while he disregards the terms of 
the premisses, whether you call them axioms, or premisses, or 
assumptions. Similarly, also, special attention must be paid 
to what suppositions a conclusion is based on ; while he may be 
quite careless as to whether one choose to term it a conclusive 
or syllogistic proposition. 

For I assert that these two things must be attended to by 
the man who would demonstrate — to assume true premisses, 
and to draw from them the legitimate conclusion, which 
some also call “ the inference,” as being what is inferred from 
the premisses. 

Now in each proposition respecting a question, there must 
be different premisses, related, however, to the proposition 
laid down ; and what is advanced must be reduced to de- 
finition. And this definition must be admitted by all. But 
when premisses irrelevant to the proposition to be established 
are assumed, it is impossible to arrive at any right result ; the 
entire proposition — which is also called the question of its 
nature — being ignored. 

In all questions, then, there is something which is previ- 
ously known, — that which being self-evident is believed with- 
out demonstration ; which must be made the starting point in 
their investigation, and the criterion of apparent results. 

496 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

CHAPTER IV. 

TO PREVENT AMBIGUITY, WE MUST BEGIN WITH CLEAR 

DEFINITION. 

For every question is solved from pre-existing knowledge. 
And the knowledge pre-existing of each object of investiga- 
tion is sometimes merely of the essence, while its functions 
are unknown (as of stones, and plants, and animals, of whose 
operations we are ignorant), or [the knowledge] of the pro- 
perties, or powers, or (so to speak) of the qualities inherent 
in the objects. And sometimes we may know some one or 
more of those powers or properties, — as, for example, the 
desires and affections of the soul, — and be ignorant of the 
essence, and make it the object of investigation. But in 
many instances, our understanding having assumed all these, 
the question is, in which of the essences do they thus inhere ; 
for it is after forming conceptions of both — that is, both of 
essence and operation — in our mind, that w r e proceed to the 
question. And there are also some objects, whose operations, 
along with their essences, we know, but are ignorant of their 
modifications. 

Such, then, is the method of the discovery [of truth]. 
For we must begin with the knowledge of the questions to be 
discussed. For often the form of the expression deceives and 
confuses and disturbs the mind, so that it is not easy to dis- 
cover to what class the thing is to be referred ; as, for example, 
whether the foetus be an animal. For, having a conception 
of an animal and a foetus, we inquire if it be the case that the 
foetus is an animal ; that is, if the substance which is in the 
foetal state possesses the power of motion, and of sensation 
besides. So that the inquiry is regarding functions and sen- 
sations in a substance previously known. Consequently the 
man who proposes the question is to be first asked, what 
he calls an animal. Especially is this to be done whenever 
we find the same term applied to various purposes ; and 
we must examine whether what is signified by the term is 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

497 

disputed, or admitted by all. For were one to say that he 
calls whatever grows and is fed an animal, we shall have again 
to ask further, whether he considered plants to be animals ; 
and then, after declaring himself to this effect, he must show 
what it is which is in the foetal state, and isjiourished. 

For Plato calls plants animals, as parta _Jfing the third 
species of life alone, that of appetency . 1 But Aristotle, while 
he thinks that plants are possessed of a life of vegetation and 
nutrition, does not consider it proper to call them animals ; for 
that alone, which possesses the other life — that of sensation — 
he considers warrantable to be called an animal. The Stoics 
do not call the power of vegetation, life. 

Now, on the man who proposes the question denying that 
plants are animals, we shall show that he affirms what con- 
tradicts himself. For, having defined the animal by the fact 
of its nourishment and growth, but having asserted that a 
plant is not an animal, it appears that he says nothing else 
than that what is nourished and grows is both an animal 
and not an animal. 

Let him, then, say what he wants to learn. Is it whether 
what is in the womb grows and is nourished, or is it whether 
it possesses any sensation or movement by impulse ? For, 
according to Plato, the plant is animate, and an animal ; but 
according to Aristotle, not an animal, for it wants sensation, 
but is animate. Therefore, according to him, an animal is 
an animate sentient being. But according to the Stoics, a 
plant is neither animate nor an animal ; for an animal is an 
animate being. If, then, an animal is animate, and life is 
sentient nature, it is plain that what is animate is sentient. 
If, then, he who has put the question, being again interro- 
gated if he still calls the animal in the foetal state an animal 
on account of its being nourished and growing, he has got 
his answer. 

But were he to say that the question he asks is, whethei 
the foetus is already sentient, or capable of moving itself in 
consequence of any impulse, the investigation of the matter 

1 ''F.'Ktdvy.Ynix.av, which accords with what Plato says in the Timseus , 
p. 1078. Lowth, however, reads <pvrix.ov. 

CLEM. — YOL. II. 2 I 

498 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book viii. 

becomes clear, the fallacy in the name no longer remaining. 
But if he do not reply to the interrogation, and will not say 
what he means, or in respect of what consideration it is that he 
applies the term u animal” in propounding the question, but 
bids us define it ourselves, let him be noted as disputatious. 

But as there are two methods, one by question and answer, 
and the other the method of exposition, if he decline the 
former, let him listen to us, while we expound all that bears on 
the problem. Then when we are done, he may treat of each 
point in turn. But if he attempt to interrupt the investiga- 
tion by putting questions, he plainly does not want to hear. 

But if he choose to reply, let him first be asked, To what 
thing he applies the name, animal. And when he has 
answered this, let him be again asked, what, in his view, the 
foetus means, whether that which is in the womb, or things 
already formed and living ; and again, if the foetus means 
the seed deposited, or if it is only when members and a shape 
are formed that the name of embryos is to be applied. And 
on his replying to this, it is proper that the point in hand be 
reasoned out to a conclusion, in due order, and taught. 

But if he wishes us to speak without him answering, let 
him hear. Since you will not say in what sense you allege 
what you have propounded (for I would not have thus engaged 
in a discussion about meanings, but I would now have looked 
at the things themselves), know that you have done just as 
if you had propounded the question, Whether a dog were an 
animal ? For I might have rightly said, Of what dog do you 
speak ? For I shall speak of the land dog and the sea dog, 
and the constellation in heaven, and of Diogenes too, and all 
the other docs in order. For I could not divine whether 
you inquire about all or about some one. What you shall 
do subsequently is to learn now, and say distinctly what it is 
that your question is about. Now if you are shuffling about 
names, it is plain to everybody that the name u foetus ” is 
neither an animal nor a plant, but a name, and a sound, and 
a body, and a being, and anything and everything rather 
than an animal. And if it is this that you have propounded, 
you are answered. 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

499 

But neither is that which is denoted by the name foetus 
an animal. But that is incorporeal, and may be called a 
thing and a notion, and everything rather than an animal. 
The nature of an animal is different. For it was clearly 
shown respecting the very point in question, I mean the 
nature of the embryo, of what sort it is. The question 
respecting the meanings expressed by the name animal is 
different. 

I say, then, if you affirm that an animal is what has the 
power of sensation and of moving itself from appetency, that 
an animal is not simply what moves through appetency and 
is possessed of sensation. For it is also capable of sleeping, 
or, when the objects of sensation are not present, of not exer- 
cising the power of sensation. But the natural power of 
appetency or of sensation is the mark of an animal. For 
something of this nature is indicated by these things. First, 
if the foetus is not capable of sensation or motion from 
appetency ; which is the point proposed for consideration. 
Another point is ; if the foetus is capable of ever exercising 
the power of sensation or moving through appetency. In 
which sense no one makes it a question, since it is evident. 

But the question was, whether the embryo is already an 
animal, or still a plant. And then the name animal was 
reduced to definition, for the sake of perspicuity. But hav- 
ing discovered that it is distinguished from what is not an 
animal by sensation and motion from appetency ; we again 
separated this from its adjuncts ; asserting that it was one 
thing for that to be such potentially, which is not yet pos- 
sessed of the power of sensation and motion, but will some 
time be so, and another thing to be already so actually ; and 
in the case of such, it is one thing to exert its powers, 
another to be able to exert them, but to be at rest or asleep. 
And this is the question. 

For the embryo is not to be called an animal from the 
fact that it is nourished ; which is the allegation of those who 
turn aside from the essence of the question, and apply their 
minds to what happens otherwise. But in the case of all 
conclusions alleged to be found out, demonstration is applied 

500 

THE MISCELLANIES . 

[Book viii. 

in common, which is discourse (X0709), establishing one thing 
from others. But the grounds from which the point in 
question is to be established, must be admitted and known 
by the learner. And the foundation of all these is what is 
evident to sense and to intellect. 

Accordingly the primary demonstration is composed of all 
these. But the demonstration which, from points already 
demonstrated thereby, concludes some other point, is no less 
reliable than the former. It cannot be termed primary, 
because the conclusion is not drawn from primary principles 
as premisses. 

The first species, then, of the different kinds of questions, 
which are three, has been exhibited, — I mean that, in which 
the essence being known, some one of its powers or proper- 
ties is unknown. The second variety of propositions was 
that in which we all know the powers and properties, but do 
not know the essence ; as, for example, in what part of the 
body is the principal faculty of the soul. 

CHAPTEE V. 

APPLICATION OF DEMONSTRATION TO SCEPTICAL SUSPENSE 

OF JUDGMENT. 

Now the same treatment which applies to demonstration 
applies also to the following question. 

Some, for instance, say that there cannot be several origi- 
nating causes for one animal. It is impossible that there 
can be several homogeneous originating causes of an animal ; 
but that there should be several heterogeneous, is not 
absurd. 

Suppose the Pyrrhonian suspense of judgment, as they 
say, [the idea] that nothing is certain : it is plain that, begin- 
ning with itself, it first invalidates itself. It either grants 
that something is true, that you are not to suspend your 
judgment on all things ; or it persists in saying that there 
is nothing true. And it is evident, that first it will not be 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

501 

true. For it either affirms what is true or it does not affirm 
what is true. But if it affirms what is true, it concedes, 
though unwillingly, that something is true. And if it does 
not affirm what is true, it leaves true what it wished to 
do away with. For, in so far as the scepticism which de- 
molishes is proved false, in so far the positions which are 
being demolished are proved true ; like the dream which 
says that all dreams are false. For in confuting itself, it is 
confirmatory of the others. 

And, in fine, if it is true, it will make a beginning with 
itself, and not be scepticism of anything else but of itself 
first. Then if [such a man] apprehends that he is a man, 
or that he is sceptical, it is evident that he is not sceptical. 
And how shall he reply to the interrogation? For he is 
evidently no sceptic in respect to this. Nay, he affirms even 
that he does doubt. 

And if we must be persuaded to suspend our judgment 
in regard to everything, we shall first suspend our judgment 
in regard to our suspense of judgment itself, whether we 
are to credit it or not. 

And if this position is true, that we do not know what is 
true, then absolutely nothing is allowed to be true by it. 
But if he will say that even this is questionable, whether we 
know what is true ; by this very statement he grants that 
truth is knowable, in the very act of appearing to establish 
the doubt respecting it. 

But if a philosophical sect is a leaning toward dogmas, or, 
according to some, a leaning to a number of dogmas which 
have consistency with one another and with phenomena, tend- 
ing to a right life ; and dogma is a logical conception ; and 
conception is a state and assent of the mind : not merely 
sceptics, but every one who dogmatizes is accustomed in 
certain things to suspend his judgment, either through want 
of strength of mind, or want of clearness in the things, or 
equal force in the reasons. 

502 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

CHAPTER VI. 

DEFINITIONS, GENERA, AND SPECIES. 

The introductions and sources of questions are about these 
poiuts and in them. 

But before definitions, and demonstrations, and divisions, 
it must be propounded in what ways the question is stated ; 
and equivocal terms are to be treated ; and synomyms stated 
accurately according to their significations. 

Then it is to be inquired whether the proposition belongs 
to those points, which are considered in relation to others, 
or is taken by itself. Further, If it is, what it is, what hap- 
pens to it ; or thus, also, if it is, what it is, why it is. And 
to the consideration of these points, the knowledge of Par- 
ticulars and Universals, and the Antecedents and the Dif- 
ferences, and their divisions, contribute. 

Now, Induction aims at generalization and definition ; and 
the divisions are the species, and what a thing is, and the in- 
dividual. The contemplation of the How adduces the as- 
sumption of what is peculiar ; and doubts bring the particular 
differences and the demonstrations, and otherwise augment 
the speculation and its consequences ; and the result of the 
whole is scientific knowledge and truth. 

Again, the summation resulting from Division becomes De- 
finition. For Definition is adopted before division and after : 
before, when it is admitted or stated ; after, when it is demon- 
strated. And by Sensation the Universal is summed up from 
the Particular. For the starting point of Induction is Sensa- 
tion ; and the end is the Universal. 

Induction, accordingly, shows not xvhat a thing is, but that 
it is, or is not. Division shows what it is ; and Definition 
similarly with Division teaches the essence and what a thing 
is, but not if it is ; while Demonstration explains the three 
points, i/*it is, what it is, and why it is. 

There are also Definitions which contain the Cause. And 
since it may be known when we see, when we see the Cause ; 
and Causes are four — the matter, the moving power, the 
species, the end ; Definition will be fourfold. 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

503 

Accordingly we must first take the genus, in which are 
the points that are nearest those above ; and after this the 
next difference. And the succession of differences, when 
cut and divided, completes the u What it is.” There is no 
necessity for expressing all the differences of each thing, but 
those which form the species. 

Geometrical analysis and synthesis are similar to logical 
division and definition ; and by division we get back to what 
is simple and more elementary. We divide, therefore, the 
genus of what is proposed for consideration into the species 
contained in it ; as, in the case of man, we divide animal, 
which is the genus, into the species that appear in it, the 
mortal, and the immortal. And thus, by continually dividing 
those genera that seem to be compound into the simpler 
species, we arrive at the point which is the subject of investi- . 
gation, and which is incapable of further division. 

For, after dividing “ the animal” into mortal and immortal, 
then into terrestrial and aquatic ; and the terrestrial again 
into those who fly and those who walk ; and so dividing the 
species which is nearest to what is sought, which also con- 
tains what is sought, we arrive by division at the simplest 
species, which contains nothing else, but what is sought alone. 

For again we divide that which walks into rational and 
irrational ; and then selecting from the species, apprehended 
by division, those next to man, and combining them into one 
formula, we state the definition of a man, who is an animal, 
mortal, terrestrial, walking, rational. 

Whence Division furnishes the class of matter, seeking 
for the definition the simplicity of the name; and the defini- 
tion of the artisan and maker, by composition and construction, 
presents the knowledge of the thing as it is ; not of those 
things of which we have general notions. To these notions 
we say that explanatory expressions belong. For to these 
notions, also, divisions are applicable. 

Now one Division divides that which is divided into species, 
as a genus ; and another into parts, as a whole ; and another 
into accidents. 

The division, then, of a whole into the parts, is, for the 

504 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

most part, conceived with reference to magnitude ; that into 
the accidents can never be entirely explicated, if, necessarily, 
essence is inherent in each of the existences. 

Whence both these divisions are to be rejected, and only 
the division of the genus into species is approved, by which 
both the identity that is in the genus is characterized, and 
the diversity which subsists in the specific differences. 

The species is always contemplated in a part. On the 
other hand, however, if a thing is part of another, it will not 
be also a species. For the hand is a part of a man, but it is 
not a species. And the genus exists in the species. For 
[the genus] is both in man and the ox. But the whole is 
not in the parts. For the man is not in his feet. Where- 
fore also the species is more important than the part ; and 
whatever things are predicated of the genus will be all pre- 
dicated of the species. 

It is best, then, to divide the genus into two, if not 
into three species. The species then being divided more 
generically, are characterized by sameness and difference. 
And then being divided, they are characterized by the points 
generically indicated. 

For each of the species is either an essence; as when we 
say, Some substances are corporeal and some incorporeal ; or 
how much, or what relation, or where, or when, or doing, or 
suffering. 

One, therefore, will give the definition of whatever he 
possesses the knowledge of ; as one can by no means be 
acquainted with that which he cannot embrace and define in 
speech. And in consequence of ignorance of the definition, 
the result is, that many disputes and deceptions arise. For 
if he that knows the thing has the knowledge of it in his 
mind, and can explain by words what he conceives ; and if 
the explanation of the thought is definition ; then he that 
knows the thing must of necessity be able also to give the 
definition. 

Now in definitions, difference is assumed, which, in the 
definition, occupies the place of sign. The faculty of laugh- 
ing, accordingly, being added to the definition of man, makes 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

505 

the whole — a rational, mortal, terrestrial, walking, laughing 
animal. For the things added by way of difference to the 
definition are the signs of the properties of things ; but do 
not show the nature of the things themselves. Now they 
say that the difference is the assigning of what is peculiar ; 
and as that which has the difference differs from all the rest, 
that which belongs to it alone, and is predicated conversely 
of the thing, must in definitions be assumed by the first genus 
as principal and fundamental. 

Accordingly, in the larger definitions the number of the 
species that are discovered are in the ten Categoi’ies ; and in 
the least, the principal points of the nearest species being 
taken, mark the essence and nature of the thing. But the 
least consists of three, the genus and two essentially neces- 
sary species. And this is done for the sake of brevity. 

We say, then, Man is the laughing animal. And we must 
assume that which pre-eminently happens to what is defined, 
or its peculiar virtue, or its peculiar function, and the like. 

Accordingly, while the definition is explanatory of the 
essence of the thing, it is incapable of accurately compre- 
hending its nature. By means of the principal species, the 
definition makes an exposition of the essence, and almost has 
the essence in the quality. 

CHAPTER VII. 

ON THE CAUSES OF DOUBT OR ASSENT. 

The causes productive of scepticism are t>vo things prin- 
cipally. One is the changefulness and instability of the 
human mind, whose nature it is to generate dissent, either 
that of one with another, or that of people with themselves. 
And the second is the discrepancy which is in things ; which, 
as to be expected, is calculated to be productive of scepticism. 

For, being unable either to believe in all views, on account 
of their conflicting nature ; or to disbelieve all, because 
that which says that all are unreliable is included in the 

506 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

number of those that are so; or to believe some and disbelieve 
others on account of the equipoise, we are led to scepticism. 

But among the principal causes of scepticism is the instability 
of the mind, which is productive of dissent. And dissent is 
the proximate cause of doubt. Whence life is full of tribu- 
nals and councils ; and, in fine, of selection in what is said to 
be good and bad ; which are the signs of a mind in doubt, 
and halting through feebleness, on account of conflicting 
matters. And there are libraries full of books, and com- 
pilations and treatises of those who differ in dogmas, and are 
confident that they themselves know the truth that there is 
in things. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE METHOD OF CLASSIFYING THINGS AND NAMES. 

In language there are three things : — Names, which are 
primarily the symbols of conceptions, and by consequence 
also of subjects. Second, there are Conceptions, which are the 
likenesses and impressions of the subjects. Whence in all, 
the conceptions are the same ; in consequence of the same 
impression being produced by the subjects in all. But the 
names ax'e not so, on account of the difference of languages. 
And thirdly, the Subject-matters by which the Conceptions 
are impressed in us. 

The Names are reduced by grammar into the twenty-four 
general elements ; for the elements must be determined. 
For of Particulars there is no scientific knowledge, seeing 
they are infinite. But it is the property of science to rest 
on general and defined principles. Whence also Particulars 
are resolved into Universals. And philosophic research is 
occupied with Conceptions and Real subjects. But since of 
these the Particulars are infinite, some elements have been 
found, under which every subject of investigation is brought ; 
and if it be shown to enter into any one or more of the 
elements, we prove it to exist ; but if it escape them all, that 
it does not exist. 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

507 

Of things stated, some are stated without connection ; as, 
for example, “ man ” and “ runs,” and whatever does not 
complete a sentence, which is either true or false. And 
of things stated in connection, some point out “ essence,” 
some “ quality,” some “ quantity,” some “ relation,” some 
“ where,” some “ when,” some “ position,” some “ posses- 
sion,” some “ action,” some “ suffering,” which we call the 
elements of material things after the first principles. For 
these are capable of being contemplated by reason. 

But immaterial things are capable of being apprehended 
by the mind alone, by primary application. 

And of those thino;s that are classed under the ten Cate- 
gories, some are predicated by themselves (as the nine Cate- 
gories), and others in relation to something. 

And, again, of the things contained under these ten 
Categories, some are Univocal, as ox and man, as far as each 
is an animal. For those are Univocal terms, to both of which 
belongs the common name, animal ; and the same principle, 
that is definition, that is animate essence. And Heteronyms 
are those which relate to the same subject under different 
names, as ascent or descent ; for the way is the same whether 
upwards or downwards. And the other species of Heteronyms, 
as horse and black, are those which have a different name 
and definition from each other, and do not possess the same 
subject. But they are to be called different, not Heteronyms. 
And Polyonyms are those which have the same definition, 
but a different name, as, hanger, sword, scimitar. AncJ 
Paronyms are those which are named from something 
different, as “manly” from “manliness.” 

Equivocal terms have the same name, but not the same 
definition, as man, — both the animal and the picture. Of 
Equivocal terms, some receive their Equivocal name fortui- 
tously, as Ajax, the Locrian, and the Salaminian ; and some 
from intention ; and of these, some from resemblance, as 
man both the living and the painted ; and some from analogy, 
as the feet of Ida, and our feet, because they are beneath ; 
some from action, as the foot of a vessel, by which the vessel 
sails, and our foot, by which we move. Equivocal terms 

508 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

are designated from the same and to the same ; as the book 
and scalpel are called surgical, both from the surgeon who 
uses them, and with reference to the surgical matter itself. 

CHAPTER IX. 

ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF CAUSES. 

Of Causes, some are Procaiarctic and some Synectic, some 
Co-operating, some Causes sine qua non. 

Those that afford the occasion of the origin of anything 
first, are Procatarchic ; as beauty is the cause of love to the 
licentious ; for when seen by them, it alone produces the 
amorous inclination, but not necessarily. 

Causes are Synectic (which are also univocally perfect of 
themselves) whenever a cause is capable of producing the 
effect of itself, independently. 

Now all the causes may be shown in order in the case 
of the learner. The father is the Procatarctic cause of 
learning, the teacher the Synectic, and the nature of the 
learner the Co-operating cause, and time holds the relation 
of the Cause sine qua non. 

Now that is properly called a cause which is capable of effect- 
ing anything actively ; since we say that steel is capable of 
cutting, not merely while cutting, but also while not cutting. 
Thus, then, the capability of causing (to nrapeKTUcov) signi- 
fies both ; both that which is now acting, and that which is 
not yet acting, but which possesses the power of acting. 

Some, then, say that causes are properties of bodies ; and 
others of incorporeal substances ; others say that the body 
is properly speaking cause, and that what is incorporeal is so 
only catachrestieally, and a quasi-cause. Others, again, re- 
verse matters, saying that corporeal substances are properly 
causes, and bodies are so improperly; as, for example, that 
cutting, which is an action, is incorporeal, and is the cause 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

509 

of cutting which is an action and incorporeal, and, in the 
case of bodies, of being cut, — as in the case of the sword 
and what is cut [by it]. 

The cause of things is predicated in a threefold manner. 
One, What the cause is, as the statuary ; a second, Of what 
it is the cause of becoming, a statue ; and a third, To what it 
is the cause, as, for example, the material : for he is the cause 
to the brass of becoming a statue. The being produced, and 
the being cut, which are causes to what they belong, being 
actions, are incorporeal. 

According to which principle, causes belong to the class 
of predicates ( KaTrjyoprj^aTwv ), or, as others say, of dicta 
(Xcktw v) (for Cleanthes and Archedemus call predicates 
dicta) ; or rather, some causes will be assigned to the class of 
predicates, as that which is cut, whose case is to be cut ; and 
some to that of axioms, — as, for example, that of a ship being 
made, whose case again is, that a ship is being made. Now 
Aristotle denominates the name of such things as a house, 
a ship, burning, cutting, an appellative. But the case is 
allowed to be incorporeal. Therefore that sophism is solved 
thus : What you say passes through your mouth. Which 
is true. You name a house. Therefore a house passes 
through your mouth. Which is false. For we do not speak 
the house, which is a body, but the case, in which the house 
is, which is incorporeal. 

And we say that the house-builder builds the house, in 
reference to that which is to be produced. So we say that 
the cloak is woven; for that which makes is the indication of 
the operation. That which makes is not the attribute of 
one, and the cause that of another, but of the same, both in 
the case of the cloak and of the house. For, in as far as one is 
the cause -of anything being produced, in so far is he also the 
maker of it. Consequently, the cause, and that which makes, 
and that through which (St o), are the same. Now, if any- 
thing is “a cause” and “that which effects,” it is certainly also 
“that through which.” But if a thing is “that through which,” 
it does not by any means follow that it is also “ the cause.” 
Many things, for instance, concur in one result, through 

510 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

which the end is reached ; but all are not causes. For 
Medea would not have killed her children, had she not been 
enraged. Nor would she have been enraged, had she not 
been jealous. Nor would she have been this, if she had not 
loved. Nor would she have loved, had not Jason sailed to 
Colchi. Nor would this have taken place, had the Argo not 
been built. Nor would this have taken place, had not the 
timbers been cut from Pelion. For though in all these 
things there is the case of 11 that through which,” they are 
not all u causes ” of the murder of the children, but only 
Medea was the cause. Wherefore, that which does not 
hinder does not act. Wherefore, that which does not hinder 
is not a cause, but that which hinders is. For it is in acting 
and doing something that the cause is conceived. 

Besides, what does not hinder is separated from what takes 
place ; but the cause is related to the event. That, therefore, 
which does not hinder cannot be a cause. Wherefore, then, 
it is accomplished, because that which can hinder is not 
present. Causation is then predicated in four ways : The 
efficient cause, as the statuary ; and the material, as the 
brass ; and the form, as the character ; and the end, as the 
honour of the Gymnasiarch. 

The relation of the cause sine qua non is held by the brass 
in reference to the production of the statue ; and likewise it 
is a [true] cause. For everything without which the effect 
is incapable of being produced, is of necessity a cause ; but 
a cause not absolutely. For the cause sine qua non is not 
Synectic, but Co-operative. And everything that acts pro- 
duces the effect, in conjunction with the aptitude of that 
which is acted on. For the cause disposes. But each thing 
is affected according to its natural constitution ; the aptitude 
being causative, and occupying the place of causes sine qua 
non. Accordingly, the cause is inefficacious without the apti- 
tude ; and is not a cause, but a co-efficient. For all causation 
is conceived in action. Now the earth could not make itself, 
so that it could not be the cause of itself. And it were ridi- 
culous to say that the fire was not the cause of the burning, 
but the logs, — or the sword of the cutting, but the flesh, — or 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

511 

the strength of the antagonist the cause of the athlete being 
vanquished, but his own weakness. 

The Synectic cause does not require time. For the 
cautery produces pain at the instant of its application to 
the flesh. Of Procatarctic causes, some require time till 
the effect be produced, and others do not require it, as the 
case of fracture. 

Are not these called independent of time, not by way of 
privation, but of diminution, as that which is sudden, not 
that which has taken place without time ? 

Every cause, apprehended by the mind as a cause, is 
occupied with something, and is conceived in relation to 
something ; that is, some effect, as the sword for cutting ; 
and to some object, as possessing an aptitude, as the fire to 
the wood. For it will not burn steel. The cause belongs 
to the things which have relation to something. For it is 
conceived in its relation to another thing. So that we 
apply our minds to the two, that we may conceive the 
cause as a cause. 

The same relation holds with the creator, and maker, and 
father. A thing is not the cause of itself. Nor is one his 
own father. For so the first would become the second. Now 
the cause acts and affects. That which is produced by the 
cause is acted on and is affected. But the same thing taken 
by itself cannot both act and be affected, nor can one be son 
and father. And otherwise the cause precedes in being 
what is done by it, as the sword, the cutting. And the same 
thing cannot precede at the same instant as to matter, 
as it is a cause, and at the same time, also, be after and 
posterior as the effect of a cause. 

Now being differs from becoming , as the cause from the 
effect, the father from the son. For the same thing cannot 
both be and become at the same instant; and consequently 
it is not the cause of itself. Things are not causes of 
one another, but causes to each other. For the splenetic 
affection preceding is not the cause of fever, but of the 
occurrence of fever ; and the fever which precedes is not 
the cause of spleen, but of the affection increasing. 

512 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

[Book viii. 

Thus also the virtues are causes to each other, because on 
account of their mutual correspondence they cannot he sepa- 
rated. And the stones in the arch are causes of its con- 
tinuing in this category, but are not the causes of one 
another. And the teacher and the learner are to one another 
causes of progressing as respects the predicate. 

And mutual and reciprocal causes are predicated, some of 
the same things, as the merchant and the retailer are causes 
of gain; and sometimes one of one thing and others of another, 
as the sword and the flesh ; for the one is the cause to the 
flesh of being cut, and the flesh to the sword of cutting. 
[It is well said,] 11 An eye for an eye, life for life.” For he 
who has wounded another mortally, is the cause to him of 
death, or of the occurrence of death. But on being mortally 
wounded by him in turn, he has had him as a cause in turn, 
not in respect of being a cause to him, but in another respect. 
For he becomes the cause of death to him, not that it was 
death returned the mortal stroke, but the wounded man him- 
self. So that he was the cause of one thing, and had another 
cause. And he who has done wrong becomes the cause to 
another, to him who has been wronged. But the law which 
enjoins punishment to be inflicted is the cause not of injury, 
but to the one of retribution, to the other of discipline. So 
that the things which are,, causes, are not causes to each other 
as causes. 

It is still asked, if many things in conjunction become 
many causes of one thing. For the men who pull together 
are the causes of the ship being drawn down ; but along with 
others, unless what is a joint cause be a cause. 

Others say, if there are many causes, each by itself be- 
comes the cause of one thing. For instance, the virtues, 
which are many, are causes of happiness, which is one ; and 
of warmth and pain, similarly, the causes are many. Are 
not, then, the many virtues one in power, and the sources of 
warmth and of pain so, also ? and does not the multitude of 
the virtues, being one in kind, become the cause of the one 
result, happiness ? 

But, in truth, Procatarctic causes are more than one both 

Book viii.] 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

513 

generically and specifically ; as, for example, cold, weakness, 
fatigue, dyspepsia, drunkenness, generically, of any disease ; 
and specifically, of fever. But Synectic causes are so, gene- 
rically alone, and not also specifically. 

For of pleasant odour, which is one thing generically, there 
are many specific causes, as frankincense, rose, crocus, styrax, 
myrrh, ointment. For the rose has not the same kind of sweet 
fragrance as myrrh. 

And the same thing becomes the cause of contrary effects; 
sometimes through the magnitude of the cause and its power, 
and sometimes in consequence of the susceptibility of that on 
which it acts. According to the nature of the force, the 
same string, according to its tension or relaxation, gives a 
shrill or deep sound. And honey is sweet to those who are 
well, and bitter to those who are in fever, according to the 
state of susceptibility of those who are affected. And one 
and the same wine inclines some to rage, and others to merri- 
ment. And the same sun melts wax and hardens clay. 

Further, of causes, some are apparent; others are grasped 
by a process of reasoning ; others are occult ; others are in- 
ferred analogically. 

And of causes that are occult, some are occult temporarily, 
being hidden at one time, and at another again seen clearly ; 
and some are occult by nature, and capable of becoming at no 
time visible. And of those who are so by nature, some are 
capable of being apprehended ; and these some would not call 
occult, being apprehended by analogy, through the medium 
of signs, as, for example, the symmetry of the passages of 
the senses, which are contemplated by reason. And some 
are not capable of being apprehended ; which cannot in any 
mode fall under apprehension ; which are by their very defi- 
nition occult. 

Now some are Procatarctic, some Synectic, some Joint- 
causes, some Co-operating causes. And there are some ac- 
cording to nature, some beyond nature. And there are some 
of disease and by accident, some of sensations, some of the 
greatness of these, some of times and of seasons. 

Procatarctic causes being removed, the effect remains 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 2 K 

THE MISCELLANIES. 

514 

[Book viii, 

But a Synectic cause is that, which being present, the effect 
remains, and being removed, the effect is removed. 

The Synectic is also called by the synonymous expression 
“ perfect in itself.” Since it is of itself sufficient to produce 
the effect. 

And if the cause manifests an operation sufficient in 
itself, the co-operating cause indicates assistance and service 
along with the other. If, accordingly, it effects nothing, it 
will not be called even a co-operating cause ; and if it does 
effect something, it is wholly the cause of this, that is, of 
what is produced by it. That is, then, a co-operating cause, 
which being present, the effect was produced — the visible 
visibly, and the occult invisibly. 

The Joint-cause belongs also to the genus of causes, as a 
fellow-soldier is a soldier, and as a fellow-youth is a youth. 

The Co-operating cause further aids the Synectic, in the 
way of intensifying what is produced by it. But the Joint- 
cause does not fall under the same notion. For a thing may 
be a Joint-cause, though it be not a Synectic cause. For the 
Joint-cause is conceived in conjunction with another, which 
is not capable of producing the effect by itself, being a cause 
along with a cause. And the Co-operating cause differs from 
the Joint-cause in this particular, that the Joint-cause pro- 
duces the effect in that which by itself does not act. But 
the Co-operating cause, while effecting nothing by itself, yet 
by its accession to that which acts by itself, co-operates with 
it, in order to the production of the effect in the intensest 
degree. But especially is that which becomes co-operating 
from being Procatarctic, effective in intensifying the force of 
the cause. 

INDEXES. 

I. INDEX OF TEXTS. 

Genesis 

xxx. 37, 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

VOt. TAGE 

. i. 310 

xxv. 24, 

. 

ii. 354 

i. 1, . 

i. 79, ii. 337 

xxxii. 24, . 

. i. 151 

xxviii. 3, . 

i. 409, 

i. 1-3, 

ii. 276 

xxxii. 30, . 

. i. 152 

ii. 396 

i. 26, . 

i. 

90, 181, 

xxxiii. 6, . 

. ii. 58 

xxx. 13, 

ii. 4 

ii. 

219, 237 

xxxiii. 11, . 

. ii. 58 

xxx. 15, 

ii. 264 

i. 27, . 

i. 344 

xlvi. 3, 

. i. 152 

xxxi. 2, 5, . 

i. 364 

i. 28, . 

ii. 

79, 100, 133 

xlvi. 27, . 

. i. 443 

xxxi. 6, 

i. 364 

i. 29, . 

ii. 100 

xlix. 6, 

. i. 152 

xxxii. 6, . 

i. 179 

i. 31, . 

ii. 33 

xlix. 11,. . 

i. 124, 145 

xxxii. 32, . 

ii. 194 

ii. 4, . 

ii. 390 

xxxii. 33, 34, 

i. 152 

ii. 18, 

ii. 80 

Exodus. 

xxxiii. 11, . 

ii. 

13, 143 

ii. 23, 

i. 250 

iii. 8, 

. i. 137 

xxxiii. 18, . 

ii. 264 

iii. 5, 

ii. 134 

iii. 14, 

. i. 161 

xxxiii. 20, . 

ii. 224 

iii. 20, 

ii. 144 

iii. 16, 

. i. 12 

xxxiv. 2, . 

ii. 33 

iii. 21, 

ii. 129 

iii. "18, 19, . 

. i. 165 

xxxiv. 12, . 

ii. 43 

iv. 1, . 

ii. 134 

viii. 13, 

. i. 293 

xxxiv. 29, . 

ii. 364 

iv. 25, 

ii. 122 

x. 28, 

. ii. 43 

xxxviii. 3, 

i. 365 

vi. 1, 2, 

i. 283 

XV. 1, 

. ii. 252 

vi. 5, . 
ix. 1, . 

ii. 352 
ii. 100 

xvi. 36, 

xvii. . 

. ii. 31 
. i. 200 

Leviticus. 

ix. 2, 3, 

i. 197, 223, 

xix. 20, 

. ii. 118 

viii. 12, 

i. 124 

ii. 100 

XX. 1, 

. i. 151 

xi. 

ii. 251 

xiv. 14, 

ii. 352 

XX. 2, 3, . 

. ii. 384 

xi. 13, 14, 

i. 326 

xv. 6, 

ii. 222 

xx. 4, . 

. i. 64 

xv. 29, 

i. 124 

xvi. 6, 

i. 369 

xx. 5, 6, . 

. i. 161 

xvi. 23, 24, 

ii. 245 

xvii. 1, 2, 

i. 151 

xx. 7, 

. i. 328 

xviii. 1-5, . 

i. 29 

xvii. 4, 

i. 470 

xx. 12, 

. ii. 131 

xviii. 20, . 

i. 248 

xviii. 6, 

i. 310 

xx. 13, 

. ii. 88 

xviii. 22, . 

i. 248 

xviii. 8, 

i. 312 

xx. 13-16, . 

. i. 97 

xix. 9, 

ii. 51 

xviii. 12, 

ii. 362 

xx. 14, 

. i. 247 

xix. 10, 

ii. 51 

xviii. 22, 

23, 

ii. 32 

xx. 14-17, 

.. i. 223 

xix. 29, 

ii. 239 

xviii. 25, 

ii. 218 

xx. 17, ii. 

38, 88, 117, 

xx. . 

i. 334 

xviii. 27, 

ii. 188 

237 

xx. 10, 

ii. 83 

xx. 12, 

ii. 78 

xx. 20, 

. ii. 158 

xxvi. 30, . 

i. 431 

xxi. 10, 

i. 386 

xxi. 24, 

. ii. 100 

xxix. 9, 

ii. 83 

xxii. 3, 4, 

ii. 264 

xxi. 33, 36, 

. ii. 253 

xxiii. 4, 

ii. 216 

xxii. 1, 

. ii. 100 

Numbers. 

xxiii. 11,. 

ii. 12 

xxiii. 1, 

. i. 228 

vi. 2, 

i. 116 

xxiv. 16, 

ii. 214 

xxiii. 4, 

. ii. 52 

vi. 9, 

i. 115 

xxvi. 8, 

i. 128 

xxiii. 10, 11, 

. ii. 51 

xv. 30, 

ii. 57 

xxviii. 15, 

) • 

i. 151 

xxv. 10, 11, 

. ii. 51 

xx. . 

i. 200 

xxix. 9, 

i. 310 

xxv. 23, 

. ii. 354 

xxv. 8, 

ii. 98 

515 

516 

INDEX OF TEXTS . 

Deuteronomy. 

1 Samuel. 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

iv. 9, 

ii. 43 

i. 13, . 

ii. 363 

iv. 12, 

ii. 323 

viii. 13, 

i. 292 

iv. 19, 

ii. 368 

xi. 18, 

ii. 320 

V. 

i. 334 

xvi. 7, 

i. 281 

vi. 2, . 

i. 153 

vi. 3, . 

i. 97 

1 Kings. 

vi. 4, . 

ii. 288 

xiii. 1, 2, . 

i. 428 

vi. 5, . 

ii. 100 

xix. 4, 6, . 

i. 302 

viii. 2, 3, 5, 

n,.' 

i. 465 

viii. 3, 

i. 190, 203 

2 Kings. 

viii. 18, 

ii. 56 

xxii. 8, 

i. 431 

x. 12, 

ii. 219 

xxiii. 22, . 

i. 431 

x. 16, 17, . 

ii. 321 

x. 20, 

i. 78 

2 Chronicles. 

xi. 413, . 

i. 78 

i. 8, . 

i. 261 

xiii. 4, 

ii. 

59, 277 

xiii. 17, 

i. 287 

Job. 

i. 

ii. 

ii. 

i. 

11 

xiv. . 
xiv. 7, 
xiv. 12, 
xiv. 21, 
xvi. 12, 
xviii. 13, 
xviii. 15, 
xviii. 19, 
xx. 5-7, 
xx. 10, 

xx. 15, 

xxi. 10, 

xxi. 11, 12, 13, 

xxii. 10, 
xxii. 12, 11 
xxii. 32, 
xxiii. 1, 
xxiii. 7, 
xxiv. 10, 11, 
xxiv. 19, 

xxiv. 20, 21, 

xxv. 4, 

xxvi. 17, 18, 

xxvii. 15, . . ii. 100 

xxx. 6, . i. 177 

xxx. 15, 19, 20, . ii. 278, 

332 

xxxi. 5, . . ii. 49 

xxxi. 20, . . i. 176 

xxxii. 5, 6, . i. 168 

xxxii. 8, . . ii. 396 

xxxii. 8, 9, . ii. 410 

xxxii. 10-12, . i. 151 

xxxii. 13, 14, . i. 148 

xxxii. 20, . . i. 160 

xxxii. 21, . . ii. 27 

xxxii. 23-25, . i. 159 

xxxii. 39, . i. 77, ii. 291 
xxxii. 41, 42, . i. 159 

xxxv. 13, 15, . i. 70 

ii. 151 
i. 244 
i. 326 
i. 255 

i. 168 

ii. 199 

i. 154 
154 

49 
53 
89 
52, 53 

ii. 117 
ii. 55 
ii. 52 

ii. 83, 88 
ii. 132 
ii. 
ii. 
ii. 
ii. 
ii. 
ii. 

52 

51 

51 

51 

55 

57 

i. 1, . 
i. 21, . 
v. 14, 
v. 25, 
xi. 2, . 
xiv. 4, 
xiv. 4, 5, 
xxi. 10, 
xlii. 2, 3, 6, 

ii. 188, 465 
ii. 214, 465 

i. 363 

ii. 140 
ii. 341 
ii. 176 

132, 188 
ii. 214 
ii. 218 

n. 

xi. 5, . 
xi. 6, . 

xi. 7, . 

xii. 3-5, 

xii. 6, 

xiii. 3, 
xv. 1, 
xvii. 3, 4, 
xvii. 25, 26 (lxx. 
xviii. 11, 12, 
xviii. 43, 
xix. 1, 
xix. 2, 3, 
xix. 5, 
xix. 9, 
xix. 10, 
xix. 11, 
xxii. 6, 
xxii. 23, 
xxiii. 4, 
xxiv. 1, 
xxix. 3, 
xxxii. 1, 2, 
xxxii. 10, 
xxxiii. 1-3, 
xxxiii. 6, 
xxxiii. 16, 17, 

VOL. PAGE 

i. 162 

ii. 334 
ii. 334 
ii. 154 
ii. 338 

i. 466 

ii. 366 
ii. 360 

), ii. 252 
ii. 372 

i. 168 

ii. 388 
ii. 259 

i. 230 

ii. 464 
i. 147 

i. 101 

ii. 227 
i. 101 

i. 154 

ii. 400 
ii. 341 
ii. 40 
ii. 189 
i. 217 
i. 65 
i. 333 
i. 194 

Psalms. 

xxxiv. 3-6, 

ii. 

448 

xxxiv. 11, . 

ii. 

466 

i. 1, . 

. i 

. 321 

6, ii 

. 41 

xxxiv. 8, . 

i. 

183 

i. 1, 2, 

i. 

175 

xxxiv. 12, i. 

84, 

ii. 

189 

i. 1-3, 

i. 

176 

xxxiv. 13, 14, 

) • 

ii. 

189 

i. 2, . 

ii. 

41 

xxxiv. 15-17, 

ii. 

189 

i. 3, . 

ii. 

193 

xxxvi. 5, . 

ii. 

275 

i. 4, i. 

176, 

ii. 211, 

489 

xxxvii. 35-37, 

) • 

ii. 

153 

i. 4, 5, 

ii. 

41 

xxx viii. 13, 

ii. 

216 

i. 5, 6, 

ii. 

42 

xiv. 4, 

ii. 

372 

i. 6, . 

i. 

334 

xiv. 9, 

i. 

233 

ii. 4, . 

i. 

162 

xiv. 10, . 

ii. 

357 

ii. 8, . 

ii. 

202 

xiv. 14, 15, 

ii. 

357 

ii. 9, . 

. . 

i. 

154 

xlviii. 8, . 

i. 

175 

ii. 12, 

ii. 

272 

xlviii. 12, . 

ii. 

468 

ii. 12, 13, . 

i. 

79 

xlviii. 13, 14, 

ii. 134, 

144 

iii. 5, . 

ii. 

284 

xlviii. 21, . 

ii. 

115 

iv. 3, . 

i. 

79 

xlix. 9, 10, 

i. 

382 

iv. 6, . 

ii. 

290 

xlix. 12, 20, 

i. 

184 

v. 6, . 

i. 

126 

xlix. 16, 17, 

ii. 

37 

v. 7, 8, 

ii. 

37 

1. 7, . . 

ii. 

132 

vi. 8, . 

ii. 

127 

1. 15, . 

ii. 

265 

vii. 9, 

ii. 

38 

1. 21, . 

ii. 

211 

viii. 3, 

i. 

123 

1. 27, . 

ii. 

371 

viii. 4, 

i. 

65, 

162 

Ii. 1-4, 

ii. 

188 

viii. 6, 

ii. 

142 

li. 6, . 

ii. 188, 

259 

ix. 9, . 

ii. 

333 

Ii. 9-14, . 

i. 

353 

ix. 11, 

ii. 

333 

li. 17, 

ii. 

191 

ix. 15, 

ii. 

333 

li. 17, 18, . 

ii. 

415 

ix. 17, 

ii. 

341 

li. 19, 

i. 

336 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

517 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

Iviii. 4, 5, . 

i. 96 

cxxviii. 1, . 

ii. 37 

vi. 6, 8, 

ii. 143 

IxL 5, 

ii. 153 

exxix. 2, . 

ii. 407 

vi. 9, 

i. 78 

lxii. 8, 

i. 96 

cxxxii. 

i. 230 

vi. 11, 

i. 78 

lxii. 12, 

ii. 202 

cxxxii. 2, . 

i. 289 

vi. 23, 

i. 

78, 470 

lxviii. 8, . 

ii. 296 

cxxxiii. 2, i. 317 

, ii. 395 

vii. 2, 

ii. 25 

lxix. 30, 31, 

ii. 191 

cxxxvi. 5, . 

ii. 37 

viii. 4-6, 

i. 174 

lxx. 4, 

i. 96 

cxxxix. 7-10, 

ii. 202 

viii, 9, 10, 11 

) 

i. 390 

lxxii. 9, 

i. 96 

cxii. 2, 

ii. 437 

viii. 10, 11, 

i. 299 

lxxiii. 1, . 

i. Ill 

cxii. 5, 

i. 167 

viii. 17, 

ii. 49 

Ixxviii. 1, 2, 

ii. 235 

cxlix. 1, 2, 

i. 218 

viii. 19, 

i. 299 

lxxviii. 2, . 

ii. 269 

cxlix. 3, 

i. 218 

viii. 22, 

i. 78 

Ixxviii. 8-10, 

i. 171 

cxlix. 4, 

i. 218 

viii. 30, 

ii. 411 

lxxviii. 32-35, 

i. 171 

viii. 34, 

i. 241 

lxxviii. 38, 

i. 172 

Proverbs. 

ix. 3, . 

i. 406 

Ixxxii. ], . 

ii. 70 

i. 1-4, 

ii. 381 

ix. 12, 

i. 416 

lxxxii. 6, . 

ii. 70, 110, 

i. 2-6, 

ii. 5 

ix. 13, 18, . 

i. 323 

132, 209 

i. 5, 6, 

ii. 381 

ix. 17, 

i. 416 

lxxxiv. 1, . 

ii. 321 

i. 7, i. 165, ii. 21, 

22, 457 

ix. 18, 

i. 279 

Ixxxvi. 2, 3, 

i. 116 

i. 10, 12, . 

i. 178 

ix. 30, 

ii. 50 

lxxxix. 14, 

i. 172 

i. 14, . 

ii. 135 

x. 4, . ii. 109, 272, 295 

lxxxix. 21, 

ii. 188 

i. 15, 16, 17, . 

ii. 136 

x. 4, 5, 8, . 

ii. 22 

xc. 9, 10, . 

ii. 390 

i. 17, 18, . 

ii. 21 

x. 7, . . 

ii. 49 

xciv. 11, . 

i. 363 

i. 18, 19, . 

ii. 136 

x. 10, i. 322, 333, ii. 2 

xcv. 7, 

i. 82 

i. 33, . ii. 24, 

77, 209 

x. 14, i. 

227, 

ii. 231 

xcv. 8, 9, . 

i. 81 

i. 34, 35, . 

i. 171 

x. 12, 17, . 

. 

i. 372 

xcv. 9-11, . 

i. 82 

ii. 

i. 386 

x. 19, 

i. 224, 373 

xcvi. 5, 

i. 65 

ii. 1, 2, . 

i. 349 

x. 20, 

ii. 338 

xcvi. 9*11, 

ii. 332 

ii. 3-5, 

i. 365 

x. 21, 

ii. 33 

cii. 8, 

ii. 43 

ii. 4, 5, 

i. 176 

x. 31, . i. 382, ii. 47 

cii. 9, 

ii. 336 

ii. 21, 22, . 

ii. 60 

xi. 1 , 

ii. 47 

ciii. 13, 

ii. 36 

iii. 1 , 

i. 350 

xi. 5, 

ii. 36 

ciii. 14, 

i. 155 

iii. 3, i. 466, 

ii. 109 

xi. 6, 

i. 78 

ciii. 19, 

i. 162 

iii. 3, 16, . - . 

i.,466 

xi. 7, 

ii. 49 

civ. 2, 

i. 262 

iii. 5, i. 301, 

ii. 109 

xi. 13, 

ii. 38 

civ. 4, 

ii. 275 

iii. 5, 6, 7, 12, 23, 

ii. 3 

xi. 21, 

i. 416 

cv. 3, 4, . 

ii. 351 

iii. 7, 

ii. 43 

xi. 22, 

i. 315 

cx. 2, 

i. 154 

iii. 11, 

i. 80 

xi. 23, 

ii. 110 

cx. 3, 

i. 

21, 81 

iii. 11, 12, . 

i. 369 

xi. 24, 

i. 299, 416 

cx. 4, 

ii. 43 

iii. 12, 

i. 167 

xi. 26, 

ii. 52 

cxi. 9, 

ii. 110 

iii. 13, 

i. 175 

xii. 4, 

i. 321 

cxi. 10, 

ii. 21 

iii. 13-15, . 

i. 272 

xiii. 5, 

ii. 196 

cxii. 5, 9, . 

ii. 302 

iii. 15, 

i. 176 

xiii. 6 , 

ii. 36 

cxii. 6 , 

ii. 350 

iii. 18, 

ii. 264 

xiii. 8, i. 

302, 

ii. 109 

cxii. 7, 

ii. 350 

iii. 23, 

i. 366 

xiii. 11 , i. 

336, 

ii. 110 

cxii. 9, . i. 

299, ii. 60 

iii. 27, 

ii. 109 

xiii. 12, . 

ii. 134 

cxiii. 18, . 

i. 123 

iv. 8, 9, 

i. 366 

xiii. 24, 

i. 337 

cxviii. 6 , . 

ii. 175 

iv. 10, 11, 21, . 

i. 366 

xiv. 3, 

i. 225 

cxviii. 9, . 

ii. 98 

iv. 18, 

i. 367 

xiv. 6, 

i. 382 

cxviii. 18, . 

i. 154, 465 

iv. 25, 

i. 330 

xiv. 8, 

ii. 59 

cxviii. 19, . 

i. 375 

v. 2,3, 5, 8,9,11,20, i. 367 

xiv. 16, 26, 

ii. 25 

cxviii. 19, 20, 

ii. 340 

v. 3, 5, . 

i. 321 

xiv. 21, 

ii. 52 

cxviii. 20, . 

i. 375 

v. 6, . 

i. 322 

xiv. 23, . 

ii. 54 

cxviii. 24, . 

ii. 390 

v. 15, 

i. 354 

xv. 8, 

ii. 47 

cxix. 20, 

ii. 340 

v. 16, 

ii. 5 

xv. 14, 

i. 386 

cxix. 69, . 

ii. 432 

20, 

i. 367 

xv. 17, . 

i. 197 

cxix. 69, . 

ii. 340 

v. 22, 

ii. 45 

xvi. . 

i. 337 

cxix. 125, . 

ii. 340 

vi. 1, 2, . 

ii. 42 

xvi. 21, 

ii. 47 

cxix. 164, . 

ii. 431 

vi. 6-8, 

i. 371 

xvii. 6, 

i. 236 

518 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

VOL. 

PAGE 

VOL. 

PAGE 

lviii. 7, 8, 9, 

VOL. 

PAGE 

xvii. 12, 

ii. 

54 

vii. 15, 

i. 

148 

. 

i. 

335 

xviii. 4, 5 

, • 

ii. 

59 

viii. 1, 

ii. 

381 

lviii. 9, 

i. 104, 

170 

xix. 7, 

i. 

295 

viii. 18, . 

i. 

123 

lix. 7, 8, . 

i. 

466 

xix. 11, 

ii. 

54 

ix. 6, 

i. 

130 

lix. 8, 

. 

ii. 

223 

xix. 17, 

i. 

272, 

ii. 

109 

x. 10, 11, . 

i. 

78 

lxi. 1, 2, i. 

445, 

ii. 

292 

xix. 23, 

ii. 

50 

x. 14, 

i. 78, 

ii. 

294 

lxii. 11, 

ii. 

202 

xix. 29, 

i. 

249 

xi. 1, 3, 4, 

i. 

154 

lxiv. 1, 2, 

# 

i. 

177 

xx. 1, 

i. 

205 

xi. 7, 

ii. 

333 

Ixiv. 4, 19, 

* 

ii. 

9 

xx. 27, 

ii. 

188 

xi. 12, 

ii. 

241 

lxv. 1, 2, . 

ii. 

27 

xx. 28, 

ii. 

52 

xiii. 10, 

i. 

79 

Ixv. 15, 16, 

* 

i. 

124 

xxi. 11, 

i. 

420 

xx. 2, 

i. 

261 

lxv. 23, 

# 

ii. 

131 

xxii. 3, 4, 

i. 

465 

xxii. 13, 

i. 

191 

lxv. 24, 

# 

ii. 

291 

xxii. 20, 21, 

i. 

380 

xxix. 13, . 

i. 165, 

231, 

lxvi. 1, i. 77, ii. 

4, 

265 

xxiii. 3, 

i. 

188 

ii. 

38, 

153 

292 

xxiii. 20, 

i. 

205 

xxix. 14, . 

i. 

363 

lxvi. 2, 

. 

i. 

127 

xxiii. 21, 

i. 

205 

xxix. 15, i 

. 253, 

ii. 

159 

lxvi. 12, 13, 

. 

i. 

128 

xxiii. 29, 

30, 

i. 

205 

xxx. 1, 

i. 

166 

xxiv. 28, 

i. 

228 

xxx. 9, 

i. 

167 

Jeremiah. 

xxvi. 5, 

ii. 

232 

xxxii. 8, 

ii. 

42 

i. 5, . 

i. 

153 

xxvi. 12, 

i. 

323 

xxxii. 20, . 

ii. 

302 

i. 7, . . 

i. 

152 

xxvii. 10, 

i. 

416 

xxxiii. 11, . 

i. 

89 

i. 16, 

i. 

166 

xxvii. 14, 

i. 

330 

xxxvi. 7, 8, 

10, '. 

ii. 

298 

ii. 12, 13, . 

i. 

166 

xxvii. 23, 

i. 

416 

xl. 3, 

i. 

24 

ii. 13, 19, . 

i. 

166 

xxvii. 25, 

26, 

i. 

416 

xl. 6, 7, 8, 

ii. 

134 

ii. 24, 

i. 

176 

xxviii. 5, 

i. 

465 

xl. 6-8, . 

ii. 

216 

iii. 3, 4, 

i. 

168 

xxviii. 14 

y 

ii. 

45 

xl. 10, 

ii. 

202 

iii. 8, 

i. 

168 

xxix. 3, 

i. 

355 

xl. 11, 

i. 

125 

iii. 9, i. 

165, 

ii. 

391 

xxx. 3, 

ii. 

46 

xl. 12, 

i. 77, 

ii. 

293 

iii. 19, 

ii. 

300 

xxxi. 19, 

20, 

i. 

310 

xl. 13, 

ii. 

295 

iv. 6, 

i. 

77 

xxxi. 22, 

i. 

321 

xl. 15, ii. 271, 368, 

489 

iv. 20, 

ii. 

40 

xxxi. 26, 

27, 

28,' 

i. 

321 

xl. 18, 19, 

i. 78, 

ii. 

289 

iv. 30, 

i. 

280 

xl. 18, 25, . 

ii. 

285 

v. 8, i. 124, ! 

247, 

ii. 

134, 

Ecclesiastes. 

xl. 26, 

ii. 

321 

135, 

144 

i. 16, 17, 

18, 

* 

i. 

390 

xliii. 20, . 

ii. 

333 

v. 8, 9, 

i. 

165 

vii. 13, 

i. 

390 

xliii. 2, 

i. 

170 

v. 11, 12, . 

i. 

168 

xlv. 3, i. 334, ii. 234, 

259 

vi. 9, 

i. 

176 

Isaiah. 

xlv. 19, 20, 

i. 

78 

vi. 10, 

i. 

167 

i.2, . 

ii. 

218 

xlv. 21, 

ii. 

218 

vi. 16, i. 

177, 

ii. 

225 

i. 2, 3, 

i. 

166 

xlv. 21-23, 

i. 78, 

ii. 

218 

vii. 9, 

i. 

165 

i. 3, . i. 

87, 

238, 

ii. 

253 

xlviii. 22, . 

i. 

178 

vii. 22, 23, 

i. 

336 

i. 4, . 

i. 166, 

167 

1. 1, . 

ii. 

127 

viii. 2, 

i. 

77 

i. 7, 11, 13, 

i. 

335 

1. 4, . 

ii. 

373 

viii. 7, 

ii. 

236 

i. 11,. 

ii. 

47 

1. 5, . . 

ii. 

373 

ix. 23, 

i. 

139 

i. 11-13, 

i. 

335 

1. 9, . . 

ii. 

125 

ix. 23, 24, . 

i. 

384 

i. 11-16, 

ii. 

290 

Ii. 1, . . 

i. 

354 

ix. 26, 

i. 

167 

i. 16, 17, 

18, 

i. 

335 

liii. 1, 

ii. 

16 

x. 2, . . 

ii. 

298 

i. 19, . 

i. 

411 

liii. 2, 3, . 

i. 

275 

x. 12 . . i, 

. 78, 

ii. 

294 

i. 19, 20, 

ii. 

332 

liii. 3, 

ii. 

14 

xi. 13, 

i. 

165 

i. 20, . 

i. 

89 

liii. 6, 

i. 

158 

xii. 1, 

ii. 

101 

i. 23, . 

i. 

168 

liv. 1, 

i. 25 

, ii 

. 18 

xii. 9, 

i. 

247 

ii. 3, . 

i. 

18 

liv. 17, . 

i. 

87 

, 88 

xiii. 1, 

i. 

261 

ii. 16, 

ii. 

259 

lv. 1, 

i. 

88 

xiii. 24-27, 

ii. 

216 

iii. 16, 17, 

i. 

324 

lv. 6, 7, . 

i. 

277 

xx. 14, 

ii. 

132 

iv. 4, 

i. 

309 

lvi. 3, 

ii. 

128 

xx. 18, 

ii. 

132 

v. 8, . 

ii. 

178 

lvi. 3, 5, . 

ii. 

131 

xxii. 29, 30, 

ii. 

216 

v. 20, 21, 

i. 

336 

lvi. 7, 

i. 

176 

xxiii. 5, 

ii. 

212 

v. 21, 

ii. 

22 

lvii. 21, . 

i. 

178 

xxiii. 23, 24, 

ii. 

4, 

290 

vii. 9, i. 

353, ii. 

5, 

201 

lviii. 6, 

. 

ii. 

47 

xxiii. 24, . 

. 

i. 

77 

INDEX OF TEXTS . 519 

xxvi. 20, . 

VOL. PAGB 

. i. 332 

xxx. 20, 

. i. 77 

xxxi. 31, 32, 

. ii. 327 

xxxi. 33, 34, 

. i. 102 

xxxii. 29, . 

. i. 165 

xlix. 19, . 

. ii. 40 

Lamentations. 

i. 1, 2, . . i. 168 

i. 8, . . . i. 166 

Ezekiel. 

ii. 6, 7, . . i. 165 

xviii. 4-9, . i. 178, ii. 77 
xviii. 23, . . i. 133 

xviii. 23, 32, . i. 152, 

ii. 22, 330 
xxiii. 13, . . i. 169 

xxiii. 14, . . i. 169 

xxxii. 7, ♦ . i. 79 

xxxiii. 11, . ii. 22, 40, 

83, 330 

xxxiv, 4, 6, . i. 42 

xxxiv. 14, 16, . i. 170 

xliv. 9, 10, . ii. 213 

xliv. 27, . . ii. 213 

Daniel. 

i. 

ii. 

98 

ii. 27, 28, . 

ii. 

364 

vii. 9, 

. i. 259, 

285 

viii. 13, 

14, . 

i. 

446 

ix. 24-27, . 

i. 

434 

xii. 11, 

12, 

i. 

446 

Hosea. 

ii. 8, . 

i. 

272 

ii. 13, 

i. 

271 

iv. 11, 

i. 

165 

v. 2, . 

i. 

149 

xiv. 9, 

Joel. 

ii. 

372 

ii. 10, 

. , 

i. 

79 

ii. 28, 

ii. 

273 

iii. 15, 

Amos. 

i. 

79 

iv. 11, 

i. 

160 

iv. 13, 

. i. 77, 

ii. 

294 

v. 13, 

• 

ii. 

372 

Jonah. 

i. 6, 9, 

14,. . 

ii. 

298 

Micah. 

i. 2, . 

, . 

ii. 

218 

vi. 7, . 

. 

ii. 

133 

Nahum. 

VOL. PAGE 

iii. 4, 

. . i. 

168 

Habakkuk. 

ii. 4, 

. i. 

5 

Haggai. 

i. 6, 

i. 214, ii. 

no 

Zechariah. 

iii. 2, 

. . i. 

86 

viii. 

. i. 

336 

ix. 9, 

. i. 

124 

Malachi. 

i. 10, 11, 14, . ii. 299 

ii. 17, . . ii. 101 

iii. 15, . . ii. 101 

APOCRYPHA. 

4 Esdras. 

v. 35, . . ii. 132 

Tobit. 

iv. 16, . . ii. 76 

xii. 8, . . ii. 363 

Wisdom. 

ii. 

12, 

# 

ii. 

285 

ii. 

22, 25, . 

ii. 

360 

iii. 

1 ,. 

t 

ii. 

175 

iii. 

2, 3, 4, 

. 

ii. 

187 

iii. 

5, 6, 7, . 

. 

ii. 

187 

iii. 

19, 

ii. 

125 

iv. 

9,. . 

ii. 

370 

iv. 

14, . 

. 

ii. 

370 

iv. 

17, 

. 

ii. 

368 

V. 

3, 5, . 

# 

ii. 

368 

vi. 

7,. 

, 

ii. 

333 

vi. 

10, 

ii. 

357 

vi. 

12-15, . 

ii. 

374 

vi. 

16, . 

ii. 

374 

vi. 

17-20, . 

. 

ii. 

374 

vi. 

19, 

. 

i. 

190 

vii, 

. 10, . 

. 

i. 

253 

vii, 

. 17, 18, 

. 

ii. 

344 

vii, 

, 17, 20, 21, 

22, 

ii. 4 

vii, 

, 18, . 

ii. 

358 

vii. 

, 24, . 

. 

ii. 

274 

xi. 

25, 

i. 

155 

xiv. 2, 3, . 

# 

ii. 

358 

xvi 

i. 17, . 

i. 

190 

xxix. 20, 23, 

. 

i. 

217 

Ecclesiasticus. 
i. 1, . . . i. 365 

i. 22, . . . i. 160 

VOL. PAGE 

1. 27, . 

ii. 43 

i. 27, 28, . 

i. 159 

iii. 29, 

ii. 43 

vi. 34, 

ii. 15 

vii. 25, 26, 

i. 164 

ix. 8, . i. 

331 bis. 

ix. 12, 

i. 226 

ix. 13, 

i. 226 

ix. 22, 

i. 294 

ix. 25, . i. 228, 229 

xi. 4, 

i. 259 

xi. 31, . i. 293, 294 

xiv. 1, 

i. 225 

xv. 10, 

ii. 15 

xvi. 12, 

i. 161 

xvi. 13, 

i. 161 

xvii. 2, 

ii. 231 

xviii. 13, 14, 

i. 169 

xviii. 30, . 

i. 254 

xviii. 32, . 

i. 191 

xix. 2, 3, 5, 

i. 254 

xix. 22, 

i. 382 

xix. 26, 27, 

i. 289 

xx. 5, 

i. 224 

xx. 8, 

i. 224 

xxi. 7, 

i. 155 

xxi. 23, 

i. 219 

xxi. 24, 

i. 316 

xxii. 6-8, . 

i. 158 

xxiii. 4, 5, 6, 

i. 250 

xxiii. 18, 19, 

i. 253 

xxv. 6, 

i. 285 

xxvi. 11, . 

i. 209 

xxvi. 12, . 

i. 323 

xxx. 8, 

i. 172 

xxx. 38, 

i. 204 

xxxi. 19-21, 

i. 226 

xxxi. 22, . 

i. 210 

xxxi. 23, . 

i. 210 

xxxi. 30, . 

i. 206 

xxxi. 31, . 

i. 204 

xxxi. 36, . 

i. 203 

xxxi. 41, . 

i. 225 

xxxii. 6, . 

i. 184 

xxxii. 10, 11, 13, 

i. 228 

xxxii. 15, . 

i. 227 

xxxii. 21, . 

i. 167 

xxxiv. 14, 15, . 

i. 158 

xxxviii. 1, 2, 7, 

i. 235 

xxxix. 17, 18, 19, 

i. 239 

xxxix. 31, 32, . 

i. 239 

Baruch. 

iii. 9, 

. i. 176 

iii. 13, 

. i. 176 

iii. 16-19, . 

. i. 212 

iv. 4, 

. i. 176 

520 INDEX OF TEXTS. 

Matthew 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

vii. 21, 

, 

ii. 

460 

xix. 12, 

. 

ii. 112, 

132 

i. 17, . 

, , 

i. 447 

viii. 13, 

. 

ii. 

154 

xix. 14, 

. i. 

122 

iii. 7, 

i. 

19, 167 

viii. 20, 

# 

i. 

363 

xix. 16, 

. ii. 

110 

iii. 9, 

i. 19 

viii. 22, . i, 

. 329 

, ii 

. 95 

xix. 17, 

i. 161, 

162 

iii. 11, 

ii. 431 

viii. 26, 

# 

ii. 

369 

xix. 21, 

i. 

2i2, ii. 

152 

iii. 12, 

i. 170 

ix. 13, 

# 

ii. 

155 

xix. 23, 

. 

. ii. 

237 

iv. 4, 

i. 303 

ix. 22, 

ii. 221, 

329 

xix. 24, 

. ii. 

13 

iv. 17, 

i. 83 

ix. 29, . i 

. 134 

* ii 

. 31 

xix. 29, 

. ii. 

146 

v. vi. vii., 

ii. 54 

ix. 37, 38, . 

i. 

252 

xx. 16, 

. ii. 

231 

V. 3, . 

ii. 14 

x. 5, . 

ii. 

136 

xx. 21, 

. i. 

161 

v. 4, 7, 

ii. 155 

x. 16, i. 

124, 

ii. 

467 

xx. 22, 

. i. 

144 

v. 5, . 

ii. 155 

x. 23, 

ii. 

173 

xx. 28, 

# 

i. 170, 

171 

v. 8, ii 

31, 224, 

367, 415 

x. 24, 25, . 

ii. 

46 

xxi. 9, 

. i. 

122 

v. 10, 

. ii. 

150, 158 

x. 27, i. 

388, 

ii. 

371 

xxi. 12, 13, 

. i. 

328 

v. 13, 

i. 

330, 377 

x. 30, 

i. 

287 

xxi. 16, 

# 

. i. 

123 

v. 15, 

i. 356 

x. 32, 

ii. 

171 

xxi. 21, 

. ii. 

462 

v. 16, 

. ii. 

100, 219 

xi. 5, 6, 

i. 

175 

xxi. 22, 

. i. 

337 

v. 17, 

ii. 105 

xi. 12, 

ii. 

230 

xxi. 31, 

# 

. ii. 

11 

v. 18, 

i. 80 

xi. 13, 

ii. 

253 

xxii. 13, 

# 

. i. 

175 

v. 19, 

ii. 57 

xi. 15, 

ii. 221, 

372 

xxii. 21, 

# 

i. 195, 

336 

v. 20, 

ii. 98, 

371, 403 

xi. 16, 17, . 

i. 

123 

xxii. 30, 

i. 

254, ii. 

106 

v. 22, 

i. 222 

xi. 18, 19, . 

i. 

108 

xxii. 37, 

. i. 

153 

v. 24, 

ii. 182 

xi. 19, 

i. 

209 

xxii. 37, 

39, 

. i. 

334 

v. 25, 

ii. 99 

xi. 27, i. 25, 127, 

468, 

xxiii. 4, 

# 

. ii. 

329 

v. 27, 28, 

ii. 117 

ii. 272, 

448 

xxiii. 8-10, 

. ii. 

337 

V. 28, 

i. 

97, 297, ii. 31, 

xi. 28, 

i. 

175 

xxiii. 9, 

ii. 9, 126 

bis. 

38, 40 

, 88, 129 

xi. 28, 29, 30, . 

i. 

108 

xxiii. 25, 

26, 

. i. 

309 

v. 29, 

, 

. i. 323 

xi. 28-30, . 

ii. 

14 

xxiii. 27, 

. i. 

309 

v. 32, 

. ii. 82 

xi. 29, 30, . 

ii. 

238 

xxiii. 37, 

i. 

124, 164, 

,367 

v. 36, 

. i. 285 

xii. 7, 

ii. 

155 

xxiii. 37- 

39, 

. i. 

167 

v. 40, 

. i. 337 

xii. 11, 

ii. 

269 

xxiv. 19, 

, 

. ii. 

107 

v. 42, 

ii 

. 96, 109 

xiii. 8, 

ii. 

371 

xxiv. 37, 

. 

. ii. 

107 

v. 44, 

i. 160, ii. 469 

xiii. 13, 

i. 

350 

xxiv. 42, 

. 

. ii. 

285 

v. 44, 45, 

. ii. 182 

xiii. 21, 

i. 

179 

xxv. 30, 

i. 175, 

350 

v. 45, 

i. 

162, ii. 

. 320, 469 

xiii. 33, 

ii. 

269 

xxv. 33, 

. 

i. 123, 

161 

v. 48, 

ii. 364, 

466, 472 

xiii. 36, 

i. 

223 

xxv. 34-36, 40, 46, i. 

337 

vi. 2,. 

. 

. ii. 203 

xiii. 47, 48, 

ii. 

359 

xxv. 35, 

36, 

. ii. 

109 

vi. 6, . 

. 

. i. 371 

xiv. 25, 

i. 

208 

xxv. 35, 

40, 

. ii. 

44 

vi. 9, . 

i. 

162, 353 

xv. 8, 

ii. 

38 

xxv. 40, 

i. 

295, ii. 

109, 

vi. 10, 

. ii. 168 

XV. 11, 

i. 

197 

371 

vi. 12, 

. 

. ii. 466 

xv. 11, 19, . 

ii. 

31 

xxv. 41, 

46, 

. i. 

81 

vi. 19, 

ii. 110, 

125, 154 

xv. 14, 

i. 

119 

xxvi. 7, 

. i. 

230 

vi. 20, 

21 

9 * 

. i. 95 

xv. 18, 

i. 

222 

xxvi. 23, 

. i. 

231 

vi. 21, 

. ii. 462 

xvi. 17, 

ii. 

382 

xxvi. 24, 

. ii. 

136 

vi. 22, 

. 

. i. 256 

xvi. 26, 

ii. 

254 

xxvi. 29, 

. i. 

208 

vi. 24, 

ii. 96, 

122, 458 

xvii. 5, 

i. 

180 

xxvi. 41, 

. ii. 

160 

vi. 25, 

. 

. i. 196 

xvii. 20, 

ii. 

31, 

221 

xxvii. 29 

. i. 

237 

vi. 30, 

, 

. ii. 158 

xviii. 1, 

i. 

125 

vi. 31, 

. 

. ii. 154 

xviii. 2, 

ii. 

228 

Make. 

vi. 32, 

33 

9 • 

. ii. 155 

xviii. 3, i. 

122, 

ii. 

214, 

i. 6, . 

. i. 

261 

vi. 33, 

i. 

267, 455 

238 

i. 7, . 

i, 

. 265, ii. 

254 

vi. 34, 

i. 

126, 182 

xviii. 6, 

ii. 

136 

i. 40, 

. ii. 

46 

vii. 6, 

. 

. i. 388 

xviii. 11, 12, 

ii. 

129 

ii. 11, 

. i. 

116 

vii. 7, 

i. 

385, ii. 65, 66, 

xviii. 20, . 

9 

ii. 

116 

iv. 11, 

. ii. 

269 

111, 

227, 140. 

, 230, 490 

xviii. 32, . 

# 

i. 

350 

iv. 21, 

. i. 

356 

vii. 7, 

8, 

. 

. i. 299 

xix. 6, 

ii. 106, 

107 

v. 34, 

ii. 214, 

367 

vii. 14, 

. 

. ii. 140 

xix. 10, 11, 

# 

ii. 

107 

vii. 6, 

. ii. 

38 

vii. 18, 

• 

. i. 219 

xix. 11, 12, 

ii. 

84, 

107 

viii. 36, 

. ii. 

369 

INDEX OF TEXTS . 

521 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

x. 2, . 

. ii. 106 

xii. 8, 

. ii. 170 

i. 12, . . . 

ii. 151 

x. 9, . 

ii. 105, 107 

xii. 11, 12, 

. ii. 171 

i. 14, . 

i. 120 

x. 17, 

. ii. 110 

xii. 16-20, . 

. ii. 110 

i. 16, . 

i. 409 

x. 23, 

. ii. 237 

xii. 20, 

. ii. 154 

i. 17, . 

i. 153 

x. 45, 

. i. 170 

xii. 22, 23, 

i. 255, ii. 154 

i. 18, 

ii. 269 

x. 48, 

. ii. 382 

xii. 24. 

. i. 255 

i. 23, . 

i. 24 

xi. 23, 

. ii. 462 

xii. 27, 

. i. 255 

i. 29, 36, . 

i. 130 

xii. 17, 

. i. 336 

xii. 28, 

i. 255, ii. 99 

i. 34, . 

i. 242 

xii. 23, 

. ii. 106 

xii. 30, 31, 

. ii. 155 

i, 47, . 

ii. 367 

xii. 39, 

. ii. 366 

xii. 33, 

. ii. 154 

ii. 13-17, . 

i. 328 

xiii. 7, 

. ii. 107 

xii. 35-37, . 

. i. 241 

iii. 8, 

ii. 40 

xiv. 15, 

. i. 208 

xii. 48, 

. ii. 83 

iii. 15, 16, 36, . 

ii. 272 

xiii. 19, 

. i. 179 

iii. 18, 

ii. 218 

Luke. 

xiii. 32, 

. ii. 153 

iii. 19, 

i. 92 

ii. 24, 

. i. 124 

xiii. 34, 

. i. 367 

iii. 30, 

ii. 358 

iii. 4, 23, . 

. i. 445 

xiv. 8, 9, . 

. i. 188 

iii. 36, 

i. 134 

iii. 7, 

i. 17, 167 

xiv. 11, 

i. 336, ii. 75 

iv. 6, 

i. 170 

iii. 9, 

. i. 19 

xiv. 12, 13, 

. i. 188 

iv. 13, 14, . 

i. 170 

iii. 16, i. 265, 

ii. 254, 431 

xiv. 15, 

. i. 189 

iv. 23, 

i. 371 

iii. 17, 

. i. 170 

xiv. 16, 

. i. 189 

iv. 32, 

i. 144 

iii. 22, 

. ii. 272 

xiv. 20, 

. ii. 127 

v. 17, 19, . 

i. 356 

vi. 

. ii. 54 

xiv. 26, 

. ii. 130 

v. 24, i. 132, 

, ii. 272 

vi. 13, 

. ii. 458 

xiv. 26, 27, 

. i. 464 

vi. 27, i. 353, 

ii. 126, 

vi. 22, 

. ii. 158 

xv. 7, 10, . 

. ii. 42 

302 

vi. 27-29, . 

. i. 337 

XV. 11, 

. i. 191 

vi. 32, 33, 51, . 

i. 144 

vi. 29, 

. i. 97 

xvi. 16, 

. ii. 253 

vi. 40, 

i. 134 

vi. 30, 

. ii. 96 

xvii. 3, 4, . 

. i. 336 

vi. 53, 54, . 

i. 142 

vi. 31, 

. i. 334 

xvii. 5, 

. ii. 221 

vi. 54, 

i. 140 

vi. 35, 36, . 

. i. 161 

xvii. 6, 

. ii. 221 

vi. 56, 

i. 138 

vi. 36, 

. ii. 59 

xvii. 28, 

. ii. 107 

vii. 16-18, . 

i. 409 

vi. 40, 

. ii. 46 

xviii. 8, 

. ii. 107 

vii. 17, 

i. 375 

vi. 43, 

. i. 219 

xviii. 13, . 

. ii. 96 

vii. 18, 

i. 420 

vi. 46, ii. 159, 484, 488 

xviii. 14, . 

. i. 336 

viii. 12, 

i. 389 

vii. 19, 20, 

. i. 270 

xviii. 18, . 

. ii. 110 

viii. 24, 

ii. 272 

vii. 19, 22, 23 

, . i. 175 

xviii. 24, . 

. ii. 237 

viii. 32-36, . 

ii. 14 

vii. 25, 

. i. 259 

xix. 8-10, . 

. ii. 155 

viii. 35, 36, 

i. 131 

vii. 28, 

. i. 130 

xix. 22, 

. i. 350 

viii. 44, 

i. 409 

vii. 47, 

. i. 230 

xix. 26, 

. ii. 446 

x. 1-3, 7, . 

ii. 273 

viii. 10, 

. ii. 269 

xix. 45, 46, 

. i. 328 

x. 8, . 

i. 406 

viii. 16, 

. i. 356 

xx. 28, 

. i. 336 

x. 9, . 

i. 25 

viii. 28, 

. i. 127 

xx. 34, i 

. 121, ii. 126 

x. 11, i. 149, 180, 462 

ix. 25, 

. ii. 369 

xx. 35, ii. 106, 126, 448 

x. 16, i. 149, 

ii. 367 

ix. 58, 

. i. 363 

xx. 36, 

. ii. 448 

x. 21, 

ii. 36 

ix. 60, 

. ii. 95 

xx. 46, 

. ii. 366 

x. 28, 

ii. 367 

ix. 62, 

. ii. 476 

xxi. 23, 

. ii. 107 

xi. 23, 

i. 117 

x. 2, . . 

i. 352 

xxii. 31, 32, 

. ii. 172 

xiii. 5, 

i. 231 

x. 4, . 

. i. 302 

xxiii. 9, 

. ii. 126 

xiii. 33, i. 123, 

ii. 131, 

x. 19, 

. ii. 151 

xxiv. 41-44, 

. i. 196 

364 

x. 21, 

. i. 136 

xiv. 6, i. 370, 

ii. 229 

x. 22, i. 162, 

173, ii. 488 

John. 

xv. 1, 2, . 

i. 159 

x. 27, 

ii. 43, 144 

i. i, . 

i. 21, 155 

xv. 11, 12, 

ii. 143 

xi. 4, 

. ii. 466 

i. 3, . i. 153, 180, 297, 

xvi. 27, 

ii. 118 

xi. 9, 

. ii. 490 

380, ii. 337, 

xvii. 21-23, 

i. 161 

xi. 33, 

. i. 356 

359, 388, 396, 

xvii. 23, 

i. 119 

xi. 40, 

. ii. 99 

417 

xvii. 24-26, 

i. 161 

xi. 43, 

. i. 337 

i. 4, . i. 

, 132, ii. 158 

xvii. 25, 

i. 162 

xi. 47, 

. ii. 329 

i. 5, . 

i. 241, 253 

xx. 29, 

ii. 6 

xii. 3, 

. ii. 371 

i. 9, . 

. ii. 13 

xxi. 4, 5, . 

i. 122 

522 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

Acts. 

i. 7, . 

ii. 26-28, 

ii. 41, 

iii. 14, 
iii. 17, 19, 

v. 1, . 

vi. 2, 

vii. 22, 
x. 10-15, 
x. 34, 35, 

xiv. 23, 

xv. 23, 28, 
xv. 24, 
xvii. . 
xvii. 18, 
xvii. 22, 23, 
xvii. 22, 28, 
xvii. 24, 25, 
xvii. 30, 
xxvi. 17, 18, 

29, 

VOL. PAGE 

ii. 107 
ii. 332 
i. 411 

i. 326 

ii. 332 
i. 451 
i. 227 
i. 451 

i. 197 

ii. 340 
ii. 365 

i. 227 

ii. 183 
ii. 403 

i. 384 

ii. 270 

i. 412 

ii. 266 
ii. 332 
i. 414 

Romans. 

i. 11, 
i. 11, 12, 
i. 17, 
i. 22, 

i. 26, 27, 

ii. 6, . 
ii. 14, 

ii. 14-16, 
ii. 17-20, 
ii. 24, 
ii. 25, 

ii. 29, 

iii. 5, 6, 
iii. 8, 

iii. 16, 17, 
iii. 18, 
iii. 20, 
iii. 21, 22, 
iii. 26, 

iii. 29, 30, 

iv. 

iv. 3, 

iv. 3, 5, 9, 
iv. 7, 8, 

iv. 15, 

v. 3-5, 
v. 4, 5, 
v. 12, 

v. 13, 

vi. 2-6, 
vi. 6, 
vi. 6, 7, 
vi. 13, 
vi. 14, 

22 . 

. ii. 236 
. ii. 221 
ii. 18, 221 
. i. 466 
. i. 246 
. ii. 202 
. ii. 28 
. i. 416 
. i. 466 
. ii. 136 
. ii. 445 
. ii. 463 
. i. 159 
. ii. 101 
. i. 466 
. i. 466 
ii. 21, 143 
. i. 162 
. i. 162 
. ii. 232 
. i. 375 
. ii. 222 
. ii. 225 
ii. 40 bis. 

. ii. 154 
. ii. 206 
. ii. 76 
. ii. 114 
. ii. 143 
. ii. 119 
. ii. 163 
. ii. 415 
. ii. 119 
. ii. 112 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

vi. 15, 

ii. 113 

xiv. 16, 17, 

. i. 189 

vi. 16, 

ii. 97 

xiv. 17, 

9 

ii. 106, 109 

vi. 20-23, . 

ii. 144 

xiv. 19, 

9 

. ii. 125 

vi. 22, 

ii. 76 

xiv. 20, 

9 

. i. 193 

vii. 2, 

ii. 121 

xiv. 21, 

i. 

193, ii. 125 

vii. 4, ii. 122, 

124 bis . 

xv. 4, 

9 

. ii. 148 

vii. 6, 

ii. 143 

xv. 25, 26, 

. ii. 259 

vii. 7, 

ii. 119 

xvi. 16, 

9 

. i. 330 

vii. 12, i. 162, 

, ii. 124 

xvi. 19, 

. 

. i. 127 

vii. 12, 14, 

ii. 144 

xvi. 26, 27, 

. ii. 143 

vii. 17, 

ii. 119 

vii. 18, 

vii. 20, 23, 24, . 

ii. 119 
ii. 120 

1 Corinthians. 

vii. 24, 

ii. 93 

i. 9, . 

# 

ii. 17, 228 

viii. 2, 3, 4, 

ii. 120 

i. 19, . 

i. 

363, ii. 225 

viii. 5-10, 12-15, 

ii. 120 

i. 19, 20, 

. i. 410 

viii. 8, 10, 13,17, 18, 

i. 20, . 

. ii. 225 

28, 29, 31, . 

ii. 160 

i. 21-24, 

. i. 410 

viii. 9, . i. 139, ii. 71 

i. 22, . 

. i. 361 

viii. 10, 11, 

ii. 120 

i. 24, . 

. i. 462 

viii. 15, 

ii. 162 

i. 29, . 

. ii. 331 

viii. 17, 

i. 102 

i. 31, . 

. i. 139 

viii. 24, 25, 

ii. 160 

i. 34,. 

. i. 420 

viii. 26, 

ii. 442 

ii. 5, . 

. ii. 226 

viii. 28, 29, 

i. 288 

ii. 5, 15, 

. i. 184 

viii. 36, 37, 

ii. 161 

ii. 6, 7, 

. ii. 260 

viii. 38, 39, 

ii. 183 

ii. 6-8, 

. ii. 235 

ix. 3, 

ii. 331 

ii. 9, . 

i. 88, 139, 272, 

ix. 14, 

ii. 218 

333, ii. 9 

x. 2, 3, 

ii. 27 

ii. 9, 10, 

ii. 235, 260 

x. 4, . . ii. 

27, 199 

ii. 10, 

. ii. 5 

x. 9, . 

ii. 144 

ii. 10-14, 

. ii. 404 

x. 10, 11, . 

ii. 161 

ii. 13, 

i. 

409, ii. 232 

x. 10, 11, 8, 9, . 

ii. 183 

ii. 14, 

i. 38, ii. 2.35 

x. 17, 14, 15, . 

ii. 15 

iii. 1, 

. i. 138 

x. 18, 

i. 231 

iii. 1-3, 

. ii. 335 

x. 19, 

ii. 27 

iii. 2, 

i. 137, 144 

x. 20, 21, . 

ii. 27 

iii. 3, 

. i. 138 

xi. 11, 

ii. 27 

iii. 8, 9, 

. i. 353 

xi. 17, 

ii. 372 

iii. 10-13, 

. ii. 236 

xi. 22, 

i. 160 

iii. 12, 

. ii. 395 

xi. 33, 

i. 334 

iii. 16, 

. ii. 466 

xii. 2, 

ii. 26 

iv. 9, 11, 

12, 

13, ii. 163 

xii. 9, i. 223, 

ii. 162 

iv. 15, 

ii. 132, 229 
. ii. 484 

xii. 9, 10, 18, 21, 

ii. 27 

iv. 19, 

xiii. 3, 4, . 

i. 169 

iv. 19, 20, . 

. i. 387 

xiii. 8, . ii. 144, 162 

iv. 21, 

. i. 154 

xiii. 9, 

ii. 485 

v. 7, . 

i. 136, 161 

xiii. 10, 

ii. 191 

v. 11, 

i. 

193, ii. 136 

xiii. 11, 

ii. 205 

vi. 1, 2, 

. ii. 469 

xiii. 11, 12, 

ii. 205 

vi. 9, 10, 

. ii. 329 

xiii. 12, 13, 

i. 215 

vi. 9, 10, 

ii, 

. ii. 137 

xiii. 12, 13, 14, . 

ii. Ill 

vi. 13, 

i. 144, 18S, 

xiii. 13, 

i. 219 

ii. 106, 136 

xiii. 14, 

i. 315 

vi. 15, 

. i. 254 

xiv. 2, 

ii. 302 

vi. 16, 

. ii. 137 

xiv. 3, i. 192, 

ii. 108 

vi. 18, 

. ii. 127 

xiv. 6, 

i. 192 

vii. 1, 2, 

. ii. 130 

vii. 24, . . ii. 121 

vii. 27, . . ii. 108 

vii. 28, 32, 35, . ii. 149 

vii. 29, 30, . i. 212 

vii. 32, 33, 34, . i. 126 

vii. 33, . . ii. 131 

vii. 38, 35, . i. 208 

vii. 39, 40, . ii. 121 

viii. 1, . . ii. 30 

viii. 1, 2, 3, . i. 387 

viii. 1, 7, 9, 11, . ii. 183 

viii. 4, . . ii. 402 

viii. 6, 11, 12, . i. 163 
viii. 7, . ii. 41, 231 

viii. 7, 8, . . i. 191 

i. 191, ii. 207 
. i. 193 

viii. 8, 

viii. 13, 

ix. 13, 
ix. 13-25, . 
ix. 14, 

ix. 19, 21, . 
ix. 20, 21, . 
ix. 22, 

ix. 27, 25, . 

x. 1, 3, 4, . 
x. 3, . 

x. 3, 4, 5, . 
x. 7, . 

x. 12, 
x. 13, 
x. 20, 
x. 23, 

x. 24, 
x. 25, 
x. 26, 

x. 26, 28, 
x. 26, 28-31, 
x. 27, 

x. 28-31, . 

x. 31, 

xi. 3, 
xi. 3-7, 
xi. 3, 8, 11, 
xi. 5, 

xi. 19, 
xi. 20, 

. ii. 17 
. ii. 184 
. i. 193 
. ii. 445 
. i. 358 
. ii. 232 
, . ii. 133 
. ii. 484 
. ii. 71 
. ii. 164 
. i. 179 
. ii. 86 
. ii. 228 
. i. 191 

i. 195, 267, 

ii. 102, 164 
. ii. 164 

i. 192, ii. 183 
355, 400 
i. 94 
ii. 164 

i. 192 

ii. 184 

i. 195 
, ii. 243 

ii. 168 
ii. 166 

i. 328 

ii. 473 
i. 209 

ii. 184, 

i. 318 

xiii. 1-3, 
xiii. 2, 
xiii. 3, 

xiii. 7, ii. 
xiii. 7, 8, 
xiii. 11, 
xiii. 12, 

xiii. 13, 

xiv. 6, 
xiv. 9, 10, 

xiv. 20, 

xv. 30, 
xv. 32, 33, 
xv. 34, 
xv. 41, 
xv. 50, 

xv. 55, 

xvi. 13, 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

523 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. 

PAGE 

VOL. 

PAGE 

vii. 

2-5, 

ii. 108 

xi. 

21, 22, . 

. i. 

194 

xi. 

2,. 

i. 126, ii. 

118 

vii. 

3, 

. ii. 137 

xi. 

27, 28, . 

. i. 

352 

xi. 

3, . ii. 

119, 122, 

129 

vii. 

3-5, 

. ii. 130 

xi. 

31, 32, . 

. i. 

355 

xi. 

6,. 

. . ii. 

403 

vii. 

5, 

. ii. 

130, 137 

xi. 

32, . 

. i. 

464 

xi. 

13, 15, 

. ii. 

85 

vii. 

6, 7, 

. ii. 268 

xi. 

33, 34, . 

. i. 

194 

xi. 

14, 

. ii. 

341 

vii. 

7, 

. ii. 

116, 202 

xii. 

2-4, . 

. i. 

139 

xi. 

23, 

. ii. 

198 

vii. 

8, 

. ii. 125 

xii. 

7-11, . 

. ii. 

201 

xi. 

31, 

. ii. 

243 

vii. 

9, 

ii. 84 

, 86, 130 

xii. 

11, . 

. ii. 

244 

xii. 

2-4, 

. i. 

139 

vii. 

10, 11, 

. ii. 131 

xii. 

13, . 

. i. 

135 

xii. 

13, 

. . i. 

135 

vii. 

10, 11, 

! 12, 

. ii. 137 

xii. 

14, . 

. ii. 

185 

xiii. 5, 

. . i. 

287 

ii. 221, 462 
. ii. 190 
ii. 221, 462 
i. 189, 274, 
ii. 449 
163, 190, 457 
. i. 189 
. i. 136 
i. 139, 415, 
ii. 224 
ii. 164 
ii. 448 
11, 13, i. 403 

i. 136 

ii. 71 

i. 139 

ii. 133 
ii. 366 
ii. 135 

i. 238 

ii. 102 

2 Corinthians. 

ii. 12, 

ii. 14-16, . 

iii. 14, 

iv. 8, 9, 

iv. 18, 

v. 1, 2, 3, 7, 

v. 1, 7, . 

v. 7, . 
v. 8, . . 

v. 10, 

v. 16, 17, . 

vi. 3-7, 

vi. 4, 10, 11, 
vi. 14, 15, . 
vi. 14, 15, 16, 
vi. 16, 17, 18, 

ii. 185 

i. 232 

ii. 285 
ii. 199 

i. 280 

ii. 217 
ii. 364 

i. 281, ii. 241 
. ii. 217 

ii. 113 
ii. 113 
ii. 200 

i. 351 

ii. 255 
ii. 113 
ii. 118, 

200 

vi. 17, 18, . . ii. 255 

vii. 1, ii. 113, 118, 200 

vii. 1-11, . . ii. 200 

viii. 12, 15, . ii. 60 

viii. 20, 21, . i, 331 

x. 5, . . . ii. 415 

x. 5, 16, . . ii. 403 

x. 17, . . i. 139 

Galatians. 

ii. 

19, 20, . 

ii. 

136 

iii. 

3, 

ii. 

135 

iii. 

, 12, 

ii. 

29 

iii. 

. 19, 23, 24, 

i. 

461 

iii. 

. 23-25, . 

i. 

135 

iii. 

, 24, . i. 180, 

366, 

ii 

i. 22 

iii. 

26-28, . 

i. 

135 

iii, 

,28, 

i. 

101 

iv. 

1, 2, 3, . 

i. 

378 

iv. 

1-5, . 

ii. 

137 

iv. 

7, 

i. 

137 

iv. 

9, 

i. 

67 

iv. 

16, 

i. 

169 

iv. 

19, 

ii. 

131 

iv. 

30, 

i. 

386 

V. 

5, 6, . 

ii. 

77 

V. 

13, 

ii. 

102 

V. 

17, ii. 384, 

385, 

464 

V. 

20, 

ii. 

391 

V. 

24, 

ii. 

159 

V. 

25, 

ii. 

241 

V. 

25, 26, . 

i. 

339 

V. 

26, 

i. 

378 

vi. 

2, 

ii. 

86 

vi. 

2, 7, 9, 

i. 

339 

vi. 

8, . ii. 

159, 

465 

vi. 

8, 9, . 

i. 

351 

vi. 

10, 

i. 

353 

vi. 

14, . 

ii. 

145 

vi. 

15, . 

i. 

101 

Ephesians, 

i. 

1, 2, 22, 

25, 

i. 

338 

i. 

4, 5, 

ii. 

347 

ii. 

2, . 

i. 

23 

ii. 

3, . 

ii. 

136 

ii. 

3-5, 

i. 

35 

ii. 

5, 

ii. 

30, 

114 

ii. 

11, 

ii. 

445 

ii. 

12, 

i. 

33 

ii. 

13, 

ii. 

30 

ii. 

14, 15, 

16, 

ii. 

366 

ii. 

20, 21, 

ii. 

359 

iii 

• 3, 4, 

i. 

468 

iii 

. 3-5, 

ii. 

257 

524 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

m. 

iii. 

iii. 

iii. 

iv. 
iv. 
iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

v. 
v. 

V. 

V. 

V. 

V. 

v. 

v. 

V. 

V. 

V. 

vi. 
vi. 
vi. 

vi. 

VOL. PAGE 

ii. 273 
i. 365 

i. 408 

ii. 337 

i. 357 

ii. 200 
ii. 354, 366 bis, 

413, 455, 46S 
. i. 126 
. i. 377 
. i. 81 
. ii. 96 
i. 285, ii. 129 
i. 412 

i. 338 

ii. 237 

i. 222 

ii. 97 
252, 294 

i. 222 

i. 225 

ii. 97 
i. 133 
i. 81 

i. 217 

ii. 168 
ii. 415 
ii. 243 

i. 338 

ii. 63 
12, ii. 133, 161, 284, 

419 

14-17, • . i. 104 

Philippians. 

5, 

10 , 

10 , 11 , . 

14, 15, . 

11 , 12 , • 

11, 12, 13, 

13, 

13-15, 

14, 

17, 18, 

20- 24, 

24, 

24, 25, 27-29, 
25-29, 

26, 

29, 

1-4, 

3, 

3, 4, 

4, • 

5-11, 

8 , . 

14, 

19, 

21- 29, 

22- 24, 

23, 

I, 4, 9, 

II , 

i. 7, . 

. ii. 181 

i. 9, 10, 

. i. 386 

i. 13, 14, 

. ii. 148 

i. 20-24, 

. ii. 115 

i. 29, 30, 

. ii. 181 

ii. 6, 7, 

. i. 24 

ii. 7, . 

. i. 274 

ii. 10, 11, 

. i. 456 

ii. 15, 

. i. 340 

ii. 20, 21, 

. ii. 181 

iii. 12-14, 

. i. 148 

iii. 15, 

. i. 148 

iii. 20, 

ii. 130, 145 

iv. 5, 

. i. 83 

iv. 8, 9, 

. ii. 138 

iv. 11-13, 

. ii. 185 

iv. 18, 

. ii. 415 

COLOSSIANS. 

i. 9-11, . . ii. 257 

i. 25-27, . . ii. 257 

i. 28, . . . i. 358 

ii. 2, 3, . ii. 258, 269 

VOL. PAGE 

VOL. PAGE 

ii. 4, . 

, 

i. 385 

vi. 2, 

i. 339 

n. 4, 8, 

, , 

i. 384 

vi. 3-5, 

i. 376 

ii. 6, 7, 

, , 

i. 385 

vi. 10, 

i. 214 

ii. 8, i. 384, 385, 

ii. 339, 

vi. 16, . ii. 322, 347 

340, 372 

vi. 20, 21, . 

ii. 32 

ii. 11, 
ii. 18-23, 

. . 

ii. 104 

# m 

ii. 108 

2 Timothy. 

iii. 4, 10, 

ii. 104 

ii. 1, 2, . 

i. 350 

iii, 5, 

, . 

ii. 391 

ii. 14, 16, 17, . . 

i. 383 

iii. 5, 6, 

i. 323 

ii. 23, 

ii. 3S5 

iii. 8, 9, 

. . 

ii. 415 

ii. 28, 

ii. 223 

iii. 11, 

, . 

ii. 168 

iii. 2, 

i. 409 

iii. 12, 14, 

15, . 

ii. 164 

iii. 15, 

i. 410 

iii. 12-15, 

ii. 169 

iii. 18-25, 

# # 

ii. 168 

Titus. 

iv. 1, 

ii. 168 

i. 6, . . . 

ii. 137 

iv. 2, . 

# # 

ii. 258 

i. 10, . 

i. 137 

iv. 3, 4, 

ii. 258 

i. 12, 13, . 

i. 391 

i. 15, . 

ii. 137 

1 Thessalonians. 

i. 16, . 

ii. 172 

ii. 5, 6, 7, 

i. 352 

ii. 3-5, 

ii. 198 

ii. 6, 7, 

i. 127 

ii. 11-13, . 

i. 22 

ii. 17, 

i. 280 

ii. 14, 

i. 411 

iv. 3-8, 

ii. 178 

iii. 3-5, 

i. 20 

iv. 9, 

i. 132 

iv. 17, 

ii. 366 

Hebrews. 

v. 5-7, 

i. 242 

i. 1, i. 365, ii. 241, 277, 

v. 6-8, 

ii. 204 

337, 351 

v. 13-15, 19-22, 

ii. 339 

i. 3, . . . 

ii. 448 

v. 21, 

i. 386 

ii. 11, 

i. 102 

iii. 5, . 

ii. 71 

2 Thessalonians. 

iv. 8, 9, 

ii. 77 

ii. 4, . 

, , 

ii. 457 

iv. 12, 

ii. 431 

iii. 1, 2, 

. , 

ii. 231 

v. 12, 

ii. 339 

v. 12, 13, . 

ii. 258 

1 Timothy. 

v. 13, 

i. 386 

i. 5, . 

i. 466 

v. 14, i. 372, 386, 

ii. 407 

i. 7, . 

i. 466 

vi. 1, . 

ii. 258 

i. 7, 8, 

ii. 162 

vi. 11-20, . 

ii. 77 

i. 8, . 

i. 466 

vii. 2, 

ii. 13 

i. 9, . 

ii. 413 

viii. 8-10, . 

ii. 327 

i. 14, . 

i. 82 

vii. 10-12, . 

i. 102 

i. 18, 19, 

. ii. 

19, 143 

ix. 14, 

ii. 112 

i. 25, . 

i. 200 

x. 26, 27, . 

ii. 36 

ii. 3, 4, 

ii. 137 

x. 32-39, . 

ii. 186 

ii. 9, . 

i. 330 

xi. 1, 2, 6, . 

ii. 6 

ii. 9, 10, 

i. 271 

xi. 3, 4, 25, 

ii. 8 

ii. 15, 

ii. 127 

xi. 26, 27, . 

ii. 187 

iii. 15, 

i. 83 

xi. 36-40, . 

ii. 1S6 

iii. 16, 17, 

i. 83 

xii. 1, 2, . 

ii. 1S6 

iv. 1, 2, 3, 

,4, 5,' 

ii. 125 

xii. 5, 6, . 

i. 369 

iv. 1, 3, 

i. 108 

xii. 13-17, . 

ii. 19S 

iv. 6-8, 

i. 339 

xii. 21, 

i. SO 

iv. 10, 

iv. 12, 

v. 14, 15, 

’. i. 83 

, ii. 400 
ii. 185 

xiii. 4, 

ii. 198 

ii. 127 

James. 

v. 18, 

ii. 55 

ii. 8, . 

ii. 403 

v. 21, 

i. 351 

ii. 23, 

ii. 12 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

525 

iv. 6, . ii. 

VOL. PAOE 

107, 188 

v. 20, 

. ii. 90 

1 Peteb. 

i. 6-9, 

. ii. 198 

i. 14, 15, 16, 

. ii. 138 

i. 17-19, . 

. i. 332 

i. 21, 22, . 

ii. 1-3, 

. ii. 138 

. i. 143 

ii. 12, 

. i. 313 

ii. 18, 

. i. 324 

ii. 24, 

. ii. 40 

iii. 1-4, 

. i. 320 

iii. 8, 

. i. 324 

iii. 13, 

. i. 333 

iii. 19, 

. ii. 331 

iii. 19, 20, . 

. ii. 329 

VOL. PAGE 

iv. 3, i. 332. 

, ii. 391 

iv. 5. 

ii. 188 

iv. 8, i. 334, 336, 466, 

ii. 

40, 190 

iv. 12, 13, 14, . 

ii. 161 

v. 5, . . . 

ii. 107 

1 John. 

i. 6, 7, . 

ii. 98 

ii. 2-6, 

i. 340 

ii. 4, . 

ii. 104 

ii. 18, 19, . 

ii. 105 

iii. 3, 

ii. 103 

iv. 7, 

i. 330 

iv. 8-16, 

ii. 191 

iv. 16, 

ii. 428 

iv. 16-18, . 

ii. 185 

v. 3, . 

VOL. PAGE 

. ii. 185 

v. 16, 17, . 

. ii. 40 

Jude. 

5, 6, . 

. i. 307 

8, 17, 

. ii. 89 

22, 25, 

. ii. 341 

Revelation. 

i* 8, . 

. i. 138 

iv. 4, 

. ii. 366 

v. 6, . 

. ii. 241 

vi. 9, 11, . 

. i. 259 

ix. 10, 

. ii. 136 

xi. 16, 

. ii. 366 

xxi. 6, 

. ii. 388 

xxii. 12, 

. ii. 202 

II. — INDEX OF SUBJECTS FORMALLY OR INCIDENTALLY 

CONSIDERED. 

Abandoned, the, i. 190. 

Abimelech, what he represents, i. 
128, 129. 

Abodes granted to believers accord- 
ing to their respective merits, ii. 
370. 

Abraham, the lesson taught him by 
God, i. 2S1 ; and Isaac and Jacob, 
ii. 12 ; and Sarah, 302. 

Abraham, the three days’ journey 
of, to Moriah, ii. 264, 205. 

Abstinence enjoined, i. 201. 

Abstraction from material things 
necessary to obtain a true know- 
ledge of God, ii. 261, etc. 

Accusation, employed by the In- 
structor, i. 168. 

Acephalus, the star so called, i. 209. 

Acrothordkes , i. 202, and note. 

Act well, to, better than to speak 
well, i. 381. 

Adages, the, of philosophers, ii. 392. 

Adam, the state in which he was 
created, ii. 359. 

Admonition, i. 164, 177. 

Adornment, in what case permitted 
to women, i. 315. 

Adornment, the true, i. 268. 

Advent, the, of Christ, the benefits 
conferred by, i. 100. 

Advent, the, of the Instructor, pre- 
intimations of, ii. 404. 

^Eacus, and the Delphic oracle, ii. 
319. 

iEgis, the, of Jove, described poeti- 
cally, ii. 69. 

iEsop quoted, ii. 429. 

^Eschylus quoted, ii. 288, 296. 

Afflictions, voluntary, i. 304. 

Agapoe, i. 188, 189. 

Agatho, the tragedian, quoted, ii. 
300. ^ 

a/^vs?, i. 342, note. 

Alcmaeon, i. 403. 

Alexander the Great, canonized as a 
god, i. 90 ; and the Indian Gymno- 
sophists, a curious story of, ii. 324, 
325. 

Alexander, the philosopher, referred 
to, i. 397. 

Alexander Polyhistor quoted, i. 436. 

Alexarchus, i. 59. 

Alexis, the comic poet, quoted, i. 
271. 

Altar, the true, ii. 428, 429. 

Amaranth, i. 237. 

Ambiguity prevented by definition, 
ii. 496, etc. 

Amosis, i. 421. 

Amours of the gods, the, i. 39, etc. 

526 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

Amphion of Thebes, i. 17 ; quoted, 
ii. 286. 

Amusements, i. 325. 

Anacharsis, king of the Scythians, a 
story of, i. 33. 

Anacharsis, the philosopher, i. 399, 
403 ; ii. 247. 

Anacreon quoted, i. 322. 

Analysis and demonstration, ii. 495. 

Anaxagoras, i. 403. 

Anaxarchus, i. 373. 

Androcydes quoted respecting the 
Ephesian Letters , ii. 247 ; on drunk- 
enness and gluttony, 430. 

Angels, ii. 275 ; distributed to the 
nations, 398 ; good things given by 
God through, 400 ; other references 
to, 412, 414. 

Angels that fell, i. 283. 

Anger of the gods, the, i. 159, 163. 

Animal-worship, i. 45, 46 ; superior 
to image-worship, 56. 

Animals, the sort forbidden to the 
Jews as food, i. 326 ; distinction 
between, of clean and unclean, its 
symbolical significance, ii. 488, 489. 

Animals, the dialect of, i. 443. 

Animals and plants, ii. 497. 

Anointing the feet of Jesus, i. 230. 

Anointing of Jesus by God, i. 233. 

Antinous, i. 55. 

Antiochus of Cyzicus, i. 57. 

Antipatrus quoted, ii. 278. 

Antiphanes, the comic poet, quoted, 
i. 278. 

Antiphon, i. 404. 

Antiquity, the, of the Hebrew philo- 
sophy, i. 421, etc. 

Antisthenes quoted, i. 71, 74 ; ii. 62. 

Anxiety, i. 256. 

Aod, i. 425, 426. 

Apelles, an anecdote of, i. 270. 

Aphrodite, i. 28, 42, 44, 45. 

Apion quoted, i. 421. 

Apis, an Egyptian god, i. 54, 57, 424. 

Apollo, i. 42, 44 ; meaning of the 
name, 48S. 

Apollodorus of Corcyra quoted, ii. 
250. 

Apollodorus of Cuma, i. 404. 

Apostles, the opinion of the, respect- 
ing veiling the mysteries of the 
faith, ii. 257-261 ; why chosen, 365. 

Appetite, the third division of the 
soul, i. 273 ; what, ii. 37. 

Arabs, the, i. 290. 

Aratus quoted, i. 73, 102 ; ii. 81 ; 
quoted by St. Paul, i. 413. 

Archilochus quoted, ii. 294. 

Archons, the, of Athens, i. 257. 

Ares, derivation of the name, i. 66. 
Arion of Methymna, i. 17. 

Aristippus, the Cyrenean, quoted, i. 

232, 234 ; ii. 67. 

Aristo quoted, ii. 62. 

Aristocritus, his Positions against 
Heracliodorus quoted, ii. 239. 
Aristophanes quoted, i. 269, 278 ; ii. 
159, 160, 370. 

Aristotle quoted, ii. 10, 272. 

Ark, the, of the Covenant, ii. 242. 
Armour of God, the, i. 104. 

"A P vts, i. 121. 

Art, i. 60, 61, 65, 90. 

Artapanus quoted, i. 451. 

Artist, the great, i, 90, 91. 

Artorius, i. 202. 

Arts, the, proceed from God, 364. 
Arts, the Barbarians inventors of the, 
i. 401. 

Arts, sophistical and useless, i. 376. 
Asclepius, i. 37. 

Asking, ii. 490. 

Ass, the fish so called, i. 198. 

Assent, the causes of, ii. 505. 
Assimilation to God, according to 
Plato, the chief good, i. 74-78. 
Associates, i. 325. 

Association, with whom to be sought, 

i. 292. 

*A o’rpccya.Xoiy i. 325, note. 

Astronomy, the influence of the study 
of, ii. 356. 

’A (Tur'icc, and cctrcorrov, i. 206. 

’A <r&roi >$ 9 i. 190. 

Athene, i. 30 ; six so named, 36. 
Athenodorus, i. 54. 

Atheist, the, and the superstitious 
man, ii. 408. 

Atheists, who were so called among 
the heathen, i. 33, 34, 66. 

Athlete, the ancient, i. 297. 

Athlete, the true, described, ii. 419. 
Attica , the, quoted, i. 423. 

Attis, i. 30. 

Authors and speakers compared, i. 
349-359. 

Bacchic Orgies, the, i. 27. 

Bacchylides quoted, ii. 262, 286, 
299. 

Balance, stepping over the, forbidden 
by Pythagoras, ii. 238. 

Banquets, proper conduct at, i. 225. 
Baptism, various references to, i. 91, 
132, 133, 134, 135, 147, 181, 417 ; 

ii. 7, 208. 

Baptism, the, of Christ, i. 131. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

527 

Barbarian philosophy, the, the Greeks 
pilferers of, ii. 1 ; perfect, 3. 

Barbarians, the, hate luxury, i. 290 ; 
the Greek philosophy in great part 
derived from, 395, etc. ; inventors 
of the arts, 401. 

Barnabas quoted, ii. 19, 22, 41, 50, 
66, 258, 340. 

Basilides, and Valentinus, and their 
followers, their views of faith, ii. 
6, 7, 1.7 ; the vagaries of, as to fear 
being the cause of all things, 22, 25 ; 
his opinions respecting continence 
and marriage refuted, 84-86 ; his 
idea of martyrdom refuted, 175- 
179 ; and Valentinus, and Marcion, 
486, 487. 

B arocXoi, i. 289. 

Baths, shameful behaviour in, i. 296, 
297 ; why we should use, 308, 309. 

Barley loaves, the five, and the two 
fishes, the mystical significance of, 
ii. 358. 

Baubo and Demeter, i. 31. 

Beard, the, the ornament of the man, 
i. 286 ; not to be plucked, 289 ; as 
to shaving, 317. 

Beatitudes, the, some points in, ii. 150. 

Beauty, the true, i. 268, 271, 273-275, 
3J9, 320. 

Beds, luxuries to be avoided, i. 240- 
243. 

Bedu , ii. 248, 249. 

Believer, the, the most punished of 
all men, ii. 367. 

Belly-demon, the, i. 197. 

Beneficence, i. 302 ; ii. 57. 

Benefits, the many, conferred by the 
advent of Christ, i. 100. 

Benevolence, ii. 18. 

Berosus’ Chaldaics quoted, i. 67. 

Bewailing one’s fate, i. 168. 

Bezaleel, i. 364. 

Bion, i. 60. 

Birds, the voices of, i. 244. 

Birds of prey, and ravenous, forbidden 
the Jews as food, i. 326 ; ii. 252. 

Blackbird, the, i. 245. 

Blame and praise, i. 177. 

Blood of Christ, the, i. 140, 200. 

Blood, the, of the Word, ii. 141, 142, 
143, 145. 

Bocchoris, the just decision of, ii. 
192. 

Body, the proper care of the, i. 186 ; 
against embellishing the, 276-283. 

Book, who first published a, i. 403. 

Boys and girls to be denied wine, i. 

201 . 

Bread from heaven, the, i. 144. 

Breastplate, the, of the high priest, 
its symbolical importance, ii. 242, 
243. 

Brimo, i. 28. 

Britain, a curious cave in the island 
of, ii. 322. 

Bryaxis, i. 54. 

Buddha, i. 399. 

Burning bush, the, i. 238. 

Butter, its spiritual significance, i. 
148. 

Buying and selling, i. 328. 

Cabiri, the orgies and mysteries of 
the, i. 30. 

Cadmus, i. 401, 402, 424. 

Callimachus quoted, i. 37, 43; ii. 
262, 280, 281, 284, 285. 

Calling, the sin of neglecting God’s, 
i. 80, etc. 

Calves, believers figuratively called, 
i. 123. 

Camels, the, of the Arabs, i. 290. 

Cambyses, i. 57. 

Captivity, the, of Israel, i. 433, 434. 

Carpocrates and Epiphanes, their 
opinion respecting a community of 
women refuted, ii. 86-89. 

Castor and Pollux, i. 38. 

Cause and causation, i. 406-40S, 418, 
419. 

Causes, different kinds of, ii. 508- 
514. 

Censure, i. 157. 

Cernos, the, i. 29, note. 

Chains of gold, fetters, i. 269. 

“ Chair of pestilence, the,” ii. 41. 

Charioteers, the two, in which Heaven 
delights, i. 282. 

Charity, the kiss of, i. 329. 

Charon, the centaur, i. 400. 

Chastisement,' i. 465. 

Cherubim, the golden, ii. 242. 

Chickens, believers so called, i. 124. 
Chiding, i. 177. 

Chief good, the, various opinions of 
the philosophers respecting, ii. 71- 
74; Plato’s opinion of, 74-78. 

Child, the, and the man, i. 136. 

Child, the little, who, i. 125. 

Child born, Christ the, i. 130. 

Children of God, who are, i. 122, etc. ; 
the name does not imply instruction 
in elementary principles, 131, etc. ; 
mode of disciplining, 164. 

“Chrestoi,” ii. 11. 

Christ the Saviour, a hymn to, i. 
343. 

528 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

Christ, the many benefits conferred 
by the advent of, i. 100-105 ; the 
Word, 104 ; the Son of God, in the 
form of man, free from human pas- 
sions, 115 ; typified by Isaac, 129 ; 
the voice from heaven to, at His 
baptism, 131 ; in what sense all 
who came before Him were thieves 
and robbers, 406 ; free from all 
human affections, ii. 344. 

Christian, the, alone rich, i. 298. 

Christian life, the, a compendious 
view of, i. 213, etc. ; general pre- 
cepts for the regulation of, 332, etc. 

Christians, ii. 11. 

Chronology in relation to Greek and 
Hebrew philosophy, i. 421, etc., 
447. 

Church, the, a mother, i. 142. 

Church, the traditions of, prior to 
heresy, ii. 485. 

Church, the true, ii. 487. 

Church, the grades of dignity in, imi- 
tations of angelic glory, ii. 366. 

Church, going to, i. 328 ; behaviour 
out of, 329. 

Cinyras, i. 28. 

Classification, ii. 506. 

Clean and unclean animals, the sym- 
bolical significance of the distinc- 
tion between, ii. 488. 

Cleansing, spiritual, i. 309. 

Cleanthes quoted, i. 72 ; ii. 231, 286, 
429, 430. 

Clemens, Titus Flavius, a sketch of 
the history of, i. 11; an account of 
his works, 12-16 ; refers to his own 
writings, 355-359. 

Clement of Rome, passages from his 
Epistle to the Corinthians respect- 
ing martyrdom, ii. 187-190 ; other 
quotations from, 340, 341. 

Clothes, considerations and counsels 
respecting, 255, etc. ; anxiety about, 
256 ; given for a covering, 25S ; 
foolish kinds of, 258 ; dyeing of, 
forbidden, 258, 259 ; gorgeous, 259 ; 
of the primal man, 261 ; of John 
the Baptist, 261 ; long, 261, 262 ; 
extravagance in, to be avoided, 262 ; 
purple, prohibited, 262, 263 ; shoes, 
264, 265 ; plain, 313 ; white, 314 ; 
substantial, 314 ; suited to sex, age, 
etc., 315. 

Cnaxzbi, ii. 250. 

Coat, Joseph’s, of many colours, in- 
terpreted, ii. 253. 

Colour in clothes, i. 258, 259 ; white, 
314. 

Colts, untamed, i. 124. 

Comic poets, nameless, quoted, i. 322. 

Command, the universal, i. 101. 

Commandments, the, expounded: the 
first and second, ii. 383 ; the fourth, 
386-391; the fifth, sixth, and seventh, 
391 ; the eighth and tenth, 392. 

Communion, the innate and original, 
of man with heaven, i. 34. 

Community of women, Carpocrates’ 
and Epiphanes’ opinions respecting, 
refuted, i. 86-89. 

Complaint, i. 165. 

Compositions, written and spoken, 
compared, i. 349-359. 

Concupiscence, the Lord free from, 
ii. 458. 

Conjecture, ii. 10. 

Contempt for pain and poverty, ii. 148. 

Continence, in what respect that of 
Christians excels that claimed by 
the philosophers, ii. 110, etc. 

Conversation, the regulation of, i. 228. 

Coveting, the mandates of the law and 
of Christ prohibiting, ii. 117. 

Corybantes, the orgies of the, i. 30. 

Costly vessels and furniture, i. 211. 

“ Counsel of the ungodly, the,” ii. 41. 

Counsels, the, of the Instructor, i. 
174, 175. 

Courage and cowardice, ii. 453, 454. 

Crapulousness, i. 204. 

Crates, the Theban, quoted, ii. 68, 69. 

Cratinus quoted, i. 363 ; ii. 249. 

Criterion, the, for distinguishing be- 
tween truth and error, ii. 476. 

Croesus, i. 49. 

Cropping the hair, i. 317, 318. 

Crowns, the use of, as ornaments, dis- 
approved, i. 235-237. 

Cruelty, the, involved in sacrifices to 
the gods, i. 48. 

Cud, chewing the, i. 326 ; ii. 251, 252, 
448. 

Custom, the, of forefathers, objections 
to abandoning, refuted, i. 85, 89 ; 
to be abandoned, 106, etc. 

Culture, the benefits of, i. 371, 379. 

Cups of gold and silver censured, i. 

211 . 

Dactyli, i. 400. 

Daniel, i. 432 ; the chronology of the 
book of, 445, etc. 

Dardanus, i. 27. 

Darkness hides not the fornicator from 
God, i. 253. 

Day, the seventh, ii. 3S6, etc. 

Death, Valentinian’s vagaries about 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

529 

the abolition of, refuted, ii. 179- 
182. 

Deborah, i. 426. 

Decalogue, the Gnostic exposition of 
the, ii. 383, etc. 

Definition, the need of perspicuous, ii. 
491, 492 ; prevents ambiguity, 496, 
etc. 

Degrees of glory in heaven, ii. 3G5, 
etc. ; more than salvation, 366, etc. 
Degrees of knowledge, ii. 37 1. 

Deities, female, their vile character, 

i. 40. 

Deluge, the, ii. 334. 

Demeter, i. 28 ; the mysteries of, 28 ; 
and Baubo, 31. 

Demetrius, king, raised to the rank of 
a god, i. 59. 

Demetrius of Phalerus, i. 448. 
Demetrius, his book on the kings in 
Judma quoted, i. 442. 

Democritus, i. 397. 

Demons, i. 60; ii. 271, 294; plagues, 
etc., attributed to, 321. 
Demonstration, ii. 472, etc. ; and 
syllogism, 493 ; and analysis, 495. 
Denunciation, i. 168. 

Desire, the duty of repressing, ii. 192, 
193. 

Devil, the, matched by our Lord, i. 
380 ; a thief and a robber, 408 ; a 
wicked spirit, referred to by Plato, 

ii. 276 ; transformed, 341. 

Dialects of men, gods, and animals, i. 

443 ; ii. 380, 381. 

Dialectic, the true, i. 467. 

Dice prohibited, i. 325. 

Didymus, the grammarian, quoted, ii. 
248. 

Diogenes quoted, ii. 68. 

Dino, i. 67. 

Dion, the philosopher, cited, ii. 194. 
Dion Thytes quoted, ii. 248. 

Dionysian mysteries, the, i, 29 ; a vile 
story of, 41.. 

Dionysius, i. 41, 45. 

Dionysius Iambus quoted, ii. 249. 
Dionysius, the tyrant, i. 57. 

Dionysius Thrax quoted, ii. 248. 
Diphilus, the comic poet, quoted, ii.. 
291, 423. 

Directions for those who live together, 

i. 225. 

Discipline, various modes of, adopted 
by the Instructor, i, 164, etc. 

Dives and Lazarus, i. 257. 

Divination, i. 26, 27. 

Divine things wrapped up in figures, 

ii. 232, etc. 

CLEM. — VOL. II. 

Division, logical, ii. 503. 

Dogs, giving holy things to, ii. 5. 
i. 257. 

Doubts, the causes of, ii. 505. 

Draco, i. 404. 

Dreams, i. 243 ; ii. 192, 193. 

Dress. See Clothing. 

Drinking, water most suitable for, i. 
199 ; water to be preferred to wine 
for, 201 ; intemperance in, censured, 
205, etc. ; decency in, 207 ; the ex- 
ample of Jesus as to, 208 ; con- 
sidered in relation to women, 209. 

Drunken bouts, and drunkards, i. 
204. 

Dyeing of the hair, the impropriety 
of, i. 235 ; and the clothes, 257. 

Earrings, i. 315. 

Ears, the, not to be bored for rings 
or drops, i., 272. 

East, turning to the, ii. 436. 

Eating, the regulation of ourselves in, 

i. 186 ; the end of, is to live, 186, 
187 ; epicurism in, to be avoided, 
187, etc. ; moderation in, 192 ; 
viewed in relation to tilings sacri- 
ficed to idols, 193 ; temperance in, 
193, 194 ; speaking while, to be 
avoided, 195 ; proper food for, 196. 

Eating the flesh of Christ, i. 140, 143. 

Eclectic philosophy, the, paves the 
way to virtue, i. 374. 

Eetion, i. 27. 

Effeminacy in men described and con- 
demned, i. 284-291. 

Egyptian styles of writing, ii. 233. 

Egyptian symbols of sacred things* ii. 
245, 246. 

Egyptian temples, i. 276. 

Egyptians, their various objects of 
worship, i. 45 ; inventors of arts, 
401 ; gods of the, 438 ; temples of 
the, i. 276 ; sacred symbols of the, 

ii. 245, 246 ; styles of writing of 
the, 233 the Greeks drew many of 
their philosophical tenets from, 323, 
324 ; did- not allow their priests to 
feed on flesh, 430. 

Egyptians, the, spoiled by the Israel- 
ites, i. 453 ; overthrown in the Bed 
Sea, 457. 

Elements, the, worshipped by the 
heathen, i. 386. 

Eleusinian mysteries, the, i. 32. 

Elias, i. 301. 

Embellishing the body, considerations 
condemnatory of, i. 276-284. 

Empedocles quoted, i. 36 ; ii. 209, 

2 L 

530 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

225 , 231, 249, 250, 269, 283, 292, 
301. 

Emperors, the Roman, i. 444. 
Empirics, the, i. 379. 

Employments, useful, the propriety, 
decency, and profitableness of, i. 
310-312. 

Encouragement, i. 175. 

Enemies, loving our, ii. 181, 182. 
Enigmas, ii. 233, 

Ephesian Letters quoted, the, ii. 247. 
Epicharmes quoted, ii. 15, 217, 381, 
389, 424. . 

Epicurism, i. 187. 

Epicurus, i. 68 ; his view of faith, ii. 

10 ; of pleasure, 71, 72. 

Epigenes on the Poetry of Orpheus , 
quoted, ii. 351. 

’e Turr'/tfAY), ii. 205, 206. 

Equivocal terms, ii. 507. 

Eratosthenes, i. 404. 

Eros, i. 50. 

Errors, an exhortation to forsake old, 

i. 106, etc. 

Esoteric and exoteric, ii. 55. 

Esther, adorns herself for her hus- 
band, i. 281 ; her influence, ii. 194. 
Eternity, i. 3S9. 

Eubulus, the comic poet, quoted, ii. 
427. 

Eucharist, the, i. 201, 416. 

'EvX'pcc<nc&, i. 179. 

E vXetfiuct, ii. 20. 

Eumolpidse, the, i. 31. 

Eunomos, the Locrian and the Pythic 
grasshopper, i. 17. 

Eunuch, a, forbidden by Moses to 
enter the congregation, i. 34. 
Euphorbion, the poet, quoted, ii. 239, 
249. 

Eupolemus quoted, i. 442, 451. 
Euphrone, night so called, why ? ii. 
204. 

Euripides quoted, i. 34, 38, 70, 75, 107, 
281, 282, 283, 305, 377, 400, 468 ; 

ii. 39, 62, 91, 163, 196, 197, 263, 
266, 287, 300. 

Eurysus, the Pythagorean, cited, ii. 
238. 

E vtIxskz, i. 304, note. 

Eva, the bacchanal cry of, i. 27. 

Eve, i. 286. 

Evil, hatred of, i. 160. 

Excellence, the true, of man, ii. 142. 
Excess forbidden, i. 194, 206. 
Execestus, tyrant of Phocis, i. 438. 
Exercises, the, suited to a good life, 
i. 310-312. 

Exhortation, i. 175. 

Exhortation, to turn to God from 
idols, i. 87-99; to abandon old 
errors, 106, etc. 

Exodus, the, of Israel from Egypt, i. 
439, 452, 453. 

Expectation, ii. 16, 17. 

Experience, ii. 43. 

Eyes, the improper movements of, i. 
322 ; the government of, 230. 

Ezekiel, the Jewish tragedian, quoted, 

i. 452, 453. 

Face, painting the, censured, i. 319. 

Face of God, the, i. 152. 

Faith, connected with salvation, i. 
133, 134, 135 ; the knowledge of 
God attained through, ii. 3-6 ; not a 
product of nature, 6-8 ; the founda- 
tion of all knowledge, 8-12; its 
excellence, 16-20 ; the knowledge 
which comes through, the surest of 
all, 30-33 ; twofold, 33-35 ; further 
and fuller discussion of, 220, etc. ; 
the objects of, perceived by the 
mind alone, 229, etc. ; must be fol- 
lowed by works., 367 ; the founda- 
tion of knowledge, 446 ; itself a 
comprehensive knowledge, 447. 

Falsehood and theft, i. 420. 

Fast, and fasting, the true, i. 335 ; 

ii. 363 ; as practised by the true 
Gnostic, 461. 

Father, God recognised by the heathen 
as, ii. 297, 298. 

Father of the universe, the, i. 128. 

Fear, the influence of, i. 168 ; two 
sorts of, 171, 172 ; the utility of, ii. 
20-22 ; the silly notion of Valenti - 
nian and Basilides respecting, 22-25 ; 
good, 25. 

Feasts, reason to rule at, i. 204 ; the 
conduct to be observed at, 215. 

Feet, bare, recommended, i. 264, 
265. 

Feet of the Lord, the, i. 230. 

Fetters, gold chains asserted to be, i. 
269. 

Figures, divine things enveloped in, 
ii. 232, etc. 

Filthy speaking condemned, i. 222- 
224. 

Finery, the evil of love of, i. 279, 280. 

Fire corrects superstition, i. 58. 

Fire, the pillar of, i. 458, 

Fire-worship, i. 67. 

First-born sons, i. 81. 

First Cause, the, of the universe, to 
be apprehended by faith only, ii. 9. 

First principles, ii. 8, 9, 494. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

531 

Five loaves, the, broken by Christ, 
the mystical signification of, ii. 240, 
241. 

Flesh, animal, its effects as food, ii. 
429, 430. 

Flesh of Christ, eating the, i. 140, 
143 145. 

Flock, the, of the Lord, i. 462. 

Flowers, not to be woven into a 
crown, i. 235, 236 ; the peculiar 
properties of some, 236 ; the beauty 
of, 255. 

Food, discrimination to be used as to, 
i. 186, 187 ; epicurism in, to be 
avoided, 187, 188 ; the proper kinds 
of, 196, etc. 

Forefathers, the objections against 
abandoning the customs of, refuted, 
i. 85-99. 

Forgiveness, i. 336. 

Fornication, the sin of, i. 253. 

Fortitude, ii. 454. 

Fortune, the goddess of, i. 56. 

Friendship, three kinds of, ii. 59. 

Frugality, i. 95 ; enjoined on the 
Jews, 197 ; a good provision for the 
Christian, 301-304. 

Games, the Grecian, i. 41. 

Vcca’rptfJLDcpylcc^ 1. 194. 

Generalization and induction, ii. 502. 

Generalship, the ideas involved in, 

i. 456. 

Geometry, the mystic meanings in the 
ratios of, ii. 353. 

Germans, the, i. 399. 

Gideon, i. 426. 

Glory, degrees of, in heaven, ii. 365, 
366, etc. 

Gluttony, i. 193, 194. 

Gnosis, ii. 43. 

Gnostic, the true, an imitator of God, 

ii. 57 ; exercises patience and self- 
restraint, 60 ; described, 199-202 ; 
does good for the sake of the, good, 
202, etc. ; erudite, 340, 344 ; free 
from all perturbations of the soul, 
344-348 ; avails himself of the help 
of all human knowledge, 449-451 ; 
the extent of his knowledge, 357 ; 
how he benefits men, 400 ; the use 
of philosophy to, 401, etc ; a true 
worshipper of God, unjustly calum- 
niated, 406, etc. ; aims at the 
nearest likeness to God, 414, etc. ; 
the sort of prayer employed by, and 
how it finds acceptance with God, 
431, etc. ; is kingly and priestly, 
432 ; magnanimous, 438 ; mild, 

meek, and contented, 439 ; self- 
trained, 439, 440 ; rejoices in pre- 
sent good, 440 ; helped by God, 
440, 441 ; demands his reward like 
a successful athlete, 441 ; prays 
always, 442 ; is far from being 
ready to lie and swear, 442, 443 ; 
a description of the life of, 449, 
etc. ; beneficent, content, and de- 
spising worldly things, 455, etc., 

465, etc. ; further description of, 

466, etc. ; description of, furnished 
by an exposition of 1 Cor. vi. 1, etc., 
468-472 abides by Scripture, and 
prospers, 484. 

Gnostic exposition of the Decalogue, 
ii. 383-393. 

Goats, and goats’ flesh, ii. 430. 

God, alone to be worshipped, i. 65 ; 
opinions of the philosophers respect- 
ing, 66, etc. ; the sin of neglecting 
the calling of, 80 ; the folly of for- 
saking, 87 ; the great Artist, 90, 91 ; 
the image of, 91, 109, 110 ; sin and 
misery of ignorance of, 92, 93 ; why 
He created man, 118, 119 ; the chil- 
dren of, described, 122 ; His love, 

155, 156 ; is good, 159, 161 ; His 
anger, 159, 163 ; seeks to lead men 
to repentance, 160 ; one, 161 ; no 
darkness hides from, 253 ; the arts 
proceed from, as well as divine know- 
ledge, 364, etc. ; not the author of 
evil, 407 ; seeing Him, 415 ; the 
knowledge of, to be obtained only ^ 
through faith, ii. 3 ; near and far 
off, 4 ; explanation of the Scrip- 
tures which ascribe human affec- 
tions to, 43-45 ; abstraction from 
things material, necessary to obtain 
a true knowledge of, 261, etc. ; a 
conception of, how to be reached, .J 
264 ; not capable of being expressed, 

264 ; one temple erected to, by 
Moses, and no image of, 265 ; made 
the world, not from need, being all- 
sufficient, 266 ; cannot be embraced \> 
in words, or by the mind, 268-270 ; 
difficult to discourse of, 269, 270 ; 
the knowledge of, a divine gift, > 
270-273 ; the ever-existing mani- 
festation of, to all right-thinking 
men, 273 ; man made in the image ^ 
of, 277 ; heathen testimonies to, 
285; not to be thought of, according 
to the opinion of the multitude, 286, 

292, 293-297 ; some knowledge of, 
possessed by the Greeks, 326-328 ; 
an imperfect knowledge of, con- 

532 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

veyed by philosophy, 393, etc. ; the 
sacrifice required by, 415 ; self-suffi- 
cient, and not influenced or warped 
by sacrifices, 416 ; the soul of the 

s, righteous an image of, 417 ; not to 
be localized or circumscribed, 425, 
426 ; hears prayer in every place, 
433 ; is good, not involuntarily, 
but of choice, 436 ; hears prayer, 
although unuttered, 437. 

God, seeing, i. 25. 

Gods, the, the origin of, i. 34, 35 ; 
human, 37 ; the loves of the, 39, etc. ; 
vile conduct of, 41, etc.; cruelty in- 
volved in the sacrifices offered to, 48; 
tombs of, 50, 51 ; shameful images 
of, 52, etc. ; opinions of the philo- 
sophers respecting, 66-68 ; the mini- 
sters of, 86 ; ideal and imaginary, 
93 ; of the Egyptians, 438 ; dialect 
attributed to, by Plato, 443 ; made 
by the heathen like themselves, ii. 
421, etc. 

Gold and silver, the symbolical import 
of, i. 232. 

Gold and silver cups and vessels, con- 
demned, i. 211 ; against fondness 
for, 266, etc. 

Good, the chief, various opinions of 
the philosophers respecting, ii. 71- 
74 ; Plato’s opinion of, 74-78. 

Good life, a, the exercises suitable to, 

i. 310, etc. 

Good man, the, without passions, ii. 
453. 

Good manners at feasts, i. 229. 

Gospel, the, preached to Jews and 
Gentiles in Hades, ii. 328-335. 

Gospel, the, the universal diffusion of, 
in contrast to philosophy, ii. 405. 

Gothoniel, i. 425. 

Grasshopper, the Pythic, i. 17. 

Greece, a succession of philosophers 
in, i. 391. 

Greek philosophy, derived in great 
part from the Barbarians, i. 395 ; 
gave utterance to some truth, 413, 
415; its use in contributing to the 
comprehension of divine truth, 418- 
420. 

Greek translation of the Old Testa- 
ment, i. 448. 

Greeks, the, imitated Moses’ general- 
ship, i. 456, 457 ; but children com- 
pared with the Hebrews, 469 ; pil- 
ferers of the Barbarian philosophy, 

ii. 1; drew from the sacred Scrip- 
tures, proved, 12-15; derived their 
ethics from the Mosaic law, 47-57 ; 

plagiarisms of, from the Hebrews, 
272 ; plagiarisms from one another, 
illustrated at large, 304, etc.; pla- 
giarism of the miracles related in 
Scripture, 319, etc.; derived many 
of their philosophical tenets from 
the Egyptians and Indian Gymno- 
sophists, 323-325 ; possessed some 
knowledge of the true God, 326-328. 

Guidance, divine, i. 150. 

ruv3i$, i. 289. 

Gymnosophists, the, i. 398, 399 ; the 
Greeks indebted to, for some of 
their philosophical tenets, ii. 324, 
325. 

Hades, the gospel preached to Jews 
and Gentiles in, ii. 328-335. 

Hagar, i. 368, 369. 

Hair, the, the impropriety of dyeing, 

i. 235 ; the custom of eradicating, 
by pitch plasters, censured, 284-287 ; 
regulations as to, 317 ; false, for- 
bidden, 318. 

Hatred of evil, i. 160. 

Hay, the figurative import of, i. 257. 

Head, a cropped, commended, i. 318. 

Health and knowledge, the difference 
between, i. 114. 

Heart, eating the, ii. 239. 

Heart, an uncared, ii. 65. 

Heathen, the, exhorted to forsake im- 
pious rites, i. 17, etc. ; the abomi- 
nable rites practised by, described, 
26, etc. ; the gods of, 34, etc. ; cruel 
sacrifices among, 48, etc. ; absurdity 
of the images of their gods, 52, etc. ; 
the objections of, to abandoning the 
customs of their forefathers, refuted, 
85, etc. ; treated righteously by God, 

ii. 368 ; made gods like themselves, 
421, etc. 

Heaven, degrees of glory in, ii. 365. 

Heavenly bodies, the, given by God 
to the Gentiles to be worshipped, 
ii. 368. 

Hebraic character, the, of the Greek 
philosophy, i. 392. 

Hebrew dialects, ii. 3S0. 

Hebrew philosophy, the, of higher an- 
tiquity than that of the Greeks, i. 
421, etc. 

Hebrew prophets, the, i. 425, 435, 439. 

Hebrews, the Greeks but children com- 
pared with, i. 469, etc. ; the plagi- 
arisms of the Greeks from, ii. 274, 
etc. 

Hellenic philosophy, the multitude 
frightened at, ii. 350. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

533 

Hellenic truth, i. 419. 

Helots, the Lacedaemonian, i. 305. 

Hephaestus, i. 37. 

Heracleon, the Yalentinian, quoted, ii. 

m. 

Heraclitus, the Ephesian, quoted, i. 
32, 07 ; ii. 11, 15, 162, 204, 205, 
226, 301. 

Hercules, i. 38, 40, 400. 

Heresies, the diversities of, made an ob- 
jection to join the church, ii. 472-474. 

Heresies and philosophy, aids in dis- 
covering truth, ii. 376, etc. 

Heresy, i. 416 ; the criterion of dis- 
tinguishing between, and truth, ii. 
476, etc. ; the traditions of the 
church prior to, 485, etc. 

Heretics, the pretexts used by, for 
indulging licentiousness and lusts 
of every kind, ii. 95, etc. ; two 
sorts of, 102-105; passages of Scrip- 
ture perverted by, to the disparage- 
ment of marriage, 112, etc., 116, 
etc., 121, 129, etc., 130, 132. 

Hermas quoted, i. 408, 467, 470; ii. 
27, 28, 34. 

Herodotus quoted, ii. 91. 

Hesiod quoted, i. 46, 73, 290, 296, 
305, 364, 372, 424, 470; ii. 230, 280, 
295, 427. 

Hevia, i. 27. 

Hiccup and sneezing, i. 229. 

High priest’s robe, the, its symbolic 
import, ii. 243. 

Hipparchus, the Pythagorean, quoted, 
ii. 255. 

Hippias, i. 457. 

Hippo, immortalizes his own death, i. 
59 ; Euripides quoted respecting, 
400. 

Hippocrates of Cos quoted, ii. 71. 

Hippodamus, the Pythagorean, 
quoted, ii. 59. 

Hiram, i. 436. 

Holy place, the, of the tabernacle, ii. 
240. 

Holy things not to be given to dogs, 
ii. 5. 

Holy women among the Germans, i. 
399. 

Homer, time of the "birth of, i. 429; 
quoted, 37, 39, 40, 47, 49, 51, 60, 
63, 75, 93, 103, 106, 147, 228, 268, 
282, 364, 392, 468; ii. 281, 284, 288, 
289, 295, 305, 306, 393, 401, 421. 

Honey, its spiritual import, i. 147, 
179. 

Hoof, dividing the, i. 326 ; ii. 251, 
488. 

Hope, ii. 17, 228, 229 ; the objects 
of, perceived by the mind, 229. 

Horse, the, forbidden to be eaten, ii. 
252. 

Hosanna, i. 122. 

Hospitality, ii. 26. 

Human affections, how ascribed to 
God, ii. 43-45. 

Human sacrifices among the heathen, 
i. 48. 

Husband and wife, i. 304, 332, etc. 

Husband, the, of the barren woman, 
i. 25. 

Husbandry, twofold, i. 352. 

Husbandry, the, of the Mosaic law, 
its typical import, ii. 56. 

Hyena, the, i. 246, 247. 

Hylobii, the, i. 399. 

Hymn to Christ the Saviour, a, i. 
343-345. 

Hymn, a noble, of God, i. 96, 97. 

Hypotyposes, the, of Clement, i. 
15. 

Idanthuris, king of the Scythians, 
his symbolic message to Darius, ii. 
247. 

Idolatry, the origin of, i. 34, 35. 

Idols to be rejected, ii. 402. 

Idols, the ministers of, i. 86. 

Idols, things sacrificed to, to be re- 
jected, i. 91. 

Illumination, i. 132 ; ii. 259. 

Image of God, the, i. 91, 109, 110; ii. 
277. 

Images of the gods, the, the absurdity 
and shamefulness of some, i. 52, 
etc. ; the stupidity of the worship 
of, 56, 57 ; often of beautiful ma- 
terial and form, but senseless and 
shameful, 61, 91. 

Immodesty of women in baths, i. 296, 
297. 

Indignation, i. 168. 

Indians, the philosophy of the, ii. 324, 
325. 

Induction, ii. 502. 

Inquiry, philosophical and theological, 
its object, ii. 490. 

Instructor, the, the office of, i. 113 ; 
His treatment of our sins, 115 ; the 
philanthropy of, 118; men and 
women alike under the charge of, 
121 ; who He is, 149-151 ; deals 
with us as we do with children, 
164 ; mode of His discipline, 165 ; 
instructs by the law and the pro- 
phets, 179, 180 ; His severity and 
benignity, 181. 

534 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

Instructors among the Persians, i. 150. 

Insult, the fruit of drunkenness, i. 
225. 

Intellect, the, i. 273. 

Intemperance, i. 204. 

Intercourse, the regulation of, i. 225. 

Intoxication, i. 204, 208, 210. 

Invective, i. 166. 

Inventors, and inventions among the 
Barbarians, i. 402. 

Invitation addressed to the heathen 
to come to Christ the Word, i. 107, 
etc. 

Involuntary, how a thing may be, ii. 
37. 

Ionic Muses, the, quoted, ii. 56. 

Iophon, the comic poet, quoted, i. 363. 

Iota , i. 171. 

Ipse dixit , the, of the followers of Py- 
thagoras, ii. 15. 

Isaac, the import of the name, i. 128 ; 
a type, 129, 369 ; ii. 12. 

Isidore, son of Basilides, quoted, ii. 
65, 334. 

Isis, i. 424. 

Isocrates quoted, ii. 262. 

Israel, ii. 12. 

Jacob, i. 24, 369. 

Jerusalem, i. 367. 

Jerusalem, the heavenly, its garni- 
ture, i. 266, 267. 

Jesting, i. 227. 

Jesus Christ, the Instructor and Shep- 
herd, i. 149, 151 ; as an example in 
eating and drinking, 208 ; anointed 
by the woman who was a sinner, 
230, etc. ; anointed by the Father, 
233. 

Jesus, the son of Nave, his vision of 
Moses ascending to heaven, ii. 382. 

Jewels, excessive fondness of, cen- 
sured, i. 266. 

Jewish laws, of higher antiquity than 
Greek philosophy, i. 421, etc. 

Jews, frugality enjoined on, i. 197, 
198 ; antiquity of the philosophy of, 
399. 

Jibing condemned, i. 226. 

John the Baptist, the forerunner of the 
Word, i. 24 ; his clothing, 261 ; his 
confession, ii. 253, 254. 

Joking, i. 227. 

Joseph, his chastity, i. 321, 322 ; en- 
vied by his brothers, his coat of 
many colours, ii. 252, 253. 

Josephus, i. 446. 

Joshua, i. 425. 

Judas, i. 231. 

Judges, the, of Israel, i. 425, etc. 

Judgment, the, Diphilus the comic 
poet quoted on, ii. 291. 

Judith, ii. 194. 

Julius Cassianus, Be Continentia vel 
Castitate, a reply to, ii. 128, etc. 

Jupiter, three of the name, i. 36 ; 
character of, 43 ; the image of, 
stripped by Dionysius, 57. 

Just One, the, is also good, i. 155, 
etc. 

K/va/Ss?, i. 294. 

King, Christ the, typified by Abime- 
lech, i. 129. 

Kingly office, the, i. 455. 

Kings, the, of Israel, i. 426, etc. ; of 
Persia, 435 ; of Macedon, 435. 

Kiss, the, between husbands and wives, 

i. 332. 

Kiss of charity, the, i. 329. 

Knocking, ii. 490. 

“Know thyself,” the adage, ii. 234, 
420. 

Knowledge, ii. 343 ; objections to, 
answered, 357 ; the advantage of, 
361 ; different degrees of, 371 ; and 
love, 374 ; true, found in the teach- 
ing of Christ alone, 375, 403 ; human, 
necessary to the understanding of 
the Scriptures, i. 379, 380 ; the pri- 
mary, 403 ; of the truth, whence it 
is, 403 ; of God, to be attained only 
through faith, ii. 3 ; faith the foun- 
dation of all, 8, etc. ; that which 
comes through faith, the surest of 
all, 30-33 ; of things predicted, 33 ; 
various kinds of, 45, 46 ; of God, 
to be obtained only through abstrac- 
tion from material things, 361 ; an 
imperfect kind of, conveyed by 
philosophy, 393. 

Knowledge and health, the difference 
between, i. 114. 

Knowledge of God, a divine gift, ii. 
270, etc. 

Kore, i. 29. 

KpaTeiXri, i. 204. 

Lacedaemonian helots, the, i. 305. 

Laertius cited in reference to the cele- 
brated Otvrcs s<pu, ii. 15. 

Aayvs/a, i. 249. 

Lambs, the, of Christ, i. 123, 125. 

Lamp, the golden, of the tabernacle, 

ii. 241. 

Language, the proper regulation of, 
i. 222 224. 

Laughter, i. 219 ; how to to be regu- 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

535 

lated, 220 ; excessive, forbidden, 
227. 

Laughter, spiritual, i. 128, 129.- 

Law, its dignity, ii. 12. 

Law, the, given by Moses, i. 153 ; de- 
signed to restrain transgression, 
179 ; aims at the good of men, 464; 
the beneficent action of, 466 ; four- 
fold division of, 467 ; how to be in- 
terpreted, 468 ; the terrors of, ii. 
21 ; the source of all ethics, 47-57 ; 
the humanity of, 51 ; the mercy of, 
53. 

Laws, divine, i. 97. 

Laws, the Jewish, more ancient than 
the philosophy of the Greeks, i. 
421, etc. 

Lazarus and the rich man, i. 257. 

Learned, the truly, i. 379. 

Learning, the necessity of, i, 372, 373. 

Leaven, the parable of the, ii. 269. 

Legislator, Moses a divine, i. 461, etc. 

Liberorum, de procreatione, qusenam 
tractanda sint, i. 244, etc. 

Licentiousness, i. 288. 

Life, religion in ordinary, i. 327, 328. 
Light, i. 133. 

Likeness of God, the, i. 109, 110. 

Little Iliad, The , quoted, i. 421. 

Lord, the, our Helper, the methods 
He employs to bring men to salva- 
tion, i. 23. 

Lord Christ, the, the Redeemer, i. 98 ; 
the temptation of, 380 ; the duration 
of His teaching, ii. 486. 

Lord’s Day, the, Plato speaks pro- 
phetically of, ii. 284. 

Lot, i. 243. 

Lot’s wife, i. 94. 

Love, celestial food, i. 189. 

Love a part of the true beauty, i. 274. 

Love and the kiss of charity, i. 329. 

Love, the many forms of, ii. 52. 

Love, Christian, commended, ii. 190. 

Love, its influence, ii. 454. 

Love, the divinity of, ii. 346. 

Love due to God from us, i. 119. 

Love and knowledge, ii. 374. 

Love, God is, i. 156. 

Love, is punishment inconsistent with ? 
i. 156. 

Love of money, i. 214. 

Loving our enemies, ii. 181, 1S2. 

Lust, i. 274. 

Lustrations, ii. 263. 

Lusts, unnatural, forbidden, i. 248. 

Lusts, pretexts of the heretics for in- 
dulging in, ii. 95. 

Luxury, i. 187, etc., 212, 213. 

Luxury, the true, i. 267. 

Lycurgus, i. 404. 

Lyre, the, its mystical significance, 
ii. 355. 

Macedonian kings, the, i. 435. 

Maenades, the, i. 107. 

Magi, the, fire-worshippers, i. 67 ; 
they foretold the Saviour’s birth, 
398. 

Magi, the, three curious mountains 
in the country of, ii. 322. 

Maiden, the model, i. 325. 

Makar and Megaclo, i. 38. 

Man, the, made in the image of God, 
ii. 277 ; his fall and redemption, i. 
100 . 

Man, the responsibility of, i. 92 ; why 
created by God, 118. 

Man, the true excellence of, ii. 142, 
etc. 

Man, an immortal, a noble hymn to 
God, i. 96, 97. 

Man, the Lord called a, i. 126. 

Manliness and modesty, i. 272 ; ii. 
48, 49. 

Marcionites, the, why they abstain 
from marriage, ii. 86, etc. 

Marriage, its use and importance, ii. 
78-83 ; Basilides’ opinion respecting, 
refuted, 84-86 ; why the Marcionites 
and other heretics abstain from, 
89-94 ; passages of Scripture per- 
verted to the disparagement of, 
vindicated, 112, etc., 116, etc., 129, 
130, 132, etc. ; those who vitupe- 
rate, vituperate the Creator and 
the gospel dispensation, 133, etc. ; 
two extreme opinions respecting, to 
be avoided, 135, etc. 

Married women not to be associated 
with at banquets, i. 226. 

Mars, i. 37. 

Martyr, the blessedness of the, ii. 
158. 

Martyrdom eulogized, ii. 145 ; why 
called perfection, 146 ; the con- 
fession of God, ibid.; women and 
slaves, as well as men, candidates 
for the crown of, 165 ; Christ’s 
sayings respecting, 170; those who 
needlessly offer themselves to, re- 
proved, 173 ; Basilides’ idea of, 
refuted, 175 - 179 ; passages from 
Clement’s Epistle to the Corinthians 
respecting, 187-190. 

Martyrs, passages of Scripture re- 
specting the patience, constancy, 
and love of, ii. 184-187. 

536 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

Matthew, traditional words of, ii. 
466. 

Matthias, ii. 365. 

Meaning of Scripture, reasons for 
veiling the, ii. 378, etc. 

Meats offered in sacrifice to idols, to 
be rejected, i. 193. 

Mediator, the, i. 274. 

Megasthenes quoted, i. 399. 

Melampus, i. 28. 

Melanippides quoted, ii. 287. 

Men, the folly of, in forsaking God 
for idols, i. 87 ; and women, under 
the Instructor’s charge, 121 ; who 
embellish themselves, 284 ; effemi- 
nate, 284, 289, 293, 294 ; employ- 
ments of, 310-312. 

Menander, his description of the 
superstitious man, ii. 422-424 ; 
quoted variously, i. 70, 74, 120, 
277 ; ii. 227, 290 bis, 295, 427. 

Menelaus and Helen, ii. 61, 62. 

Merciful, the, ii. 156. 

Methods, the, used by God in bring- 
ing men to salvation, i. 23. 

Metrorlorus, the Epicurean, quoted, 
ii. 300. 

Midas, i. 27. 

Midianite women, the, seduce the 
Israelites, ii. 49, 50. 

Milk, feeding with, i. 138, 145, 146, 
147 ; and water and wine, 147. 

Milk and meat, ii. 260, 26 L 

Miltiades, i. 457. 

Mind, the culture of the, i. 371. 

Minerva, i. 30. 

Ministers of idols, the, i. 86. 

Minos, ii. 12. 

Miracles, the, related in Scripture, 
plagiarized by the Greeks, ii, 319, 
etc. 

Miriam, ii. 194. 

Mirrors, the use of, reprobated, i. 
280, 281. 

Mistake, ii. 39. 

Model maiden, the, i. 325. 

Money, the love of, i. 214. 

Mosaic law, the, the fourfold division 
of, i. 467 ; the source of all ethics, 
ii. 47-57. 

Moses, an instructor, i. 152 ; the law 
given by, 153 ; the antiquity of the 
philosophy of, 421 ; the birth and 
education of, 451 ; meaning of the 
name, 451 ; as a military leader, 
455 ; his strategy, 457 ; Plato an 
imitator of, 459 ; rightly called a 
divine legislator, 461 ; his dignity, 
ii. 12, 13 ; erected one temple to 

and no image of God, 265 ; ascends 
the mount, and enters the darkness 
by himself, 267 ; the shining of the 
face of, 364. 

Moses, the prophet like unto, i. 153. 

Muses, the, i. 38 ; and Syrens, 383. 

Music, the inventors of, i. 424. 

Music to be banished from feasts, i. 

215. 

Mmic, the mystical significance of, 
ii. 354 ; its use, 355, 366. 

Mustard, i. 179. 

Mysteries, the, of the Christian faith, 
not to be divulged to all, i. 388 ; 
celebrated in the night, ii. 204; rea- 
sons for veiling, 254, 255 ; opinion 
of the apostles about veiling the, 
257, etc. 

Mysteries, the heathen, i. 26, 27 ; de- 
rivation of the word, 27 ; of De- 
meter, 28 ; the Sabazian, 29 ; of 
Dionysius, 29 ; the Eleusinian, 32 ; 
of Plato, Pythagoras, and the Epi- 
cureans, ii. 255. 

Mystical meanings in the proportions 
of numbers, etc., ii. 352-359. 

Nabla, the, i. 402, and note. 

Nard, i. 232. 

Natiuns, the number of, i. 443. 

Nature possesses an adaptation for 
perfection, ii. 359. 

Neanthes of Cyzicum quoted, ii. 249. 

Necessaries and luxuries, i. 267. 

Nechephres, king of Egypt, i. 452. 

Neglect of God’s gracious calling, the 
sin of, i. 80. 

Nicagorus, i. 59. 

Nightingale, the, i. 245. 

Noah, his drunkenness, i. 210. 

Nobility, ii. 58. 

Noses, making sounds of lewdness or 
of provocation through, censured, i. 
294. 

Nov0i<ryi<n$ 9 i. 177. 

Numa, i. 398. 

Numbers, the mystical meaning in the 

. proportions of, ii. 352, etc. 

Numenius quoted, i. 449. 

Nymphodorus quoted, i. 424. 

Oath, the, avoided by the true Gnos- 
tic, ii. 442-444. 

Objurgation, i. 168. 

Offence, avoiding, ii. 183. 

Oil, the use of, i. 234. 

.Ointments, the use of, not necessary 
to Christians, i. 230 ; varieties of, 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

537 

232, 239 ; render effeminate, 233 ; 
not to be wholly laid aside, 234, 
Old age, i, 319. 

Old men may drink wine, i. 202, 

Old Testament, the Greek translation 
of, i. 448. 

Olive, the wild, ii. 372, 373. 

Oracles of divination, i. 26, 27. 

Orgies, the Bacchic, i. 27 ; derivation 
of the word, ibid. ; full of imposture 
and quackery, 28 ; of the Cory- 
bantes, 30. 

Ornamentation, the, of the body, i. 

276, etc.; when permitted, 315. 
Ornaments, i. 256 ; excessive fondness 

for, censured, 266 ; excuses for wear- 
ing, 267 ; the true and the false, 
268, 269, 271 ; Aristophanes’ cata- 
logue, 269, 270 ; the love of, 273, etc. 
Orpheus, i. 19; quoted, 30, 31, 73; 

ii. 248, 267, 292, 293, 294, 295. 
Osiraphis, i. 54. 

Osiris, i. 54. 

Ox, the, and the bear dwelling to- 
gether, ii. 333. 

Ox, the, and the ass forbidden to be 
yoked together, ii. 55, 56. 

’O \]/o(pocytcc, i. 194. 

Pactolus, the, i. 82. 

Psedagogus, the, a prayer to, i. 342 ; 

verses to, 346. 

Psedagogy, i. 121, 125. 

Huduptov, i. 121. 

Pain and poverty, contempt for, ii. 
148. 

Painting the eyes, etc., condemned, i. 

277. 

Painting the face censured, i. 319. 
Palladium, the, i. 53. 

Pallas, i. 30. 

Pantacnus, the teacher of Clement, i. 

11 ; referred to, 355. 

Pantarkes, i. 58. 

Panyasis quoted, i. 42. 

Parabolic style of Scripture, the, ii. 379. 
Parmenides, the Eleatic, quoted, ii. 
256, 287, 300. 

Passions, the, ii. 37 ; how called by 
Basilides, 64 ; to be subdued, 66, 
67 ; the true Gnostic free from, 346. 
Patience or endurance, ii. 60. 
Peacemakers, ii. 157. 

Pearls, the wearing of, i. 266, 358. 
Pearls, casting, before swine, i. 388. 
Penitents, ii. 156. 

Pentheus, i. 389. 

People, the new and the old, i. 128. 
Perfection, i. 126, 131, 132 ; women 

as well as men capable of, ii. 193, 
etc. ; consists in the knowledge and 
love of God, 212-215; nature adapted 
to, 359, etc. ; the Gnostic alone at- 
tains, 362-364 ; steps to, 446, etc. 

Perfect man, the, described, ii. 199- 
202 ; does good for the sake of the 
good, 202, etc. ; how he treats the 
body and the things of the world, 
215. 

Peripatetics, the, i. 68. 

Persian kings, the, i. 455. 

Persians, the, fire-worshippers, i. 67 ; 
instructors among, 150. 

Perturbations of the soul, the true 
Gnostic free from, ii. 344-348. 

Peter, the Preaching of, quoted, i. 
470 ; ii. 326, 379, 380. 

Peter, the story of his wife’s martyr- 
dom, ii. 451, 452. 

Petulantia, i. 247. 

Phalloi, i. 41. 

Phanothea, i. 404. 

Phemonoe, i. 424. 

Pherecrates, the comic poet, quoted, 
ii. 427. 

Pherecydes quoted, i. 392 ; ii. 247. 

Pherephatta, i. 29. 

Phidias, i. 58. 

Philanthropy, ii. 26. 

Philanthropy, the, of our Instructor, 
i. 118. 

Philemon, the comic poet, quoted, i. 
269, 324; ii. 294, 423. 

Philip of Pella, i. 59. 

Philo, his interpretation of Sarah and 
Hagar, i. 368. 

Philolaus quoted, ii. 91. 

Philosopher, the, to what he applies 
himself, ii. 29, 30. 

Philosophers, the variety of, respecting 
God, i. 66-68 ; by divine inspiration, 
sometimes hit on the truth, 69 ; ob- 
jections to extracts from the writings 
of, answered, 360, 361 ; a succession 
of, in Greece, 391, etc. ; their philo- 
sophy Hebraic, 392 ; the first so 
called, ibid. ; thieves and robbers — 
how ? 406 ; attained to some truth, 
413, ii. 396 ; varieties of opinions 
among, respecting the chief good , 
71.-74. 

Philosophical inquiry, its object, ii. 
490. 

Philosophy, i. 361 ; the handmaid of 
theology, 366 ; what it is, 368, 369 ; 
the eclectic, paves the way to vir- 
tue, 374 ; that which the apostle 
bids us shun, 3S4 ; all sections of, 

538 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

contain a germ of truth, 389 ; 
schools of, 392 ; the Grecian, de- 
rived in great part from the Bar- 
barian, 395 ; prepares the way for 
higher teaching, 405 ; a true spark 
of divine fire in, 409 ; how it con- 
tributes to the comprehension of 
divine truth, 418 ; the Jewish laws 
of higher antiquity than, 421, etc. ; 
given by God, 339-344; the study 
of, 366 ; an imperfect knowledge of 
God conveyed by, 395, etc. ; absur- 
dity of those who say it is not from 
God, 397-399 ; given to the Greeks 
as the law was to the Jews, 399 ; 
use of, to the Gnostic, 402, etc. 

Philosophy, the Barbarian, followed 
by Christians, perfect, ii. 3. 

Philosophy, the true, ii. 335-339. 

Philydeus, the comic poet, quoted, 
ii. 248, 249. 

Phocylides quoted, ii. 294. 

Phoebus, i. 149. 

Phoenix, i. 150. 

PhoroniSy The , quoted, i. 458. 
and i. 133. 
i. 168. 

Phryne, the courtesan, i. 58. 

Piety, i. 185. 

Pigeons to be offered to God, i. 124. 

Pilferers, the Greeks, of the Barbarian 
philosophy, ii. 1 ; and of each other, 
304 etc 

Pillar of fire, the, i. 458. 

Pindar quoted, i. 37, 323, 383, 420, 
424, 470; ii. 162, 282, 295, 299. 

Pit, opening a, ii. 253. 

Pitch plasters to eradicate hair, cen- 
sured, ii. 284, 285, 287. 

Pittacus, king of Miletus, i. 311. 

Plagiarisms, the, of the Greeks, from 
the Hebrews, ii. 274, etc.; from one 
another, 304, etc. 

Plants and animals, ii. 497. 

Plasters of pitch to eradicate hair, i. 
i84, 285, 287. 

Plato an imitator of Moses, i. 459. 

Plato, his view of the chief goody ii. 
74-78 ; respecting marriage, 89-94 ; 
variously quoted or referred to, i. 
69, 70, 71, 198, 248, 254, 314, 378, 
382,385, 395, 396, 397, 414, 443, 
469 ; ii. 13, 14, 58, 91, 92, 93, 147, 
151, 163, 226, 230, 231, 252, 260, 
266, 267, 271, 275, 276, 279, 282, 
283, 284, 285, 297, 299. 

Plato, the comic poet, quoted, ii. 429. 

Pleasure, ii. 61, 62, 63 ; not a neces- 
sity, 67, 68. 

Plutus, i. 280. 

Poets, the, their testimony to the 
truth, i. 73-75 ; their employment 
of the symbolic style, ii. 247. 

Polemo, the disciple of Xenocrates, 
cited, i. 76. 

Poseidon, i. 66. 

Pot, the mark of, not to be left on the 
ashes, according to Pythagoras, ii. 
237. 

Praise to God, ii. 216, 217 ; and prayer, 
426. 

Praise and blame, i. 177. 

Prayer to the Psedagogus, i. 342. 

Prayer, such as employed by the 
Gnostic, and how it is heard by 
God, ii. 431, etc. ; the right sort 
of, 434 ; hours of, 435 ; the false 
doctrine of certain heretics respect- 
ing, ibid. 

Prayer and praise the best sacrifices, 
ii. 426, etc. 

Praxiphanes, i. 404. 

Praxiteles, i. 50. 

Preaching , the, of Peter, referred to 
or quoted, i. 470 ; ii. 326, 379, 
380. 

Presbyter, who is a true ? ii. 365. 

Procreatione liberorum, de, i. 244, 
etc. 

Prodicus, the Ceian sophist, his deli- 
neation of vice and virtue, i. 260. 

Prophecy, ii. 34; is full knowledge, 
343 ; why it employs figurative 
forms of expression, 380. 

Prophet, the, like unto Moses, i. 35. 

Prophets, the, the truth to be found 
in, 76-79 ; their knowledge, 380 ; 
the antiquity of, 425, 435, 439. 

Propriety of conduct, i. 293. 

Proserpine, i. 27. 

Prosy mnus, i. 41. 

Proteus, i. 273. 

Pruning-hook, the, ii. 341. 

Ptolemy Philadelphus, i. 448. 

Ptolemy, the priest, referred to, i. 
421. 

Punishment, the reason and end of 
divine, ii. 210, 211. 

Punishment after death, ii. 275. 

Punishment and love reconciled, i. 
156, 157 ; aims at the good of men, 
464. 

Punishments and threatenings, i. 
306, 307. 

n up, i. 443. 

Pure ip. heart, the, ii. 157. 

Purification, i. 91, ii. 263 ; a suffi- 
cient, 205. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

539 

Purple colour in dress forbidden, i. 
262. 

Pyrrhonism, its self-contradictions, 
ii. 500. 

Pythagoras, his symbols, ii. 236. 

Pythagoras referred to or quoted, i. 
393, 394, 395, 397 ; ii. 54. 

Pythagoreans, the, i. 72, 177, 383. 

Pythic grasshopper, the, i. 17. 

Reason to rule at feasts, i. 204. 

Rebecca and Isaac, i. 128, 129. 

Redemption through the Word, i. 
100-105. 

Religion in ordinary life, i. 327. 

Repentance, an earnest exhortation 
to, i. 87, etc. ; the nature of, ii. 17; 
first and second, 35-37. 

Reproach, i. 157. 

Reproof, i. 157, 158, 166, 169. 

Reprover, the, i. 172. 

Respect of persons, none with God, 
ii. 340. 

Responsibility, the, i. 92. 

Revelling, i. 215. 

Revenge, i. 160. 

Rhetoric, i. 376. 

Rich, the believer alone is, i. 298 ; ii. 
13. 

Rich man, the, and Lazarus, i. 15. 

Riches, i. 212-214, 298. 

Righteous man, the, ii. 285, 331. 

Righteousness, true riches, i. 299. 

Righteousness, the Sun of, i. 102. 

Ring, a, engraven with the images of 
the gods, prohibited by Pythagoras, 
ii. 237. 

Rings, on the wearing of, i. 315-317. 

Robe of the high priests, its symbolic 
import, ii. 243, 244, 245. 

Roman emperors, the, i. 444. 

'Fo/xfios, i. 30, note. 

Royalty, different kinds of, i. 455, 456. 

Sabazian mysteries, the, i. 29. 

Sacrifices, the, of the law, ii. 429. 

Sacrifices, the, of the heathen to their 
gods, the absurdity of, ii. 427, etc. 

Sacrifices, the cruelty of some of the 
heathen, i. 48, etc. 

Sailing on land forbidden by Pytha- 
goras, ii. 237. 

Salvation, i. 82, 132, 382 ; one un- 
changeable gift of, ii. 366. 

Sambuca, the, i. 402, and note. 

Samson, i. 321. 

Samuel sent to anoint David, i. 281. 

Sappho, i. 237. 

Sarah, i. 368, 369 ; her laughter, ii. 
262. 

Sardanapalus, i. 322, 323 ; ii. 67. 

Sarmance, i. 399. 

Sauromatac, the, i. 67. 

Saved, something greater than being, 
ii. 367. 

Saviour, the, i. 98 ; His supreme dig- 
nity, ii. 13 ; free from human af- 
fections, 344 ; the Son of God, 410. 

Scents, i. 234. 

Scripture, the criterion for distinguish- 
ing between truth and heresy, ii. 
476, etc. 

Scriptures, the, i. 82 ; the Hebrew, 
translated into Greek, 37 5 ; human 
knowledge necessary to the under- 
standing of, 379. 

Scythians, the, i. 290. 

Seal-rings, i. 315-317. 

Sects or schools of philosophy, i. 392. 

Seducer, the, i. 23. 

Seeing double, an effect of much wine, 
i. 203. 

Seeing God, i. 25, 415. 

Self-conceit, the cure of, ii. 480. 

Self-restraint or self-control, ii. 48, 
61, 454. 

Self-sufficiency, Christian, i. 182. 

Selling and buying, i. 328. 

Sepulchres of the gods, i. 50, 51. 

Serapis, i. 54, 424. 

Serpent, the, that deceived Eve, i. 23, 
100 ; why called wise, ii. 396. 

Servants, the numerous, pandering to 
luxury, i. 292. 

Sesostris orders a statue of Serapis to 
be made, i. 54. 

Seven, the number, ii. 388-390. 

Seventh day, the, ii. 380, 390 ; testi- 
monies from heathen authors to, 
284, 285. 

Shaving, ignoble, i. 285, 317. 

Shades and demons, i. 50. 

Shechemites, the, i. 283. 

Shepherd, Jesus the, i. 149 ; the good, 
462. 

Shoes, what sort to be worn, i. 264, 
265. 

Sibyl, the, quoted, i. 36, 55, 64, 72, 
76, 284, 425 ; ii. 90, 285, 288 ; her 
power of divination, i. 398 ; others 
of the name, 425. 

Silk and the silk- worm, i. 258. 

Similitudes an important part of in- 
struction, i. 304. 

Simmias of Rhodes quoted, ii. 249. 

Simonides, i. 232. 

540 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

Simplicity of dress recommended, i. 

2 71. 

Sin, irrational, i. 184 ; condemned by 
the Gnostic, ii. 360 ; the source of, 
482. 

Sins, how the Instructor treats our, 

i. 115 ; resulting from voluntary 
action, ii. 38, etc. 

Six, the number, ii. 388. 

Sleep, the regulation of, i. 240, etc. ; 
Christians not to indulge in, as 
others, 241-243. 

Smiling, i. 220. 

Sneezing at banquets, i. 229. 

Socrates quoted or referred to, i. 393, 
414; ii. 68, 175. 

Sodomites, the, i. 306. 

Solomon, i. 427, 436. 

Solon quoted, i. 49, 50, 362 ; ii. 269, 
389, 390. 

Son, the, the Euler and Saviour of all, 

ii. 409, etc. 

Son of God, the Instructor, i. 114. 
Songs, amatory, prohibited, i. 218. 
Songs of praise to God, i. 216. 
Sophistical arts useless, i. 376. 
Sophistry, i. 376. 

Sophists, the, condemned, i. 362, 363. 
Sophocles quoted, i. 73, 86, 203, 313 ; 

ii. 141, 234, 286, 287, 291, 294. 

Soul, the, the threefold division of, i. 
273. 

Soul, the pure, an image of God, ii. 
417 ; of a most excellent temper, 
427. 

Sow, the, forbidden to be eaten, ii. 
251. 

Speaking, filthy, i. 222-224. 

Spectacles, public, to be discounte- 
nanced, i. 326, 327. 

Speech, the regulation of, at banquets, 
i. 228. 

Speech and writing compared, i. 351, 
etc. 

Speech, good, inferior to good action, i. 
381-383. 

Speusippus quoted, ii. 12. 

Sphvnxes, the Egyptian, their symbolic 
import, ii. 239, 249. 

Sports, divine, i. 128, 129. 

Stoics, the, i. 385 ; ii. 59. 

Stones, the, in the robe of the high 
priest, ii. 243, 244. 

Stones and stocks, silly people, i. 19. 
Stromata , the, of Clement, i. 361 ; 

meaning of the word, ii. 1 40, etc. 
Sun, the, and stars, given to the Gen- 
tiles to worship, ii. 368. 

Superstition, i. 50, 57, 58, ii. 25 ; the 
source of, 421. 

Superstitious man, the, described, ii. 

422, 423. 

Susanna, i. 194. 

Swallow, the, of Pythagoras, ii. 236. 
Swearing avoided by the Gnostic, ii. 
442-444. 

Swine, the flesh of, forbidden to the 
Jews, i. 326, ii. 429. 

Swine, casting one’s pearls before, i. 
388. 

Syllogism and demonstration, ii. 493. 
Symbolic style, the, employed by poets 
and philosophers, ii. 247. 

Symbols, the reasons for veiling the 
truth in, ii. 254. 

Symbols, the, of the Egyptians, of 
sacred things, ii. 245, etc. 

Symbols, the, of Pythagoras, ii. 236. 
Syrens, the, i. 383. 

Tabernacle, the, and its furniture, the 
mystical meaning of, ii. 240 ; and its 
geometrical proportions, 354. 

Table of shew-bread, the, ii. 42 ; its 
geometrical proportions, meaning of, 
354. 

Tables, the two, of the law, their 
mystical significance, ii. 383, 385. 
Tact, the importance of, in king or 
general, i. 456, 457. 

Tatian referred to, i. 355. 

Taxes, ii. 342. 

Teaching, motives in, to be examined, 

i. 352. 

Teacher, the, intimations of the advent 
of, ii. 404. 

Teachers of others ought to excel in 
virtue, ii. 444-446. 

Teaching, the, of our Lord, its dura- 
tion, ii. 486. 

Temperance, i. 193, 201, 202, 242 ; ii. 
248. 

Temples, the Egyptian, what they illus- 
trate, i. 276. 

Temptation, the, of our Lord, i. 380. 
Ten, the number, ii. 383, 384. 

Terrors of the law, the, ii. 21. 

Thales, i. 394, 395 ; ii. 278. 

Thamar, i. 369. 

Thanksgiving, ii. 436. 

Theano referred to or quoted, i. 404 ; 

ii. 159, 195. 

Thearidas’ book On Nature quoted, ii. 
296, 297. 

Theft and falsehood, i. 420. 

Theocritus quoted, i. 90. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

541 

Theognis quoted, ii. 252. 

Theological inquiry, its object, ii. 490. 

Theology, philosophy the handmaid to, 
i. 366. 

Theophrastus, i. 68 ; quoted, ii. 6. 

Thersites, i. 228, 237, 294. 

Thespes quoted, i. 404 ; ii. 250. 

Thrasubulus, i. 457. 

Threatening, i. 174. 

Thieves and robbers, all who came 
before Christ were — how ? i. 406, etc. 

Timseus the Locrian, ii. 288. 

Timocles, the poet, quoted, ii. 141, 142. 

Timon of Phlius quoted, ii. 227. 

Timotheus, i. 403. 

Titans, the, and Dionysius, i. 30. 

Tombs of the gods, the, i. 50, 51. 

Tradition of the church, the, prior to 
heresies, ii. 485. 

Tragedy, its inventors, i. 404. 

Training, i. 182, 371. 

Translation, the, of the Old Testament 
out of Hebrew into Greek, i. 448. 

Trojan war, the, how caused, i. 282. 

Troy, when taken, i. 421. 

Truth, i. 18 ; poets bear witness to, 
73 ; found in the prophets, 76, etc. ; 
and custom contrasted, 98 ; a germ 
of, found in all sects of philosophy, 
389 ; how philosophy contributes to 
its comprehension, 418 ; is one, 
ibid. ; four things in which it re- 
sides, ii. 8 ; the Scripture the cri- 
terion for distinguishing between 
heresy and, 476, etc. 

Truth, reasons for veiling the, in sym- 
bols, ii. 254, etc., 257. 

Truth, the true searcher after, i. 379. 

Two tables, the, of the law, the mys- 
tical significance of, ii. 283, 285. 

T fyts, i. 247. 

Ulysses, i. 241. 

Unbelief, i. 462. 

Understanding, the human, ii. 340. 

Unicorn, the, i. 25. 

Unnatural lusts forbidden, i. 248. 

Upbraiding, i. 165. 

Usury, ii. 50. 

Valentinus, quoted, ii. 65 ; his va- 
garies about the abolition of death 
refuted, 179, etc. ; his work, On the 
Intercourse of Friends , quoted, 334 ; 
the time of, 486. 

Vaphres, i. 436. 

Veiling the truth in symbols, reasons 
for, ii. 254 - 256 ; opinion of the 
apostles respecting, 257-261. 

Veiling the meaning of Scripture, rea- 
sons for, ii. 378-382. 

Veils, the, of the tabernacle, ii. 240, 
244. 

Vessels of gold and silver, i. 211 ; to 
be rejected, 302. 

Vice and virtue, as delineated by Pro- 
dicus, i. 260. 

Vine, the, i. 158 ; its symbolical cha- 
racter, 200. 

Vipers, i. 19. 

Virtue, rational, i. 184 ; and vice, as 
delineated by Prodicus, 260 ; one, 
418. 

Virtues, the Christian, their connec- 
tion, ii. 26-29. 

Visitation, i. 167. 

Voice from heaven, the, at the baptism 
of Christ, i. 131. 

Voices, the, of birds, i. 244. 

Voluntary actions, of different kinds, 
ii. 38, etc. 

Waggery censured, i. 219. 

Walking, i. 324. 

Washing, the, of the soul, i. 309. 

Watching, i. 241. 

Water, the natural beverage for the 
thirsty, i. 200. 

Water, the, of the Word, i. 91 ; and 
milk, 147 ; regeneration by, 181. 

“ Way of sinners,” the, ii. 41. 

Wealth, i. 212-214, 298 ; the love of, 
301. 

Well trained, the, ii. 262. 

White dress recommended, i. 259, 264. 

Wife, a, ii. 80. 

Wife and husband, both to be equipped 
for heaven, i. 302 ; how to live with 
each other, 304 ; the kiss between, 
382. 

Wife, a thrifty, i. 321 ; a good, ii. 196. 

Wills, observances of the ltomans re- 
specting, ii. 254. 

Wine, to be avoided by boys and girls, 
i. 201 ; when and by whom to be 
used, 202 ; to be taken moderately, 

203 ; the ill effects of much, 203, 

204 ; excessive drinking of, con- 
demned, 204-206 ; various kinds of, 
207 ; how Jesus drank, 208. 

Wine and milk, i. 147. 

Wine-bibber, the, i. 205. 

Wisdom, i. 97, 203, 242 ; the queen of 
philosophy, 368 ; of the wise to be 
destroyed, 410 ; its nature, ii. 15, 
453 ; the panacea, 262 ; different 
forms of, 397 ; and knowledge, 446. 

Wisdom, the, of God, magnified, i. 365. 

542 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS . 

Wise, the, 365. 

Wise man, the, ii. 12, 13, 14, 15. 

Wolves in sheeps’ clothing, i. 20. 

Woman, the thrifty and virtuous, i. 
321 ; the foolish, 323 ; the wise, ii. 
196. 

Woman’s clothing, men forbidden to 
wear — why ? ii. 49. 

Women, married and unmarried, the 
duty of, in relation to banquets, i. 
266 ; in regard to dress, 260 ; orna- 
ments worn by, described, 269, 270 ; 
externally adorned only, compared 
to Egyptian temples, 276 ; some, 
fond of dress and extravagance, 277- 
279 ; improper behaviour of, con- 
demned, 293, 294 ; employments of, 
310 ; permitted to adorn themselves 
to please their husbands, 315, 316 ; 
the Instructor’s orders to, 320 ; should 
clothe themselves with their home- 
made work, 321 ; voluptuous move- 
ments of some, 221, 222 ; lascivious 
tricks of, 323 ; how they should go 
to church, 328 ; refutation of Car- 
pocrates’ and Epiphanes’ doctrine of 
a community of, ii. 86-89 ; candi- 
dates for the martyr’s crown, 165- 
170 ; capable of perfection, illustrious 
examples of, 193-196. 

Women, holy, among the Germans, i. 
399. 

Word, the, various references to, i. 21, 
22, 24, 98, 100, 101, 104, 108, 109, 

113, 114, 116, 145, 147, 151, 152, 
157, 162, 179, 180, 274, 299, 380, 
385. 

Word, the, our instructor, i. 113. 

Word, water of the, i. 91. 

World, the, Moses teaches, was created, 
ii. 275. 

World, the, of thought and of sense, ii. 
276. 

Written compositions, the value of, i. 
349 ; and spoken, compared, 351- 
359. 

Xenocrates quoted, ii. 14. 

Xenophanes cited, i. 394 ; ii. 285, 286. 

Xenophon quoted, i. 71 ; ii. 62, 285. 

Xopra,(r[jLa,) i. 179. 

Yoking the ox and the ass forbidden, 
ii. 55, 56. 

Young people should absent them- 
selves from banquets, i. 225, 226. 

Zacharias, his dumbness, i. 25. 

Zaleucus, i. 404. 

Zaps, ii. 249. 

Zeus, the Stoic, i. 393 ; quoted, 69, 75, 
ii. 266. 

Zeus, various stories of, i. 28, 29, 30 ; 
the amours of, 39, .etc. ; human, 43 ; 
vile, ibid. ; worshipped under various 
names and forms, 44, 45. 

Zopyrus, i. 150. 

Zoroaster, i. 397 ; ii. 282. 

END OF VOL. II. 

MURRAY AND GIBB, EDINBURGH, 
PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE. 

In demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE 

ATONEMENT 

AS TAUGHT BY CHRIST HIMSELF; 

OR, 

THE SAYINGS OF JESUS ON THE ATONEMENT EXEGET1CALLY 
EXPOUNDED AND CLASSIFIED. 

By REV. GEORGE SMEATON, 

PROFESSOR OF EXEGETICAL THEOLOGY, NEW COLLEGE, EDINBURGH. 

4 We recommend it as forming a most useful introduction to the study of a deep and 
mysterious doctrine, and likely to be profitable to the thoughtful and judicious reader. 
Its matter is carefully digested, and its argument is well thought and clearly reasoned.’ 
— Churchman. 

4 We attach very great value to this seasonable and scholarly production. The idea 
of the work is most happy, and the execution of it worthy of the idea. On a scheme of 
truly Baconian exegetical induction, he presents us with a complete view of the various 
positions or propositions which a full and sound doctrine of the Atonement embraces. 1 II. III. — 
British and Foreign Evangelical Review. 

In crown 8vo, price 3s. 6d., 

THE FOUR EVANGELISTS; 

WITH THE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF THEIR GOSPELS. 

By EDWARD A. THOMSON, 

Minister of Free St. Stephen’s, Edinburgh. 

4 We have not seen for a long time a volume more fresh and scholarly, more suggestive 
and beautiful.’ — Freeman. 

Just published, in crown 8vo, price 3s. 6d., 

APOLOGETICAL LECTURES 

ON 

JOHN’S GOSPEL. 

Br J. J. YAN OOSTERZEE, D.D., 

Professor of Theology , University of Utrecht 

I. The Authenticity of St. John’s 
Gospel. 

II. John and the Synoptic Gospels. 

III. John’s Account of Christ’s Miracles. 

IV. The Johannean Christ. 

V. Table of Apologetical Literature 

on John’s Gospel. 

TRANSLATED, WITH ADDITIONS, BY J. F. HURST, D.D., 

AUTHOR OF THE ‘ HISTORY OF RATIONALISM.’ 

1 The small volume before us is the production of a strong and cultivated mind 

Nothing could be more able, seasonable, and complete.’ — Watchman. 

-Pufolteijett b» C. & C. Clark, CUmburgfy. 

In Two Volumes 8vo, price 21s., 

THE CHURCH OF CHRIST: 

A Treatise on the Nature, Powers, Ordinances, Discipline, and Government 

of the Christian Church. 

By the late JAMES BANNERMAN, D.D., 

Professor of Apologetics and Pastoral Theology, New College, Edinburgh. 

Edited by his Son . 

4 Its intrinsic value makes it a rare accession to theological literature We 

cannot but feel grateful that a posthumous work so complete and careful as this has 
appeared/ — Daily Review . 

4 Dr. Bannerman lias argued his points with great clearness and force The 

spirit with which he writes is beyond all praise, it is that of a scholar and Christian.’ — 
Church Review . 

4 We commend these learned and masterly volumes to the careful study, not only of 
the scientific divine, but of all thoughtful men who would desire to understand some 
of the greatest and most vital questions of our time.’ — Presbyterian . 

4 The book is very ably written; the various points involved in the extensive inquiry 
are handled with much care, acuteness, and power.’ — Evangelical Magazine . 

4 This substantial and seasonable work is a fitting monument of the great abilities and 
wide research of its lamented author.’ — Watchman . 

Prof. EADIE’S New Work. 

Just published, in demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 

A Commentary on the Greek Text 

OF THE 

EPISTLE of PAUL to the GALATIANS, 

By JOHN EADIE, D.D., LL.D., 

Professor of Biblical Literature and Exegesis to the U-P. Church . 

4 Everything which lexical research and grammatical analysis can effect to bring out 
the most subtle and delicate shades of thought contained in fet. Paul’s writing, has been 
accomplished by the learned and painstaking Professor. The high tone of the book, 
too, is equal to its unquestionable scholarship.’ — Watchman . 

4 This work will do more than preserve the well won reputation of Dr. Eadie. There 
is a considerable advance over his former expositions. There is a greater amount of 
resources at his disposal, and more freedom in his treatment of them.’— Daily Review . 

SUotfisi puMtgtjeti C. anti tSE. Oarft, C5titn 1 6urs'&. 

In demy 8vo, price 9s., 

folic Strt|3furc fo-csfimuiur ia % |pjo(ir Spirit. 

By JAMES MORGAN, D.D., Belfast. 

‘ Controversy and criticism are avoided. Scripture ideas are unfolded in a clear and 
popular way, so as not only to inform the judgment, but also to purify the heart/ — 
Evangelical Magazine. 

‘Dr. Morgan’s book is one of the best works on the subject of the Holy Spirit which 
has appeared since the days of Dr. Owen, and may well become a standard work of 
reference on our book-shelves .’ — Christian Advocate. 

‘It is thorough in its scope, and so exhaustive that there is not a passage of importance 
which has not come under consideration .’ — Wesleyan Times. 

BY TEE SAME AUTHOR . 

In demy 8vo, price 9s., 

%n foqiosifbit of % Jfirst (Epistle oi Sf. Aiofjir. 

‘ These lectures are written in a perspicuous, terse, and homely style ; each subject 
divided with great skill.’ — Record. 

‘ The tone, spirit, and manner of the lectures will commend themselves to the pious 
reader, and to the minister of Christ’s flock ; to the former they will furnish abundant 
spiritual food, while the latter may advantageously consult them for hints and sugges- 
t i o n s . ’ — Evange Heal Chr isten dom. 

In demy 8vo, price 9s., 

|Cii dfopflsificrtt oi % fo^isflc of Jumcs. 

IN A SERIES OE DISCOURSES. WITH AN APPENDIX OF DISSERTATIONS. 

By Rev. JOHN ADAM, D.D. 

‘ The book is perfectly readable from beginning to end ; while, at the same time, the 
treatment is so thorough, that the instructed student cannot but derive profit from its 
perusal. The language is copious, varied, and cultivated, and possesses the vital qualities 
of clearness and vigour ; and both the interpretation and the practical treatment of the 
epistle are marked by discrimination, sagacity, independence of thought, and high prin- 
ciple ; with constant evidence of ample I'esearch, and no slight mastery of a difficult theme. 
. ... It is to such free, full, and powerful preaching of God’s word that Scotland owes 
whatever she has of moral health and vigour .’ — British and Foreign Evangelical Review. 

1 This is a thoroughly and carefully written work, and will be of much service to the 
earnest Christian reader, inasmuch as it throws light upon the meaning of many, at first 
sight, obscure passages, and points out what may reasonably be presumed to be the 
under current of thought and purpose which renders this epistle at once so beautiful and 
so complete. We have much pleasure in commending this volume to the notice of our 
readers .’ — Christian Observer . 

In demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 

&[rc glpulcrgchcs jotf the foljrisfhw Jmtlj. 

By the late WILLIAM M. HETHERINGTON, D.D., LL.D., 

PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY, FREE CHURCH COLLEGE, GLASGOW. 

‘It is impossible candidly and carefully to peruse the volume, without feeling at every 
step that the reader is under the spell and fascination of a master, who, in exercising an 
imperial sway over the copious materials at his command, displays a thorough compre- 
hension of the lofty task which he has assigned to himself, and no ordinary powers in 
the tact, skill, and ability with which it is prosecuted to a successful issue. With the 
tone and sp>irit which pervade the work throughout, every lover of truth must cordially 
sympathize. Taking it all in all, as we find it, it ought to be gratefully hailed, .as 
perhaps the weightiest contribution to the general cause of Apologetical Christianity 
which has appeared in our strangely chequered and eventful times.’ — Dr. Duff. 

‘ We think we have said enough to show that Dr. Duff is right in his estimate of the 
value of Dr. Hetherington’s Christian Apologetics, and that it is, as he states, admirably 
fitted for missionaries labouring amongst the educated natives of India, as well as for the 
libraries of Working Men’s Institutes and Christian Young Men’s Associations.’ — Record. 

19ubltei)ctt by C. & C. Clark, Ctttnkurglj. 

In crown 8vo, price 6s., 

APOLOGETIC LECTURES ON 

THE SAYING TRUTHS OF CHRISTIANITY. 

By C. E. LUTHARDT, D.D., Leipsic. 

The Nature of Christianity ; Sin ; Grace ; The God-Man ; The Work of Jesus Christ : The 
Trinity ; The Church ; Holy Scripture ; The Means of Grace ; The Last Things. 
‘We can assure our friends that the work is worthy of being studied.’ — Clerical Journal. 
‘Dr. Luthardtis a profound scholar, but a very simple teacher, and expresses himself on 
the grayest matters with the utmost simplicity, clearness, and force.’ — -Literary World . 

By the same Author, in crown 8vo, Second Edition, price 6s., 

THE FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS OF CHRISTIANITY. 

The Antagonistic Views of the World in their Historical Development; The Anomalies 
of Existence ; The Personal God ; The Creation of the World ; Man ; Eeligion ; 
Bevelation ; History of Eevelation — Heathenism and Judaism ; Christianity in 
History ; The Person of Jesus Christ. 

‘ Luthardt is the very man to help those entangled in the thickets of modern 
rationalism ; we do not know just such another book as this ; it is devout, scholar^, 
clear, forcible, penetrating, comprehensive, satisfactoiy, admirable.’ — Evangelical Magazine. 

‘ We have never met with a volume better adapted to set forth the evidences of 
Christianity in a form suited to the wants of our day. The whole of the vast argument 
is illustrated by various and profound learning ; there is no obscurity in the thoughts or 
in the style ; the language is simple, the ideas clear, and the argument logical, and 
generally, to our mind conclusive.’ — Guardian. 

In crown 8vo, price 5s., 

THE CHURCH: 

ITS OEIGIN, ITS HISTOEY, ITS PBESENT POSITION. 

By Drs. LUTHARDT, KAHNIS, and BRUCKNER, 

PROFESSORS OF THEOLOGY, LEIPSIC. 

History of the Old Testament Eevelation ; The History of Jesus Christ ; The History of 
the Apostolic Church; The Ancient Church; The Mediaeval Church; The Modern 
Church ; The Present Condition of the Church , The Present Tasks of the Church ; 
The Present Prospects of the Church. 

In crown 8vo, price 4s., 

THE SYMBOLICAL NUMBERS OF SCRIPTURE. 

By Rev. MALCOLM WHITE, M.A. 

Chap. I. The Time of the End. II. The Time and Times and Half a Time. III. The 
Numbers Three and a Half. IV. The Number of Beast 666. V. The Number Ten, 
and the Millennium. VI. The Eelated Numbers Seven, Three, Four, Twelve. VII. 
The Number Forty. VIII. The Numbers in the Book of Job. IX. The Number 
One hundred and fifty- three. 

‘ We heartily thank Mr. White for his able, sober, and suggestive contribution to the 
right interpretation of the symbolical numbers of Scripture ; for, without binding our- 
selves to every detail, we say with confidence, that he has rendered a good and needful 
service to the book “ one jot or one tittle of which shall in no wise pass away till all bo 
fulfilled.’” — London Weelcly Review. 

‘ We have read this volume with more than ordinary interest, treating as it does of one 
of the greatest difficulties which the interpreters of Scripturfc have to encounter. . . .1 
We bear willing testimony to the general excellence of his work, which is well deserving 
of a place in the library of every biblical student.’ — Wesleyan Methodist Magazine. 

‘ The recommendation of Mr. White’s researches is, that while he has no sympathy 
with this presumptuous prying into the future, he yet endeavours to give the right 
meaning to the symbolical numbers.’ — Clerical Jouimal. 

6i) ®. & ©. ©lark, ©KtnfcttrgTj. 

In demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 

A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL 

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 

WITH A NEW TRANSLATION. 

BY JAMES G. MURPHY, LL.D., T.C.D. 

1 Dr Murphy has conferred a great service on a difficult department of scriptural learn- 
ing.’ — Clerical Journal . 

4 A work of most massive scholarship, abounding in rich and noble thought, and 
remarkably fresh and suggestive.’ — Evangelical Magazine . 

4 This is emphatically a great work ; the subject is great, and so is the management.’ 
— Christian Witness . 

BY THE SAME AUTHOR . 

In demy 8vo, price 9s., 

A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL 

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF EXODUS. 

In demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 

THE EARLY SCOTTISH CHURCH: 

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SCOTLAND FROM THE FIRST TO 
THE MIDDLE OF TEE TWELFTH CENTURY. 

BY THOMAS M'LAUCHLAN, LL.D., F.S.A.S. 

4 The author has given it an air of thoroughness and originality, which will justify its 
claim to a permanent place in literature. We do not now undertake to analyse the work, 
but we are able to bear witness to its genuine character.’ — Journal of Sacred Literature . 

4 To those who delight to trace in the distant past the germs of the present, 44 The 
Early Scottish Church ” will afford gratification and instruction.’ — Reader . 

4 We regard the work before us as the most important contribution which has been 
made for many years towards the illustration of Early Scottish Church History.’ — United 
Presbyterian Magazine . 

4 An able, honest work, conscientiously executed, after extensive reading, with a 
thorough knowledge of the ancient language and history of Scotland.’ — Inverness Courier . 

4 A work marked by sound judgment, great candour, and extensive reading.’ — Noncon- 
formist. 

In Two Volumes, demy 8vo, price 21s., 

A HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. 

BY WILLIAM G. SHEDD, D.D., 

PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY, UNION COLLEGE, NEW YORK. 

4 The high reputation of Dr Shedd will be increased by this remarkable work. The 
style is lucid and penetrating. No one can master these volumes without being quick- 
ened and strengthened.’ — American Theological Review. 

4 We do not hesitate to pronounce the work a great improvement on anything we have 
had before. To the young student it will be valuable as a guide to his critical reading, 
and to the literary man it will be indispensable as a book of reference.’ — Bibliotheca Sacra. 

4 We hail the appearance of the volumes as being much wanted at the present time in 
our own country.’ — Clerical Journal. 

In foolscap 8vo, price 5s., 

THE PARABLES OF CHRIST ILLUSTRATED & EXPOUNDED. 

BY DR F. G. L I S C O. 

In Two Volumes, crown 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 

Modern Pantheism: 

ESSAY ON RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY. 

By M. EMILE SAISSET, 

' PROFESSOR OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE FACULTY OF LETTERS IN PARIS. 

Cranstfateti from t$e jTrenclj* 

With Marginal Analysis, Notes, Critical Essay, and Philosophical Appendix. 

The original draft of this work obtained the prize offered by the Academy of Moral and 
Political Sciences on the following subject : Examen Critique des Principaux Systemes 
Modernes de Th^odicee. The second edition carried off the first of the great Monthyon 
Prizes of the French Academy. 

4 As a handbook to the theological side of modern speculation, it is a most valuable 
addition to philosophical literature. The translation is clear and idiomatic ; it is English 
in its language, French in the transparency of its expression.’ — t Saturday Review . 

In crown octavo, price 6s., 

The Redeemer: 
DISCOURSES BY E. DE PRESSENSE, D.D. 

With Introduction by W. Lindsay Alexander, D.D. 

4 The whole volume is marked by a rare richness of thought and illustration, and by 
a high and fervid eloquence.’ — Evangelical Magazine . 

4 De Pressensd stands forth as one of the most zealous, fearless, and eloquent defenders 
of evangelical truth and the claims of the Bible. A man of high culture and large intellec- 
tual resources, gifted with remarkable powers of clear, pointed, and eloquent discourse, 
he has ever shown himself ready to consecrate his best energies to the defence and pro- 
pagation of the Gospel of Christ.’ — Dr. Lindsay Alexander. 

BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 

In demy 8vo, price 7s. 6d., 

The Religions before Christ : 

BEING AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF THE FIRST THREE 
CENTURIES OF THE CHURCH. 

4 Stamped with the true genius of a historian, and imbued with the devoutness of a 
Christian.’ — Patriot. 

In crown 8vo, Sixth Edition, price 7s. 6d., 

Christ’s Second Coming; 

WILL IT BE P R E- M I L L E N N I A L P 

By DAYID BROWN, D.D. 

4 This is, in our judgment, one of the most able, comprehensive, and conclusive of 
the numerous works which the millenarian controversy has called forth.’ — Watchman . 

In demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 

Pax Yobiscum; 

OR, THE BFBLE AND THE FAMILY. 

Being a deduction from the Scriptures, of the Gospel in its characteristically 

Family Aspect. 

By the Rev. DANIEL FRASER, A.M. 

W H « 

VJ1 g cO 

ro 

3* *rO ~ i 

^ *> 

*S*Sr^?5 « 
1 «£* «# -fc 

o 

H 

O 

3 

o> 

£ 

H* 

H 

cn 

- > w \. 

Clement of Alexandria - Writings 
(Wilson tr.) 

v. 2 

/PONTIFICAL INSTITUTE 
£p>F MEDIAEVAL STUDIES 
V 59 QUEEN'S PARK 
^ "pORONTO 5. Canada 

12798 • 

nt of