Lectures and Essays, Vol. 1 (W. K. Clifford, 1879)
==========================================================
Contains 'The Ethics of Belief': the classic evidentialist manifesto against credulity. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (agg6533.0002.001.umich.edu).

ni


LECTUEES   MD   ESSAYS


VOL.  IT.


Wwn^


i-r^  CC^cM  ,


LECTURES  AM)  ESSAYS


BY    THE    LATE


WILLIAM  KINGDOM  CLIPFOED,   F.E.S.

.\rv    PROl  F^^Oll    OP   APPTJED  MATHEMATICS  AND  MECHANICS  IN   UNIVERSITY   COLLEG I],  LONDON-
AX  D   sOAIEIIME   FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE,   CAMBRIDGE


EDITED    BY

LESLIE   STEPHEN  and  FREDERICK   POLLOCK


WITH  an    INTRODUCTION  by   F.   POLLOCK

*  La  v^rite  est  toute  pow  to«5'— Paul-Louis  Courier

IN     TWO     VOLUMES
VOL.  IL


MACMILLAN    AND     CO.

1879

IThe  right  of  ti^anslation  is  reserved']


Nil


CONTENTS

OF

THE     SECOND     VOLUME.
LECTURES  AND  ESSAYS— continued,

PAGE

Instruments  used  in  Measurement 3

Body  and  Mind 31

On  the  Nature  of  Things-in-themselves       .        .        .        .71

On  the  Types   of   Compound   Statement   involving   Four

Classes 89

■^On  the  Scientific  Basis  of  Morals 106

^RiGHT  and  Wrong  :  the  Scientific  Ground  of  their  Dis-
tinction    124

^The  Ethics  of  Belief 177

^The  Ethics  of  Religion 212

The  Influence  upon  Morality  of  a  Decline  in  Religious

Belief 244

Cosmic  Emotion 253

Virchow  on  the  Teaching  of  Science 286


^         LECTUEES   AND    ESSAYS

{contiwaed)


VOL.    IL


INSTRUMENTS   USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.'

By  Measurement^  for  scientific  purposes,  is  meant  the
measurement  of  quantities.  In  each  special  subject
there  are  quantities  to  be  measured  ;  and  these  are  very
various,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  list  of  those
belonging  to  geometry  and  dynamics.

Geometrical  Quantities,

Lengths

Areas

Volumes

Angles  (plane  and  solid)

Curvatures  (plane  and  solid)

Strains  (elongation,  torsion,  shear).

Circumstances  of  Motion.  Properties  of  Bodies.


Time

Mass

Velocity

Weight

Momentum

Density

Acceleration

Specific  gravity

Force

Elasticity  (of  form  and

Work

volume)

Horse-power

Viscosity

Temperature

Diffusion

Heat.

Surface  tension

Specific  heat.

^  [*  Handbook  to  Loan  Collection  of  Scientific  Apparatus,  1876J.

B  2


4  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

Notwithstanding  the  very  diiOferent  characters  of  these
quantities,  they  are  all  measured  by  reducing  them  to
the  same  kind  of  quantity,  and  estimating  that  in  the
same  way.  Every  quantity  is  measured  by  finding  a
length  proportional  to  the  quantity,  and  then  measuring
this  length.  This  will,  perhaps,  be  better  understood  if
we  consider  one  or  two  examples.

The  measurement  of  angles  occurs  in  a  very  large
majority  of  scientific  instruments.  It  is  always  efiected
by  measuring  the  length  of  an  arc  upon  a  graduated
circle ;  the  circumference  of  this  circle  being  divided
not  into  inches  or  centimetres,  but  into  degrees  and
parts  of  a  degree — that  is,  into  aliquot  parts  of  the
whole  circumference.

As  a  step  towards  their  final  measurement,  some
quantities,  of  which  work  is  a  good  instance,  are  repre-
sented in  the  form  of  areas ;  and  there  seems  reason
to  believe  that  this  method  is  likely  to  be  extended.
Instruments  for  measuring  areas  are  called  Planimeters  ;
and  one  of  the  simplest  of  these  is  Amsler's,  consisting
of  two  rods  jointed  together,  the  end  of  one  being  fixed
and  that  of  the  other  being  made  to  run  round  the  area
which  is  to  be  measured.  The  second  rod  rests  on  a
wheel,  which  turns  as  the  rod  moves  ;  and  it  is  proved
by  geometry  that  the  area  is  proportional  to  the  distance
through  which  the  wheel  turns.  Thus  the  measure-
ment of  an  area  is  reduced  to  tlie  measurement  of  a
length.

Volumes  are  measured  in  various  ways,  but  all
depending  on  tlie  same  principle.  Quantities  of  earth
excavated  for  engineering  purposes  are  estimated  by  a
rough  determination  of  the  shape  of  the  cavity,  and  the


INSTRUMENTS  USED   IN  MEASUREMENT.  5

measurement  of  its  dimensions^  namely,  certain  lengths
belonging  to  it.  The  contents  of  a  vessel  are  some-
times gauged  in  the  same  way ;  but  the  more  accurate
method  is  to  fill  it  with  liquid  and  then  pour  the  hquid
into  a  cylinder  of  known  section,  when  the  quantity
is  measured  by  tlie  height  of  the  hquid  in  the  cyhnder,
that  is,  by  a  length.  The  volumes  of  irregular  solids
are  also  measured  by  immersing  them  in  liquid  con-
tained in  a  uniform  cylinder,  and  observing  the  height
to  which  the  liquid  rises  ;  that  is,  by  measuring  a  length.
An  apparatus  for  this  purpose  is  called  a  Stereometer.
The  liquid  must  be  so  chosen  that  no  chemical  action
takes  place  between  it  and  the  solid  immersed,  and  that
it  wets  the  solid,  so  that  no  air  bubbles  adhere  to  the
surface.  Thus  mercury  is  used  in  the  case  of  metals
by  the  Standards  Department.

Time  is  measured  for  ordinary  purposes  by  the  length
of  the  arc  traced  out  by  a  moving  hand  on  a  circular
clock-face.  For  astronomical  purposes  it  is  sometimes
measured  by  counting  the  ticks  of  a  clock  which  beats
seconds,  and  estimating  mentally  the  fractions  of  a
second  ;  and  in  cases  where  the  period  of  an  oscillation
has  to  be  found,  it  is  determined  by  counting  the
number  of  oscillations  in  a  time  sufficient  to  make  the
number  considerable,  and  then  dividing  that  time  by
the  number.  But  by  far  the  most  accurate  way  of
measuring  time  is  by  means  of  the  line  traced  by  a
pencil  on  a  sheet  of  paper  rolled  round  a  revolving
cylinder,  or  a  spot  of  light  moving  on  a  sensitive  surface.
If  the  pencil  is  made  to  move  along  the  length  of  the
cylinder  so  as  to  indicate  what  is  happening  as  time  goes
along,  the  time  of  each  event  will  be  found  when  the


6  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  IVIEASUREMENT.

cylinder  is  unrolled  by  measuring  the  distance  of  the
mark  recording  it  from  the  end  of  the  unrolled  sheet,
provided  that  the  rate  at  which  the  cylinder  goes  round
is  known.  In  this  way  Helmholtz  measured  the  rate  of
transmission  of  nerve-disturbance.

A  very  common  case  of  the  measurement  of  force
is  the  barometer,  which  measures  the  pressure  of  the
atmosphere  per  square  inch  of  surface.  This  is  deter-
mined by  finding  the  height  of  the  column  of  mercury
which  it  will  support  (mercurial  barometer),  or  the
strain  which  it  causes  in  a  box  from  which  the  air  has
been  taken  out  (aneroid  barometer).  The  height  in  the
former  case  may  be  measured  directly,  or  it  may  first
be  converted  into  the  quantity  of  turning  of  a  needle,
and  then  read  ofi*  as  length  of  arc  on  a  graduated  circle ;
in  the  latter  case  the  strain  is  always  indicated  by  a
needle  turning  on  a  graduated  circle.

The  mass^  and  (what  is  proportional  to  it)  the  weighty
of  difierent  bodies  at  the  same  place,  are  measured  by
means  of  a  balance  ;  and  at  first  sight  this  mode  of
measurement  seems  different  from  those  which  we
have  hitherto  considered.  For  we  put  the  body  to  be
weighed  in  one  scale,  and  then  put  known  weights  into
the  other  until  equilibrium  is  obtained  or  the  scale
turns,  and  then  we  count  the  weights.  But  in  a  steel-
yard the  weight  is  determined  directly  by  means  of  a
length  ;  and  in  a  balance  which  is  accurate  enough  for
scientific  purposes,  both  methods  are  employed.  We  get
as  near  as  we  can  with  the  weights,  and  then  the  remain-
der is  measured  by  a  small  rider  of  wire  which  is  moved
along  the  beam,  and  which  determines  the  weight  by
its  position  ;  that  is,  by  the  measurement  of  a  length.


INSTKUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  7

.For  the  measurement  of  weight  in  different  places  a
spring-balance  has  to  be  used,  and  the  weight  is  deter-
mined by  the  alteration  it  produces  in  the  length  of  the
spring  ;  or  else  the  length  of  the  seconds  pendulum  is
measured,  from  which  the  force  of  gravity  on  a  given
mass  can  be  calculated.  This  last  is  an  example  of  a
very  common  and  useful  mode  of  measuring  forces
called  into  play  by  displacement  or  strain ;  namely,  by
measuring  the  period  of  the  oscillations  which  they
produce.

It  seems  unnecessary  to  consider  any  further
examples,  as  all  other  quantities  are  measured  by  means
of  some  simple  geometrical  or  dynamical  quantity  which
is  proportional  to  them ;  as  temperature  by  the  height
of  mercury  in  a  thermometer,  heat  by  the  quantity  of
ice  it  will  melt  (the  volume  of  the  resulting  water),
electric  resistance  by  the  length  of  a  standard  wire
which  has  an  equivalent  resistance.  It  only  remains  to
show  how,  when  a  length  has  been  found  proportional
to  the  quantity  to  be  measured,  this  length  itself  is
measured.

For  rough  purposes,  as  for  example  in  measuring
the  length  of  a  room  with  a  foot-rule,  we  apply  the  rule
end  on  end,  and  count  the  number  of  times.  For  the
piece  left,  we  should  apply  the  rule  to  it  and  count  the
number  of  inches.  Or  if  we  wanted  a  length  expressed
roughly  for  scientific  purposes,  we  should  describe  it  in
metres  or  centimetres.  But  if  it  has  to  be  expressed
with  greater  accuracy,  it  must  be  described  in
hundredth,  or  thousandth,  or  millionth  parts  of  a  milli-
metre ;  and  this  is  still  done  by  comparing  it  with  a
scale.


8  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUEEMENT.

But  in  order  to  estimate  a  length  in  terms  of  these
very  small  quantities,  it  must  be  magnified  ;  and  this  is
done  in  three  ways.  First,  geometrically,  by  what  is
called  a  vernier  scale.  This  is  a  movable  scale,  which
gains  on  the  fixed  one  by  one-tenth  in  each  division.
To  measure  any  part  of  a  division,  we  find  how  many
divisions  it  takes  the  vernier  to  gain  so  much  as  that
part ;  this  is  how  many  tenths  the  part  is.  The  quantity
to  be  measured  is  here  geometrically  multiplied  by  ten.
Next,  optically,  by  looking  at  the  length  and  scale  with
a  microscope  or  telescope.  Third,  mechanically,  by  a
screw  with  a  disc  on  its  head,  on  which  there  is  a
graduated  rim,  called  a  micrometer  screw.  If  the  pitch
of  the  screw  is  one-tenth  and  the  radius  of  the  disc  ten
times  that  of  the  screw,  the  motion  is  multiplied  by  one
hundred.  The  two  latter  modes  are  combined  together
in  an  instrument  called  a  micrometer-microscope.
Another  mechanical  multiplier  is  a  mirror  which  turns
round  and  reflects  light  on  a  screen  at  some  distance,  as
in  Thomson's  reflecting  galvanometer.

Properly  speaking,  however,  any  description  of  a
length  by  counting  of  standard  lengths  is  imperfect  and
merely  approximate.  The  true  way  of  indicating  a
length  is  to  draw  a  straight  line  which  represents  it  on
a  fixed  scale.  And  this  is  done  by  means  of  self-record-
ing instruments,  which  measure  lengths  from  time  to
time  on  a  cylinder  in  the  manner  described  above.  It
is  only  by  this  graphical  representation  of  quantities
that  the  laws  of  their  variation  become  manifest,  and
that  higher  branch  of  measurement  becomes  possible
which  determines  the  nature  of  the  connexion  between
two  simultaneously  varying  quantities.


INSTEUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.


INSTRUMENTS  ILLUSTRATING  KINEMATICS,  STATICS,
AND  DYNAMICS.

Science  of  Motion,

Geometry  teaches  us  about  the  sizes,  the  shapes,  and
the  dibtances  of  things  ;  to  know  sizes  and  distances
we  liave  to  measure  lengths^  and  to  know  shapes  we
have  to  measure  angles.  The  science  of  Motion^  which
is  the  subject  of  the  present  sketch,  tells  us  about  the
changes  in  these  sizes,  shapes,  and  distances  which  take
place  from  time  to  time.  A  body  is  said  to  move  when
it  changes  its  place  or  position ;  that  is  to  say,  when
it  changes  its  distance  from  surrounding  objects.  And
when  the  parts  of  a  body  move  relatively  to  one  another,
i.e.  when  they  alter  their  distance  from  one  another,
the  body  changes  in  size,  or  shape,  or  both.  All  these
changes  are  considered  in  the  science  of  motion.

Kinematics.

The  science  of  motion  is  divided  into  two  parts  :  the
accurate  description  of  motion,  and  the  investigation  of
the  circumstances  under  which  particular  motions  take
place.  The  description  of  motion  may  again  be  divided
into  two  parts,  namely,  that  which  tells  us  what  changes
of  position  take  place,  and  that  which  tells  us  when
and  how  fast  they  take  place.  We  might,  for  example,
describe  the  motion  of  the  hands  of  a  clock,  and  say
that  they  turn  round  on  their  axes  at  the  centre  of  the
clock-face  in  such  a  way  that  the  minute-hand  always
moves  twelve  times  as  much  as  the  hour-hand  ;  this  is


10  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

the  first  part  of  the  description  of  the  motion.  We
might  go  on  to  say  that  when  the  clock  is  going
correctly,  this  motion  takes  place  uniformly,  so  that  the
minute-hand  goes  round  once  in  each  hour ;  and  this
would  be  the  second  part  of  the  description.  The  first
part  is  what  was  called  Kinematics  by  Ampere :  it  tells
us  how  the  motions  of  the  difierent  parts  of  a  machine
depend  on  each  other  in  consequence  of  the  machinery
which  connects  them.  This  is  clearly  an  appHcation  of
geometry  alone,  and  requires  no  more  measurements
than  those  which  belong  to  geometry,  namely,  measure-
ments of  lines  and  angles.  But  the  name  Kinematics  is
now  conveniently  made  to  include  the  second  part  also
of  the  description  of  motion — when  and  how  fast  it
takes  place.  This  requires  in  addition  the  measurement
of  time^  with  which  geometry  has  nothing  to  do.  The
word  Kinematic  is  derived  from  the  Greek  Mnema^
*  motion ; '  and  will  therefore  serve  equally  well  to  bear
the  restricted  sense  given  it  by  Ampere,  and  the  more
comprehensive  sense  in  which  it  is  now  used.  And  since
the  principles  of  this  science  are  those  which  guide  the
construction  not  only  of  scientific  apparatus,  but  of
all  instruments  and  machines,  it  may  be  advisable  to
describe  in  some  detail  the  chief  topics  with  which  it
deals.

Dynamics.

That  part  of  the  science  which  tells  us  about  the

circtimstanoes  under  which  particular    motions  take

place  is  called  Dynamics.    It  is  found  that  the  change

of  motion  in  a  body  depends  on  the  position  and  state

*  of  surrounding  bodies,  according  to  certain  simple  laws  ;


INSTEUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  11

when  considered  as  so  depending  on  surrounding  bodies,
the  rate  of  change  in  the  quantity  of  motion  is  called
force.  Hence  the  name  Dynamic,  from  the  Greek
dynamis^  '  force.'  The  word  force  is  here  used  in  a
technical  sense,  pecuhar  to  the  science  of  motion  ;  the
connexion  of  this  meaning  with  the  meaning  which  the
word  has  in  ordinary  discourse  will  be  explained  further
on.

Statics  and  Kinetics.

Dynamics  are  again  divided  into  two  branches :  the
study  of  those  circumstances  in  which  it  is  possible  for
a  body  to  remain  at  rest  is  called  Statics,  and  the  study
of  the  circumstances  of  actual  motion  is  called  Kinetics.
The  simplest  part  of  Statics,  the  doctrine  of  the  Lever,
was  successfully  studied  before  any  other  part  of  the
science  of  motion,  namely  by  Archimedes,  who  proved
that  when  a  lever  with  unequal  arms  is  balanced  by
weights  at  the  ends  of  it,  these  weights  are  inversely
proportional  to  the  arms.  But  no  real  progress  could
be  made  in  determining  the  conditions  of  rest,  until  the
laws  of  actual  motion  had  been  studied.

Translation  of  Rigid  Bodies.

Returning,  then,  to  the  description  of  motion,  or
Kinematics,  we  must  first  of  all  classify  the  different
changes  of  position,  of  size,  and  of  shape,  with  which
we  have  to  deal.  We  call  a  body  rigid  when  it  changes
only  its  position,  and  not  its  size  or  shape,  during  the
time  in  which  we  consider  it.  It  is  probable  that  every
actual  body  is  constantly  undergoing  slight  changes  of


12  INSTKUMENTS   USED   IN  MEASUEEMENT.

size  and  shape,  even  when  we  cannot  perceive  them ;  but
in  Kinematics,  as  in  most  other  matters,  there  is  a  great
convenience  in  talking  about  only  one  thing  at  a  time.
So  we  first  of  all  investigate  changes  of  position  on  the
assumption  that  there  are  no  changes  of  size  and  shape  ;
or,  in  technical  phrase,  we  treat  of  the  motion  of  rigid
bodies.  Here  an  important  distinction  is  made  between
motion  in  which  the  body  merely  travels  from  one  place
to  another,  and  motion  in  which  it  also  turns  round.
Thus  the  wheels  of  a  locomotive  engine  not  only  travel
along  the  line,  but  are  constantly  turning  round  ;  while
the  coupling-bar  which  joins  two  wheels  on  the  same
side  remains  always  horizontal,  though  its  changes  of
position  are  considerably  complicated.  A  change  of
place  in  which  there  is  no  rotation  is  called  a  translation.
In  a  rotation  the  different  parts  of  the  body  are  moving
different  ways,  but  in  a  translation  all  parts  move  in
the  same  way.  Consequently,  in  describing  a  translation
we  need  only  specify  the  motion  of  any  one  particle  of
the  moving  body ;  where  by  a  particle  is  meant  a  piece
of  matter  so  small  that  there  is  no  need  to  take  account
of  the  differences  between  its  parts,  which  may  therefore
be  treated  for  purposes  of  calculation  as  a  point.

We  are  thus  brought  down  to  the  very  simple
problem  of  describing  the  motion  of  a  point.  Of  this
there  are  certain  cases  which  have  received  a  great  deal
of  attention  on  account  of  their  frequent  occurrence  in
nature ;  such  as  Parabolic  Motion,  Simple  Harmonic
Motion,  Elliptic  Motion.  We  propose  to  say  a  few
words  in  explanation  of  each  of  these.


INSTRUMENTS   USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  13

Parabolic  Motion.

The  motion  of  a  projectile^  that  is  to  say,  of  a  body-
thrown  in  any  direction  and  faUing  under  the  influence
of  gravity,  was  investigated  by  Gahleo  ;  and  this  is  the
first  problem  of  Kinetics  that  was  ever  solved.  We
must  confine  ourselves  here  to  a  description  of  the
motion,  without  considering  the  way  in  which  it  depends
on  the  circumstance  of  the  presence  of  the  earth  at  a
certain  distance  from  the  moving  body.  Galileo  found
that  the  path  of  such  a  body,  or  the  curve  which  it
traces  out,  is  a  parabola ;  a  curve  which  may  be
described  as  the  shadow  of  a  circle  cast  on  a  horizon-
tal table  by  a  candle  which  is  just  level  with  the  highest
point  of  the  circle.

It  is  convenient  to  consider  separately  the  vertical
and  the  horizontal  motion,  for  in  accordance  with  a  law
subsequently  stated  in  a  general  form  by  Newton,  these
two  take  place  in  complete  independence  of  one  another.
So  far  as  its  horizontal  motion  is  concerned,  the  projec-
tile moves  uniformly,  as  if  it  were  sliding  on  perfectly
smooth  ice  ;  and,  so  far  as  its  vertical  motion  is  con-
cerned, it  moves  as  if  it  were  falling  down  straight.
The  nature  of  this  vertical  motion  may  be  described  in
two  ways,  each  of  which  imphes  the  other.  First,  a
falling  body  moves  faster  and  faster  as  it  goes  down  ;
and  the  rate  at  which  it  is  going  at  any  moment  is
strictly  proportional  to  the  number  of  seconds  which
has  elapsed  since  it  started.  Thus  its  downward  velo-
city is  continually  being  added  to  at  a  uniform  rate.
Secondly,  the  whole  distance  fallen  from  the  starting-
point  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  number  of


14  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

seconds  elapsed  ;  thus,  in  three  seconds  a  body  will  fall
nine  times  as  far  as  it  will  fall  in  one  second.  The
latter  of  these  statements  was  experimentally  proved  by
Galileo  ;  not,  however,  in  the  case  of  bodies  faUing  ver-
tically, which  move  too  quickly  for  the  time  to  be  con-
veniently measured,  but  in  the  case  of  bodies  falhng
down  incUned  planes,  the  law  of  which  he  at  first  as-
sumed, and  afterwards  proved  to  be  identical  with  that
of  the  other.  The  former  statement,  that  the  velocity
increases  uniformly,  is  directly  tested  by  an  apparatus
known  as  Attwood's  machine,  consisting  essentially  of  a
pulley,  over  which  a  string  is  hung  with  equal  weights
attached  to  its  ends.  A  small  bar  of  metal  is  laid  on
one  of  the  weights,  which  begins  to  descend  and  pull
the  other  one  up  ;  after  a  measured  time  the  bar  is
lifted  off,  and  then,  both  sides  pulling  equally,  the
motion  goes  on  at  the  rate  which  had  been  acquired  at
that  instant.  The  distance  travelled  in  one  second  is
then  measured,  and  gives  the  velocity ;  this  is  found  to
be  proportional  to  the  time  of  falling  with  the  bar  on.

The  second  statement,  that  the  space  passed  over  is
proportional  to  the  square  of  the  number  of  seconds
elapsed,  is  verified  by  Morin's  machine,  which  consists
of  a  vertical  cylinder  which  revolves  uniformly  while  a
body  falhng  down  at  the  side  marks  it  with  a  pencil.
The  curve  thus  described  is  a  record  of  the  distance  the
body  had  fallen  at  every  moment  of  time.

Fluxions,

This  investigation  of  GaHleo's  was  in  more  than  one
aspect  the  foundation  of  dynamical  science  ;  but  not  the
least  important  of  these  aspects  is  the  proof  that  either


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  15

of  the  two  ways  of  stating  the  law  of  faUing  bodies  in-
volves the  other.     Given  that  the  distance  fallen  is  pro-
portional to  the  square  of  the  time,  to  show  that  the
velocity  is  proportional  to  the  time  itself;  this  is  a  par-
ticular case  of  the  problem.     Given  where  a  body  is  at
every  instant,  to  find  how  fast  it  is  going  at  every  in-
stant.    The  solution  of  this  problem  was  given  by  New-
ton's Method  of  Fluxiong.     When  a  quantity  changes
from   time   to  time,  its   rate  of  change   is  called   the
fluxion  of  the  quantity.    In  the  case  of  a  moving  body  the
quantity  to  be  considered  is  the  distance  which  the  body
has  travelled ;  the  fluxion  of  this  distance  is  the  rate  at
which  the  body  is  going.     Newton's  method  solves  the
problem,  Given  how  big  a  quantity  is  at  any  time,  to
find  its  fluxion  at  any  time.     The  method   has  been
called  on  the  Continent,  and  lately  also  in  England,  the
Difierential   Calculus ;   because  the  difference  between
two  values  of  the  varying  quantity  is  .mentioned  in  one
of  the  processes  that  may  be  used  for  calculating  its
fluxion.     The  inverse  problem,  Given  that  the  velocity
is  proportional  to  the  time  elapsed,  to  find  the  distance
fallen,  is  a  particular  case  of  the  general  problem.  Given
how  fast  a  body  is  going  at  every  instant,  to  find  where
it  is  at  any  instant ;  or.  Given  the  fluxion  of  a  quantity,
to  find  the  quantity  itself.     The  answer  to  this  is  given
by  Newton's  Inverse  Method  of  Fluxions ;  which  is  also
called  the  Integral  Calculus,  because  in  one  of  the  pro-
cesses which  may  be  used  for  calculating  the  quantity,
it  is  regarded  as  a  whole  (integer)  made  up  of  a  number
of  small  parts.     The  method  of  Fluxions,  then,  or  Dif-
ferential and  Integral   Calculus,  takes  its   start   from
Galileo's  study  of  parabolic  motion.


16  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

Harmonic  Motion.

The  ancients,  regarding  the  circle  as  the  most  perfect
of  figures,  believed  that  circular  motion  was  not  only
simple^  that  is,  not  made  up  by  putting  together  other
motions,  but  also  perfect^  in  the  sense  that  when  once  set
up  in  perfect  bodies  it  would  maintain  itself  without
external  interference.     The  moderns,  who  know  nothing
about  perfection  except  as  something  to  be  aimed  at,
but  never  reached,  in  practical  work,  have  been  forced
to  reject  both  of  these  doctrines.     The  second  of  them,
indeed,  belongs  to  Kinetics,  and  will  again  be  mentioned
under  that  head.     But  as  a  matter  of  Kinematics  it  has
been  found  necessary  to  treat  the  uniform  motion  of  a
point  round  a  circle  as  compounded  of  two  oscillations.
To  take  again  the  example  of  a  clock,  the  extreme  point
of  the  minute-hand  describes  a  circle  uniformly  ;  but
if  we  consider  separately  its  vertical  position  and  its
horizontal  position,  we  shall  see  that  it  not  only  oscil-
lates up  and  down,  but  at  the  same  time  swings  from
side  to  side,  each  in  the  same  period  of  one  hour.     If
we  suppose  a  button  to  move  up  and  down  in  a  slit
between  the  figures  XII  and  VI,  in  such  a  way  as  to  be
always  at  the  same  height  as  the  end  of  the  minute-hand,
this  button  will  have  only  one  of  the  two  oscillations
which  are  combined  in  the  motion  of  that  point ;  and
the  other  oscillation  would  be  exhibited  by  a  button  con-
strained to  move  in  a  similar  manner  between  the  figures
in  and  IX,  so  as  always  to  be  either  vertically  above  or
vertically  below  the  extreme  point  of  the  minute-hand.
The  laws  of  these  two  motions  are  identical,  but  they  are
so  timed  that  each  is  at  its  extreme  position  when  the


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT,  17

other  is  crossing  the  centre.  An  oscillation  of  this  kind
is  called  a  simple  harmonic  motion  :  the  name  is  due  to
Sir  William  Thomson,  and  was  given  on  account  of  the
intimate  connexion  between  the  laws  of  such  motions
and  the  theory  of  vibrating  strings.  Indeed,  the  har-
monic motion,  simple  or  compound,  is  the  most  univer-
sal of  all  forms  ;  it  is  exemplified  not  only  in  the  motion
of  every  particle  of  a  vibrating  sohd,  such  as  the  string
of  a  piano  or  violin,  a  tuning-fork,  or  the  membrane  of
a  drum,  but  in  those  minute  excursions  of  particles  of
air  which  carry  sound  from  one  place  to  another,  in  the
wa^es  and  tides  of  the  sea,  and  in  the  amazingly  rapid
tremor  of  the  luminiferous  ether  which,  in  its  varying
action  on  different  bodies,  makes  itself  known  as  light
or  radiant  heat  or  chemical  action.  Simple  harmonic
motions  differ  from  one  another  in  three  respects;  in
the  extent  or  amplitude  of  the  swing,  which  is  measured
by  the  distance  from  the  middle  point  to  either  extreme ;
in  the  period  or  interval  of  time  between  two  successive
passages  through  an  extreme  position ;  and  in  the  time
of  starting,  or  epochs  as  it  is  called,  which  is  named
by  saying  what  particular  stage  of  the  vibration  was
being  executed  at  a  certain  instant  of  time.  One  of  the
most  astonishing  and  fruitful  theorems  of  mathematical
science  is  this ;  that  every  periodic  motion  whatever,
that  is  to  say,  every  motion  which  exactly  repeats  itself
again  and  again  at  definite  intervals  of  time,  is  a  com-
pound of  simple  harnionic  motions,  whose  periods  are
successively  smaller  and  smaller  aUquot  parts  of  the
original  period,  and  whose  amphtudes  (after  a  certain
number  of  them)  are  less  and  less  as  their  periods  are
more  rapid.     The  '  harmonic '  tones  of  a  string,  which

VOL.  II.  c


18  INSTRUMENTS  tSED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

are  always  heard  along  with  the  fundamental  tone,  are
a  particular  case  of  these  constituents.  The  theorem
was  given  by  Fourier  in  connexion  with  the  flow  of
heat,  but  its  applications  are  innumerable,  and  extend
over  the  whole  range  of  physical  science.

The  laws  of  combination  of  harmonic  motions  have
been  illustrated  by  some  ingenious  apparatus  of  Messrs.
Tisley  and  Spiller,  and  by  a  machine  invented  by  Mr.
Donkin ;  but  the  most  important  practical  application
of  these  laws  is  to  be  found  in  Sir  W.  Thomson's  Tidal
Clock,  and  in  a  more  elaborate  machine  which  draw3
curves  predicting  the  height  of  the  tide  at  a  given  port
for  all  times  of  the  day  and  night  with  as  much
accuracy  as  can  be  obtained  by  direct  observation.
One  special  combination  is  worthy  of  notice.  The
union  of  a  vertical  vibration  with  a  horizontal  one  of
half  the  period  gives  rise  to  that  figure  of  8  which  M.
Marey  has  observed  by  his  beautiful  methods  in  the
motion  of  the  tip  of  a  bird's  or  insect's  wing.

Elliptic  Motion.

The  motion  of  the  sun  and  moon  relative  to  th^
earth  was  at  first  described  by  a  combination  of  circular
motions  ;  and  this  was  the  immortal  achievement  of  the
Greek  astronomers  Hipparchus  and  Ptolemy.  Indeed,
in  so  far  as  these  motions  are  periodic,  it  follows  from
Fourier's  theorem  mentioned  above  that  this  mode
of  description  is  mathematically  sufficient  to  represent
them ;  and  astronomical  tables  are  to  this  day  calcu-
lated by  a  method  which  practically  comes  to  the
same  thing.  But  this  representation  is  not  the  simplest
that  can  be  found ;  it  requires  theoretically  an  infinite


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  19

number  of  component  motions,  and  gives  no  informa-
tion about  the  way  in  which  these  are  connected  with
one  another.  We  owe  to  Kepler  the  accurate  and  com-
plete description  of  planetary  or  elliptic  motion.  His
investigation  applied  in  the  first  instance  to  the  orbit
of  the  planet  Mars  about  the  sun,  but  it  was  found  true
of  the  orbits  of  all  planets  about  the  sun,  and  of  the
moon  about  the  earth.  The  path  of  the  moving  body  in
each  of  these  motions  is  an  ellipse,  or  oval  shadow  of  a
circle,  a  curve  having  various  properties  in  relation  to
two  internal  points  or  foci,  which  replace  as  it  were
the  one  centre  of  a  circle.  In  the  case  of  the  elhpse
described  by  a  planet,  the  sun  is  in  one  of  these  foci ;
in  the  case  of  the  moon,  the  earth  is  in  one  focus.  So
much  for  the  geometrical  description  of  the  motion.
Kepler  further  observed  that  a  line  drawn  from  the  sun
to  a  planet,  or  from  the  earth  to  the  moon,  and  sup-
posed to  move  round  with  the  moving  body,  would
sweep  out  equal  areas  in  equal  times.  These  two  laws,
called  Kepler's  first  and  second  laws,  complete  the
kinematic  description  of  elliptic  motion ;  but  to  obtain
formula  fit  for  computation,  it  was  necessary  to  cal-
culate from  these  laws  the  various  harmonic  compo-
nents of  the  motion  to  and  from  the  sun,  and  round  it ;
this  calculation  has  much  occupied  the  attention  of
mathematicians.

The  laws  of  rotatory  motion  of  rigid  bodies  are
somewhat  difficult  to  describe  without  mathematical
symbols,  but  they  are  thoroughly  known.  Examples
of  them  are  given  by  the  apparatus  called  a  gyroscope,
and  the  motion  of  the  earth  ;  and  an  application  of  the
former  to   prove  the   nature   of  the  latter,  made  by

c2


20  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

Foucault,  is   one   of  the   most   beautiful   experiments
belonging  entirely  to  dynamics.

Rotation,

Next  in  simplicity  after  the  translation  of  a  rigid
body,  come  two  kinds  of  motion  which  are  at  first  sight
very  different,  but  between  which  a  closer  observation
discovers  very  striking  analogies.  These  are  the  motion
of  rotation  about  a  fixed  point,  and  the  motion  of  slid-
ing on  a  fixed  plane.  The  first  of  these  is  most  easily
produced  in  practice  by  what  is  well  known  as  a  ball-
and-socket  joint ;  that  is  to  .say,  a  body  ending  in  a
portion  of  a  spherical  surface  which  can  move  about  in
'  a  spherical  cavity  of  the  same  size.  The  centre  of  the
spherical  surface  is  then  a  fixed  point,  and  the  motion
is  reduced  to  the  sliding  of  one  sphere  inside  another.
In  the  same  way,  if  we  consider,  for  instance,  the
motion  of  a  fiat-iron  on  an  ironing-board,  we  may  see
that  this  is  not  a  pure  translation,  for  the  iron  is
frequently  turned  round  as  well  as  carried  about ;  but
the  motion  may  be  described  as  the  sliding  of  one  plane
upon  another.  Thus  in  each  case  the  matter  to  be
studied  is  the  sliding  of  one  surface  on  another  which  it
exactly  fits.  For  two  surfaces  to  fit  one  another  exactly,
in  all  positions,  they  must  be  either  both  spheres  of  the
same  size,  or  both  planes  ;  and  the  latter  case  is  really  in-
cluded under  the  former,  for  a  plane  may  be  regarded
as  a  sphere  whose  radius  has  increased  without  limit.
Thus,  if  a  piece  of  ice  be  made  to  slide  about  on  the
frozen  surface  of  a  perfectly  smooth  pond,  it  is  really
rotating  about  a  fixed  point  at  the  centre  of  the  earth  ;
for  the  frozen  surface  may  be  regarded  as  part  of  an


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  21

enormous  sphere,  having  that  point  for  centre.  And
yet  the  motion  cannot  be  practically  distinguished  from
that  of  shding  on  a  plane.

In  this  latter  case  it  is  found  that,  excepting  in  the
case  of  a  pure  translation,  there  is  at  every  instant  a
certain  point  which  is  at  rest,  and  about  which  as  a
centre  the  body  is  turning.     This  point  is  called  the  in-
stantaneous centre  of  rotation ;  it  travels  about  as  the
motion  goes  on,  but  at  any  instant  its  position  is  per-
fectly definite.     From  this  fact  follows  a  very  important
consequence ;  namely  that  every  possible  motion  of  a
plane  sliding  on  a  plane  may  be  produced  by  the  rolling
of  a  curve  in  one  plane  upon  a  curve  in  the  other.     The
point  of  contact  of  the  two  curves  at  any  instant  is  the
instantaneous  centre  at  that  instant.     The  problems  to
be  considered  in  this  subject  are  thus  of  two  kinds :
Given  the  curves  of  rolling  to  find  the  path  described
by  any  point  of  the  moving  plane ;    and.  Given  the
paths  described   by  two  points   of  the   moving   plane
(enough  to  determine  the  motion)  to  find  the  curves  of
rolling  and  the  paths  of  all  other  points.     An  important
case  of  the  first  problem  is  that  in  which  one  circle  rolls
on  another,  either  inside  or  outside ;    the   curves  de-
scribed by  points  in  the  moving  plane  are  used  for  the
teeth   of  wheels.     To  the  second  problem  belongs  the
valuable  and  now  rapidly  increasing  theory  of  link-work^
which,  starting   from   the  wonderful  discovery  of  an
exact  parallel  motion  by  M.  Peaucellier,  has  received  an
immense   and    most   unexpected   development   at   the
hands   of  Professor  Sylvester,  Mr.  Hart,  and  Mr.  A.  B,
Kempe.

Passing  now  to  the  spherical  form  of  this  motion^


22  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

we  find  that  the  instantaneous  centre  of  rotation  (which
is  clearly  equivalent  to  an  instantaneous  axis  perpen-
dicular to  the  plane)  is  replaced  by  an  instantaneous
axis  passing  through  the  common  centre  of  the  moving
spheres.  In  the  same  way  the  rolling  of  one  curve  on
another  in  the  plane  is  replaced  by  the  rolling  of  one
cone  upon  another,  the  two  cones  having  a  common
vertex  at  the  same  centre.

Analogous  theorems  have  been  proved  for  the  most
general  motion  of  a  rigid  body.  It  was  shown  by  M.
Chasles  that  this  is  always  similar  to  the  motion  of  a
corkscrew  desending  into  a  cork ;  that  is  to  say,  there  is
always  a  rotation  about  a  certain  instantaneous  axis,
combined  with  translation  along  this  axis.  The  amount
of  translation  per  unit  of  rotation  is  called  the  pitch  of
the  screw.  The  instantaneous  screw  moves  about  as
the  motion  goes  on,  but  at  any  given  instant  it  is  per-
fectly definite  in  position  and  pitch.  And  any  motion
whatever  of  a  rigid  body  may  be  produced  by  the
rolling  and  sliding  of  one  surface  on  another,  both
surfaces  being  produced  by  the  motion  of  straight
lines.  This  crowning  theorem  in  the  geometry  of
motion  is  due  to  Professor  Cayley.  The  laws  of  combina-
tion of  screw  motions  have  been  investigated  by  Dr.  Ball.

Thus,  proceeding  gradually  from  the  more  simple  to
the  more  complex,  we  have  been  able  to  describe  every
change  in  the  position  of  a  body.  It  remains  only  to
describe  changes  of  size  and  shape.  Of  these  there  are
three  kinds,  but  they  are  all  included  under  the  same
name — strains.  We  may  have,  first,  a  change  of  size
without  any  change  of  shape,  a  uniform  dilatation  or
contraction  of  the  whole  body  in  all  directions,  such  as


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT,  23

happens  to  a  sphere  of  metal  when  it  is  heated  or  cooled.
Next,  we  may  have  an  elongation  or  contraction  in  one
direction  only,  all  lines  of  this  body  pointing  in  this
direction  being  increased  or  diminished  in  the  same
fatio ;  such  as  would  happen  to  a  rod  six  feet  long  and
an  inch  square,  if  it  were  stretched  to  seven  feet  long,
still  remaining  an  inch  square.  Thirdly,  we  may  have  a
change  of  shape  produced  by  the  sliding  of  layers  over
one  another,  a  mode  of  deformation  which  is  easily  pro-
duced in  a  pack  of  cards ;  this  is  called  a  shear.  By
appropriate  combinations  of  these  three,  every  change
of  size  and  shape  may  be  produced  ;  or  we  may  even
leave  out  the  second  element,  and  produce  any  strain
whatever  by  a  dilatation  or  contraction,  and  two
shears.

Dynamics,

We  have  already  said  that  the  change  of  motion
of  a  body  depends  upon  the  position  and  state  of  sur-
rounding bodies.  To  make  this  intelligible  it  will  be
necessary  to  notice  a  certain  property  of  the  three  kinds
of  motion  of  a  point  which  we  described.

The  combination  of  velocities  may  be  understood
from  the  case  of  a  body  carried  in  any  sort  of  cart  or
vehicle  in  which  it  moves  about.  The  whole  velocity
of  the  body  is  then  compounded  of  the  velocity  of  the
vehicle  and  of  its  velocity  relative  to  the  vehicle.
Thus,  if  a  man  walks  across  a  railway  carriage  his
whole  velocity  is  compounded  of  the  velocity  of  the
railway  carriage  and  of  the  velocity  with  which  he
walks  across.

When  the  velocity  of  a  body  is  changed  by  adding


24  INSTRUMENTS  USED   IN  MEASUREMENT.

to  it  a  velocity  in  the  same  direction  or  in  the  opposite
direction,  it  is  only  altered  in  amount;  but  when  a
transverse  velocity  is  compounded  with  it,  a  change  of
direction  is  produced.  Thus,  if  a  man  walks  fore  and
aft  on  a  steamboat,  he  only  travels  a  httle  faster  or
slower ;  but  if  he  walks  across  from  one  side  to  the
other,  he  slightly  changes  the  direction  in  which  he  is
moving.

Now,  in  the  parabolic  motion  of  a  projectile,  we
found  that  while  the  horizontal  velocity  continues
unchanged,  the  vertical  velocity  increases  at  a  uniform
rate.  Such  a  body  is  having  a  downwards  velocity
continually  poured  into  it,  as  it  were.  This  gradual
change  of  the  velocity  is  called  acceleration :  we  may
say  that  the  acceleration  of  a  projectile  is  always  the
same,  and  is  directed  vertically  downwards.

In  a  simple  harmonic  motion  it  is  found  that  the
acceleration  is  directed  towards  the  centre,  and  is
always  proportional  to  the  distance  from  it.  In  the
case  of  elliptic  motion  it  was  proved  by  Newton  that
the  acceleration  is  directed  towards  the  focus,  and  is
inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance
from  it.

Let  us  now  consider  the  circumstances  under
which  these  motions  take  place.  To  produce  a  simple
harmonic  motion  we  may  take  a  piece  of  elastic  string,
whose  length  is  equal  to  the  height  of  a  smooth  table ;
then  fasten  one  end  of  the  string  to  a  bullet  and  the
other  end  to  the  floor,  having  passed  it  through  a  hole
in  the  table,  so  that  the  bullet  just  rests  on  the  top  of
the  hole  when  the  string  is  unstretched.  If  the  bullet
be  now  pulled  away  from  the  hole  so  that  the  string  is


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  25

stretched,  and  then  let  it  go,  it  will  oscillate  to  and  fro
on  either  side  of  the  hole  with  a  simple  harmonic
motion.  The  acceleration  (or  rate  of  change  of  velo-
city) is  here  proportional  to  the  distance  from  the  hole ;
that  is,  to  the  amount  of  elongation  of  the  string.  It  is
directed  towards  the  hole  ;  that  is,  in  the  direction  of
this  elongation.  In  the  case  of  the  moon  moving  round
the  earth,  the  acceleration  is  directed  towards  the
earth,  and  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of
the  distance  from  the  earth.

In  both  these  cases,  then,  the  change  of  velocity
depends,  upon  surrounding  circumstances  ;  but  in  the
case  of  the  bullet,  this  circumstance  is  the  strained  con-
dition of  an  adjoining  body,  namely,  the  elastic  string  ;
while  in  the  case  of  the  moon  the  circumstance  is  the
position  of  a  distant  body,  namely,  the  earth.  The
motion  of  a  projectile  turns  out  to  be  only  a  special
case  of  the  motion  of  the  moon ;  for  the  parabola
which  it  describes  may  be  regarded  as  one  end  of  a
very  long  ellipse,  whose  other  end  goes  round  the
earth's  centre.

There  is  a  remarkable  difference  between  the  two
cases.  The  swing  of  the  bullet  depends  upon  its  size  ;
a  large  bullet  will  oscillate  more  slowly  than  a  small
one.  This  leads  us  to  modify  the  rule.  If  a  large
bullet  is  equivalent  to  two  small  ones,  then  when  it  is
going  at  the  same  rate  it  must  contain  twice  as  much
motion  as  one  of  the  small  ones ;  or,  as  we  now  say,
with  the  same  velocity  it  has  twice  the  momentum.
Now  the  change  of  momentum  is  found  to  be  the  same
for  all  bullets,  when  the  momentum  is  reckoned  as  pro-
portional to  the  quantity  of  matter  iij  the  bullet  as  well


26  INSTBUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT*

as  to  the  velocity.  The  quantity  of  matter  in  a  body  is
called  its  mass :  for  bodies  of  the  same  substance  it  is,  of
course,  simply  the  quantity  of  that  substance  ;  but  for
bodies  of  different  substances  it  is  so  reckoned  as  to
make  the  rule  hold  good.  The  rule  for  this  case  may
then  be  stated  thus  ;  the  change  of  momentum  of  a
body  (that  is,  the  change  of  velocity  multiplied  by  the
mass),  depends  on  the  state  of  strain  of  adjoining  bodies.
Eegarded  as  so  depending,  this  change  of  momentum  is
called  the  pressure  or  tension  of  the  adjoining  body,
according  to  the  nature  of  the  strain ;  both  of  these
are  included  in  the  name  stress,  introduced  by  Eankine.

But  in  the  case  of  projectiles,  the  acceleration  is
found  to  be  the  same  for  all  bodies  at  the  same  place  ;
and  this  rule  holds  good  in  all  cases  of  planetary
motion.  So  that  it  seems  as  if  the  change  of  velocity,
and  not  the  change  of  momentum,  depended  upon  the
position  of  distant  bodies.  But  this  case  is  brought
under  the  same  rule  as  the  other  by  supposing  that  the
mass  of  the  moving  body  is  to  be  reckoned  among  the
*  circumstances.'  The  change  of  momentum  is  in  this
case  called  the  attraction  of  gravitation,  and  we  say
that  the  attraction  is  proportional  to  the  mass  of  the
attracted  body.  And  this  way  of  representing  the  facts
is  borne  out  by  the  electrical  and  magnetic  attractions
and  repulsions,  where  the  change  of  momentum  depends
on  the  position  and  state  of  the  attracting  thing,  and
upon  the  electric  charge  or  the  induced  magnetism  of
the  attracted  thing.

Force,  then,  is  of  two  kinds  ;  the  stress  of  a  strained
adjoining  body,  and  the  attraction  or  repulsion  of  a
distant  body.     Attempts  have  been  made  with  more  or


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  57

less  success  to  explain  each  of  these  by  means  of  the
other.  In  common  discourse  the  word  '  force  '  means
muscular  effort  exerted  by  the  human  frame.  In  this
case  the  part  of  the  human  body  which  is  in  contact
with  the  object  to  be  moved  is  in  a  state  of  strain,  and
the  force,  dynamically  considered,  is  of  the  first  kind.
But  this  state  of  strain  is  preceded  and  followed  by
nervous  discharges,  which  are  accompanied  by  the
sensations  of  effort  and  of  muscular  strain  ;  a  complica-
tion of  circumstances  which  does  not  occur  in  the
action  of  inanimate  bodies.  What  is  common  to  the
two  cases  is,  that  the  change  of  momentum  depends  on
the  strain.

Having  thus  explained  the  law  of  Force,  which  is
the  foundation  of  Dynamics,  we  may  consider  the
remaining  laws  of  motion.  It  is  convenient  to  state
them  first  for  particles,  or  bodies  so  small  that  we  need
take  account  only  of  their  position.  Every  particle,
then,  has  a  rate  of  change  of  momentum  due  to  the
position  or  state  of  every  other  particle,  whether
adjoining  it  or  distant  from  it.  These  are  compounded
together  by  the  law  of  composition  of  velocities,  and
the  result  of  the  whole  is  the  actual  change  of  momen-
tum of  the  particle.  This  statement,  and  the  law  of
Force  stated  above,  amount  together  to  Newton's  first
and  second  laws  of  motion.  His  third  law  is,  that  the
change  of  momentum  in  one  particle,  due  to  the  posi-
tion or  state  of  another,  is  equal  and  opposite  to  the
change  of  momentum  in  the  other,  due  to  the  position
or  state  of  the  first.

By  the  help  of  these  laws  D'Alembert  showed  how
the  motion  of  rigid  bodies,  or  systems  of  particles,  might


28  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.

be  dealt  with.  It  appears  from  his  method  that  two
stresses,  acting  on  a  rigid  body,  may  be  equivalent,  in
their  effect  on  the  body  as  a  whole,  to  a  single  stress,
whose  direction  and  position  will  be  totally  independent
of  the  shape  and  nature  of  the  body  considered.  The
law  of  combination  of  stresses  acting  on  a  system  of
particles  is,  in  fact,  the  same  as  the  law  of  combination
of  velocities,  so  far  as  regards  the  motion  of  the  system
as  a  whole.  This  beautiful  but  somewhat  complex
result  of  Dynamics  has  been  used  in  some  text-books  as
the  independent  foundation  of  Statics,  under  the  name  of
the  parallelogram  of  forces  ;  a  singular  inversion  of  the
historical  order  and  of  the  methods  of  the  great  writers.
When  the  result  of  all  the  circumstances  surround-
ing a  body  is  that  there  is  no  change  of  momentum,  the
body  is  said  to  be  in  equiKbrium.  In  this  case,  if  the
body  is  at  rest,  it  will  remain  so  ;  and  on  this  account
the  study  of  such  conditions  is  called  Statics.  In  deal-
ing with  the  statics  of  rigid  bodies,  we  have  only  to
examine  those  cases  in  which  the  resultant  of  the
external  stresses  and  attractions  acting  on  the  body
amounts  to  nothing.  But  the  most  important  part  of
statics  is  that  which  finds  the  stresses  acting  in  the
interior  of  bodies  between  contiguous  parts  of  them  ;
for  upon  this  depends  the  determination  of  the  requisite
strength  of  structures  which  have  to  bear  given  loads.
It  is  found  that  the  way  in  which  the  stress  due  to  a
given  strain  depends  on  the  strain  varies  according  to
the  physical  nature  of  the  body ;  for  bodies,  however,
which  are  not  crystalline  or  fibrous,  but  which  have  the
same  properties  in  all  directions,  there  are  two  quanti-
ties which,  if  known,  will  enable  us  always  to  calculate


INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  MEASUREMENT.  29

the  stress  due  to  a  given  strain.  These  are,  the
elasticity  of  volume,  or  resistance  to  change  of  size  ;  and
the  rigidity,  elasticity  of  figure,  or  resistance  to  change
of  shape.  Problems  relating  to  the  interior  state  of
bodies  are  far  more  difficult  than  those  which  regard
them  as  rigid.  Thus,  if  a  beam  is  supported  at  its  two
ends,  it  is  very  easy  to  find  the  portion  of  its  weight
which  is  borne  by  each  support*;  but  the  determination
of  the  state  of  stress  in  the  interior  is  a  problem  of
great  complexity.

There  is  one  theorem  of  kinetics  which  must  be
mentioned  here.  If  we  multiply  half  the  momentum  of
every  particle  of  a  body  by  its  velocity,  and  add  all  the
results  together,  we  shall  get  what  is  called  the  kinetic
energy  of  the  body.  When  the  body  is  moved  from
one  position  to  another,  if  we  multiply  each  force  acting
on  it — ^whether  attraction  or  stress — by  the  distance
moved  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  force,  and  add
the  results,  we  shall  get  what  is  called  the  work  done  ,
against  the  forces  during  the  change  of  position.  It
does  not  at  all  depend  on  the  rate  at  which  the  change
is  made,  but  only  on  the  two  positions.  If  a  body
moves,  and  loses  kinetic  energy,  it  does  an  amount  of
work  equal  to  the  kinetic  energy  lost.  If  it  gains  kinetic
energy,  an  amount  of  work  equal  to  this  gain  must  be
done  to  take  it  back  from  the  new  position  to  the  old
one.  The  amount  of  work  which  must  be  done  to  take
a  body  from  a  certain  standard  position  to  the  position
which  it  has  at  present  is  called  the  potential  energy  of
the  body.  The  theorem  may  be  stated  in  this  form ;
the  sum  of  the  potential  and  kinetic  energies  is  always
the  same,  provided  the  surrounding  circumstances  do


30  INSTRUMENTS   USED  IN  MEASUREMENT:

not  alter.  Hence  the  theorem  is  called  the  Conservation
of  Energj.  It  is  one  fact  out  of  many  that  may  be
deduced  from  the  equations  of  motion  ;  it  is  not  suffi-
cient to  determine  the  motion  of  a  body,  but  it  is  ex-
ceedingly useful  as  giving  a  general  result  in  cases
where  it  might  be  difficult  or  undesirable  to  investigate
all  the  particulars ;  and  it  is  especially  apphcable  to
machines,  the  important  question  in  regard  to  which  is
the  amount  of  work  which  they  can  do.

It  will  have  been  seen  that  the  science  of  motion
depends  on  a  few  fundamental  principles  which  are
easily  verified,  and  consists  almost  entirely  of  mathema-
tical deductions  and  calculations  based  on  those  princi-
ples. It  is  no  longer  therefore  an  experimental  science
in  the  same  sense  as  those  are  in  which  the  fundamental
facts  are  still  being  discovered.  The  apparatus  con-
nected with  it  may  be  conveniently  classified  under
three  heads  : —

(a)  Apparatus  for  illustrating  theorems  or  solving
problems  of  kinematics,  such  as  those  mentioned
above  for  compounding  harmonic  motions.
There  is  reason  to  hope  for  great  extension  of
our  powers  in  this  direction.
(6)  Apparatus  for  measuring  the  dynamical
quantities,  such  as  weight,  work,  and  the
elasticities  of  different  substances.  These  are
more  fully  classified  under  Measurements.
(c)  Apparatus  designed  for  purposes  belonging  to
other  sciences,  but  illustrating  by  its  structure
and  functions  the  results  of  kinematics  or
dynamics.  In  this  class  the  remainder  of  the
collection  is  included.


81


BODY  AND  MIND.'

The  subject  of  this  Lecture  is  one  in  regard  to  which
a  great  change  has  recently  taken  place  in  the  public
mind.  Some  time  ago  it  was  the  custom  to  look  with
suspicion  upon  all  questions  of  a  metaphysical  nature
as  being  questions  that  could  not  be  discussed  with  any
good  result,  and  which,  leading  inquirers  round  and
round  in  the  same  circle,  never  came  to  an  end.  But
quite  of  late  years  there  is  an  indication  that  a  large
number  of  people  are  waking  up  to  the  fact  that  Science
has  something  to  say  upon  these  subjects  ;  and  the
English  people  have  always  been  very  ready  to  hear
what  Science  can  say — understanding  by  Science  what
we  shall  now  understand  by  it,  that  is,  organized  com-
mon sense.

When  I  say  Science,  I  do  not  mean  what  some
people  are  pleased  to  call  Philosophy.  The  word  '  phi-
losopher,' which  meant  originally  '  lover  of  wisdom,'
has  come  in  some  strange  way  to  mean  a  man  who
thinks  it  his  business  to  explain  everything  in  a  certain
number  of  large  books.  It  will  be  found,  I  think,  that
in  proportion  to  his  colossal  ignorance  is  the  perfection
and  symmetry  of  the  system  which  he  sets  up ;  because
it  is  so  much  easier  to  put  an  empty  room  tidy  than  a

^  Sunday  Lecture  Society,  Noyember  1,  1874 ;  *  Fortnightly  Keview/
December,  1874.


32  BODY  AND  MIND.

full  one.  A  man  of  science,  on  the  other  hand,  explains
as  much  as  ever  he  can,  and  then  he  says,  '  This  is  all
I  can  do ;  for  the  rest  you  must  ask  the  next  man.'
And  with  regard  to  such  explanations  as  he  has  given,
whether  the  next  man  comes  at  all,  whether  there  is
any  next  man  or  any  further  explanation  or  no  (and  we
may  have  to  wait  hundreds  or  even  thousands  of  years '
before  another  step  is  made), — yet  if  the  original  step
was  a  scientific  step,  was  made  by  true  scientific  methods,
and  was  an  organization  of  the  normal  experience  of
healthy  men,  that  step  will  remain  good  for  ever,  no
matter  how  much  is  left  unexplained  by  it.

Now  the  supposition  that  this  subject  in  itself  is
necessarily  one  which  cannot  be  discussed  to  good  pur-
pose, that  is  to  say,  in  such  a  way  as  to  lead  to  definite
results,  is  a  mistake.  The  fact  that  the  subject  has  been
discussed  for  many  hundreds  of  years  to  no  good  pur-
pose, and  without  leading  to  definite  results,  by  great
numbers  of  people,  is  due  to  the  method  which  was
employed,  and  not  to  the  subject  itself ;  and,  in  fact,  if
we  like  to  look  in  the  same  way  upon  other  subjects  as
we  have  been  accustomed  to  look  upon  metaphysics —
if  we  regard  every  man  who  has  written  about  mathe-
matics or  mechanics  as  having  just  the  same  right  to
speak  and  to  be  heard  that  we  give  to  every  man  who
has  written  about  metaphysics — then  I  think  we  shall
find  that  exactly  the  same  thing  can  be  said  about  the
most  certain  regions  of  human  science.

Those  who  like  to  read  the  last  number  of  the
'Edinburgh  Eeview,'^  for  example,  will  find,  from  an
article  on  '  Comets  and  Meteors,'  that  it  is  at  present  quite

1  October,  1874,


BODY  AND  MIND.  38

an  open  question  whether  bodies  which  are  shot  out  from'
the  sun  by  eruptive  force  may  not  come  to  circle  about
the  sun  in  orbits  which  are  like  those  of  the  planets.
Now  that  is  not  an  open  question  ;  the  supposition  is  an
utterly  absurd  one,  and  has  been  utterly  absurd  from
the  time  of  Kepler.      Again,  those   who   are  curious
enough  to  read  a  number  of  pamphlets  that  are  to  be
found  here  and  there  may  think  it  is  an  open  question
whether  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle  to  its
diameter  may  not  be  expressed  by  certain  finite  numbers.
"  It  is  not  an  open  question  to  Science  ;  it  is  only  open  to
those  people  who  do  not  know  any  Trigonometry,  and
who  will  not  learn  it.     In  exactly  the  same  way  there
are  numbers  of  questions  relating  to  the  connexion  of
the  mind  with  the  body  which  have  ceased  to  be  open
questions,  because  Science  has  had  her   word  to  say
about  them ;    and  they  are  only  open  now  to  people
who  do  not  know  what  that  word  of  Science  is,  and
who  will  not  try  to  learn  it.

The  whole  field  of  human  knowledge  maybe  divided
roughly,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  into  three  great
regions.  There  are  first  of  all  what  we  call  par  excel-
lence the  Physical  Sciences — those  which  deal  with  in-
animate  matter.  Next,  there  are  those  sciences  which
deal  with  organic  bodies — the  bodies  of  living  things,
whether  plants  or  animals,  and  the  rules  according  to
which  those  things  move.  And  lastly,  there  are  those
sciences  which  make  a  further  supposition — which  sup-
pose that  besides  this  physical  world,  including  both
organic  and  inorganic  bodies,  there  are  also  certain
other  facts,  namely,  that  other  men  besides  me,  and
most  likely  other  animals  besides  men,   are  conscious,

VOL.  II.  B


31  BODY  AKD  MIND.

The  sciences  which  make  that  supposition  are  the
sciences  of  Ethics  and  PoUtics,  which  are  still  in  the
practical  stage,  and  especially  the  more  advanced  science
which  is  now  to  be  considered — Psychology,  the  Science
of  Mind  itself;  that  is  to  say,  the  science  of  the  laws
which  regulate  the  succession  of  feehngs  in  any  one
consciousness.  Each  of  these  three  great  divisions
began  in  the  form  of  a  number  of  perfectly  disconnected
subjects,  between  which  nobody  knew  of  any  relation ;
but  in  the  history  of  science  each  of  them  has  been
woven  together,  in  consequence  of  connexions  being
found  between  the  different  subjects  included  in  it,  into
a  complete  whole;  and  the  further  progress  of  the
history  of  science  requires  that  each  of  these  great
threads,  into  which  all  the  little  threads  have  been
twined,  should  themselves  be  twin§d  together  into  a
single  string.

With  regard  to  the  first  two  groups, — the  group
of  mechanical  sciences  as  we  may  call  them,  or  the
physics  of  inorganic  bodies,  and  the  group  of  biological
sciences,  or  the  physics  of  organic  bodies — the  gulf
between  these  two  has  in  these  last  days  been  firmly
bridged  over.  A  description  of  that  bridge,  and  an
account  of  the  doctrines  which  form  it,  will  be  found
in  Professor  Huxley's  admirable  lecture  delivered  at
Belfast  before  the  British  Association.  That  bridge,
as  we  have  it  now,  is,  in  the  conception  of  it,  mainly
due  to  Descartes ;  but  parts  of  it  have  been  worked
out  since  his  time  by  a  vast  number  of  physiologists,
with  the  expenditure  of  an  enormous  amount  of
labour  and  thought.  Such  facts  as  that  discovered  by
Harvey,  that  the  movement  of  the  blood  was  a  mere


BODY  AND  MIND.  35

question  of  Hydrodynamics,  and  was  to  be  explained
upon  the  same  principles  as  the  motion  of  water  in  pipes
— facts  like  these  have  been  piled  up,  one  upon  another ,
and  have  gradually  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the
science  of  organic  bodies  is  only  a  comphcation  of  the
science  of  inorganic  bodies.

It  would  not  be  advisable  here  to  describe  in  detail
the  stones  which  compose  this  bridge ;  but  we  have  to
ask  whether  it  is  possible  to  construct  some  similar
bridge  between  the  now  united  Science  of  Physics,
which  deals  with  all  phenomena,  whether  organic  or
inorganic,  in  fact  with  all  the  material  world,  and  the
other  science,  the  Science  of  Consciousness,  which  deals
with  the  Laws  of  Mind  and  with  the  subject  of  Ethics.
This  is  the  question  which  we  have  now  to  discuss.

In  order  to  make  this  bridge  a  firm  one,  so  that  it
will  not  break  down  like  those  which  philosophers  have
made,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  with  great  care  what  is
the  exact  difference  between  the  two  classes  of  facts.  If
we  confuse  the  two  things  together  to  begin  with,  if  we
do  not  recognize  the  great  difference  between  them,  we
shall  not  be  likely  to  find  any  explanation  which  will
reduce  them  to  some  common  term.  The  first  thing,
therefore,  that  we  have  to  do  is  to  realize  as  clearly  as
possible  how  profound  the  gulf  is  between  the  facts
which  we  call  Physical  facts  and  the  facts  which  we
call  Mental  facts.  The  difference  is  one  which  has  been
observed  from  primeval  times,  when  man  or  his  pre-
human ancestor  found  it  not  good  to  be  alone  ;  for  the
very  earliest  precept  that  we  find  set  forth  in  all
societies  to  regulate  the  lives  of  those  who  belong  to
them,  is,  '  Put  yourself  in  his  place  ; '  that  is  to   say,

D  2


36  BODY  AND  MIND.

ascribe  to  other  men  a  consciousness  which  is  Uke  your
Qwji.  And  this  behef,  which  the  lowest  savage  got,  that
there  was  something  else  than  the  physical  organization
in  other  men,  is  the  foundation  of  Natural  Ethics  as
well  as  of  the  modern  Science  of  Consciousness.  But
in  very  early  times  an  hypothesis  was  formed  which
was  supposed  to  make  this  behef  easier.  If  you  eat  too
much  you  will  dream  when  you  are  asleep ;  if  you  eat
too  little  you  will  dream  when  you  are  awake,  or  have
visions ;  and  those  dreams  of  savages  whose  food  was
very  precarious  led  them  to  a  biological  hypothesis.
They  saw  in  those  dreams  their  fellows,  other  men,
when  it  appeared  from  evidence  furnished  to  them
afterwards  that  those  other  men  were  not  there  when
they  were  dreaming.  Consequently  they  supposed
that  the  actions  of  the  organic  body  were  caused  by
some  other  body  which  was  not  physical  in  the  ordinary
sense,  which  was  not  made  of  ordinary  matter,  and  this
ojiher  body  was  called  the  Soul.  'Animism,>  as  Mr.
Tylor  calls  this  belief,  was  at  first,  then,  an  hypothesis
in  the  domain  of  biology.  It  was  a  physical  hypothesis
to  account  for  the  peculiar  way  in  which  living  things
went  about.  But  then  when  people  had  got  this  beUef
in  another  body  which  was  not  a  physical  body,  after  a
long  series  of  years  they  reasoned  in  this  way.  It  is
very  difficult  indeed  to  suppose  that  the  ordinary  matter
which  makes  a  man's  body  can  be  conscious.  This  Me
is  quite  different  from  the  flesh  and  blood  which  make
up  a  man  ;  but  then  as  to  this  other  body,  or  soul,  we
do  not  know  anything  about  it,  so  that  it  may  as  well
be  conscious  as  not.  That  hypothesis  put  upon  the  soul,
whose  basis  was  in   the  phenomena  of  dreams,    the


BODY   AND  MIND.  37

explanation  of  the  consciousness  which  we  cannot  help
believing  to  exist  in  other  men.  I  have  mentioned  this
early  hypothesis  on  the  subject,  because  out  of  it  grew
the  almost  universal  custom  of  holding  at  this  time  of
the  year  the  Festival  of  the  Dead  which  we  preserve  in
our  All  Souls'  Day.

But  now  let  us  see  what  it  is  that  Science  can  tell
us  and  what  we  can  believe  in  place  of  that  early
hypothesis  of  our  savage  ancestors.  In  the  first  place,
let  us  consider  a  little  more  narrowly  what  we  mean  by
the  body,  and  more  especially  what  we  mean  by  the
nervous  system ;  for  it  is  the  great  discovery  of
Descartes  that  the  nervous  system  is  that  part  of  the
body  which  is  related  directly  to  the  mind.  This  can
hardly  be  better  expressed  than  it  is  by  the  first  of  that
series  of  propositions  which  Professor  Huxley  has  stated
in  his  lecture.

I.  '  The  brain  is  the  organ  of  sensation^  thought^  and
emotion ;  that  is  to  say^  some  change  in  the  condition  of
the  matter  of  this  organ  is  the  invariable  antecedent  of  the
state  of  consciousness  to  which  each  of  these  terms  is
applied.'  We  may  complete  this  statement  by  saying
not  only  that  some  change  in  the  matter  of  this  organ
is  the  invariable  antecedent,  but  that  some  other  change
is  the  invariable  concomitant  of  sensation,  thought,  and
emotion  ;  and  that  is  rather  an  important  remark,  as
you  will  see  presently.

Let  us  now  look  at  the  general  structure  of  the
brain  and  see  what  it  is  like.  We  can  easily  make  a
rough  picture  of  it,  which  will  serve  our  present
purpose.^     A   parachute   is   a  round   piece  of  paper,

^  [See  the  diagram  at  p.  43  below.]


as  BODY  AND  MIND.

like  the  top  of  a  parasol,  with  strings  going  from  its
circumference  to  a  cork.  Let  us  imagine  a  parachute
with  two  corks,  a  red  and  a  blue  one ;  each  of  these
corks  being  attached  by  strings,  not  only  to  the  circum-
ference of  our  piece  of  paper,  but  to  innumerable
points  in  the  inside  of  it.  Moreover,  let  innumerable
other  strings  go  across  from  point  to  point  of  the  paper,
like  a  spider's  web  spun  in  the  inside  of  a  parasol.
And  the  corks  themselves  must  be  tied  to  each  other
and  to  a  third  cork,  say  a  white  one,  while  from  all
three  streamers  fly  away  in  all  directions.

This  is  our  diagram.  Now  the  sheet  of  paper  re-
presents the  cerebral  hemispheres^  a  great  sheet  of  grey
nervous  matter  which  forms  the  outside  of  your  brain,
and  lies  just  under  your  skull.  Our  red  and  blue  corks
are  two  other  masses  of  grey  matter  lying  at  the  base  of
the  brain,  and  called  the  optic  thalami  and  the  corpora
striata  respectively.  The  white  cork  is  another  mass  of
grey  matter  called  the  medulla  oblongata^  which  is  the
top  of  the  spinal  cord.  Our  strings  which  tie  part  of
the  parachute  together,  and  our  streamers  which  go  out
in  all  directions  from  the  corks,  represent  the  nerves,
white  threads  that  run  all  over  the  body.  And  they  are
of  two  kinds  :  there  are  some  which  go  to  the  brain  from
any  part  of  the  body,  and  others  which  come  from  the
brain  to  it.  As  regards  the  position  of  the  nerves  this
is  the  same  thing  for  both  of  them,  but  it  is  not  the
same  thing  with  regard  to  what  they  do.  The  nerves
which  are  called  Sensory  nerves,  and  which  go  to  the
brain,  are  those  which  are  excited  whenever  any  part  of
the  body  is  touched.  When  your  finger  is  touched,  a
certain  excitement  is  given  to  the  nerves  which  end  in


BQUY   AND  MIND.  39

your  finger,  and  that  excitement  is  carried  along  your
arm  and  away  up  to  the  medulla,  represented  by  our
white  cork.  But  when  you  are  going  to  move  your  arm
the  excitement  starts  from  the  brain,  and  goes  along  the
other  set  of  nerves  which  are  called  Motor  nerves,  or
moving  nerves,  and  goes  to  the  muscles  which  work  the
part  of  the  arm  which  you  want  to  move.  And  that
excitement  of  the  nerves  by  purely  mechanical  means
makes  those  muscles  contract  so  as  to  move  the  part
which  you  want  to  move.  We  have  then  a  connexion
between  the  brain  and  any  part  of  the  body  which  is  of
a  double  kind  :  there  is  the  means  of  sending  a  message
to  the  brain  from  this  part  of  the  body,  and  the  means
of  taking  a  message  from  the  brain  to  this  part.  The
nerves  which  carry  the  message  to  the  brain  are  called
the  '  Sensory  nerves,'  because  they  accompany  what  we
call  sensation  ;  the  nerves  which  carry  the  message  from
the  brain  are  called  '  Motor  nerves,'  because  they  are
the  agents  in  the  motion  of  that  part  of  the  body.

All  this  is  expressed  in  Professor  Huxley's  second
and  third  propositions.

II.  '  The  movements  of  animals  are  due  to  the  change
of  form  of  the  muscles^  which  shorten  and  become  thicker ;
and  this  change  of  form  in  a  muscle  arises  from  a  motion
of  the  substance  contained  within  the  nerves  which  go  to  the
muscle.^

in.  *  The  sensations  of  animals  are  due  to  a  motion  of
the  substance  of  the  nerves  which  connect  the  sensory  organs
with  the  brain'

I  pass  on  to  his  fourth  proposition  : —

IV.  '  The  motion  of  the  matter  of  a  sensory  nerve  may
be   transmitted  through   the  brain  to  motor  nerves^  and


40  BODY  AND  MIND.

thereby  give  rise  to  a  contraction  of  the  mw^cles  to  which
these  motor  nerves  are  distributed;  and  this  reflection  of
motion  from  a  sensory  into  a  motor  nerve  may  take  place
without  volition^  or  even  contrary  to  it^

Let  us  take  that  organ  of  sense  which  always  occurs
to  us  as  a  type  of  the  others,  because  it  is  the  most
perfect — the  eye.  The  optic  nerve  which  runs  from  the
eye  towards  the  brain  may  be  represented  by  one  of  our
streamers  going  to  the  red  cork,  to  which  it  is  fastened  ^%
by  a  knot  that  is  called  the  '  Optic  ganghon/  Suppos-
ing that  you  move  your  hand  rapidly  towards  anybody's
eye,  a  message  with  news  of  this  movement  goes  along
the  nerve  to  the  optic  ganghon,  and  it  comes  away  back
again  by  another  streamer,  not  direct  from  the  ganghon,
but  from  a  point  on  the  blue  cork  very  near  it,  to  the
muscles  which  move  the  eyehd,  and  that  makes  the  eye
wink.  You  know  that  the  winking  of  the  eye,  when
anybody  moves  his  hand  very  rapidly  towards  it,  is  not
a  thing  which  you  determine  to  do,  and  which  you  con-
sider about ;  it  is  a  thing  which  happens  without  your  in-
terference with  it ;  and  in  fact  it  is  not  you  who  wink
your  eye,  but  your  body  that  does  it.  This  is  called
Automatic  or  involuntary  motion,  or  again  it  is  called
Eeflex  action,  because  it  is  a  purely  mechanical  thing.
A  wave  runs  along  that  nerve,  and  comes  back  on
another  nerve,  and  that  without  any  dehberation ;  and
at  the  point  where  it  stops  and  comes  back  it  is  just  a
reflection  like  the  wave  which  you  send  along  a  string,
and  which  comes  back  from  the  end  of  the  string,  or  like
a  wave  of  water  which  is  sent  up  against  a  sea-wall,  and
which  reflects  itself  back  along  the  sea.

V.  '  The  motion  of  any  given  portion  of  the  matter  of


BODY  AND  MIND.  41

the  brain^  excited  by  the  motion  of  a  sensory  nerve^  leaves
behind  it  a  readiness  to  be  moved  in  the  same  way  in  that
part^  and  anything  which  resuscitates  the  motion  gives  rise
to  the  appropriate  feeling.  This  is  the  physical  mechanism
of  memory.'  We  can,  perhaps,  make  tMs  a  little  more
clear  in  the  following  manner  :  — Suppose  two  messages
are  sent  at  once  to  the  brain  ;  each  of  them  is  reflected
back,  but  the  two  disturbances  which  they  set  up  in  the
brain  create,  in  some  way  or  other,  a  link  between  them,
so  that  when  one  of  these  disturbances  is  set  up  after-
wards the  other  one  is  also  set  up.  It  is  as  if  every  time
two  bells  of  a  house  were  rung  together,  that  of  itself
made  a  string  to  tie  them  together,  so  that  when  you
rang  one  bell  it  was  necessary  to  ring  the  other  bell  in
consequence.  That,  remember,  is  purely  a  physical
circumstance  of  which  we  know  that  it  happens.  There
is  a  physical  excitation  or  disturbance  which  is  sent  along
two  difierent  nerves,  and  which  produces  two  different
disturbances  in  the  brain,  and  the  effect  of  these  two
disturbances  taking  place  together  is  to  make  a  change
in  the  character  of  the  brain  itself,  so  that  when  the  one
of  them  takes  place  it  produces  the  other.

Now  there  are  two  different  ways  in  which  a  stimulus
coming  to  the  eye  can  be  made  to  move  the  hand.  In
the  first  place,  suppose  you  are  copying  out  a  book ;
you  have  the  book  before  you,  and  you  read  the  book
whilst  you  are  copying  with  your  hand,  and  conse-
quently the  light  coming  into  your  eye  from  the  book
directs  your  hand  to  move  in  a  certain  way.  It  is
possible  for  this  light  impinging  upon  the  eye  to  send  a
message  along  the  optic  nerve  into  the  ganghon,  and
that  message  may  go  almost,  though  not  quite,  direct


42  BODY  AND  MIND.

to  the  hand,  so  as  to  make  the  hand  move,  and  that
causes  the  hand  to  describe  the  letter  which  you  have
seen  in  the  book  ;  or  else  the  message  may  go  by  a
longer  route  which  takes  more  time.     A  simple  experi-
ment to  distinguish  between  these  processes  was  tried
by  Bonders,  the  great  Dutch  physiologist.     He  made  a
sign  to  a  man  at  a  distance,  and  when  he  made  this  sign
the  man  was  to  put  down  a  key  with  his  hand.     He
measured  the  time  which  was  taken  in  this  process,  that
is  to  say,  the  time  which  was  taken  by  the  message  in
going  from  the  eye  to  the  ganghon,  and  then  to  the
hand.     Measurements  of  the  rate  of  nerve-motions  have
also  been  made  by  Helmholtz.     The  velocity  varies  to
a  certain  extent  in  diiferent  people,  but  it  is  something
hke  one  hundred   feet   a   second.     But  Bonders   also
made  another  measurement.     Suppose  it  is  not  decided
beforehand  whether  the  man  is  to  move  the  key  with
his  right  or  left  hand,  and  this  is  to  be  determined  by
the  nature  of  the  signal,  then  before  he  can  move  his
hand  he  has  to  decide  which  hand  he  will  use.     The
time   taken    for   that    process    of   decision    was    also
measured.     That  process  of  decision,  when  looked  at
from  the  physical  side,  means  this.     The  message  goes
up   from  the  eye  to  the  ganglion.     It  is  immediately
connected  there  with  the  mass  of  grey  matter  repre-
sented by   our   red   cork.     From   that   mass   of  grey
matter  there  go  white  threads  away  to  the  whole  of  the
surface  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  or  the  paper  of
our  parachute,  and  they  take  that  message,  therefore,
which  comes  from  the  eye  to  the  ganghon  away  to  all
this  grey  matter  which  is  put  round  the  inside  of  your
skull.     There  are  also  white  threads  which  connect  all


BODY  AND  MIND.  4a

the  parts  of  this  grey  matter  together,  and  they  run
across  from  every  part  of  it  to  almost  every  other  part
of  it.     As  soon  as  a  message  has  been  taken  to  this  grey
matter,  there  is  a  vast  interchange  of  messages  going
on  between   those  parts ;  but  finally,  as  the  result  of
that,   a  number  of  messages  come  upon  other  white
threads  to  another  piece  of  grey  matter,  which  is  re-
presented by  our  blue  cork  ;  from  that  the  message  is
then  taken  to  the  muscles  of  the  hand.     There  are  then
two  different  ways  in  which  a  message  may  go  from  the
eye  to  the  hand.     It  may  go  to  the  optic  ganglion,  and
then  almost  straight  to  the  hand,  and  in  that  case  you
do  not  know  much  about  it — you  only  know  that  some-
thing has  taken  place,  you  do  not  think  that  you  have
done  it  yourself ;  or  it  may  go  to  the  optic  ganglion,
and  be  sent  up  to  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  and  then
be  sent  back  to  the  sensory  tract  and  then  on  to  the
hand.     But  that  takes  more  time,  and  it  implies  that
you  have  deliberated  upon  the  act.

The  diagram  here  drawn  may  make  this  point  more
clear.     Here  E  is  the  eye,  E  and  B  are  the  red  and  blue


corks,  and  H  is  the  hand.     The  curve  C  0  represents
the  cerebral  hemispheres,  or  the  top  of  our  parachute.


44  BODY  AND  MIND.

If  the  action  is  so  habitually  associated  with  the  signal
that  it  takes  place  involuntarily,  without  any  elTort  of
the  will,  the  message  goes  from  the  eye  to  the  hand
along  the  line  E  E  B  H.  This  may  happen  with  a
practised  performer  when  it  is  settled  beforehand  which
hand  he  is  to  use.  But  if  it  is  necessary  to  deliberate
about  the  action,  to  call  in  the  exercise  of  the  will,  the
message  goes  round  the  loop-line,  E  K  CO  B  H ;  from
the  eye  to  the  optic  thalami,  from  them  to  the  cere-
brum, thence  to  the  corpora  striata,  and  so  through  the
medulla  to  the  hand.

Besides  this  fact  which  we  have  just  explained,  the
fact  of  a  message  going  from  one  part  of  the  body  to
the  brain  and  coming  out  in  the  motion  of  some  other
part  of  the  body,  there  is  another  thing  which  is  going
on  continually,  and  that  is  this  : — ^There  is  a  faint  repro-
duction of  some  excitement  which  has  previously  existed
in  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  and  which  calls  up,  by  the
process  which  we  have  just  now  described,  all  those
that  have  become  associated  with  it ;  and  it  is  continu-
ally sending  down  faint  messages  which  do  not  actually
tell  the  muscles  to  move,  but  which  as  it  were  begin  to
tell  them  to  move.  They  are  not  always  strong  enough
to  produce  actual  motions,  but  they  produce  just  the
beginnings  of  those  motions :  and  that  process  goes  on
even  when  there  is  apparently  no  sensation  and  no
motion.  If  a  man  is  in  a  brown  study,  with  his  eyes
shut,  although  he  apparently  sees  and  feels  nothing  at
all,  there  is  a  certain  action  going  on  inside  his  brain
which  is  not  sensation,  but  is  hke  it,  because  it  is  the
transmission  to  the  cerebral  hemispheres  of  faint  mes-
sages which  are  copies  of  previous  sensations ;  and    it


BODY  AND  MIND.  45

does  not  produce  motion,  but  it  produces  something
like  it ;  it  produces  incipient  motion,  the  beginnings  of
motion  which  do  not  actually  take  effect.  Sometimes  a
train  of  thought  may  so  increase  in  strength  as  to  pro-
duce motion.  A  man  may  get  so  excited  by  a  train  of
thought  that  he  jumps  up  and  does  something  in  con-
sequence. And  the  sensory  impressions  which  are  taken
from  the  ganglia  to  the  hemispheres  may  be  so  strong
as  to  produce  an  illusion ;  he  may  think  that  he  sees
something,  he  may  think  that  he  sees  a  ghost,  when  he
does  not.  This  continuous  action  of  the  brain  depends
upon  the  presence  of  blood  ;  so  long  as  the  proper
amount  of  blood  is  sent  to  the  brain  it  is  active,  and
when  the  blood  is  taken  away  it  becomes  inactive.  And
it  is  a  curious  property  of  the  nervous  system  that  it  can
direct  the  supply  of  blood  which  is  to  be  sent  to  a  parti-
cular part  of  it.  It  is  possible,  by  directing  your  attention
to  a  particular  part  of  your  hand,  to  make  a  determina-
tion of  blood  to  that  part  which  shall  in  time  become  a
sore  place.  Some  people  have  given  this  explanation,
which  seems  a  very  probable  one,  of  what  has  happened
to  those  saints  who  have  meditated  so  long  upon  the  cru-
cifixion that  they  have  got  what  are  called  stigmata,  that
is,  marks  of  wounds  corresponding  to  the  wounds  they
were  thinking  about.

That,  then,  is  the  general  character  of  the  nervous
system  which  we  have  to  consider  in  connexion  with
the  mind.  There  is  a  train  of  facts  between  stimulus
and  motion  which  may  be  of  two  kinds :  it  may  be
direct  or  it  may  be  indirect,  it  may  go  round  the  loop-
line  or  not ;  and  also  there  is  a  continuous  action  of
the  brain  even  when  these  steps  are  not  taking  place  in


46  BODY  AND  MIND.

completeness.  Moreover,  when  two  actions  take  place
simultaneously,  they  form  a  sort  of  link  between  them,
so  that  if  one  of  them  is  afterwards  repeated  the  other
gets  repeated  with  it.  That  is  what  we  have  to  remem-
ber chiefly  as  to  the  character  of  the  brain.

Now  let  us  consider  the  other  class  of  facts  and  the
connexions  between  them — the  facts  of  consciousness.
An  eminent  divine  once  said  to  me  that  he  thought
there  were  only  two  kinds  of  consciousness-— to  have  a
feeling,  and  to  know  that  you  haye_a  feehng.  It
seemi  to  me  that  there  is  only  one  kind  of  conscious-
ness, and  that  is  to  have  fifty  thousand  feelings  at  once,
and  to  know  them  all  in  different  degrees.  Whenever
I  try  to  analyse  any  particular  state  of  consciousness  in
which  I  am,  I  find  that  it  is  an  extremely  complex  one.
I  cannot  help  at  this  moment  having  a  consciousness  of
all  the  difierent  parts  of  this  hall,  and  of  a  great  sea  of
faces  before  me ;  and  I  cannot  help  having  the  con-
sciouness,  at  the  same  time,  of  all  the  suggestions  that
that  picture  makes,  that  each  face  represents  a  person
sitting  there  and  listening  or  not,  as  the  case  may  be.
And  I  cannot  help  combining  with  them  at  the  same
moment  a  number  of  actions  which  they  suggest  to  me,
and  in  particular  the  action  of  going  on  speaking.  There
are  a  great  number  of  elements  of  complexity  which  I
cannot  describe,  because  I  am  so  faintly  conscious  of
them  that  I  cannot  remember  them.  Any  state  of  our
consciousness,  then,  as  we  are  at  present  constituted,  is
an  exceedingly  complex  thing  ;  but  it  certainly  possesses
this  property,  that  if  two  feelings  have  occurred  together,
and  one  of  them  afterwards  occurs  again,  it  is  very
likely  that  the  other  will  be  called  up  by  it.     That  is  to


BODY  AND  MIND.  47

say,  two  states  of  consciousness  whicli  have  taken  place
at  the  same  moment  produce  a  link  between  them,  so
that  a  repetition  of  the  one  calls  up  a  repetition  of  the
other.

Again  I  find  a  certain  train  of  facts  between  my  sen-
sations and  my  exertions.  When  I  see  a  thing,  I  may
go  through  a  long  process  of  deliberation  as  to  what  I
shall  do  with  it,  and  then  afterwards  I  may  do  that
which  I  have  deliberated  and  decided  upon.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  I  may,  by  seeing  a  thing,  be  quite  sud-
denly forced  into  doing  something  without  any  chance
of  deliberation  at  all.  If  I  suddenly  see  a  cab  coming
upon  me  from  the  corner  of  a  street  where  I  did  not  at
all  expect  it,  I  jump  out  of  the  way  without  thinking
that  it  is  a  very  desirable  thing  to  get  out  of  the  way
of  the  cab.  But  if  I  see  a  cab  a  little  while  before,  and
have  more  time  to  think  about  it,  then  it  occurs  to  me
that  it  will  be  unpleasant  and  undesirable  to  be  run  over
by.  that  cab,  and  that  I  can  avoid  it  by  walking  out  of
the  way.  You  here  see  that  there  are  in  the  case  of  the
mind  two  distinct  trains  of  facts  between  sensation  and
exertion.  There  is  an  involuntary  train  of  facts  when
the  exertion  follows  the  sensation  without  asking  my
leave,  and  there  is  a  voluntary  train  in  which  it  does
ask  my  leave.

Then,  again,  there  is  this  fact :  that  even  when
there  is  no  actual  sensation  and  no  actual  exertion,
there  may  still  be  a  long  train  of  facts  and  sensations
which  hang  together  ;  there  may  be  faint  reproductions
of  sensation  which  are  not  so  vivid  as  are  the  sensations
themselves,  but  which  form  a  series  of  pictures  of  sen-
sations which  pass  continually  before  my  mind  ;  and


48  BODY  AND  MIND.

there  will  be  faint  beginnings  of  action.  Now  the
sense  in  which  those  are  faint  beginnings  of  action  is
very  instructive.  Any  beginning  of  an  action  is  what
we  call  a  judgment.  When  you  see  a  thing,  you  in
the  first  instance  form  no  judgment  about  it  at  all — you
are  not  prepared  to  assert  any  proposition — you  merely
have  the  feeling  of  a  certain  sight  or  sound  presented  to
you ;  but  after  a  very  short  space  of  time,  so  short  that
you  cannot  perceive  it,  you  begin  to  frame  propositions.
If  you  consider  what  a  proposition  means,  you  will  see
it  must  correspond  to  the  beginning  of  some  sort  of
exertion.  When  you  say  that  A  is  B,  you  mean  that
you  are  going  to  act  as  if  A  were  B.  If  I  see  water
with  a  particularly  dull  surface,  and  with  stones  resting
upon  the  surface  of  it,  then,  first  of  all,  I  have  merely
an  impression  of  a  certain  sheet  of  colour,  and  of  certain
objects  which  interrupt  the  colour  of  that  sheet.  But
the  second  thing  that  I  do  is  to  come  to  the  conclusion
that  the  water  is  frozen,  and  that  therefore  I  may  walk
upon  it.  The  assertion  that  the  water  is  frozen  imphes
a  bundle  of  resolves  ;  which  means,  given  certain  other
conditions,  I  shall  go  and  walk  upon  it.  So,  then,  an
act  of  judgment  or  an  assertion  of  any  kind  implies
a  certain  incipient  action  of  the  muscles,  not  actually
carried  out  at  that  time  and  place,  but  preparing  a
certain  condition  of  the  mind  such  as  afterwards,  when
the  occasion  comes,  will  guide  the  action  that  we  shall
take  up.

Now,  then,  what  is  it  that  we  mean  by  the
character  of  a  person?  You  judge  of  a  person's
character  by  what  he  thinks  and  does  under  certain
circumstances.     Let  us  see  what  determines  this.     We


BODY  AND  MIND.  49

can  only  be  speaking  here  of  voluntary  actions — those
actions  in  which  the  person  is  consulted,  and  which  are
not  done  by  his  body  without  his  leave.  In  those
voluntary  actions  what  takes  place  is  that  a  certain
sensation  is  communicated  to  the  mind,  the  sensation  is
manipulated  by  the  mind,  and  conclusions  are  drawn
from  it,  and  then  a  message  is  sent  out  which  causes
certain  motions  to  take  place.  The  character  of  the
person  is  evidently  determined  by  the  nature  of  this
manipulation.  If  the  sensation  suggests  a  wrong  thing,
the  character  of  the  person  will  be  bad ;  if  the
sensation  suggests  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  a  right
thing,  you  will  say  that  the  character  of  the  person  is
good.  So,  then,  it  is  the  character  of  the  mind  which
determines  what  it  will  do  with  a  given  sensation,
and  what  act  will  follow  from  it, — which  determines
what  we  call  the  personality  of  any  person ;  and  that
character  is  persistent  in  the  main,  although  it  is
continually  changing  a  little.  The  vast  mass  of  it  is
a  thing  which  lasts  through  the  whole  of  every  in-
dividual's life,  although  everything  which  happens  to
him  makes  some  small  change  in  it,  and  that  constitutes
the  education  of  the  man.

Then  the  question  arises,  is  there  anything  else  in
your  consciousness  of  a  different  nature  from  what  we
have  here  described  ?  That  is  a  question  which  every
man  has  to  decide  by  examining  his  own  consciousness.
I  do  not  find  anything  else  in  mine.  If  you  find  any-
thing else  in  yours,  it  is  extremely  important  that  you
should  analyse  it  and  find  out  all  that  you  possibly  can
about  it,  and  state  it  in  the  clearest  form  to  other  people  ;
because  it  is  one  of  the  most  important  problems  of

VOL.  II.  E


50  BODY  AND  MIND.

philosophy  to  account  for  the  whole  of  consciousness
out  of  individual  feelings.  It  seems  to  me  that  the
account  of  which  I  have  only  given  a  very  rough  sketch,
which  was  begun  by  Locke  and  Hume,  and  has  been
carried  out  by  their  successors,  chiefly  in  this  country,
is  in  its  great  general  features  complete,  and  leaves
nothing  but  more  detailed  explanations  to  be  desired.
It  seems  to  me  that  I  find  nothing  in  myself  which  is
not  accounted  for  when  I  describe  myself  as  a  stream  of
feehngs  such  that  each  of  them  is  capable  of  a  faint
repetition,  and  that  when  two  of  them  have  occurred
together  the  repetition  of  the  one  calls  up  the  other,
and  that  there  are  rules  according  to  which  the
resuscitated  feeling  calls  up  its  fellows.  These  are,  in
the  main,  fixed  rules  which  determine  and  are  deter-
mined by  my  character  ;  but  my  character  is  gradually
changing  in  consequence  of  the  education  of  life.  It
seems  to  me  that  this  is  a  complete  account  of  all  the
kinds  of  facts  which  I  can  find  in  myself;  and,  as  I  said
before,  if  anybody  finds  any  other  kinds  of  facts  in  him-
self, it  is  an  exceedingly  important  thing  that  he  should
describe  them  as  clearly  as  he  possibly  can.

We  have  described  two  classes  of  facts ;  let  us  now
notice  the  parallehsm  between  them.  First,  we  have
these  two  parallel  facts,  that  two  actions  of  the  brain
which  occur  together  form  a  link  between  tliemselves,
so  that  the  one  being  called  up  the  other  is  called  up ;
and  two  states  of  consciousness  which  occur  together
form  a  link  between  them,  so  that  when  one  is  called  up
the  other  is  called  up.  But  also  we  find  a  train  of  facts
between  the  physical  fact  of  the  stimulus  of  light  going
into  the  eye  and  the  physical  fact  of  the  motion  of  the


BODY   AND  MIND.  51

muscles.  Corresponding  to  a  part  of  that  train,  we  have
found  a  train  of  facts  between  sensation,  the  mental
fact  which  corresponds  to  a  message  arriving  from  the
eye,  and  exertion,  the  mental  fact  which  corresponds  to
the  motion  of  the  hand  by  a  message  going  out  along
the  nerves.  And  we  have  found  a  correspondence
between  the  continuous  action  of  the  brain  and  the  con-
tinuous existence  of  consciousness  apparently  indepen-
dent of  sensation  and  exertion.

But  let  us  look  at  this  correspondence  a  little  more
closely ;  we  shall  find  that  there  are  one  or  two  things
which  can  be  established  with  practical  certainty.  In
the  first  place,  it  is  not  the  whole  of  the  physical  train
of  facts  which  corresponds  to  the  mental  train  of  facts.
The  beginning  of  the  physical  train  consists  of  light
going  into  the  eye  and  exciting  the  retina,  and  then  of
that  wave  of  excitation  being  carried  along  the  optic
nerve  to  the  ganglion.  For  all  we  know,  and  it  is  a  very
probable  thing,  the  mental  fact  begins  here,  at  the  gan-
glion. There  is  no  sensation  till  the  message  has  got  to
the  optic  ganglion,  for  this  reason,  that  if  you  press  the
optic  nerve  behind  the  eye  you  can  produce  the  sensa-
tion of  light.  It  is  like  tapping  a  telegraph,  and  sending
a  message  which  has  not  come  from  the  station  from
which  it  ought  to  have  come ;  nobody  at  the  other  end
can  tell  whether  it  has  come  from  that  station  or  not.
The  optic  ganglion  cannot  tell  whether  this  message
which  comes  along  the  nerve  has  come  from  the  eye  or
is  the  result  of  a  tapping  of  the  telegraph,  whether  it  is
produced  by  light  or  by  pressure  upon  the  nerve.  It  is
a  fact  of  immense  importance  that  all  these  nerves  are
exactly  of  the  same  kind.  The  only  thing  which  the  nerve

E  2


52  BODY  AND   MIND.

does  is  to  transmit  a  message  whicli  has  been  given  to  it ;  it
does  not  transmit  a  message  in  any  other  way  than  the
telegraph  wire  transmits  a  message — that  is  to  say,  it  is
excited  at  certain  intervals,  and  the  succession  of  these
intervals  determines  what  this  message  is,  not  the  nature
of  the  excitation  which  passes  along  the  wire.  So  that
if  we  watched  the  nerve  excited  by  pressure  the  mes-
sage going  along  to  the  ganghon  would  be  exactly  the
same  as  if  it  were  the  actual  sight  of  the  eye.  We  may
draw  from  this  the  conclusion  that  the  mental  fact  does
not  begin  anywhere  before  the  optic  ganghon.  Again,
a  man  who  has  Lad  one  of  his  legs  cut  off  can  try  to
move  his  toes,  which  he  feels  as  if  they  were  still  there  ;
and  tiiat  shows  that  the  consciousness  of  the  motor  im-
pulse which  is  sent  out  along  the  nerve  does  not  go  to
the  end  to  see  whether  it  is  obeyed  or  not.  The  only
way  in  which  we  know  whether  our  orders,  given  to  any
parts  of  our  body,  are  obeyed,  is  by  having  a  message
sent  back  to  say  that  they  are  obeyed.  If  I  tell  my
hand  to  press  against  this  black-board  the  only  way  in
Avhich  I  know  that  it  does  press  is  by  having  a  message
sent  back  by  my  skin  to  say  that  it  is  pressed.  But
supposing  there  is  no  skin  there,  I  can  have  the  exertion
that  precedes  the  action  without  actually  performing  it,
because  I  can  send  out  a  message,  and  consciousness
stops  with  the  sending  of  the  message,  and  does  not
know  anything  further.  So  that  the  mental  fact  is
somewhere  or  other  in  the  region  E  C  C  B  of  the  dia-
gram, and  does  not  include  the  two  ends.  That  is  to
say,  it  is  not  the  whole  of  the  bodily  fact  that  the  mental
fact  corresponds  to,  but  only  an  intermediate  part  of  it.
If  it  just  passes  through  the  points  E  B,  without  going


BODY  AND  MIND.  53

round  the  loop  from  C  to  C,  then  we  merely  have  the
sensation  that  something  has  taken  place — ^we  have  had
no  voice  in  the  nature  of  it  and  no  choice  about  it.  If
it  has  gone  round  from  C  to  C,  we  have  a  much  larger
fact — we  have  that  fact  which  we  call  choice,  or  the
exercise  of  volition.  We  may  conclude,  then — I  am
not  able  in  so  short  a  space  as  I  have  to  give  you  the
whole  evidence  which  goes  to  an  assertion  of  this  kind ;
but  there  is  evidence  which  is  sufficient  to  satisfy
any  competent  scientific  man  of  this  day — that  every
fact  of  consciousness  is  parallel  to  some  disturbance
of  nerve  matter,  although  there  are  some  nervous  dis-
turbances which  have  no  parallel  in  consciousness,
properly  so  called ;  that  is  to  say,  disturbances  of
my  nerves  may  exist  which  have  no  parallel  in  my
consciousness.

We  have  now  observed  two  classes  of  facts  and  the
parallelism  between  them.  Let  us  next  observe  what
an  enormous  gulf  there  is  between  these  two  classes  of
facts.

The  state  of  a  man's  brain  and  the  actions  which  go
along  with  it  are  things  which  every  other  man  can  per-
ceive, observe,  measure,  and  tabulate  ;  but  the  state  of  a
man's  own  consciousness  is  known  to  him  only,  and  not
to  any  other  person.  Things  which  appear  to  us  and
which  we  can  observe  are  called  objects  or  phenomena.
Facts  in  a  man's  consciousness  are  not  objects  or  pheno-
mena to  any  other  man  ;  they  are  capable  of  being  ob-
served only  by  him.  We  have  no  possible  ground,  there-
fore^for  speaking  of  another  man's  consciousness  as  in  any
sense  a  part  of  the  physical  world  of  objects  or  pheno-
mena.   It  is  a  thing  entirely  separate  from  it ;  and  aU  the


54  BODY  AND   MIND.

evidence  that  we  have  goes  to  show  that  the  physical
world  gets  along  entirely  by  itself,  according  to  practi-
cally universal  rules.  That  is  to  say,  the  laws  which
hold  good  in  the  physical  world  hold  good  everywhere
in  it — they  hold  good  with  practical  universality,  and
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  anything  else  but  those
laws  in  order  to  account  for  any  physical  fact ;  there  is
no  reason  to  suppose  anything  but  the  universal  laws  of
mechanics  in  order  to  account  for  the  motion  of  organic
bodies.  The  train  of  physical  facts  between  the  stimu-
lus sent  into  the  eye,  or  to  any  one  of  our  senses,  and
the  exertion  which  follows  it,  and  the  train  of  physical
facts  which  goes  on  in  the  brain,  even  when  there  is  no
stimulus  and  no  exertion,-— these  are  perfectly  complete
physical  trains,  and  every  step  is  fully  accounted  for  by
mechanical  conditions.  In  order  to  show  what  is  meant
by  that,  I  will  endeavour  to  explain  another  supposition
which  might  be  made.  When  a  stimulus  comes  into
the  eye  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  energy  transferred
from  the  ether,  which  fills  space,  to  this  nerve  ;  and  this
energy  travels  along  into  the  ganglion,  and  sets  the  gan-
glion into  a  state  of  disturbance  which  may  use  up  some
energy  previously  stored  in  it.  The  amount  of  energy
is  the  same  as  before  by  the  law  of  the  conservation
of  energy.  That  energy  is  spread  over  a  number  of
threads  which  go  out  to  the  brain,  and  it  comes  back
again  and  is  reflected  from  there.  It  may  be  supposed
that  a  very  small  portion  of  energy  is  created  in  that
process,  and  that  while  the  stimulus  is  going  round  this
loop-hne  it  gets  a  little  push  somewhere,  and  then,  when
it  comes  back  to  the  ganglia,  it  goes  away  to  the  muscle
and  sets  loose  a  store  of  energy  in  the  muscle  so  that  it


BODY  AND   MIND.  55

moves  the  limb.  Now  the  question  is,  Is  there  any  crea-
tion of  energy  anywhere?  Is  there  any  part  of  the
physical  progress  Avhich  cannot  be  included  within
ordinary  physical  laws  ?  It  has  been  supposed,  I  say,
by  some  people,  as  it  seems  to  me  merely  by  a  confu-
sion of  ideas,  that  there  is,  at  some  part  or  other  of  this
process,  a  creation  of  energy ;  but  there  is  no  reason
whatever  why  we  should  suppose  this.  The  difficulty  in
proving  a  negative  in  these  cases  is  similar  to  that  in  prov-
ing a  negative  about  anything  which  exists  on  the  other
side  of  the  moon.  It  is  quite  true  that  I  am  not  abso-
lutely certain  that  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy
is  exactly  true ;  but  there  is  no  more  reason  why  I
should  suppose  a  particular  exception  to  occur  in  the
brain  than  anywhere  else.  I  might  just  as  well  assert
that  whenever  anything  passes  over  the  Line,  when  it
goes  from  the  north  side  of  the  Equator  to  the  south,  there
is  a  certain  creation  of  energy,  as  that  there  is  a  creation
of  energy  in  the  brain.  If  I  chose  to  say  that  the
amount  was  so  small  that  none  of  our  present  measure-
ments could  appreciate  it,  it  would  be  difficult  or  indeed
impossible  for  anybody  to  disprove  that  assertion ;  but
I  should  have  no  reason  whatever  for  making  it.  There
being,  then,  an  absence  of  positive  evidence  that  the
conditions  are  exceptional,  the  reasons  which  lead  us  to
assert  that  there  is  no  loss  of  energy  in  organic  any  more
than  in  inorganic  bodies  are  absolutely  overwhelming.
There  is  no  more  reason  to  assert  that  there  is  a  creation
of  energy  in  any  part  of  an  organic  body,  because  we
are  not  absolutely  sure  of  the  exact  nature  of  the  law,
than  there  is  reason,  because  we  do  not  know  what
there  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  moon,  to  assert  that


56  BODY  AND   MIND.

there  is  a  sky-blue  peacock  tliere  with  forty-five  eyes
in  his  tail.

Therefore  it  isjmL^  right  thing  to  say,  for  example,
that  the  mind  is  a  force,  because  if  the  mind  were  a  force
we  should  be  able  to  perceive  it.  I  should  be  able  to  per-
ceive your  mind  and  to  measure  it,  but  I  cannot ;  I  have
absolutely  no  means  of  perceiving  your  mind.  I  judge
by  analogy  that  it  exists,  and  the  instinct  which  leads
me  to  come  to  that  conclusion  is  the  social  instinct,  as
it  has  been  formed  in  me  by  generations  during  which
men  have  lived  together ;  and  they  could  not  have  lived
together  unless  they  had  gone  upon  that  supposition.
But  I  may  very  well  say  that  among  the  physical  facts
which  go  along  at  the  same  time  with  mental  facts  there
are  forces  at  work.  That  is  perfectly  true,  but  the  two
things  are  on  two  utterly  different  platforms — the  phy-
sical facts  go  along  by  themselves,  and  the  mental  facts
go  along  by  themselves.  There  is  a  parallelism  between
them,  but  there  is  no  interference  of  one  with  the  other.
Again,  if  anybody  says  that  the  will  influences  matter,
the  statement  is  not  untrue,  but  it  is  nonsense.  The
will  is  not  a  material  thing,  it  is  not  a  mode  of  material
motion.  Such  an  assertion  belongs  to  the  crude  mate-
rialism of  the  savage.  The  only  thing  which  influences
matter  is  the  position  of  surrounding  matter  or  the
motion  of  surrounding  matter.  It  may  be  conceived
that  at  the  same  time  with  every  exercise  of  volition
there  is  a  disturbance  of  the  physical  laws ;  but  this
disturbance,  being  perceptible  to  me,  would  be  a  physical
fact  accompanying  the  volition,  and  could  not  be  the
vohtion  itself,  which  is  not  perceptible  to  me.  Whether
there  is  such  a  disturbance  of  the  physical  laws  or  no


BODY  AND   MIND.  57

is  a  question  of  fact  to  which  we  have  the  best  of
reasons  for  giving  a  negative  answer  ;  but  the  assertion
that  another  man's  vohtion,  a  feeUng  in  his  conscious-
ness which  I  cannot  perceive,  is  part  of  the  train  of
physical  facts  which  I  may  perceive, — this  is  neither  true
nor  untrue,  but  nonsense ;  it  is  a  combination  of  words
whose  corresponding  ideas  will  not  go  together.

Thus  we  are  to  regard  the  body  as  a  physical  ma-
chine, which  goes  by  itself  according  to  a  physical  law,
that  is  to  say,  is  automatic.  An  automaton  is  a  thing
which  goes  by  itself  when  it  is  wound  up,  and  we  go  by
ourselves  when  we  have  had  food.  Excepting  the  fact
that  other  men  are  conscious,  there  is  no  reason  why  we
should  not  regard  the  human  body  as  merely  an  exceed-
ingly complicated  machine  which  is  wound  up  by  put-
ting food  into  the  mouth.  But  it  is  not  merely  a  machine,
because  consciousness  goes  with  it.  The  mind,  then,  is
to  be  regarded  as  a  stream  of  feelings  which  runs  pa-
rallel to,  and  simultaneous  with,  a  certain  part  of  the
action  of  the  body,  that  is  to  say,  that  particular  part
of  the  action  of  the  brain  in  which  the  cerebrum  and
the  sensory  tract  are  excited.

Then,  you  say,  if  we  are  automata  what  becomes  of
the  freedom  of  the  will  ?  The  freedom  of  the  will,  ac-
cording to  Kant,  is  that  property  which  enables  us  to
originate  events  independently  of  foreign  determining
causes  ;  which,  it  seems  to  me,  amounts  to  saying  pre-
cisely that  we  are  automata,  that  is,  that  we  go  by  our-
selves, and  do  not  want  anybody  to  push  or  pull  us.
The  distinction  between  an  automaton  and  a  puppet  is
that  the  one  goes  by  itself  when  it  is  wound  up  and  the
other  requires  to  be  pushed  or  pulled  by  wires  or  strings.


68  BODY  AND   MIND.

We  do  not  want  any  stimulus  from  without,  but  we  go
by  ourselves  when  we  have  had  our  food,  and  therefore
so  far  as  that  distinction  goes  we  are  automata.  But  we
are  more  than  automata,  because  we  are  conscious  ;
mental  facts  go  along  with  the  bodily  facts.  That  does
not  hinder  us  from  describing  the  bodily  facts  by  them-
selves, and  if  we  restrict  our  attention  to  them  we  must
describe  ourselves  as  automata.

The  objection  which  many  people  feel  to  this  doc-
trine is  derived,  I  think,  from  the  conception  of  such
automata  as  are  made  by  man.  Tn  that  case  there  is
somebody  outside  the  automaton  who  has  constructed
it  in  a  certain  definite  way,  with  definite  intentions,  and
has  meant  it  to  go  in  that  way  ;  and  the  whole  action
of  the  automaton  is  determined  by  that  pelrson  out-
side. If  we  consider,  for  example,  a  machine  such  as
Frankenstein  made,  and  imagine  ourselves  to  have  been
put  together  as  that  fearful  machine  was  put  together
by  a  German  student,  the  conception  naturally  strikes  us
with  horror  ;  but  if  we  consider  the  actual  fact,  we  shall
see  that  our  own  case  is  not  an  analogous  one.  For,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  we  were  not  made  by  any  Frankenstein,
but  we  made  ourselves.  I  do  not  mean  that  every  in-
dividual has  made  the  whole  of  his  own  character,  but
that  the  human  race  as  a  whole  has  made  itself  during
the  process  of  ages.  The  action  of  the  whole  race  at
any  given  time  determines  what  the  character  of  the
race  shall  be  in  the  future.  From  the  continual  storing
up  of  the  effects  of  such  actions,  graven  into  the  char-
acter of  the  race,  there  arises  in  process  of  time  that
exact  human  constitution  which  we  now  have.  By
the  process  of  natural  selection  all  the  actions  of  our


BODY  AND   MIND.  50

»

ancestors  are  built  into  us  and  form  our  character,  and
in  that  sense  it  may  be  said  that  the  human  race  has
made  itself.  In  that  sense  also  we  are  individually
responsible  for  what  the  human  race  will  be  in  the
future,  because  every  one  of  our  actions  goes  to
determine  what  the  character  of  the  race  shall  be  to-
morrow. If,  on  the  contrary,  we  suppose  that  in  the
action  of  the  brain  there  is  some  point  where  physical
causes  do  not  apply,  and  where  there  is  a  discontinuity,
then  it  will  follow  that  some  of  our  actions  are  not
dependent  upon  our  character.  Provided  the  action
which  goes  on  in  my  brain  is  a  continuous  one,  subject
to  physical  rules,  then  it  will  depend  upon  what  the
character  of  my  brain  is  ;  or  if  I  look  at  it  from  the
mental  side,  it  will  depend  upon  what  my  mental
character  is ;  but  if  there  is  a  certain  point  where  the
law  of  causation  does  not  apply,  where  my  action  does
not  follow  by  regular  physical  causes  from  what  I  am,
then  I  am  not  responsible  for  it,  because  it  is  not  I  that
do  it.  So  you  see  the  notion  that  we  are  not  automata
destroys  responsibility  ;  because,  if  my  actions  are  not
determined  by  my  character  in  accordance  with  the
particular  circumstances  which  occur,  then  I  am  not
responsible  for  them,  and  it  is  not  I  that  do  them.

Moreover,  if  we  once  admit  that  physical  causes  are  (
not  continuous,  but  that  there  is  some  break,  then  we
leave  the  way 'open  for  the  doctrine  of  a  destiny  or  a  i
Providence  outside  of  us,  overruhng  human  efforts  and|
guiding   history   to   a   foregone   conclusion.     Now   off
course  it  is  the  business  of  the  seeker  after  truth  to  find
out  whether  a  proposition  is  true  or  no,  and  not  what
are  the  moral  consequences  which  may  be  expected  to


60  BODY  AND   MIND.

follow  from  it.  But  I  do  think  that  if  it  is  right  to  call
any  doctrine  immoral,  it  is  right  so  to  call  this  doctrine,
when  we  remember  how  often  it  has  paralysed  the
efforts  of  those  who  were  cUmbing  honestly  up  the  hill-
side towards  the  light  and  the  right,  and  how  often  it
has  nerved  the  sacrilegious  arm  of  the  fanatic  or  the
adventurer  who  was  conspiring  against  society.

I  want  now,  very  briefly  indeed,  to  consider  to  what
extent  these  doctrines  furnish  a  bridge  between  the  two
classes  of  facts.  I  have  said  that  the  series  of  mental
facts  corresponds  to  only  a  portion  of  the  action  of  the
organism.  But  we  have  to  consider  not  only  ourselves,
but  also  those  animals  which  are  next  below  UlS  in  the
scale  of  organization,  and  we  cannot  help  ascribing  to
them  a  consciousness  which  is  analogous  to  our  own.
We  find,  when  we  attempt  to  enter  into  that,  and  to
judge  by  their  actions  what  sort  of  consciousness  they
possess,  that  it  differs  from  our  own  in  precisely  the  same
way  that  their  brains  differ  from  our  brains.  There  is
less  of  the  co-ordination  which  is  imphed  by  a  message
going  round  the  loop-line.  A  much  larger  number
of  the  messages  which  go  in  at  a  cat's  eyes  and  come
out  at  her  paws  go  straight  through  without  any  loop-
line  at  all  than  do  so  in  the  case  of  a  man  ;  but  still  there
is  a  httle  loop-line  left.  And  the  lower  we  go  down  in
the  scale  of  organization  the  less  of  this  loop-line  there
is ;  yet  we  cannot  suppose  that  so  enormous  a  jump
from  one  creature  to  another  should  have  occurred  at
any  point  in  the  process  of  evolution  as  the  introduction
of  a  fact  entirely  different  and  absolutely  separate  from
the  physical  fact.  It  is  impossible  for  anybody  to  point
out  the  particular  place  in  the  line  of  descent  where


BODY  AND   MIND.  61

thac  event  can  be  supposed  to  have  taken  place.  The
only  thing  that  we  can  come  to,  if  we  accept  the
doctrine  of  evolution  at  all,  is  that  even  in  the  very
lowest  organisms,  even  in  the  Amceba  which  swims  |
about  in  our  own  blood,  there  is  something  or  other,
inconceivably  simple  to  us,  which  is  of  the  same  nature
with  our  own  consciousness,  although  not  of  the  same
complexity — that  is  to  say  (for  we  cannot  stop  at
organic  matter,  knowing  as  we  do  that  it  must  have
arisen  by  continuous  physical  processes  out  of  inorganic
matter),  we  are  obliged  to  assume,  in  order  to  save
continuity  in  our  behef,  that  along  with  every  motion
of  matter,  whether  organic  or  inorganic,  there  is  some
fact  which  corresponds  to  the  mental  fact  in  ourselves.
The  mental  fact  in  ourselves  is  an  exceedingly  complex
thing ;  so  also  our  brain  is  an  exceedingly  complex
thing.  We  may  assume  that  the  quasi-mental  fact
which  corresponds  and  which  goes  along  with  the
motion  of  every  particle  of  matter  is  of  such  inconceiv-
able simplicity,  as  compared  with  our  own  mental  fact,
with  our  consciousness,  as  the  motion  of  a  molecule  of
matter  is  of  inconceivable  simplicity  when  compared
with  the  motion  in  our  brain.

This  doctrine  is  not  merely  a  speculation,  but  is  a
result  to  which  all  the  greatest  minds  that  have  studied
this  question  in  the  right  way  have  gradually  been
approximating  for  a  long  time.

Again,  let  us  consider  what  takes  place  when  we
perceive  anything  by  means  of  our  eye.  A  certain
picture  is  produced  upon  the  retina  of  the  eye,  which
is  like  the  picture  on  the  ground-glass  plate  in  a  photo-
graphic camera ;  but  it  is  not  there  that  the  conscious-


62  BODY  AND   MIND.

ness  begins,  as  I  have  shown  before.  When  I  see  any-
thing there  is  a  picture  produced  on  the  retina,  but  I
am  not  conscious  of  it  there  ;  and  in  order  that  I  may
be  conscious  the  message  must  be  taken  from  each
point  of  this  picture  along  the  special  nerve-fibre  to
the  ganglion.  These  innumerable  fine  nerves  which
come  away  from  the  retina  go  each  of  them  to  a  par-
ticular point  of  the  ganghon,  and  the  result  is  that,
corresponding  to  that  picture  at  the  back  of  the  retina,
there  is  a  disturbance  of  a  great  number  of  centres  of
grey  matter  in  the  ganglion.  If  certain  parts  of  the
retina  of  my  eye,  having  light  thrown  upon  them,  are
disturbed  so  as  to  produce  the  figure  of  a  square,  then
certain  little  pieces  of  grey  matter  in  this  ganglion,
which  are  distributed  we  do  not  know  how,  will  also  be
disturbed,  and  the  impression  .corresponding  to  that  is
a  square.  Consciousness  belongs  to  this  disturbance  of
the  ganghon,  and  not  to  the  picture  in  the  eye ;  and
therefore  it  is  something  quite  different  from  the  thing
which  is  perceived.  But  at  the  same  time,  if  we  con-
sider another  man  looking  at  something,  we  shall  say
that  the  fact'  is  this — there  is  something  outside  of  him
which  is  matter  in  motion,  and  that  which  corresponds
inside  of  him  is  also  matter  in  motion.  The  external
motion  of  matter  produces  in  the  optic  ganglion  some-
thing which  corresponds  to  it,  but  is  not  like  it.
Although  for  every  point  in  the  object  there  is  a  point
of  disturbance  in  the  optic  ganglion,  and  for  every
connexion  between  two  points  in  the  object  there  is  a
connexion  between  two  disturbances,  yet  they  are  not
like  one  another.  Nevertheless  they  are  made  of  the
same  stuff;  the  object  outside  and  the  optic  ganglion


BODY  AND  MIND.  03

are  both  matter,  and  that  matter  is  made  of  molecules  '
moving  about  in  ether.  When  I  consider  the  impression
which  is  produced  upon  my  mind  of  any  fact,  that  is  just
a  part  of  my  mind  ;  the  impression  is  a  part  of  me.  The
hall  which  I  see  now  is  just  an  impression  produced  on
my  mind  by  something  outside  of  it,  and  that  impression
is  a  part  of  me.

We  may   conclude  from  this  theory  of  sensation,
which  is  established  by  the  discoveries  of  Helmholtz,
that  the  feehng  which  I  have  in  my  mind — the  picture
of  this   hall — is   something   corresponding,    point    for
point,  to   the   actual    reality   outside.     Though    every
small  part  of  the  reality  which  is  outside  corresponds
to  a  small  part  of  my  picture,  though  every  connexion
between  two  parts  of  that  reality  outside  corresponds ,
to  a  connexion  between  two  parts  of  my  picture,  yet^
the  two  things  are  not  alike.     They  correspond  to  one .
another,  just  as  a  map  may  be  said  in  a  certain  sense  to
correspond  with  the  country  of  which  it  is  a  map,  or
as  a  written  sentence  may  be  said  to  correspond  to  a
spoken  sentence.     But  then  I  may  conclude  from  what!
I  said   before   that,  although   the   two   corresponding!
things  are  not  alike,  yet  they  are  made  of  the  same  \
stuff.     Now  what  is  my  picture  made  of  ?     My  picture
is  made  of  exceedingly  simple  mental  facts,  so  simple
that  I  only  feel  them  in  groups.     My  picture  is  made
up  of  these  elements ;  and  I  am  therefore  to  conclude
that   the  real   thing   which  is  outside  me,  and  which
corresponds    to   my   picture,   is   made   up    of    similar
things ;    that   is    to    say,    the   reality   which   underlies
matter,  the  reality  which   we   perceive   as   matter,  'is
that  same  stuff  which,  being  compounded  together  in  a


64  BODY  AND   MIND.

(particular  way,  produces  mind.  What  I  perceive  as
your  brain  is  really  in  itself  your  consciousness,  is  You  ;
but  then  that  which  I  call  your  brain,  the  material
fact,  is  merely  my  perception.  Suppose  we  put  a
certain  man  in  the  middle  of  the  hall,  and  we  all  looked
at  him.  We  should  all  have  perceptions  of  his  brain  ;
those  would  be  facts  in  our  consciousness,  but  they
would  be  all  different  facts.  My  perception  would  be
different  from  the  picture  produced  upon  you,  and  it
would  be  another  picture,  although  it  might  be  very
Hke  it.  So  that  corresponding  to  all  those  pictures
which  are  produced  in  our  minds  from  an  external
object,  there  is  a  reality  which  is  not  like  the  pictures,
but  which  corresponds  to  them  point  for  point,  and
which  is  made  of  the  same  stuff  that  the  pictures  are.
^The  actual  reahty  which  underlies  what  we  call  matter
is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  mind,  is  not  the  same
thing  as  our  perception,  but  it  is  made  of  the  same
stuff.  To  use  the  words  of  the  old  disputants,  we  may
say  that  matter  is  not  of  the  same  substance  as  mind,
not  homoousion^  but  it  is  of  like  substance,  it  is  made
of  similar  stuff  differently  compacted  together,  homoi-
otision.

With  the  exception  of  just  this  last  bridge  connect-
ing the  two  great  regions  of  inquiry  that  we  have  been
discussing,  the  whole  of  what  I  have  said  is  a  body  of
doctrine  which  is  accepted  now,  as  far  as  I  know,  by
all  competent  people  who  have  considered  the  subject.
There  are,  of  course,  individual  exceptions  with  regard
to  particular  points,  such  as  that  I  have  mentioned
about  the  possible  creation  of  energy  in  the  brain ;  but
these  are  few,  and  they  occur  mainly,  I  think,  among


BODY  ANB  MIND.  65

those  who  are  so  exceedingly  weR  acquainted  with  one
side  of  the  subject  that  they  regard  the  whole  of  it  from
the  point  of  view  of  that  side^  and  do  not  sufficiently
weigh  what  may  come  from  the  other  side.  With
such  exceptions  as  those,  and  with  the  exception  of
the  last  speculation  of  all,  the  doctrine  which  I  have
expounded  to  you  is  the  doctrine  of  Science  at  the
present  day.

These  results  may  now  be  applied  to  the  consider-
ation of  certain  questions  which  have  always  been  of
great  interest.  The  application  which  I  shall  make  is  a
purely  tentative  one,  and  must  be  regarded  as  merely
indicating  that  such  an  apphcation  becomes  more  pos-
sible every  day.  The  first  of  these  questions  is  that  of
the  possible  existence  of  consciousness  apart  from  a
nervous  system,  of  mind  "Vvithout  body*  Let  us  first  of
all  consider  th^  effect  upon  this  question  of  the  doctrines
which  are  admitted  by  all  competent  scientific  men.
All  the  consciousness  that  we  know  of  is  associated  with
a  brain  in  a  certain  definite  manner,  namely,  it  is  built
up  out  of  elements  in  the.  same  way  as  part  of  the  action
of  the  brain  is  built  up  out  of  elements ;  an  element  of
one  corresponds  to  an  element  in  the  other  ;  and  the
mode  of  connexion,  the  shape  of  the  building,  is  the
same  in  the  two  cases.  The  mere  fact  that  all  the  con-
sciousness we  know  of  is  associated  with  certain  com-
plex forms  of  matter  need  only  make  us  exceedingly
cautious  not  to  imagine  any  consciousness  apart  from
matter  without  very  good  reason  indeed ;  just  as  the
fact  of  all  swans  having  turned  out  white  up  to  a  certain
time  made  us  quite  rightly  careful  about  accepting
stories  that  involved  black  swans.     But  the  fact  that

VOL.  II.  F


66  BODY  AND  MIND.

mind  and  brain  are  associated  in  a  definite  way,  and  in
that  particular  way  that  I  have  mentioned,  affords  a
very  strong  presumption  that  we  have  here  something
which  can  be  explained ;  that  it  is  possible  to  find  a
reason  for  this  exact  correspondence.  If  such  a  reason
can  be  found,  the  case  is  entirely  altered  ;  instead  of  a
provisional  probabihty  which  may  rightly  make  us
cautious,  we  should  have  the  highest  assurance  that
Science  can  give,  a  practical  certainty  on  which  we  are
bound  to  act,  that  there  is  no  mind  without  a  brain.
Whatever,  therefore,  is  the  probability  that  an  expla-
nation exists  of  the  connexion  of  mind  with  brain  in
action,  such  is  also  the  probability  that  each  of  them
involves  the  other.

If,  however,  that  particular  explanation  which  I
have  ventured  to  offer  should  turn  out  to  be  the  true
one,  the  case  becomes  even  stronger.  If  mind  is  the
reahty  or  substance  of  that  which  appears  to  us  as
brain-action,  the  supposition  of  mind  without  brain  is
the  supposition  of  an  organized  material  substance  not
affecting  other  substances  (for  if  it  did  it  might  be  per-
ceived), and  therefore  not  affected  by  them ;  in  other
words,  it  is  the  supposition  of  immaterial  matter,  a  con-
tradiction in  terms  to  the  fundamental  assumption  of
the  uniformity  of  nature,  without  practically  believing  in
which  we  should  none  of  us  have  been  here  to-day.
But  if  mind  without  brain  is  a  contradiction,  is  it  not
still  possible  that  an  organization  like  the  brain  can
exist  without  being  perceived,  without  our  being  able
to  hold  it  fast,  and  weigh  it,  and  cut  it  up  ?  Now  this
is  a  physical  question,  and  we  know  quite  enough  about
the  physical  world  to  say,  '  Certainly  not.'     It  is  made


BODY  AND  MIND.  67

of  atoms  and  ether,   and  there  is  no  room  in  it  for
ghosts.

The  other  question  which  may  be  asked  is  this  :  Can  ,
we  regard  the  universe,  or  that  part  of  it  which  imme-
diately surrounds  us,  as  a  vast  brain,  and  therefore  the
reahty  which  underhes  it  as  a  conscious  mind  ?  This  .
question  has  been  considered  by  the  great  naturahst  Du
Bois  Eeymond,  and  has  received  from  him  that  negative
answer  which  I  think  we  also  must  give.  For  we  found
that  the  particular  organization  of  the  brain  which  en-
ables its  action  to  run  parallel  with  consciousness
amounts  to  this— that  disturbances  run  along  definite
channels,  and  that  two  disturbances  which  occur  to-
gether establish  links  between  the  channels  along  which
they  run,  so  that  they  naturally  occur  together  again.
It  will,  I  think,  be  clear  to  everyone  that  these  are
not  characteristics  of  the  great  interplanetary  spaces.
Is  it  not  possible,  however,  that  the  stars  we  can  see
are  just  atoms  in  some  vast  organism,  bearing,  some
such  relation  to  it  as  the  atoms  which  make  up  our
brains  bear  to  us  ?  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know.  But  it
seems  clear  that  the  knowledge  of  such  an  organism
could  not  extend  to  events  taking  place  on  the  earth,
and  that  its  volition  could  not  be  concerned  in  them.
And  if  some  vast  brain  existed  far  away  in  space,  being
invisible  because  not  self-luminous,  then,  according  to
the  laws  of  matter  at  present  known  to  us,  it  could  affect
the  solar  system  only  by  its  weight.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  we  seem  entitled  to  con-
clude that  during  such  time  as  we  can  have  evidence  of
no  intelligence  or  volition  has  been  concerned  in  events
happening  within  the  range  of  the  Solar  system,  except

r  2


68  BODY  AND  MIND.

that  of  animals  living  on  the  planets.  The  weight  of
such  probabilities  is,  of  course,  estimated  differently  by
different  people,  and  the  questions  are  only  just  begin-
ning to  receive  the  right  sort  of  attention.  But  it  does
seem  to  me  that  we  may  expect  in  time  to  have  negative
evidence  on  this  point  of  the  same  kind  and  of  the  same
cogency  as  that  which  forbids  us  to  assume  the  existence
between  the  Earth  and  Venus  of  a  planet  as  large  as
either  of  them.

Now,  about  these  conclusions  which  I  have  described
as  probable  ones,  there  are  two  things  that  may  be  said.
In  the  first  place,  it  may  be  said  that  they  make  the
world  a  blank,  because  they  take  away  the  objects  of
very  important  and  widespread  emotions  of  hope  and
reverence  and  love,  which  are  human  faculties  and
require  to  be  exercised,  and  that  they  destroy  the
motives  for  good  conduct.  To  this  it  may  be  answered
that  we  have  no  right  to  call  the  world  a  blank  while  it
is  full  of  men  and  women,  even  though  our  one  friend
may  be  lost  to  us.  And  in  the  regular  everyday  facts
of  this  common  life  of  men,  and  in  the  promise  which  it
holds  out  for  the  future,  there  is  room  enough  and  to
spare  for  all  the  high  and  noble  emotions  of  which  our
f  nature  is  capable.  Moreover,  healthy  emotions,  are  felt
about  facts  and  not  about  phantoms  ;  and  the  question
is  not  '  What  conclusion  wiU  be  most  pleasing  or  eleva-
ting to  my  feelings  ? '  but  '  What  is  the  truth  ?  '  For  it
is  not  all  human  faculties  that  have  to  be  exercised,  but
only  the  good  ones.  It  is  not  right  to  exercise  the
faculty  of  feehng  terror  or  of  resisting  evidence.  And
if  there  are  any  faculties  which  prevent  us  from  accept-
ing  the   truth   and  guiding  our  conduct  by  it,  these


BODY   AND  MIND.  69

faculties  ought  not  to  be  exercised.  As  for  the  assertion
that  these  conclusions  destroy  the  motive  for  good  con-
duct, it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  not  only  utterly  untrue,
but,  because  of  its  great  influence  upon  human  action,
one  of  the  most  dangerous  doctrines  that  can  be  set
forth.  The  two  questions  which  we  have  last  discussed
are  exceedingly  difficult  and  complex  questions ;  the
ideas  and  the  knowledge  which  we  used  in  their  dis-
cussion are  the  product  of  long  centuries  of  laborious
investigation  and  thought ;  and  perhaps,  although  we
all  make  our  httle  guesses,  there  is  not  one  man  in  a
milhon  who  has  any  right  to  a  definite  opinion  about
them.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  answer  these  questions
in  order  to  tell  an  honest  man  from  a  rogue.  The
distinction  of  right  and  wrong  grows  up  in  the  broad
light  of  day  out  of  natural  causes  wherever  men  live
together ;  and  the  only  right  motive  to  right  action  is
to  be  found  in  the  social  instincts  which  have  been  bred
into  mankind  by  hundreds  of  generations  of  social  life.
In  the  target  of  every  true  Englishman's  allegiance  the
bull's-eye  belongs  to  his  countrymen,  who  are  visible
and  palpable  and  who  stand  around  him ;  not  to  any
far-off  shadowy  centre  beyond  the  hills,  ultra  monies^
either  at  Eome  or  in  heaven.  Duty  to  one's  country-
men and  fellow-citizens,  which  is  the  social  instinct
guided  by  reason,  is  in  all  healthy  communities  the  one
thing  sacred  and  supreme.  If  the  course  of  things  is
guided  by  some  unseen  intelligent  person,  then  this
instinct  is  his  highest  and  clearest  voice,  and  because
of  it  we  may  call  him  good.  But  if  the  course  of  things
is  not  so  guided,  that  voice  loses  nothing  of  its  sacred-
ness,  nothing  of  its  clearness,  nothing  of  its  obligation.


70  BODY  AND  MIND.

In  the  second  place  it  may  be  said  that  Science  ought
not  to  deal  with  these  questions  at  all ;  that  while
scientific  men  are  concerned  with  physical  facts,  they
are  dans  leur  droit,  but  that  in  treating  of  such  subjects
as  these  they  are  going  out  of  their  domain,  and  must
do  harm.

What  is  the  domain  of  Science  ?  It  is  all  possible
human  knowledge  which  can  rightly  be  used  to  guide
human  conduct.

In  many  parts  of  Europe  it  is  customary  to  leave  a
part  of  the  field  untilled  for  the  Brownie  to  five  in,
because  he  cannot  five  in  cultivated  ground.  And  if
you  grant  him  this  grace,  he  will  do  a  great  deal  of
your  household  work  for  you  in  the  night  while  you
sleep.  In  Scotland  the  piece  of  ground  which  is  left
wild  for  him  to  live  in  is  called  'the  good  man's
croft.'  Now  there  are  people  who  indulge  a  hope  that
the  ploughshare  of  Science  will  leave  a  sort  of  good
man's  croft  around  the  field  of  reasoned  truth  ;  and  they
promise  that  in  that  case  a  good  deal  of  our  civilizing
work  shall  be  done  for  us  in  the  dark,  by  means  we
know  nothing  of.  I  do  not  share  this  hope ;  and  I  feel
very  sure  that  it  will  not  be  realized  :  I  think  that  we
should  do  our  work  with  our  own  hands  in  a  healthy
straightforward  way.  It  is  idle  to  set  bounds  to
the  purifying  and  organizing  work  of  Science.  With-
out mercy  and  without  resentment  she  ploughs  up
weed  and  briar ;  from  her  footsteps  behind  her  grow
up  corn  and  healing  flowers ;  and  no  corner  is  far
enough  to  escape  her  furrow.  Provided  only  that
we  take  as  our  motto  and  our  rule  of  action,  Man  speed
the  plough.


71


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  TUINGS-IN-THEMSELVES.^

Meaning  of  the  Individual  Object.

My  feelings  arrange  and  order  themselves  in  two  distinct
ways.     There   is  the  internal  or   subjective   order,  in
which  sorrow  succeeds  the  hearing  of  bad  news,  or  the
abstraction  '  dog '  symbohzes  the  perception  of  many
different  dogs.     And  there  is  the  external  or  objective
order,  in  which  the  sensation  of  letting  go  is  followed
by  the  sight  of  a  falling  object  and  the  sou.nd  of  its  fall.
The  objective  order,  qud  order,  is  treated  by  physical)
science,   which   investigates   the   uniform   relations   ofl
objects  in  time  and  space.     Here  the  word  object  (or  phe-  \
nomenon)  is  taken  merely  to  mean  a  group  of  my  feelings,
which  persists  as  a  group  in  a  certain  manner  ;  for  I
am  at  present  considering  only  the  objective  order  of
my  feelings.     The  object,  then,  is  a  set  of  changes  in
my  consciousness,  and  not  anything  out  of  it.     Here  is
as  yet  no  metaphysical  doctrine,  but  only  a  fixing  of  the
meaning  of  a  word.     We  may  subsequently  find  reason
to  infer  that  there  is  something  which  is  not  object,  but
which  corresponds  in  a  certain  way  with  the  object ;
this  will  be  a  metaphysical  doctrine,  and  neither  it  nor
its  denial  is  involved  in  the  present  determination  of
meaning.     But   the  determination  must  be   taken   as
extending   to  all  those  inferences  which  are  made  by

1  '  Mind;  January,  1878.


72         ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES.

science  in  the  objective  order.  If  I  hold  that  there  is
hydrogen  in  the  sun,  I  mean  that  if  I  could  get  some  of
it  in  a  bottle,  and  explode  it  with  half  its  volume  of
oxygen,  I  should  get  that  group  of  possible  sensations
which  we  call  'water.'  The  inferences  of  physical
science  are  all  inferences  of  my  real  or  possible  feelings  ;
inferences  of  something  actually  or  potentially  in  my
consciousness,  not  of  anything  outside  it.

Distinction  of  Object  and  Eject.

There  are,  however,  some  inferences  which  are  pro-
foundly different  from  those  of  physical  science.  When
I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  you  are  conscious,  and
that  there  are  objects  in  your  consciousness  similar  to
those  in  mine,  I  am  not  inferring  any  actual  or  possible
feehngs  of  my  own,  but  your  feelings,  which  are  not,  and
cannot  by  any  possibihty  become,  objects  in  my  con-
sciousness. The  compUcated  processes  of  your  body
and  the  motions  of  your  brain  and  nervous  system,
inferred  from  evidence  of  anatomical  researches,  are
all  inferred  as  things  possibly  visible  to  me.  However
remote  the  inference  of  physical  science,  the  thing  in-
ferred is  always  a  part  of  me,  a  possible  set  of  changes
in  my  consciousness  bound  up  in  the  objective  order
with  other  known  changes.  But  the  inferred  existence
of  your  feelings,  of  objective  groupings  among  them
similar  to  those  among  my  feehngs,  and  of  a  subjective
order  in  many  respects  analogous  to  my  own, — these
inferred  existences  are  in  the  very  act  of  inference
thrown  out  of  my  consciousness,  recognised  as  outside  of
it,  as  not  being  a  part  of  me.  I  propose,  accordingly,
to  call  these  inferred  existences  ejects^  things  thrown  out


ON  THE  NATUKE  OF  THINaS-IN-THEMSELVES.        73

of  my  consciousness,  to  distinguish  them  from  objects^  \
things  presented  in  my  consciousness,  phenomena.  It
is  to  be  noticed  that  there  is  a  set  of  changes  of  my  con-
sciousness symboHc  of  the  eject,  which  may  be  called
my  conception  of  you ;  it  is  (I  think)  a  rough  picture
of  the  whole  aggregate  of  my  consciousness,  under
imagined  circumstances  hke  yours  ;  qud  group  of  my
feelings,  this  conception  is  Hke  the  object  in  substance
and  constitution,  but  differs  from  it  in  implying  the  ex-
istence of  something  that  is  not  itself,  but  corresponds
to  it,  namely,  of  the  eject.  The  existence  of  the  object,
whether  perceived  or  inferred,  carries  with  it  a  group
of  behefs  ;  these  are  always  beliefs  in  the  future  se-
quence of  certain  of  my  feelings.  The  existence  of  this
table,  for  example,  as  an  object  in  my  consciousness,
carries  with  it  the  behef  that  if  I  climb  up  on  it  I  shall
be  able  to  walk  about  on  it  as  if  it  were  the  ground.
But  the  existence  of  my  conception  of  you  in  my  con-
sciousness carries  with  it  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  you
outside  of  my  consciousness,  a  belief  which  can  never
be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  future  sequence  of  my  feel-
ings. How  this  inference  is  justified,  how  consciousness
can  testify  to  the  existence  of  anything  outside  of  itself,
I  do  not  pretend  to  say ;  I  need  not  untie  a  knot  which
the  world  has  cut  for  me  long  ago.  It  may  very  well
be  that  I  myself  am  the  only  existence,  but  it  is  simply
ridiculous  to  suppose  that  anybody  else  is.  The  position
of  absolute  ideahsm  may,  therefore,  be  left  out  of  count,
although  each  individual  may  be  unable  to  justify  his
dissent  from  it.


74        ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN- THEMSELVES.

Formation  of  the  Social  Object

The  belief,  however,  in  the  existence  of  other  men's
consciousness,  in  the  existence  of  ejects,  dominates  every
thought  and  every  action  of  our  lives.  In  the  first
place,  it  profoundly  modifies  the  object.  This  room,
the  table,  the  chairs,  your  bodies,  are  all  objects  in  my
consciousness;  as  simple  objects,  they  are  parts  of  me.
But  I  somehow  infer  the  existence  of  similar  objects  in
your  consciousness,  and  these  are  not  objects  to  me,
nor  can  they  ever  be  made  so ;  they  are  ejects.  This
being  so,  I  bind  up  with  each  obj  ect  as  it  exists  in  my
mind  the  thought  of  similar  objects  existing  in  other
men's  minds ;  and  I  thus  form  the  complex  conception,
'  this  table,  as  an  object  in  the  minds  of  men,' — or,  as
Mx.  Shadworth  Hodgson  puts  it,  an  object  of  conscious-
ness in  general  This  conception  symboHzes  an  inde-
finite number  of  ejects,  together  with  one  object  which
the  conception  of  each  eject  more  or  less  resembles.
Its  character  is  therefore  mainly  ejective  in  respect  of
what  it  symbolizes,  but  mainly  objective  in  respect  of
'  its  nature.  I  shall  call  this  complex  conception  the
social  object ;  it  is  a  symbol  of  one  thing  (the  individual
object^  it  may  be  called  for  distinction's  sake)  which  is  in
my  consciousness,  and  of  an  indefinite  number  of  other
things  which  are  ejects  and  out  of  my  consciousness.
Now,  it  is  probable  that  the  individual  object,  as  such,
never  exists  in  the  mind  of  man.  For  there  is  every
reason  to  believe  that  we  were  gregarious  animals  before
we  became  men  properly  so  called.  And  a  belief  in
the  eject — some  sort  of  recognition  of  a  kindred  con-
sciousness in  one's  fellow-beings — is  clearly  a  condition


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN-THEMSELYES.        75

of  gregarious  action  among  animals  so  highly  developed
as  to  be  called  conscious  at  all.     Language,  even  in  its
first  beginnings,  is  impossible  without  that  behef ;  and
any  sound  which,  becoming  a  sign  to  my  neighbour,
becomes  thereby  a  mark  to  myself,  must  by  the  nature
of  the  case  be  a  mark  of  the  social  object,  and  not  of  the
individual  object.     But  if  not  only  this  conception  of  the
particular  social  object,  but  all  those  that  have  been
built  up  out  of  it,  have  been  formed  at  the  same  time
with,  and  under  the  influence  of,  language,  it  seems  to
follow  that  the  belief  in  the  existence  of  other  men's
minds   hke   our    own,   but   not   part   of  us,   must   be
inseparably    associated    with   every   process   whereby
discrete  impressions  are  built  together  into  an  object.
I  do  not,  of  course,  mean  that  it  presents  itself  in  con-
sciousness as  distinct ;  but  I  mean  that  as  an  object  is
formed  in  my  mind,  a  fixed  habit  causes  it  to  be  formed  as
a  social  object,  and  insensibly  embodies  in  it  a  reference
to   the  minds  of  other  men.     And  this  sub-conscious
reference  to  supposed  ejects  is  what  constitutes  the  im-
pression of  externality  in  the  object,  whereby  it  is  de-
scribed as  not-me.    At  any  rate,  the  formation  of  the  social
object  supplies  an  account  of  this  impression  of  outness,
without  requiring  me  to  assume  any  ejects  or  things  out-
side my  consciousness  except  the  minds  of  other  men.
Consequently,  it  cannot  be  argued  from  the  impression
of  outness  that  there  is  anything  outside  of  my  con-
sciousness except  the  minds  of  other  men.     I  shall  argue
presently  that  we  have  grounds  for  believing  in  non-
personal  ejects,  but  these  grounds  are  not  in  any  way
dependent  on  the  impression  of  outness,  and  they  are
not  included  in  the  ordinary  or  common-sense  view  of


76        ON  THE  NATUKE  OF  THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES.

things-  It  seems  to  me  that  the  prevailing  belief  of  un-
instructed  people  is  merely  a  belief  in  the  social  object,
and  not  in  a  non-personal  eject,  somehow  corresponding
to  it ;  and  that  the  question  whether  the  latter  exists
or  not  is  one  which  cannot  be  put  to  them  so  as  to
convey  any  meaning  without  considerable  preUminary
training.  On  this  point  I  agree  entirely  with  Berkeley,
and  not  with  Mr.  Spencer.

Difference  between  Mind  and  Body.

I  do  not  pause  to  show  how  belief  in  the  Eject  un-
derhes  the  whole  of  natural  ethic,  whose  first  great
commandment,  evolved  in  the  hght  of  day  by  healthy
processes  wherever  men  have  hved  together,  is,  'Put
yourself  in  his  place.'  It  is  more  to  my  present  pur-
pose to  point  out  what  is  the  true  difference  between
body  and  mind.  Your  body  is  an  object  in  my  con-
sciousness ;  your  mind  is  not,  and  never  can  be.  Being
an  object,  your  body  follows  the  laws  of  physical  science,
which  deals  with  the  objective  order  of  my  feelings.
That  its  chemistry  is  ordinary  chemistry,  its  physics
ordinary  physics,  its  mechanics  ordinary  mechanics,  may
or  may  not  be  true  ;  the  circumstances  are  exceptional,
and  it  is  conceivable  (to  persons  ignorant  of  the  facts)
that  allowance  may  have  to  be  made  for  them,  even  in
the  expression  of  the  most  general  laws  of  nature.  But
in  any  case,  every  question  about  your  body  is  a
question  about  the  physical  laws  of  matter,  and  about
nothing  else.  To  say :  '  Up  to  this  point  science  can
explain ;  here  the  soul  steps  in,'  is  not  to  say  what  is
untrue,  but  to  talk  nonsense.  If  evidence  were  found
that  the  matter  constituting  the  brain  behaved  other-


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES.         77

wise  than  ordinary  matter,  or  if  it  were  impossible  to
describe  vital  actions  as  particular  examples  of  general
physical  rules,  this  would  be  a  fact  in  physics,  a  fact
relating  to  the  motion  of  matter  ;•  and  it  must  either  be
explained  by  further  elaboration  of  physical  science  or
else  our  conception  of  the  objective  order  of  our  feelings
would  have  to  be  changed.     The  question,  '  Is  the  mind
a  force?'  is  condemned  by  similar  considerations.     A
certain  variable  quality  of  matter  (the  rate  of  change  of
its  motion)  is  found  to  be  invariably  connected  with  the
position  relatively  to  it  of  other  matter ;  considered  as
expressed  in  terms  of  this  position,  the  quality  is  called
Force.     Force  is  thus  an  abstraction  relating  to  objective
facts  ;  it   is  a  mode  of  grouping   of  my  feelings,  and
cannot  possibly  be  the  same  thing  as  an  eject,  another
man's    consciousness.     But    the    question :    '  Do     the
changes  in  a  man's  consciousness  run  parallel  with  the
changes  of  motion,  and  therefore  with  the  forces  in  his
brain  ? '  is  a  real  question,  and  not  primd  facie  nonsense.
Objections  of  like  character  may  be  raised  against  the
language  of  some  writers  who  speak  of  changes  in  con-
sciousness as  caused  by  actions  on  the  organism.     The
word  Cause^  TroXXax^?  Xeyo/Mevov  and  misleading  as  it  is,
having  no  legitimate  place  in  science  or  philosophy,  may
yet  be  of  some  use  in  conversation  or  literature,  if  it  is
kept  to  denote  a  relation  between  objective  facts,  to
describe  certain  parts  of  the  phenomenal  order.     But
only   confusion  can   arise  if  it  is  used  to  express  the
relation  between  certain  objective  facts  in  my  conscious-
ness   and  the  ejective  facts  which  are  inferred  as  cor-
responding in  some  way  to  them  and  running  parallel
with  them.     For  all  that  we  know  at  pl-esent,  thia  relation


78        ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN- THEMSELVES.

does  not  in  any  way  resemble  that  expressed  by  the  word
Cause.

To  sum  up,  the  distinction  between  eject  and  object,
properly  grasped,  forbids  us  to  regard  the  eject,  another
man's  mind,  as  coming  into  the  world  of  objects  in  any
way,  or  as  standing  in  the  relation  of  cause  or  effect  to
any  changes  in  that  world.  I  need  hardly  add  that
the  facts  do  very  strongly  lead  us  to  regard  our  bodies
as  merely  complicated  examples  of  practically  universal
physical  rules,  and  their  motions  as  determined  in  the
same  way  as  those  of  the  sun  and  the  sea.  There  is  no
evidence  which  amounts  to  a  primd  facie  case  against
the  dynamical  uniformity  of  Nature ;  and  I  make  no
exception  in  favour  of  that  slykick  force  which  fills
existing  lunatic  asylums  and  makes  private  houses  into
new  oiles.

Correspondence  of  Elements  of  Mind  and  Brain-Action.

I  have  already  spoken  of  certain  ejective  facts — the
changes  in  your  consciousness — as  running  parallel  with
the  changes  in  your  brain,  which  are  objective  facts.
The  parallelism  here  meant  is  a  parallelism  of  com-
plexity, an  analogy  of  structure.  A  spoken  sentence  and
the  same  sentence  written  are  two  utterly  unhke  things,
but  each  of  them  consists  of  elements  ;  the  spoken
sentence  of  the  elementary  sounds  of  the  language,  the
written  sentence  of  its  alphabet.  Now  the  relation
between  the  spoken  sentence  and  its  elements  is  very
nearly  the  same  as  the  relation  between  the  written
sentence  and  its  elements.  There  is  a  correspondence
of  element  to  element ;  although  an  elementary  sound
is  quite  a  different  thing  from  a  letter  of  the  alphabet,


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS -IN-THEMSELVES.         79

yet  each  elementary  sound  belongs  to  a  certain  letter  or
letters.  And  the  sounds  being  built  up  together  to
form  a  spoken  sentence,  the  letters  are  built  up  together,
in  nearly  the  same  way^  to  form  the  written  sentence.
The  two  complex  products  are  as  wholly  unlike  as  the
elements  are,  but  the  manner  of  their  complication  is
the  same.  Or,  as  we  should  say  in  the  mathematics,  a
sentence  spoken  is  the  same  function  of  the  elementary
sounds  as  the  same  sentence  written  is  of  the  cor-
responding letters.

Of  such  a  nature  is  the  correspondence  or  parallelism
between  mind  and  body.  The  fundamental  'dehver-
ance '  of  consciousness  affirms  its  own  complexity.  It
seems  to  me  impossible,  as  I  am  at  present  constituted,
to  have  only  one  absolutely  simple  feeling  at  a  time.
Not  only  are  my  objective  perceptions,  as  of  a  man's
head  or  a  candlestick,  formed  of  a  great  number  of  parts
ordered  in  a  definite  manner,  but  they  are  invariably
accompanied  hf  an  endless  string  of  memories,  all
equally  complex.  And  those  massive  organic  feelings
with  which,  from  their  apparent  want  of  connexion
with  the  objective  order,  the  notion  of  consciousness
has  been  chiefly  associated, — those  also  turn  out,  when
attention  is  directed  to  them,  to  be  complex  things.  In
reading  over  a  former  page  of  my  manuscript,  for  in--
stance,  I  found  suddenly,  on  reflection,  that  although
I  had  been  conscious  of  what  I  was  reading  I  paid
no  attention  to  it ;  but  had  been  mainly  occupied  in
debating  whether  faint  red  lines  would  not  be  better
than  blue  ones  to  write  upon,  in  picturing  the  scene  in
the  shop  when  I  should  ask  for  such  hues  to  be  ruled,
and  in  reflecting  on  the  lamentable  helplessness  of  nine


80        ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES.

men  out  of  ten  when  you  ask  them  to  do  anything
slightly  different  from  what  they  have  been  accustomed
to  do.  This  debate  had  been  started  by  the  observation
that  my  handwriting  varied  in  size  according  to  the
nature  of  the  argument,  being  larger  when  that  was
diffuse  and  explanatory,  occupied  with  a  supposed
audience ;  and  smaller  when  it  was  close,  occupied  only
with  the  sequence  of  propositions.  Along  with  these
trains  of  thought  went  the  sensation  of  noises  made  by
poultry,  dogs,  children,  and  organ-grinders ;  and  that
vague  diffused  feeling  in  the  side  of  the  face  and  head
which  means  a  probable  toothache  in  an  hour  or  two.
Under  these  circumstances,  it  seems  to  me  that  con-
sciousness must  be  described  as  a  succession  of  groups
of  changes,  as  analogous  to  a  rope  made  of  a  great
number  of  occasionally  interlacing  strands.

This  being  so,  it  will  be  said  that  there  is  a  unity  in
all  this  complexity,  that  in  all  these  varied  feehngs  it  is
I  who  am  conscious,  and  that  this  sense  of  personahty,
the  self-perception  of  the  Ego,  is  one  and  indivisible.
It  seems  to  me  (here  agreeing  with  Hume)  that  the
*  unity  of  apperception '  does  not  exist  in  the  instanta-
neous consciousness  which  it  unites,  but  only  in  sub-
sequent reflection  upon  it ;  and  that  it  consists  in  the
power  of  estabhshing  a  certain  connexion  between  the
memories  of  any  two  feehngs  which  we  had  at  the  same
instant.  A  feehng,  at  the  instant  when  it  exists^  exists
an  undfur  sich,  and  not  as  my  feehng  ;  but  when  on  re-
flection I  remember  it  as  my  feeling,  there  comes  up  not
merely  a  faint  repetition  of  the  feehng,  but  inextricably
connected  with  it  a  wholje  set  of  connexions  with  the
general   stream  of  my   consciousness.     This   memory.


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  TmNGS-IN- THEMSELVES.        81

again,  qud  memory,  is  relative  to  the  past  feeling  which
it  partially  recalls  ;  but  in  so  far  as  it  is  itself  a  feehng,
it  is  absolute,  Ding-an-sich.     The  feehng  of  personahty,
then,  is   a  certain  feehng  of  connexion  between  faint
images  of  past  feelings ;  and  personality  itself  is   the
fact  that  such  connexions  are  set  up,  the  property  of
the  stream  of  feehngs  that  part  of  it  consists  of  hnks
binding  together  faint  reproductions  of  previous  parts.
It   is   thus   a   relative  thing,  a  mode  of  complication
of  certain  elements,  and  a  property  of  the  complex  so
produced.     This  complex   is   consciousness.     When   a
stream  of  feelings  is  so  compact  together  that  at  each
instant  it  consists  of  (1)  new  feelings,  (2)  fainter  repeti-
tions of  previous  ones,  and  (3)  links  connecting  these
repetitions,  the  stream  is  called  a  consciousness.     A  far
more  complicated  grouping  than  is  necessarily  implied
here  is  estabhshed  when  discrete  impressions  are  run
together  into  the  perception  of  an  object.     The  concep-
tion of  a  particular   object,   as  object,  is  a  group  of
feehngs  symbolic  of  many  different  perceptions,  and  of
links  between  them  and  other  feehngs.     The  distinction
between  Subject  and  Object  is  twofold ;  first,  the  dis-
tinction with  which  we  started  between  the  subjective
and  objective  orders  which  simultaneously  exist  in  my
feelings  ;  and  secondly,  the  distinction  between  me  and
the  social  object,  which  involves  the  distinction  between
me  and  you.     Either  of  these  distinctions  is  exceedingly
complex  and  abstract,  involving  a  highly  organized  ex-
perience.    It  is  not,  I  think,  possible  to  separate  one
from  the  other  ;  for  it  is  just  the  objective  order  which
I  do  suppose  to  be  common  to  me  and  to  other  minds.
I  need  not  set  down  here  the  evidence  which  shows

VOL.  II.  G


82         ON  THE  NATURE  OF  TfflNGS-IN-THEMSELVES.

that  the  complexity  of  consciousness  is  paralleled  by
complexity  of  action  in  the  brain.  It  is  only  necessary
to  point  out  what  appears  to  me  to  be  a  consequence  of
the  discoveries  of  Muller  and  Helmholtz  in  regard  to
sensation :  that  at  least  those  distinct  feeUngs  which  can
be  remembered  and  examined  by  reflection  are  paralleled
by  changes  in  a  portion  of  the  brain  only.  In  the  case
of  sight,  for  example,  there  is  a  message  taken  from
things  outside  to  the  retina,  and  therefrom  sent  in  some-
whither by  the  optic  nerve ;  now  we  can-  tap  this  tele-
graph at  any  point  and  produce  the  sensation  of  sight,
without  any  impression  on  the  retina.  It  seems  to  follow
that  what  is  known  directly  is  what  takes  place  at  the
inner  end  of  this  nerve,  or  that  the  consciousness  of  sight
is  simultaneous  and  parallel  in  complexity  with  the
changes  in  the  grey  matter  at  the  internal  extremity,
and  not  with  the  changes  in  the  nerve  itself,  or  in  the
retina.  So  also  a  pain  in  a  particular  part  of  the  body
may  be  mimicked  by  neuralgia  due  to  lesion  of  another
part.

We  come  then,  finally,  to  say  that  as  your  conscious-
ness is  made  up  of  elementary  feelings  grouped  together
in  various  ways  (ejective  facts),  so  a  part  of  the  action
in  your  brain  is  made  up  of  more  elementary  actions  in
parts  of  it,  grouped  together  in  the  same  ways  (objective
facts).  The  knowledge  of  this  correspondence  is  a  help
to  the  analysis  of  both  sets  of  facts  ;  but  it  teaches  us
in  particular  that  any  feeling,  however  apparently  simple,
which  can  be  retained  and  examined  by  reflection,  is
already  itself  a  most  complex  structure.  We  may,
however,  conclude  that  this  correspondence  extends
to  the  elements,  and   that  each  simple   feeling  corres-


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES.        83

ponds  to  a  special  comparatively  simple  change  of  nerve-
matter.

The  Elementary  Feeling  is  a  Thing -in-itself.

The  conclusion  that  elementary  feehng  co-exists  with
elementary  brain-motion  in  the  same  way  as  conscious-
ness co-exists  with  complex  brain-motion  involves  more
important  consequences  than  might  at  first  sight  appear.
We  have  regarded  consciousness  as  a  complex  of  feel-
ings, and  explained  the  fact  that  the  complex  is  con-
scious as  depending  on  the  mode  of  comphcation.     But
does  not  the  elementary  feeling  itself  imply  a  conscious-
ness in  which  alone  it  can  exist,  and  of  which  it  is  a
modification?     Can  a  feeling  exist  by  itself,  without
forming  part  of  a  consciousness  ?     I  shall  say  no  to  the
first  question,  and  yes  to  the  second,  and  it  seems  to  me
that  these  answers  are  required  by  the  doctrine  of  evo-
lution.    Eor  if  that  doctrine  be   true,  we   shall  have
along  the  line  of  the  human  pedigree  a  series  of  imper-
ceptible steps  connecting  inorganic   matter  with   our-
selves.    To  the  later  members  of  that  series  we  must
undoubtedly  ascribe  consciousness,  although  it  must,  of
course,  have  been  simpler  than  our  own.     But  where
are  we  to  stop  ?     In  the  case  of  organisms  of  a  certain
complexity  consciousness  is  inferred.     As  we  go  back
along  the  line,  the  complexity  of  the  organism  and  of
its  nerve-action  insensibly  diminishes  ;  and  for  the  first
part  of  our  course  we  see  reason  to  think  that  the  com-
plexity of  consciousness  insensibly  diminishes  also.     But
if  we  make  a  jump,  say  to  the  tunicate  molluscs,  we  see
no  reason  there  to  infer  the  existence  of  consciousness
at  all.     Yet  not  only  is  it  impossible  to  point  out  a  place

&  2


84        ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINaS-IN-THEMSELVES.

where  any  sudden  break  takes  place,  but  it  is  contrary
to  all  the  natural  training  of  our  minds  to  suppose  a
breach  of  continuity  so  great.  All  this  imagined  line
of  organisms  is  a  series  of  objects  in  my  consciousness ;
they  form  an  insensible  gradation,  and  yet  there  is  a
certain  unknown  point  at  which  I  am  at  liberty  to  infer
facts  out  of  my  consciousness  corresponding  to  them !
There  is  only  one  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  and  to  that
we  are  driven.  Consciousness  is  a  complex  of  ejective
facts, — of  elementary  feehngs,  or  rather  of  those  remoter
elements  which  cannot  even  be  felt,  but  of  which  the
simplest  feehng  is  built  up.  Such  elementary  ejective
facts  go  along  with  the  action  of  every  organism,  how-
ever simple ;  but  it  is  only  when  the  material  organism
has  reached  a  certain  complexity  of  nervous  structure
(not  now  to  be  specified)  that  the  complex  of  ejective
facts  reaches  that  mode  of  complication  which  is  called
Consciousness.  But  as  the  hne  of  ascent  is  unbroken,
and  must  end  at  last  in  inorganic  matter,  we  have  no
choice  but  to  admit  that  every  motion  of  matter  is
simultaneous  with  some  ejective  fact  or  event  which
might  be  part  of  a  consciousness.  From  this  follow
two  important  corollaries.

1.  A  feeling  can  exist  by  itself,  without  forming  part
of  a  consciousness.  It  does  not  depend  for  its  existence
on  the  consciousness  of  which  it  may  form  a  part.
Hence  a  feeling  (or  an  eject-element)  is  Ding-an-sich^  an
absolute,  whose  existence  is  not  relative  to  anything  else.
Sentitur  is  all  that  can  be  said.

2.  These  eject-elements,  which  correspond  to  motions
of  matter,  are  connected  together  in  their  sequence  and
co-existence  by  counterparts  of  the  physical  laws  of


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS -IN-THEMSELVES.        85

matter.     For  otherwise  the  correspondence  could  not
be  kept  up.

Mind-stuff  is  the  reality  which  we  perceive  as  Matter.

That  element  of  which,  as  we  have  seen,  even  the
simplest  feeling  is  a  complex,  I  shall  call  Mind-stuff,  A
moving  molecule  of  inorganic  matter  dpes  not  possess
mind  or  consciousness ;  but  it  possesses  a  small  piece  of
mind-stuff.  When  molecules  are  so  combined  together
as  to  form  the  film  on  the  under  side  of  a  jelly-fish,  the
elements  of  mind-stuff  which  go  along  with  them  are  so
combined  as  to  form  the  faint  beginnings  of  Sentience.
When  the  molecules  are  so  combined  as  to  form  the
brain  and  nervous  system  of  a  vertebrate,  the  corres-
ponding elements  of  mind-stuff  are  so  combined  as  to
form  some  kind  of  consciousness  ;  that  is  to  say,  changes
in  the  complex  which  take  place  at  the  same  time  get
so  linked  together  that  the  repetition  of  one  implies  the
repetition  of  the  other.  When  matter  takes  the  complex
form  of  a  hving  human  brain,  the  corresponding  mind-
stuff  takes  the  form  of  a  human  consciousness,  having
intelligence  and  vohtion.

Suppose  that  I  see  a  man  looking  at  a  candlestick.
Both  of  these  are  objects,  or  phenomena,  in  my  mind.
An  image  of  the  candlestick,  in  the  optical  sense,  is
formed  upon  his  retina,  and  nerve  messages  go  from  all
parts  of  this  to  form  what  we  may  call  a  cerebral  image
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  optic  thalami
in  the  inside  of  his  brain.  This  cerebral  image  is  a
certain  complex  of  disturbances  in  the  matter  of  these
organs  ;  it  is  a  material  or  physical  fact,  therefore  a
group  of  my  possible  sensations,  just  as  the  candlestick


86        ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS-IN-THEMSELVES.

is.  The  cerebral  image  is  an  imperfect  representation
of  the  candlestick,  corresponding  to  it  point  for  point
in  a  certain  way.  Both  the  candlestick  and  the  cerebral
image  are  matter ;  but  one  material  complex  represents
the  other  material  complex  in  an  imperfect  way.

Now   the   candlestick  is   not   the   external  reality
whose  existence  is  represented  in  the  man's  mind ;  for
the  candlestick  is  a  mere  perception  in  my  mind.     Nor
is  the  cerebral  image  the  man's  perception  of  the  candle-
stick ;  for  the  cerebral  image  is  merely  an  idea  of  a
possible  perception  in  my  mind.     But  there  is  a  percep-
tion in  the  man's  mind,  which  we  may  call  the  mental
image ;  and  this  corresponds  to  some  external  reaUty.
The  external  reality  hears  the  same  relation  to  the  mental
image   that  the    {^phenomenal)   candlestick   hears   to   the
cerehral  image.     Now  the  candlestick  and  the  cerebral
image  are  both  matter ;  they  are  made  of  the  same  stuff.
Therefore  the  external  reahty  is  made  of  the  same  stuff
as  the  man's  perception  or  mental  image,  that  is,  it  is
made  of  mind-stuff.     And  as  the  cerebral  image  repre-
sents imperfectly  the  candlestick,  in  the  same  way  and
to   the   same  extent   the  mental  image  represents  the
reality  external  to  his  consciousness.     Thus  in  order  to
find   the   thing-in-itself  which   is  represented   by  any
object  in  my  consciousness  such  as  a  candlestick,  I  have
to  solve  this  question  in  proportion,  or  rule  of  three  : —

As   the   physical   configuration  of  my  cerebral
image  of  the  object

is  to  the  physical  configuration  of  the  object,

so  is  my  perception  of  the  object  (the  object
regarded  as  complex  of  my  feelings)

to  the  thing-in-itself.


ON  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS -TN-THEMSELVES.         87

Hence  we  are  obliged  to  identify  the  thing-in-itself
with  that  complex  of  elementary  mind-stuff  which  on
other  grounds  we  have  seen  reason  to  think  of  as  going
along  with  the  material  object.  Or,  to  say  the  same
thing  in  other  words,  the  reality  external  to  our  minds
which  is  represented  in  our  minds  as  matter  is  in  itself
mind-stuff.

The  universe,  then,  consists  entirely  of  mind-stuff.
Some  of  this  is  woven  into  the  complex  form  of  human
minds  containing  imperfect  representations  of  the  mind-
stuff  outside  them,  and  of  themselves  also,  as  a  mirror
reflects  its  own  image  in  another  mirror,  ad  infinitum.
Such  an  imperfect  representation  is  called  a  material
universe.  It  is  a  picture  in  a  man's  mind  of  the  real
universe  of  mind-stuff.

The  two  chief  points  of  this  doctrine  may  be  thus
summed  up : —

Matter  is  a  mental  picture  in  which  mind-stuff  is
the  thing  represented.

Eeason,  intelligence,  and  volition  are  properties  of  a
complex  which  is  made  up  of  elements  themselves  not
rational,  not  intelhgent,  not  conscious.

Note,  The  doctrine  here  expounded  appears  to  have
been  arrived  at  independently  by  many  persons ;  as
was  natural,  seeing  that  it  is  (or  seems  to  me)  a  necessary
consequence  of  recent  advances  in  thetheory  of  percep-
tion. Kant  ^  threw  out  a  suggestion  that  the  Ding  an
sich  might  be  of  the  nature  of  mind  ;  but  the  first  state-
ment of  the  doctrine  in  its  true  connexion  that  I  know

^  ['  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft/  pp.  287-8,  ed.  Rosenkranz.  Wundt's
statement  is  in  the  concluding  paragraphs  of  ^  Grundziige  der  physiologischen
Psychologie.'  Compare  too  Hackel,  'Zellseelen  and  Seelenzellen/  in
*  Deutsche  Rundschau/  July,  1878,  yol.  x^i.  p.  40.]


88        ON  THE  NATUBE  OF  THINGS-IN- THEMSELVES.

of  is  by  Wundt.  Since  it  dawned  on  me,  some  time
ago,  I  have  supposed  myself  to  find  it  more  or  less
plainly  hinted  in  many  writings  ;  but  the  question  is
one  in  which  it  is  peculiarly  difficult  to  make  out
precisely  what  another  man  means,  and  even  what  one
means  one's  self.

Some  writers  [e.g.  Dr.  Tyndall)  have  used  the  word
matter  to  mean  the  phenomenon  plus  the  reahty  repre-
sented ;  and  there  are  many  reasons  in  favour  of  such
usage  in  general.  But  for  the  purposes  of  the  present
discussion  I  have  thought  it  clearer  to  use  the  word  for
the  phenomenon  as  distinguished  from  the  thing-in-itself.


89


ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT
INVOLVING  FOUR  CLASSES.

Peofessor  Stanley  Jevoxs  has  enumerated  ^  the  types  of
compound  statement  involving  three  classes,  among
which  the  premises  of  a  syllogism  appear  as  a  type  of
fourfold  statement.  He  propounded  at  the  same  time
the  corresponding  problem  of  enumeration  for  four
classes,  which  is  solved  in  the  present  communication.
The  reader  is  referred  to  the  paper  or  the  book  just
mentioned  for  further  explanation  of  the  nature  and
purpose  of  the  problem  than  is  to  be  found  in  art.  1.
It  may,  however,  be  premised  that  the  letters  A,  B,  C,
D  denote  four  classes  or  terms  (for  example,  hard,  wet,
black,  nice),  and  that,  according  to  a  convenient  notation
of  De  Morgan's,  the  small  letters  a,  &,  c,  d  denote  the
complementary  classes  or  contrary  terms  (not  hard,  not
wet,  not  black,  not  nice).  A  simple  statement  is  of  the
form  ABCD=0  (no  hard,  wet,  black,  nice  things  exist  or

^  *  Proceedings  of  tlie  Manchester  PMlosopbical  Society/  toI.  vi.  pp.
66-68,  and  '  Memoirs/  Third  series,  vol.  v.  pp.  119-130.  *  The  Principles
of  Science/  vol,  i.  pp.  154-164.  [1st  ed.  Prof.  Jevons  there  said,  p.  163 :
'  Some  years  of  continuous  lahour  would  be  required  to  ascertain  the  precise
nimiher  of  types  of  laws  which  may  govern  the  eomhinations  of  only  four
things.'  In  the  second  edition,  p.  143,  he  says :  '  Though  I  still  believe
that  some  years'  labour  would  be  required  to  work  out  the  types  themselves,
it  is  clearly  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  numbers  of  such  types  cannot  be
calculated  with  a  reasonable  amount  of  labour.  Professor  "W.  K.  Clifford
having  actually  accomplished  the  task.'  A  short  statement  of  the  results  of
the  present  paper  is  then  given.]


90  ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT

which  is  the  same  thing,  all  hard,  wet,  black  things  are
nasty).  The  statement  ABC=0  (no  hard,  wet,  black
things  exist,  or  all  hard,  black  things  are  dry)  is  to  be
regarded  as  made  of  these  two,  ABOD=0,  A3Cd=0  (no
hard,  wet,  black,  nice  things  exist,  and  no  hard,  wet,
black,  nasty  things  exist)  and  so  is  called  a  compound
(in  this  case  a  twofold)  statement.  The  notion  of  types
is  defined  in  art.  1.

1.  Four  classes  or  terms  A,  B,  C,  D,  give  rise  to
sixteen  cross  divisions  or  marks  such  as  AbCd,  A
denial  of  the  existence  of  one  of  these  cross  divisions,  or
of  anything  having  its  mark  (such  as  A&Cc?=0),  is  called
a  simple  statement.  A  denial  of  two  or  more  cross
divisions  is  called  a  compound  statement,  and  more-
over, twofold,  threefold,  etc.,  according  to  the  number
denied.

When  two  compound  statements  can  be  converted
into  one  another  by  interchange  of  the  classes  A,  B,  C,
D,  with  each  other  or  with  their  complementary  classes
a,  ^,  c,  6?,  they  are  called  similar ;  and  all  similar
statements  are  said  to  belong  to  the  same  type.  The
problem  before  us  is  to  enumerate  all  the  types  of  com-
pound statement  that  can  be  made  with  four  terms.

2.  Two  statements  are  called  complementary  when
they  deny  between  them  all  the  sixteen  marks  without
both  denying  any  mark,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,
when  each  denies  just  those  marks  which  the  other
permits  to  exist.  It  is  obvious  that  when  two  statements
are  similar,  the  complementary  statements  will  also  be
similar ;  and,  consequently,  for  every  type  of  n-fold
statement  there  is  a  complementary  type  of  16-?2-fold
statement.     It  follows  that  we  need  only  enumerate  the


INVOLVING  FOUR  CLASSES.  91

types  as  far  as  the  eighth  order  ;  for  the  types  of  more
than  eightfold  statement  will  already  have  been  given  as
complementary  to  types  of  lower  orders.  Every  eight-
fold statement  is  complementary  to  an  eightfold  state-
ment ;  but  these  are  not  necessarily  of  the  same  type.

3.  One  mark  A  B  C  D  may  be  converted  into  another
AbCd  by  interchanging  one  or  more  of  the  classes  A,  B,
C,  D  with  its  complementary  class.    The  number  of  such
changes  is  called  the  distances  of  the  two  marks.     Thus
in  the  example  given  the  distance  is  2.     In  two  similar
compound  statements  the  distances  of  the  marks  denied
must  be  the  same  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  when  all
the  distances  are  the  same  the  two  statements  are  similar.
There  is,  however,  as  we  shall  see,  only  one  example  of
two   dissimilar   statements  having  the  same  distances.
When  the  distance  is  4,  the  two  marks  are  said  to  be
obverse  to  one  another,  and  the  statements  denying  them
are  called  obverse  statements — as  ABCD,  abcd^  or,  again,
AbCd^  or,  again,  AbCd^  aBcD,     When  any  one  mark  is
given  (called  the  origin)^  all  the  others  may  be  grouped
in  respect  of  their  relations  to  it  as  follows : — ^Pour  are
at  distance  one  from  it,  and  may  be  called  proximates  ;
six  at  distance  twa^  and  may  be  called  mediates  ;  four  at
distance  three^  and  may  be  called  ultimates.     Finally,  the
obverse  is  at  distance /owr.

«BCD  ahOJy  Ahcd

AbcD^        I         ^AbOd  I


ABC<?— ABCD— A6CD  7\  ahcD-^abcd—aBcd


ABcB  ABed  abOd

Origin  and  4  proximates.  6  mediates.  Obverse  and  4  ultimates.

It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  table  that  the  four  proxi-


92    ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT

mates  are  respectively  obverse  to  the  four  ultimates,  and
that  the  mediates  form  three  pairs  of  obverses.  Every
proximate  or  ultimate  is  distant  1  and  3  respectively
from  such  a  pair  of  mediates.  Thus  each  proximate  or
ultimate  divides  the  mediates  into  two  classes  ;  three  of
them  are  at  distance  1  from  it,  and  three  at  distance  3.
Two  mediates  which  are  not  obverse  are  at  distance  2.
Two  proximates  or  two  ultimates,  or  an  ultimate  and  a
proximate  which  are  not  obverse,  are  also  at  distance  2.
This  view  of  the  mutual  relations  of  the  marks  is
the  basis  of  the  following  enumeration  of  types.

4.  There  is  clearly  only  one  type  of  simple  state-
ment. But  of  twofold  statements  there  are  four  types  ;
viz.  the  distance  may  be  1, 2,  3,  or  4  ;  and  so,  in  general,
with  n  classes  there  are  n  types  of  twofold  statement.

5.  A  compound  statement  containing  no  pair  of
obverses  is  called  jpure.  In  a  threefold  statement  there
are  three  distances  ;  one  of  these  must  be  not  less  than
either  of  the  others.  If  this  be  2,  the  remaining  mark
must  be  at  odd  distance  from  both  of  these  or  at  even
distance  from  both  ;  thus  we  get  the  types  1,  1,  2,  and
2,  2,  2.  If  the  not-less  distance  be  3,  the  remaining
distances  must  be  one  even  and  the  other  odd  ;  the
even  distance  must  be  2,  the  odd  one  either  1  or  3  ;
and  the  types  are  1,  2,  3 ;  2,  3,  3.  Thus  there  are  4
pure  threefold  types.  With  a  pair  of  obverses,  the  re-
maining mark  must  be  at  odd  or  even  distance  from
them;  1,  3,  4;  2,  2,  4.  In  all  six  threefold  types
observe  that  there  is  necessarily  one  even  distance.

6.  A  fortiori^  in  a  fourfold  statement  there  must  be
one  even  distance.  In  a  pure  fourfold  statement  this
distance  is  2.     From  this  pair  of  marks  let  both  the


INVOLVWa  fOUB  CLASSES.  9^

others  be  oddly  distant ;  then  they  must  be  evenly
distant  from  one  another  i,e,  at  distance  2,  obverses
being  excluded.  The  odd  distances  are  3  or  3  ;  and  it
will  be  easily  seen  that  the  following  are  all  the  possible
cases : —

LL^         lii         ill        IJL?         U^        ^Al

'l  I  l'  *1  I  3*  3  1  3*  *3  I  1*  '3  [  3*  *3  I  3*

In  these  figures  the  dots  indicate  the  four  marks,  the
cross  lines  indicate  distance  2,  and  the  other  figures  the
distances  between  the  marks  on  either  side  of  them.
Next,  from  the  pairs  of  marks  at  distance  2  let  one  of
the  others  at  least  be  evenly  distant,  i.e,  at  distance  2.
Then  we  have  three  marks  which  are  all  at  distance  2
from  one  another  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  show  that  they  are
all  proximates  of  a  certain  other  mark.  For,  select  one
of  them  as  origin ;  then  the  other  two  are  mediates
which  are  not  obverse,  and  which  consequently  are  at
distance  1,  from  some  one  proximate.  With  this  proxi-
mate as  origin,  therefore,  all  three  are  proximates.  We
have  therefore  only  to  inquire  what  diiferent  relations
the  fourth  mark  can  bear  to  these  three.  It  may  be
the  origin,  its  obverse,  the  remaining  proximate,  its
obverse,  or  one  of  two  kinds  of  mediates,  viz.  at  distance
1  or  3  from  the  remaining  proximate.  Thus  we  have  6
types,  in  which  the  distances  of  the  fourth  mark  from  the
triad  are  respectively  1 11,  3  3  3,  2  2  2,  2  2  2,  1  3  3,  11 3.
The  third  and  fourth  of  the^e  are  especially  interesting,  as
being  distinct  types  with  the  same  set  of  distances  ;  I  call
them  proper  and  improper  groups  respectively  :  viz.,  a
proper  group  is  the  four  proximates  of  any  origin ;  an
improper  group  is  three  proximates  with  the  obverse  of


94    ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT

the  fourth.     On  the  whole  we  get  12  types  of  pure
fourfold  statement.

7.  In  a  fourfold  statement  with  one  pair  of  obverses,
take  one  of  them  for  origin ;  the  remaining  two  marks
must  then  be  either  a  pair  of  proximates  or  ultimates,  a
proximate  and  an  ultimate,  a  pair  of  mediates,  or  a
proximate  or  ultimate,  with  one  of  two  kinds  of  mediate
— in  all,  5  types,  with  the  distances  1  3^,  1  3  ;  1  3'"*,  3  1 ;
2  2^,  2  2  ;  1  3S  2  2  ;  1  3^  2  2.  With  two  pairs  of  ob-
verses they  must  be  either  at  odd  or  even  distances  from
one  another ;  two  types.  Altogether  12  +  5  +  2=19
fourfold  types.

8.  In  a  pure  fivefold  statement  there  is  always  a
triad  of  marks  at  distance  2  from  one  another.  For
there  is  a  pair  evenly  distant ;  if  there  is  not  another
mark  evenly  distant  from  these,  the  remaining  three  are
all  oddly  distant,  and  therefore  evenly  distant  jfrom  one
another.  First,  then,  let  the  remaining  two  marks  be
both  oddly  distant  from  the  triad.  In  regard  to  the
origin  of  which  these  are  proximates,  the  two  to  be
added  must  be  either  two  mediates,  Hke  (of  two  kinds)
or  unlike,  or  a  mediate  of  either  kind  with  the  origin  or
the  obverse ;  7  types.  Next,  if  one  of  the  two  marks
be  evenly  distant  from  the  triad,  it  must  form  with  the
triad  either  a  proper  or  an  improper  group  of  four.  To
a  proper  group  we  may  add  the  origin,  the  obverse,  or
a  mediate ;  to  an  improper  group,  the  origin  or  the
obverse  (the  mediates  give  no  new  type),  5  types ;  or,
in  all,  12  pure  fivefold  types.

9.  In  a  fivefold  statement  with  one  pair  of  obverses
there  must  be  another  pair  of  marks  at  distance  2.  We
have  therefore  to  add  one  mark  to  each  of  the  following


INVOLVING  FOUR  CLASSES.  95

three  types  of  fourfold  statement, — a  pair  of  obverses
together  with  (1)  two  proximates,  (2)  a  proximate  and
an  ultimate,  (3)  two  mediates.  To  the  first  we  may
add  another  proximate,  an  ultimate  or  a  mediate  of
three  kinds,  viz.  at  distances  1 1,  1  3,  3  3  from  the  two
proximates ;  5  types.  To  the  second  if  we  add  a  proxi-
mate or  an  ultimate,  we  fall  back  on  one  of  the  pre-
vious cases  ;  but  there  are  again  three  kinds  of  mediates,
at  distances  1 1, 3  3, 1  3  from  the  proximate  and  ultimate ;
3  types.  To  the  third  we  may  add  another  mediate,
whereby  the  type  becomes  a  proper  group  together
with  the  obverse  of  one  of  its  marks,  which  is  the  same
thing  as  an  improper  group  together  with  the  obverse
of  one  of  its  marks — or  a  proximate  or  ultimate  which
are  of  three  kinds,  at  distances  11,  13,  3  3  from
the  two  mediates  ;  4  types.  Thus  there  are  12  five-
fold types  with  one  pair  of  obverses.  With  two  pair
of  obverses  at  odd  distances,  there  is  only  one  type,
all  the  remaining  marks  being  similarly  related  to
them ;  at  even  distance  the  remaining  mark  may  be
evenly  or  oddly  distant  from  them ;  2  types.  On
the  whole  we  have  12  +  12  +  3=27  types  of  fivefold
statement.

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  there  is  no  pure  fivefold
statement  in  which  all  the  distances  are  even,  and  that,
if  there  is  only  one  pair  of  obverses  with  all  the  distances
even,  the  type  is  a  proper  group  together  with  the
obverse  of  one  of  its  marks.

10.  We  may  now  prove,  as  a  consequence  of  the
last  remark,  that  a  pure  sixfold  statement  either
contains  a  group  of  four  with  a  pair  oddly  distant  from
it,  or  consists  of  two  triads  oddly  distant  from  one  another.


96  ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT

For  there  must  be  a  pair  at  distance  2 :  if  the  other
four  are  all  oddly  distant  from  these,  they  form  a
group  ;  if  one  is  evenly  distant,  and  three  oddly  distant,
we  have  the  case  of  the  two  triads  ;  if  two  are  evenly
distant,  we  again  have  a  group.  We  must  add,  then,
first  to  a  proper  group,  and  then  to  an  improper  group,
a  pair  oddly  distant  from  it.  To  a  proper  group  con-
sisting of  the  proximates  to  a  certain  origin  we  may
add  the  origin  or  its  obverse  with  a  mediate,  or  two
mediates  ;  3  types.  An  improper  group  is  symmetrical ;
that  is  to  say,  if  we  substitute  for  any  one  of  its  marks
the  obverse  of  that  mark,  we  shall  obtain  a  proper
group.  In  this  way  we  shall  get  four  origins  distant
1113  from  the  group,  and  four  obverses  distant
13  3  3;  if  we  add  to  these  the  obverses  of  the  marks
in  the  group  itself,  we  have  described  the  relation  of
the  twelve  remaining  marks  to  the  group.  To  form,
therefore,  a  pure  sixfold  statement  we  may  add  either
two  origins  or  two  obverses  or  an  origin  and  an  obverse  ;
3  types.

In  the  case  of  the  two  triads,  since  they  are  oddly
distant  from  one  another  their  origins  must  be  oddly
distant ;  that  is,  they  must  be  distant  either  1  or  3.  If
they  are  distant  1,  neither,  both,  or  one  of  the  origins
may  appear  in  the  statement ;  if  they  are  distant  3,
neither,  both,  or  one  of  the  obverses :  6  types.  Thus
we  obtain  12  types  of  purely  sixfold  statement.

11.  If  a  sixfold  statement  contains  one  pair  of
obverses,  the  remaining  four  marks  cannot  all  be  evenly
distant  from  this  pair.  For  in  that  case  they  would
constitute  a  group ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  marks
evenly  distant  from  a  group,  whether  proper  or  improper,


mVOLVING  FOUR  CLASSES.  97

do  not  contain  a  pair  of  obverses.     We  have  therefore
only  these  four  cases  to  consider  : —

(1)  The  four  marks  are  all  oddly  distant  from  the
obverses.

(2)  One  is  evenly  distant  and  three  oddly  distant.

(3)  Two  are  evenly  distant  and  two  oddly.

(4)  Three  are  evenly  distant  and  one  oddly.

In  the  first  case  the  four  marks  form  a  group.  If
this  is  a  proper  group,  the  pair  of  obverses  must  be
either  the  origin  and  obverse  of  the  group,  or  a  pair  of
mediates ;  2  types.  If  the  group  is  improper,  the  pair
must  be  an  origin  and  an  obverse  ;  1  type.  In  the
second  case  we  have  an  origin,  an  obverse,  and  a
mediate,  to  which  we  must  add  3  marks  taken  out  of
the  proximates  and  ultimates.  We  may  add  3  proxi-
mates  distant  respectively  113  or  13  3  from  the
mediates  (2  types), — or  2  proximates  distant  respec-
tively 1 1,  1  3,  3  3  from  the  mediate,  and  with  each  of
these  combinations  an  ultimate  distant  either  1  or  3  (6
types).  To  interchange  proximates  with  ultimates  clearly
makes  no  difference  ;  so  that  in  reckoning  the  cases  of
1  proximate  and  2  ultimates  or  3  ultimates,  we  should
find  no  new  types.  In  the  third  case  we  have  an  origin,
an  obverse,  and  two  mediates  distant  2  from  each  other ;
and  to  these  we  have  to  add  either  two  proximates  or  a
proximate  and  an  ultimate.  The  two  proximates  may
be  distant  from  the  two  mediates  1 1,  1  3,  or  1 1,  3  3,  or
13,13,  or  1 3,  33;  4  types.  The  proximate  or  ultimate
must  not  be  respectively  distant  11,  33,  or  33,  11;
for  then  they  would  form  a  pair  of  obverses ;  there
remain  the  cases  1 1  with  11  or  1  3,  1  3  with  1  3,  and
3  3  with  1 3  or  3  3  ;  5  types.    In  the  fourth  case  we  have

VOL.  11.  H


98    ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT

an  origin,  obverse,  and  three  mediates  distant  2  from
another ;  the  remaining  mark  must  be  distant  either
1  or  3  from  these  mediates ;  2  types.  This  makes
twenty-two  types  of  sixfold  statement  with  one  pair
of  obverses.

12.  If  a  sixfold  statement  contains  two  pairs  of
obverses,  these  must  be  either  evenly  or  oddly  distant.
If  they  are  evenly  distant  we  have  an  origin,  obverse,
and  two  obverse  mediates,  to  which  two  other  marks
are  to  be  added.  These  may  be  both  evenly  distant ;
taking  one  of  them  as  origin,  it  is  associated  with  5
mediates,  so  that  there  is  1  type  only.  Or  both  oddly
distant ;  here  there  are  two  cases,  according  as  the  dis-
tances are  11,  3  3,  or  1  3,  1  3.  Or  one  oddly  and  one
evenly  distant ;  the  latter  is  any  one  of  the  four  remain-
ing mediates,  and  then  the  former  is  distant  1  or  3  from
it ;  2  types.  If  the  two  pairs  of  obverses  be  oddly  dis-
tant they  form  an  aggregate  which  is  related  in  th^
same  way  to  all  the  remaining  twelve  marks ;  viz.  any
one  of  these  being  taken  as  origin,  we  have  a  pair  of
mediates  and  a  proximate  with  its  obverse  ultimate.
The  thing  to  be  considered,  therefore,  is  the  distance
between  the  two  marks  to  be  added,  which  may  be  1,
2,  or  3,  and  each  in  two  ways ;  6  types.

A  sixfold  statement  with  three  pairs  of  obverses  is
one  of  two  types  only ;  viz.  these  are  all  evenly  distant
when  they  are  the  mediates  to  one  origin,  or  two
evenly  distant  and  one  oddly  distant  from  both  of
them.

13.  A  pure  sevenfold  statement  must  consist  of  a
group  and  a  triad  ;  for  it  must  contain  a  triad,  by  the
same  reasoning  by  which  this  was  proved  for  a  fivefold


INVOLVING  FOUK  CLASSES.  99

statement ;  and  then  either  all  the  other  four  marks  are
oddly  distant  from  this,  and  so  form  a  group  by  them-
selves, or  else  one  of  them  is  evenly  distant  from  the
triad  and  so  forms  a  group  with  it.     If  the  group  is
proper,  being  the  proximates  to  a  certain  origin,  the
triad  must  consist  of  two  mediates  and  either  the  origin,
the  obverse,  or  another  mediate ;  and  in  the  latter  case
the  three  mediates  are  distant  1 1 1  or  3  3  3  from  some
proximate ;  4  types.     If  the    group   is   improper,  the
triad  is  either  all  origins  or  all  obverses,  or  two  origins
and  an  obverse,  or  an  origin  and  two  obverses ;  4  types.
In  all,  8  types  of  pure  sevenfold  statement.

14.  A  sevenfold  statement  with  one  pair  of  obverses
must  consist  either  of  four  marks  evenly  distant  from
one  another  and  three  oddly  distant  from  them  ;  or  of
five  marks  evenly  distant  from  one   another  and  two
oddly  distant  from  them.     In  the  former  case  the  pair
of  obverses  may  be  in  the  four  or  in  the  three.     If  they
are  in  the  four,  the  three  form  a  triad  which  are  proxi-
mates to  one  origin  ;  and  then  the  pair  may  be  the  origin
and  .obverse  or  a  pair  of  mediates.     If  the  pair  are
origin  and  obverse,  the  other  two  (at  distance  2)   are
mediates,  distance  1 1,  1  3  or  3  3  from  the  proximate
which  is  not  in  the  triad  ;  if  the  pair  are  mediates,  the
two  may  be  the  origin  or  obverse  with  a  mediate  distant
1  or  3  from  that  proximate  (4  types),  or  two  mediate
distant  11,  13,  3  3  from  it  (3  types).     If  the  pair  of
obverses  are  in  the  set  of  three  marks,  the  four  form  a
group,  which  may  be  proper  or  improper.     If  proper,
the  three  may  be  origin  and  obverse  with  a  mediate,  or
a  pair  of  mediates  with   origin,  obverse,  or  another
mediate  ;  4  types.     If  improper,  the  three  must  be  two

H  2


100         ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT

origins  and  an  obverse,  or  an  origin  and  two  obverses ;
3  types.

Five  marks  evenly  distant  containing  only  one  pair
of  obverses,  must  be  a  proper  group  with  the  obverse
of  one  of  its  marks ;  see  end  of  art  9.  To  these  we
may  add  the  origin  or  obverse  of  the  proper  group  with
a  mediate  distant  1  or  3  from  the  extra  mark,  or  else
two  mediates  distant  1 1,  1  3,  or  3  3  from  that  mark  ;  7
types.

15.  A  sevenfold  statement  with  two  pairs  of  ob-
verses may  have  six  marks  evenly  distant  from  one
another  and  one  oddly  distant  from  them ;  in  this  case
the  six  are  an  origin  and  five  mediates  in  two  different
ways,  or  say  two  pairs  and  a  two ;  the  remaining  mark
may  be  distant  11,  13,  or  3  3  from  the  two,  which
gives  3  types.

Otherwise  the  sevenfold  statement  must  subdivide
(as  in  the  last  case)  into  five  and  two  or  into  four  and
three.  If  it  subdivide  into  five  and  two,  the  two  may
be  a  pair  or  not.  In  the  first  case  we  have  a  proper
group  and  the  obverse  of  one  of  its  marks,  together
with  the  origin  and  obverse  of  the  group  or  a  pair  of
mediates ;  2  types.  In  the  second  case  we  have  five
mediates  of  an  origin  or  its  obverse,  to  which  we  may
add  two  proximates  distant  1 1,  1  3  or  3  3  from  the  old
mediate,  or  a  proximate  and  an  ultimate  distant  1  1,
1  3  or  3  3  respectively  from  the  odd  mediate ;  6  types.

If  the  sevenfold  statement  subdivide  into  four  and
three,  the  two  pairs  may  be  both  in  the  four,  or  one  in  the
four  and  one  in  the  three.  In  the  former  case  we  have
a  triad,  to  which  may  be  added  the  origin  and  obverse
and  a  pair  of  mediates  or  two  pairs  of  mediates  ;  2


INVOLVING  FOUE  CLASSES.  101

types.  In  the  latter  case  the  four  consists  of  an  origin
and  obverse  and  two  mediates  ;  we  must  add  a  pair
consisting  of  a  proximate  and  an  ultimate,  which  may
be  distant  1 1,  3  3  or  1  3,  1  3  from  the  two  mediates,
and  then  another  proximate  or  ultimate  which  may  be
distant  1 1,  1  3,  or  3  3  from  the  two  mediates  ;  6  types.

16.  Three  pairs  of  obverses  in  a  sevenfold  statement
may  be  all  evenly  distant,  or  two  evenly  and  the  other
pair  oddly  distant  from  each.  If  they  are  all  evenly
distant  they  are  the  mediates  to  a  certain  origin  or  its
obverse,  and  the  seventh  mark  may  be  the  origin  or  a
proximate,  2  types.  In  the  other  case  we  have  an
origin,  obverse,  and  pair  of  mediates  together  with  a
proximate  and  its  obverse  ultimate ;  we  may  add
a  proximate  or  a  mediate,  2  types.

17.  A  pure  eightfold  statement  must  consist  of  two
groups,  either  both  proper  or  both  improper,  or  one
of  each.  Two  proper  groups  may  have  their  origins
distant  1  or  3  ;  2  types.  To  an  improper  group  we
may  add  a  proper  group  made  of  one  origin  and  three
obverses  or  of  three  origins  and  one  obverse,  or  an
improper  group  made  of  four  origins  or  four  obverses
or  two  origins  and  two  obverses  ;  5  types.  Altogether
there  are  7  types  of  pure  eightfold  statement.

18.  An  eightfold  statement  with  one  pair  of  obverses
must  subdivide  into  four  and  four,  or  into  five  and
three.  In  the  former  case  we  have  a  pair  of  obverses,
viz.  an  origin  and  its  obverse,  and  two  mediates ;  to
which  we  must  add  a  group  formed  out  of  the  proxi-
mates  and  ultimates.  This  group  may  be  proper,  (1
type),  or  improper,  the  mediates  being  in  regard  to  it
two  origins,  two  obverses,  or  an  origin  and  an  obverse ;


102         ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND   STATEMENT

3  types.  In  the  latter  case  the  five  marks  must  be  a
proper  group  with  the  obverse  of  one  mark,  to  which
we  must  add  a  triad  made  out  of  the  origin,  obverse,
and  mediates  of  the  group.  This  triad  may  be  the
origin  or  obverse  together  with  two  mediates  distant  11,
1  3,  3  3  from  the  ultimate,  6  types ;  or  else  it  may  be
three  mediates  distant  111,  113,  13  3,  333  from  the
ultimate,  4  types.

19.  An    eightfold    statement   with    two    pairs    of
obverses  must  subdivide  into  four  and  four,  or  into  five
and  three,  or  into  six  and  two.     In  the  first  case  the
two  pairs  of  obverses  may  be  evenly  distant,  when  the
remaining  marks  form  a  group  either  proper,  with  its
origin,  obverse,  and  pair  of  mediates,  or  two  pairs  of
mediates,  or  else  improper,  3  types ;  or  oddly  distant,
when  the  remainder  form  one  of  the  six  pure  fourfold
statements  enumerated  art.  6.    Two  marks  distant  2  from
each  other  may  be  distant  11,  33  or  13,  13  from  the
pair  of  obverses  which  are  oddly  distant  from  them ;
thus  each  of  the  six  fourfold  statements  gives  3  types  of
eightfold  statement,  except  the  third,  which   gives  4 ;
in  all  19.     In  the  second  case  the  three  may  be  a  triad
or  may  contain  a  pair  of  obverses.     If  it  is  a  triad,  the
five  are  mediates  to  one  origin  and  its  obverse,  and  we
add  three  proximates  distant    113    or   13  3    or    two
proximates  distant  1 1,  1  3  or  3  3,  with  an  ultimate  dis-
tance respectively  1 1  or  3  3  from  the  old  mediate ;  6
types.     If  the  three  contain  a  pair  of  obverses,  the  five
make  a  proper  group  with  obverse  of  one  mark  ;  to  this
we  may  add  the  origin  and  obverse  of  the  group  with
mediate  distant  1  or  3  from  the  ultimate,  or  a  pair  of


INVOLVING  FOUK  CLASSES.  103

obverse  mediates  with  a  mediate  distant  1  or  3  as
before  ;  4  types.  In  the  third  case  the  six  must  be  an
origin  and  five  mediates,  and  we  may  add  two  proxi-
mates  distant  11,  13,  3  3  from  the  old  mediate,  or  a
proximate  and  an  ultimate,  or  two  ultimates,  distant  as
before ;  9  types.

20.  In  an  eightfold  statement  with  three  pairs  of  ob-
verses these  may  be  either  all  evenly  distant,  or  two  of
them  evenly  distant  and  the  other  oddly  distant  from
both.  In  the  first  case  they  are  mediates  to  a  certain
origin  and  its  obverse,  and  we  may  add  the  origin  with  a
proximate  or  ultimate,  two  proximates,  or  a  proximate
and  ultimate ;  4  types.  In  the  second  case  take  the
oddly  distant  pair  for  origin  and  obverse ;  then  these
are  associated  with  two  proximates  and  their  obverse
ultimates,  and  we  may  add  the  two  other  proximates,
a  proximate  and  an  ultimate,  a  proximate  and  a  mediate
(distant  11,  13,  31,  33  from  this  proximate  and  the
remaining  one),  or  two  mediates  distant  1 1,  3  3  or  1  3,
13  from  the  two  proximates  ;  8  types.

Lastly,  in  an  eightfold  statement  with  four  pairs  of
obverses  they  may  be  all  evenly  distant^  or  the  statement
may  subdivide  into  six  and  two,  or  into  four  and  four  ;
in  the  latter  case  there  are  2  types.

21.  To  obtain  the  whole  number  of  types,  we
observe  that  for  every  less-than-eightfold  type  there  is
a  complementary  more-than-eightfold  type  (art.  2) ;  so
that  we  must  add  the  number  of  eightfold  types  (78)  to
twice  the  number  of  less-than-eightfold  types  (159)  ;
the  result  is  396.


104         ON  THE  TYPES  OF  COMPOUND  STATEMENT


TABLE.

Art.

4.  1-fold

2-fold,  distance  1,  2,  3,  4

5.  3-fold,  pure,  distance  112,  222,  12  3,  233       .         .         .        4

1  pair  obv.,  dist.  134,  324 2

6

6.  4-fold,  pure,  two  and  two : —


1  I  1     ijl     ij  1     1  J3    1  |3    3_[3    g
*1  I  l'  *1  I  3'  '3  I  3*  *3  [  1*  '3  j  3'  '3  I  3

three  and  one 4

group,  proper  or  improper  .        .        .2

12  12

7.  „       1  pair  obv 6

2  pair  obr.,  dist.  odd  or  even 2

19

8.  Wold,  pure,  three  and  two  ....    7

four  and  one  .        ,        ,        .     5

12

9.  „       1  pair  obv.  +  two  prox 5

+  prox.  +  ult 3

+  two  med 4

12

—  12

2  pair  obv.,  odd  dist.,  1 ;  even,  2     .        .         .         .3

"It"


10.  6-fold,  pure,  three  and  three        ....    6

four  and  two  ....    6

12

—  12

11.  „       1  pair  obv.,  two  and  four         .        .        .3

three  and  three     .        .        .8
four  and  two  .        .        .9

five  and  one  .         ...    2

^^

12.  „       2  pair  obv.,  odd  dist.,  6 ;  even,  5     .        .        ,        .11

3  pair  obv 2


1
4


19


27


47       47


INVOLVING  FOUR  CLASSES.  105


Art.

13.  7-fold,

14.  „

pure  ;  proper  group,  4;  improper,  4
1  pair  obv.,  four  and  three

three  and  four

five  and  two

.  10

.    7
.     7

24

16.      ,

2  pair  ohv.,  six  and  one  .
five  and  two  .
four  and  three

.     3

.    8
.     8

19

16.      „

3  pair  obv

.  ~"  .

24


19


55       55

Total  of  less-than-eightfuld  statements         .        .     159
Complementary  more-than-eightfold  statements  .     159

17.  8-fold,  pure 7

18.  „       1  pair  obv.,  four  and  four         .        .        .4

five  and  three        .        .        .10


14  14


19.  „       2  pair  obv.,  four  and  four         .        .        ,22

five  and  three        .        .        .10
six  and  two  ....    9

41  41

20.  8-fold,  3  pair  obv.,  all  evenly  dist.       .         .        .     4

two  evenly  dist.     .         .        .8

12  12

4  pair  obv.       ........      4

78       78


Grand  Total     ......     396


106


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.'

The  crude  essay  which  here  follows  is  allowed  to  see  the  light  leather  as  a  text
for  the  remarks  to  which  it  has  given  rise  than  for  its  own  sake.  It  was
written  as  a  means  of  seeking  for  more  light ,  and  in  that  respect  has  suC"
ceeded.  Some  remarks  of  Mr,  Darwin^ s  ('  Descent  of  Man,  part  i.  ch,  3)
appeared  to  me  to  constitute  a  method  of  dealing  with  ethical  probletns
bearing  a  close  analogy  to  the  methods  which  have  been  successful  in  all
other  practical  questions^  but  differing  somewhat  in  principle  from  the
theories  which  are  at  present  in  vogue^  while  in  its  7'esults  it  coincides  with
the  highest  and  healthiest  practical  instincts  of  this  and  of  all  times.  All
•that  is  attempted  here  is  te  show  roughly  what  account  is  given  by  this
method 'of  som^  of  the  fundamental  conception's — right  and  wrong,  conscience,
responsibility — and  to  indicate  the  nature  of  the  standard  which  must  guide
their  application.  Ex4ict  definitions  are  not  to  be  looked  for  ;  they  come  as
the  last  product  ^f  a  completed  theory,  and  are  m>re  to  be  wrong  at  an
early  stage  ^f  science.  But  th-ough  we  may  be  unable  to  define  fuUy  what
right  is,  we  do,  I  think,  arrive  at  principles  which  show  us  very  clearly
many  things  which  it  is  not ;  and  these  conclusions  are  not  mdy  of  great
practical  importance,  but  theoretically  bear  close  analogy  to  the  steps  by  which
complete  definition  has  been  attained  in  the  exact  sciences.

By  Morals  or  Ethic  I  mean  the  doctrine  of  a  special
kind  of  pleasure  or  displeasure  which  is  felt  by  the
human  mind  in  contemplating  certain  courses  of  conduct,
whereby  they  are  felt  to  be  right  or  wrong^  and  of  a
special  desire  to  do  the  right  things  and  avoid  the  wrong
ones.  The  pleasure  or  displeasure  is  commonly  called
the  moral  sense ;  the  corresponding  desire  might  be
called  the  moral  appetite.  These  are  facts,  existing  in
the  consciousness  of  every  man  who  need  considered
in  this  discussion,  and  sufficiently  marked  out  by  these
names ;  they  need  no  further  definition.  In  the  same
*  '  Contemporary  Review/  September,  1876.


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.  107

way  the  sense  of  taste  is  a  feeling  of  pleasure  or  displea-
sure in  things  savoury  or  unsavoury,  and  is  associated
with  a  desire  for  the  one  and  a  repulsion  from  the  other.
We  must  assume  that  everybody  knows  what  these
words  mean  ;  the  feehngs  they  describe  may  be  analysed
or  accounted  for,  but  they  cannot  be  more  exactly  de-
fined as  feehngs.

The  maxims  of  ethic  are  recommendations  or  com-
mands of  the  form,  '  Do  this  particular  thing  because  it
is  right,'  or  '  Avoid  this  particular  thing  because  it  is
wrong.'     They  express  the  immediate  desire  to  do  the
right  thing  for  itself,  not  for  the  sake  of  anything  else :
on  this  account  the  mood  of  them  is  called  the  catego-
rical imperative.     The  particular  things  commanded  or
forbidden  by  such  maxims  depend  upon  the  character
of  the  individual  in  whose  mind  they  arise.     There  is
a  certain  general  agreement  in  the  ethical  code  of  per-
sons belonging  to  the  same  race  at  a  given  time,  but
considerable  variations  in  different  races  and  times.     To
the  question  '  What  is  right  ? '  can  therefore  only  be
answered  in  the  first  instance,  '  That  which  pleases  your
moral  sense.'     But  it  may  be  further  asked  '  What  is
generally  thought  right  ? '  and  the  reply  will  specify  the
ethic  of  a  particular  race  and  period.     But  the  ethical
code  of  an  individual,  like  the  standard  of  taste,  may  be
modified  by  habit  and  education ;  and  accordingly  the
question  may  be  asked,  '  How  shall  I  order  my  moral
desires  so  as  to  be  able  to  satisfy  them  most  completely
and  continuously  ?     What  ought  1  to  feel  to  be  right  ?  '
The  answer  to  this  question  must  be  sought  in  the  study
of  the  conditions  under  which  the  moral  sense  was  pro-
duced and  is  preserved  ;  in  other  words,  in  the  study  of


108  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MOEALS.

its  functions  as  a  property  of  the  human  organism.  The
maxims  derived  from  this  study  may  be  called  maxims
of  abstract  or  absolute  right ;  they  are  not  absolutely
universal,  '  eternal  and  immutable/  but  they  are  inde-
pendent of  the  individual,  and  practically  universal  for
the  present  condition  of  the  human  species.

I  mean  by  Science  the  appHcation  of  experience  to  new
circumstances,  by  the  aid  of  an  order  of  nature  which  has
been  observed  in  the  past,  and  on  the  assumption  that
such  order  will  continue  in  the  future.  The  simplest  use
of  experience  as  a  guide  to  action  is  probably  not  even
conscious ;  it  is  the  association  by  continually-repeated
selection  of  certain  actions  with  certain  circumstances,
as  in  the  unconsciously-acquired  craft  of  the  maker  of
flint  implements.  I  still  call  this  science,  although  it
is  only  a  beginning ;  because  the  physiological  process
is  a  type  of  what  takes  place  in  all  later  stages.  The
next  step  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  a  hypothetical
maxim, — '  If  you  want  to  make  brass,  melt  your  copper
along  with  this  blu^e  stone.'  To  a  maxim  of  this  sort
it  may  always  be  rephed,  '  I  do  not  want  to  make  brass,
and  so  I  shall  not  do  as  you  tell  me.'  This  reply  is
anticipated  in  the  final  form  of  science,  when  it  is
expressed  as  a  statement  or  proposition:  brass  is  an
alloy  of  copper  and  zinc,  and  calamine  is  zinc  carbonate.
Behef  in  a  general  statement  is  an  artifice  of  our  mental
constitution,  whereby  infinitely  various  sensations  and
groups  of  sensations  are  brought  into  connexion  with
infinitely  various  actions  and  groups  of  actions.  On
the  phenomenal  side  there  corresponds  a  certain  cerebral
structure  by  which  various  combinations  of  disturbances
in  the  sensor  tract  are  made  to  lead  to  the  appropriate


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.  109

combinations  of  disturbances  in  the  motor  tract.  Tlie
important  point  is  that  science,  though  apparently
transformed  into  pure  knowledge,  has  yet  never  lost
its  character  of  being  a  craft ;  and  that  it  is  not  the
knowledge  itself  which  can  rightly  be  called  science,  but
a  special  way  of  getting  and  of  using  knowledge.  Namely,
science  is  the  getting  of  knowledge  from  experience
on  the  assumption  of  uniformity  in  nature,  and  the  use
of  such  knowledge  to  guide  the  actions  of  men.  And
the  most  abstract  statements  or  propositions  in  science
are  to  be  regarded  as  bundles  of  hypothetical  maxims
packed  into  a  portable  shape  and  size.  Every  scientific
fact  is  a  shorthand  expression  for  a  vast  number  of
practical  directions :  if  you  want  so-and-so,  do  so-and-
so.

If  with  this  meaning  of  the  word  '  Science,'  there  is
such  a  thing  as  a  scientific  basis  of  Morals,  it  must  be
true  that, —

1,  The  maxims  of  Ethic  are  hypothetical  maxims

2,  Derived  from  experience

3,  On  the  assumption  of  uniformity  in  nature.
These  propositions  I  shall  now  endeavour  to  prove  ;
and  in  conclusion,  I  shall  indicate  the  direction  in  which
we  may  look  for  those  general  statements  of  fact  whose
organization  will  complete  the  likeness  of  ethical  and
physical  science.

The  Tribal  Self}

In  the  metaphysical  sense,  the  word  'self  is  taken
to   mean   the   conscious   subject,  das  Ich^   the   whole

^  This  conception  of  an  Extended  Self  I  found  many  years  ago  that  I  liad
in  common  with  my  friend  Mr.  Macmillan.  Since  then  I  have  heard  and
read  in  many  places  expressions  of  it  more  or  less  distinct.


110  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MOEALS.

stream  of  feelings  which  make  up  a  consciousness  re-
garded as  bound  together  by  association  and  memory.
But,  in  the  more  common  and  more  restricted  ethical
sense,  what  we  call  self  is  a  selected  aggregate  of
feehngs  and  of  objects  related  to  them  which  hangs
together  as  a  conception  by  virtue  of  long  and  repeated
association.  My  self  does  not  include  all  my  feehngs,
because  I  habitually  separate  off  some  of  them,  say
they  do  not  properly  belong  to  me,  and  treat  them  as
my  enemies.  On  the  other  hand,  it  does  in  general
include  my  body  regarded  as  an  object,  because  of  the
feehngs  which  occur  simultaneously  with  events  which
affect  it.  My  foot  is  certainly  part  of  myself,  because
I  get  hurt  when  anybody  treads  on  it.  When  we
desire  anything  for  its  somewhat  remote  consequences,
it  is  not  common  for  these  to  be  represented  to  the
mind  in  the  form  of  the  actual  feehngs  of  pleasure
which  are  ultimately  to  flow  from  the  satisfaction  of
the  desire;  instead  of  this,  they  are  replaced  by  a
symbohc  conception  which  represents  the  thing  desired
as  doing  good  to  the  complex  abstraction  self.  This
abstraction  serves  thus  to  support  and  hold  together
those  complex  and  remote  motives  which  make  up  by
far  the  greater  part  of  the  hfe  of  the  intelligent  races.
When  a  thing  is  desired  for  no  immediate  pleasure  that
it  can  bring,  it  is  generally  desired  on  account  of  a
certain  symbohc  substitute  for  pleasure,  the  feehng  that
this  thing  is  suitable  to  the  self.  And,  as  in  many  like
cases,  this  feeling,  which  at  first  derived  its  pleasurable
nature  from  the  faintly  represented  simple  pleasures
of  which  it  was  a  symbol,  ceases  after  a  time  to  recall
them   and   becomes  a  simple   pleasure  itself     In  this


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.  Ill

way  the  self  becomes  a  sort  of  centre  about  which  our
remoter  motives  revolve,  and  to  which  they  always
have  regard ;  in  virtue  of  which,  moreover,  they
become  immediate  and  simple,  from  having  been  com-
plex and  remote.

If  we  consider  now  the  simpler  races  of  mankind,
we  shall  find  not  only  that  immediate  desires  play  a  far
larger  part  in  their  lives,  and  so  that  the  conception  of
self  is  less  used  and  less  developed,  but  also  that  it  is
less  definite  and  more  wide.  The  savage  is  not  only
hurt  when  anybody  treads  on  his  foot,  but  when  any-
body treads  on  his  tribe.  He  may  lose  his  hut,  and
his  wife,  and  his  opportunities  of  getting  food.  In  this
way  the  tribe  becomes  naturally  included  in  that  con-
ception of  self  which  renders  remote  desires  possible  by
making  them  immediate.  The  actual  pains  or  pleasures
which  come  from  the  woe  or  weal  of  the  tribe,  and
which  were  the  source  of  this  conception,  drop  out
of  consciousness  and  are  remembered  no  more ;  the
symbol  which  has  replaced  them  becomes  a  centre  and
goal  of  immediate  desires,  powerful  enough  in  many
cases  to  override  the  strongest  suggestions  of  individual
pleasure  or  pain.

Here  a  helping  cause  comes  in.  The  tribe,  qud
tribe,  has  to  exist,  and  it  can  only  exist  by  aid  of  such
an  organic  artifice  as  the  conception  of  the  tribal  self  in
the  minds  of  its  members.  Hence  the  natural  selection
of  those  races  in  which  this  conception  is  tlie  most
powerful  and  most  habitually  predominant  as  a  motive
over  immediate  desires.  To  such  an  extent  has  this
proceeded  that  we  may  fairly  doubt  whether  the  self-
hood of  the  tribe  is  not  earlier  in  point  of  development


112  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.

than  that  of  the  individual.  In  the  process  of  time  it
becomes  a  matter  of  hereditary  transmission,  and  is  thus
fixed  as  a  specific  character  in  the  constitution  of  social
man.  With  the  settlement  of  countries,  and  the  aggre-
gation of  tribes  into  nations,  it  takes  a  wider  and  more
abstract  form ;  and  in  the  highest  natures  the  tribal
self  is  incarnate  in  nothing  less  than  humanity.  Short
of  these  heights,  it  places  itself  in  the  family  and  in  the
city.  I  shall  call  that  quahty  or  disposition  of  man
which  consists  in  the  supremacy  of  the  family  or  tribal
self  as  a  mark  of  reference  for  motives  by  its  old  name
Piety.  And  I  have  now  to  consider  certain  feehngs  and
conceptions  to  which  the  existence  of  piety  must  neces  -
sarily  give  rise.

Before  going  further,  however,  it  will  be  advisable
to  fix  as  precisely  as  may  be  the  sense  of  the  words  just
used.  Self,  then,  in  the  ethical  sense,  is  a  conception  in
the  mind  of  the  individual  which  serves  as  a  peg  on
which  remote  desires  are  hung  and  by  which  they  are
rendered  immediate.  The  individual  self  is  such  a  peg
for  the  hanging  of  remote  desires  which  affect  the  indi-
vidual only.  The  tribal  self  is  a  conception  in  the  mind
of  the  individual  which  serves  as  a  peg  on  which  those
remote  desires  are  hung  which  were  implanted  in  him
by  the  need  of  the  tribe  as  a  tribe.  We  must  carefully
distinguish  the  tribal  self  from  society,  or  the  '  common
consciousness  ; '  it  is  something  in  the  mind  of  each  in-
dividual man  which  binds  together  his  gregarious  in-
stincts.

The  word  tribe  is  here  used  to  mean  a  group  of  that
size  which  in  the  circumstances  considered  is  selected
for  survival  or  destruction  as  a  group,     Self-regarding


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.  1L3

excellences  are  brought  out  by  the  natural  selection  of
individuals  ;  the  tribal  self  is  developed  by  the  natural
selection  of  groups.  The  size  of  the  groups  must  vary
at  different  times  ;  and  the  extent  of  the  tribal  self  must
vary  accordingly.

Approbation  and  Conscience.

The  tribe  has  to  exist.  Such  tribes  as  saw  no
necessity  for  it  have  ceased  to  hve.  To  exist,  it  must
encourage  piety  ;  and  there  is  a  method  which  lies  ready
to  hand.

We  do  not  like  a  man  whose  character  is  such  that
we  may  reasonably  expect  injuries  from  him.  This  dis-
like of  a  man  on  account  of  his  character  is  a  more
complex  feeling  than  the  mere  dislike  of  separate
injuries.  A  cat  Hkes  your  hand,  and  your  lap,  and  the
food  you  give  her  ;  but  I  do  not  think  she  has  any  con-
ception of  you}  A  dog,  however,  may  like  you  even
when  you  thrash  him,  though  he  does  not  like  the
thrashing.  Now  such  likes  and  disHkes  may  be  felt  by
the  tribal  self.  If  a  man  does  anything  generally  re-
garded as  good  for  the  tribe,  my  tribal  self  may  say,  in
the  first  place,  '  I  like  that  thing  that  you  have  done.'
By  such  common  approbation  of  individual  acts  the
influence  of  piety  as  a  motive  becomes  defined ;  and
natural  selection  will  in  the  long  run  preserve  those
tribes  which  have  approved  the  right  things  ;  namely,
those  things  which  at  that  time  gave  the  tribe  an
advantage  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  But  in  the
second  place,  a  man  may  as  a  rule  and  constantly,
being  actuated  by  piety,  do  good  things  for  the  tribe ;

^  Present  company  always  excepted :  I  fully  iDelieve  in  tlie  personal  and
disinterested  affection  of  my  cat.

VOL.  II.  I


114  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIO  BASIS  OF  MORALS.

and  in  that  case  the  tribal  self  will  say,  I  like  you.
The  feeling  expressed  by  this  statement  on  the  part  of
any  individual,  '  In  the  name  of  the  tribe,  I  Hke  you,'  is
what  I  call  approbation.  It  is  the  feeling  produced  in
pious  individuals  by  that  sort  of  character  which  seems
to  them  beneficial  to  the  community.

Now  suppose  that  a  man  has  done  something
obviously  harmful  to  the  community.  Either  some
immediate  desire,  or  his  individual  self,  has  for  once
proved  stronger  than  the  tribal  self.  When  the  tribal
self  wakes  up,  the  man  says,  ^  In  the  name  of  the  tribe,
I  do  not  like  this  thing  that  I,  as  an  individual,  have
done.'  This  Self-judgment  in  the  name  of  the  tribe  is
called  Conscience.  If  the  man  goes  further  and  draws
from  this  act  and  others  an  inference  about  his  own
character,  he  may  say,  '  In  the  name  of  the  tribe,
I  do  not  Kke  my  individual  self.'  This  is  remorse.
Mr.  Darwin  has  weU  pointed  out  that  immediate  desires
are  in  general  strong  but  of  short  duration,  and  cannot
be  adequately  represented  to  the  mind  after  they  have
passed ;  while  the  social  forces,  though  less  violent,
have  a  steady  and  continuous  action.

In  a  mind  sufficiently  developed  to  distinguish  the
individual  from  the  tribal  self,  conscience  is  thus  a  ne-
cessary result  of  the  existence  of  piety  ;  it  is  ready  to
hand  as  a  means  for  its  increase.  But  to  account  for
the  existence  of  piety  and  conscience  in  the  elemental
form  which  we  have  hitherto  considered  is  by  no  means
to  account  for  the  present  moral  nature  of  man.  We
shall  be  led  many  steps  in  that  direction  if  we  consider
the  way  in  which  society  has  used  these  feehngs  of  the
individual  as  a  means  for  its  own  preservation.


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MOEALS.  115

Right  and  Responsibility.

A  Kke  or  a  dislike  is  one  thing ;  the  expression  of
it  is  another.     It  is  attached  to  the  feeling  by  links  of
association ;  and  when  this  association  has  been  selec-
tively modified  by  experience,  whether  consciously  or
unconsciously,  the  expression  serves  a  purpose  of  retain-
ing or  repeating  the  thing  liked,  and  of  removing  the
thing  disliked.     Such  a  purpose  is  served  by  the  ex-
pression of  tribal  approbation  or  disapprobation,  how-
ever httle  it  may  be  the  conscious  end  of  such  expression
to  any  individual.     It  is  necessary  to  the  tribe  that  the
pious  character  should  be  encouraged  and  preserved^
the  impious  character  discouraged  and  removed.     The
process  is  of  two   kinds ;   direct  and  reflex.      In  the
direct   process   the    tribal   dislike   of    the   ojffender   is
precisely  similar  to  the  dislike  of  a  noxious  beast ;  and
it  expresses  itself  in  his  speedy  removal.     But  in  the
reflex  process  we  find  the  first  trace  of  that  singular  and
wonderful  judgment  by  analogy  which  ascribes  to  other
men  a  consciousness  similar  to  our  own.     If  the  process
were  a  conscious  one,  it  might  perhaps  be  described  in
this  way :    the  tribal  self  says,  '  Put  yourself  in  this
man's  place ;  he  also  is  pious,  but  he  has  ofiended,  and
that  proves  that  he  is  not  pious  enough.     Still,  he  has
some  conscience,  and  the  expression  of  your  tribal  dis-
like to  his  character,  awakening  his  conscience,  will
tend  to  change  him  and  make  him  more  pious.'     But
the  process  is  not  a  conscious  one :  the  social  craft  or
art  of  living  together  is  learned  by  the  tribe  and  not  by
the  individual,  and  the   purpose   of  improving  men's
characters  is  provided  for  by  complex  social  arrange-

I  2


116  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.

t
ments  long  before  it  has  been  conceived  by  any-
conscious  mind.  The  tribal  self  learns  to  approve
certain  expressions  of  tribal  liking  or  disliking;  the
actions  whose  open  approval  is  liked  by  the  tribal  self
are  called  right  actions,  and  those  whose  open  dis-
approval is  liked  are  called  wrong  actions.  The  corre-
sponding characters  are  called  good  or  bad,  virtuous
or  vicious.

This  introduces  a  further  complication  into  the  con-
science. Self-judgment  in  the  name  of  the  tribe  be-
comes associated  with  very  definite  and  material  judg-
ment by  the  tribe  itself.  On  the  one  hand,  this
undoubtedly  strengthens  the  motive-power  of  conscience
in  an  enormous  degree.  On  the  other  hand,  it  tends  to
guide  the  decisions  of  conscience ;  and  since  the  ex-
pression of  pubHc  approval  or  disapproval  is  made  in
general  by  means  of  some  organized  machinery  of
government,  it  becomes  possible  for  conscience  to  be
knowingly  directed  by  the  wise  or  misdirected  by  the
wicked,  instead  of  being  driven  along  the  right  path
by  the  slow  selective  process  of  experience.  Now  right
actions  are  not  those  which  are  publicly  approved,  but
those  whose  pubhc  approbation  a  well-instructed  tribal
self  would  like.  Still,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  the
guiding  influence  of  expressed  approbation  on  the  great
mass  of  the  people ;  and  in  those  cases  where  the
machinery  of  government  is  approximately  a  means  of
expressing  the  true  public  conscience,  that  influence
becomes  a  most  powerful  help  to  improvement.

Let  us  note  now  the  very  important  diflerence
between  the  direct  and  the  reflex  process.  To  clear  a
man  away  as  a  noxious  beast,  and  to  punish  him  for


ON  THE   SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MOBALS.  117

doing  wrong,  these  are  two  very  different  things.  The
purpose  in  the  first  case  is  merely  to  get  rid  of  a
nuisance ;  the  purpose  in  the  second  case  is  to  improve
the  character  either  of  the  man  himself  or  of  those  who
will  observe  this  public  expression  of  disapprobation.
The  offence  of  which  the  man  has  been  guilty  leads  to
an  inference  about  his  character,  and  it  is  supposed
that  the  community  may  contain  other  persons  whose
characters  are  similar  to  his,  or  tend  to  become  so.  It
has  been  found  that  the  expression  of  public  disappro-
bation tends  to  awake  the  conscience  of  such  people
and  to  improve  their  characters.  If  the  improvement
of  the  man  himself  is  aimed  at,  it  is  assumed  that  he
has  a  conscience  which  can  be  worked  upon  and  made
to  deter  him  from  similar  offences  in  future.

The  word  purpose  has  here  been  used  in  a  sense
to  which  it  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  call  attention.
Adaptation  of  means  to  an  end  may  be  produced  in  two
ways  that  we  at  present  know  of;  by  processes  of
natural  selection,  and  by  the  agency  of  an  intelUgence
in  which  an  image  or  idea  of  the  end  preceded  the  use
of  the  means.  In  both  cases  the  existence  of  the  adap-
tation is  accounted  for  by  the  necessity  or  utility  of
the  end.  It  seems  to  me  convenient  to  use  the  word
purpose  as  meaning  generally  the  end  to  which  certain
means  are  adapted,  both  in  these  two  cases,  and  in  any
other  that  may  hereafter  become  known,  provided  only
that  the  adaptation  is  accounted  for  by  the  necessity  or
utiHty  of  the  end.  And  there  seems  no  objection  to  the
use  of  the  phrase  '  final  cause '  in  this  wider  sense,  if  it
is  to  be  kept  at  all.  The  word  '  design '  might  then  be
kept  for  the  special  case  of  adaptation  by  an  intelligence.


118  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.

And  we  may  then  say  that  since  the  process  of  natural
selection  has  been  understood,  purpose  has  ceased
to  suggest  design  to  instructed  people,  except  in  cases
where  the  agency  of  man  is  independently  probable.

When  a  man  can  be  punished  for  doing  wrong  with
approval  of  the  tribal  self,  he  is  said  to  be  responsible,
Eesponsibility  impUes  two  things : — (1),  The  act  was  a
product  of  the  man's  character  and  of  the  circumstances,
and  his  character  may  to  a  certain  extent  be  inferred
from  the  act ;  (2),  The  man  had  a  conscience  which
might  have  been  so  worked  upon  as  to  prevent  his  do-
ing the  act.     Unless  the  first  condition  be  fulfilled,  we
cannot  reasonably  take  any  action  at  all  in  regard  to
the  man,  but  only  in  regard   to  the  ofience.     In  the
case  of  crimes  of  violence,  for  example,  we  might  carry
a  six-shooter  to  protect  ourselves  against  similar  possi-
bilities, but  unless  the  fact  of  a  man's  having  once  com-
mitted a  murder  made  it  probable  that  he  would  do
the  hke  again,  it  would  clearly  be  absurd  and  unreason-
able to  lynch  the  man.     That  is  to  say,  we  assume  an
uniformity  of  connexion  between  character  and  actions,
infer   a  man's   character   from  his   past   actions,   and
endeavour  to  provide  against  his  future  actions  either
by   destroying  him  or  by  changing  his  character.     I
think  it  will  be  found  that  in  all  those  cases  where  we
not  only  deal  with  the  offence  but  treat  it  with   moral
reprobation,  we  imply   the   existence  of  a  conscience
which  might  have  been  worked  upon  to  improve  the
character.      Why,    for   example,    do   we   not    regard
a  lunatic  as  responsible  ?     Because  we  are  in  possession
of  information  about  his   character  derived  not    only
from  his  one  offence  but  from  other  facts,  whereby  we


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MOBALS.  119

know  that  even  if  he  had  a  conscience  left,  his  mind  is
so  diseased  that  it  is  impossible  by  moral  reprobation
alone  to  change  his  character  so  that  it  may  be  subse-
quently reHed  upon.  With  his  cure  from  disease  and
the  restored  validity  of  this  condition,  responsibility  re-
turns. There  are,  of  course,  cases  in  which  an  irre-
sponsible person  is  punished  as  if  he  were  responsible,
pour  encourager  les  autres  who  are  responsible.  The
question  of  the  right  or  wrong  of  this  procedure  is  the
question  of  its  average  effect  on  the  character  of  men  at
any  particular  time.

J'he  Categorical  Imperative.

May  we  now  say  that  the  maxims  of  Ethic  are
hypothetical  maxims?  I  think  we  may,  and  that  in
showing  why  we  shall  explain  the  apparent  difference
between  them  and  other  maxims  belonging  to  an  early
stage  of  science.  In  the  first  place,  ethical  maxims  are
learned  by  the  tribe  and  not  by  the  individual.  Those
tribes  have  on  the  whole  survived  in  which  conscience
approved  such  actions  as  tended  to  the  improvement  of
men's  characters  as  citizens  and  therefore  to  the  sur-
vival of  the  tribe.  Hence  it  is  that  the  moral  sense  of
the  individual,  though  founded  on  the  experience  of  the
tribe,  is  purely  intuitive ;  conscience  gives  no  reasons.
Notwithstanding  this,  the  ethical  maxims  are  presented
to  us  as  conditional ;  if  you  want  to  live  together  in
this  complicated  way,  your  ways  must  be  straight  and
not  crooked,  you  must  seek  the  truth  and  love  no  lie.
Suppose  we  answer,  ^  I  don't  want  to  live  together  with
other  men  in  this  complicated  way ;  and  so  I  shall  not
do  as  youiell  me.'     That  is  not  the  end  of  the  matter,


120  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MOEALS.

as  it  might  be  with  other  scientific  precepts.  For
obvious  reasons  it  is  right  in  this  case  to  reply,  '  Then
in  the  name  of  my  people  I  do  not  hke  you/  and  to
express  this  disHke  by  appropriate  methods.  And  the
offender,  being  descended  from  a  social  race,  is  unable
to  escape  his  conscience,  the  voice  of  his  tribal  self
which  says,  '  In  the  name  of  the  tribe,  I  hate  myself  for
this  treason  that  I  have  done.'

There  are  two  reasons,  then,  why  ethical  maxims
appear  to  be  unconditional.  First,  they  are  acquired
from  experience  not  directly  but  by  tribal  selection,  and
therefore  in  the  mind  of  the  individual  they  do  not  rest
upon  the  true  reasons  for  them.  Secondly,  although
they  are  conditional,  the  absence  of  the  condition  in
one  born  of  a  social  race  is  rightly  visited  by  moral  re-
probation.

Ethics  are  based  on  Uniformity,

I  have  already  observed  that  to  deal  with  men  as  a
means  of  influencing  their  actions  imphes  that  these
actions  are  a  product  of  character  and  circumstances ;
and  that  moral  reprobation  and  responsibiHty  cannot
exist  unless  we  assume  the  efficacy  of  certain  special
means  of  influencing  character.  It  is  not  necessary
to  point  out  that  such  considerations  involve  that
uniformity  of  nature  which  underlies  the  possibility
of  even  unconscious  adaptations  to  experience,  of  lan-
guage, and  of  general  conceptions  and  statements.  It
may  be  asked  '  Are  you  quite  sure  that  these  observed
uniformities  between  motive  and  action,  between  cha-
racter and  motive,  between  social  influence  and  change
of  character,  are  absolutely  exact  in  the  form  in  which


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.  121

you  state  them,  or  indeed  that  they  are  exact  laws  of  any
form  ?  May  there  not  be  very  shght  divergences  from
exact  laws,  which  will  allow  of  the  action  of  an  "  uncaused
will,"  or  of  the  interference  of  some  "  extramundane
force "  ? '  I  am  sure  I  do  not  know.  But  this  I  do
know:  that  our  sense  of  right  and  wrong  is  derived
from  such  order  as  we  can  observe,  and  not  from  such
caprice  of  disorder  as  we  may  fancifully  conjecture  ;
and  that  to  whatever  extent  a  divergence  from  exact-
ness became  sensible,  to  that  extent  it  would  destroy
the  most  widespread  and  worthy  of  the  acquisitions  of
mankind.

The  Final  Standard,

By  these  views  we  are  led  to  conclusions  partly  ne-
gative, partly  positive  ;  of  which,  as  might  be  expected,
the  negative  are  the  most  definite.

First,  then,  Ethic  is  a  matter  of  the  tribe  or  commu-
nity, and  therefore  there  are  no  '  self-regarding  virtues.'
The  qualities  of  courage,  prudence,  &c.,  can  only  be
rightly  encouraged  in  so  far  as  they  are  shown  to  con-
duce to  the  efficiency  of  a  citizen ;  that  is,  in  so  far  as
they  cease  to  be  self-regarding.  The  duty  of  private
judgment,  of  searching  after  truth,  the  sacredness  of
belief  which  ought  not  to  be  misused  on  unproved
statements,  follow  only  on  showing  of  the  enormous
importance  to  society  of  a  true  knowledge  of  things.
And  any  diversion  of  conscience  from  its  sole  allegiance
to  the  community  is  condemned  a  priori  in  the  very
nature  of  right  and  wrong.

Next,  the  end  of  Ethic  is  not  the  greatest  happiness
of  the  greatest  number.     Your  happiness  is  of  no  use  to


122  ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MOEALS.

the  community,  except  in  so  far  as  it  tends  to  make  you
a  more  efficient  citizen — that  is  to  say,  happiness  is  not
to  be  desired  for  its  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  some-
thing else.  If  any  end  is  pointed  to,  it  is  the  end  of  in-
creased efficiency  in  each  man's  special  work,  as  well  as
in  the  social  functions  which  are  comman  to  all.  A
man  must  strive  to  be  a  better  citizen,  a  better  work-
man, a  better  son,  husband,  or  father.  Farvi  migliori ;
questo  ha  da  essere  lo  scopo  delta  vostra  vita}

Again,  Piety  is  not  Altruism.  It  is  not  the  doing
good  to  others  as  others,  but  the  service  of  the  com-
munity by  a  member  of  it,  who  loses  in  that  service
the  consciousness  that  he  is  anything  different  from  the
community.

The  social  organism,  like  the  individual,  may  be
healthy  or  diseased.  Health  and  disease  are  very  diffi-
cult things  to  define  accurately :  but  for  practical  pur-
poses, there  are  certain  states  about  which  no  mistake
can  be  made.  When  we  have  even  a  very  imperfect
catalogue  and  description  of  states  that  are  clearly  and
certainly  diseases,  we  may  form  a  rough  preliminary
definition  of  health  by  saying  that  it  means  the  absence
of  all  these  states.  Now  the  health  of  society  involves
among  other  things,  that  right  is  done  by  the  individuals
composing  it.  And  certain  social  diseases  consist  in
a  wrong  direction  of  the  conscience.  Hence  the  deter-
mination of  abstract  right  depends  on  the  study  of
healthy  and  diseased  states  of  society.  How  much
light  can  be  got  for  this  end  from  the  historical  records
we  possess  ?  A  very  great  deal,  if,  as  I  believe,  for
ethical  purposes  the  nature  of  man  and  of  society  may

^  Mazzioi,  Doveri  dell'  Uomo.


ON  THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASIS  OF  MORALS.  123

be   taken  as   approximately  constant   during   the  few
thousand  years  of  which  we  have  distinct  records.

The  matters  of  fact  on  which  rational  ethic  must  be
founded  are  the  laws  of  modification  of  character,  and
the  evidence  of  history  as  to  those  kinds  of  character
which  have  most  aided  the  improvement  of  the  race.
For  although  the  moral  sense  is  intuitive,  it  must  for
the  future  be  directed  by  our  conscious  discovery  of
the  tribal  purpose  which  it  serves.


124


RIGHT  AND   WRONG:
THE   SCIENTIFIC   GROUND  OF  THEIR  DISTINCTION,  i

The  questions  which  are  here  to  be  considered  are
especially  and  peculiarly  everybody's  questions.  It  is
not  everybody's  business  to  be  an  engineer,  or  a  doctor,
or  a  carpenter,  or  a  soldier ;  but  it  is  everybody's
business  to  be  a  citizen.  The  doctrines  and  precepts
which  guide  the  practice  of  the  good  engineer  are  of
interest  to  him  who  uses  them  and  to  those  whose  busi-
ness it  is  to  investigate  them  by  mechanical  science  ;  the
rest  of  us  neither  obey  nor  disobey  them.  But  the
doctrines  and  precepts  of  morahty,  which  guide  the
practice  of  the  good  citizen,  are  of  interest  to  all ;  they
must  be  either  obeyed  or  disobeyed  by  every  human
being  who  is  not  hopelessly  and  for  ever  separated  from
the  rest  of  mankind.  No  one  can  say,  therefore,  that
in  this  inquiry  we  are  not  minding  our  own  business,
that  we  are  meddhng  with  other  men's  affairs.  We
are  in  fact  studying  the  principles  of  our  profession,  so
far  as  we  are  able  ;  a  necessary  thing  for  every  man
who  wishes  to  do  good  work  in  it.

Along  with  the  character  of  universal  interest  which
belongs  to  our  subject  there  goes  another.  What  is
everybody's  practical  business  is  also  to  a  large  extent

*  Sunday  Lecture  .Society,  November  7, 1876 ;  '  Fortnightly  Keview,'
December,  1876.


EIGHT  AND  WRONG.  126

what  everybody  knows  ;  and  it  may  be  reasonably  ex-
pected that  a  discourse  about  Right  and  Wrong  will  be
full  of  platitudes  and  truisms.  The  expectation  is  a
just  one.  The  considerations  I  have  to  oflfer  are  of  the
very  oldest  and  the  very  simplest  commonplace  and
common  sense  ;  and  no  one  can  be  more  astonished  than
I  am  that  there  should  be  any  reason  to  speak  of  them
at  all.  But  there  is  reason  to  speak  of  them,  because
platitudes  are  not  all  of  one  kind.  Some  platitudes
have  a  definite  meaning  and  a  practical  apphcation,  and
are  established  by  the  uniform  and  long-continued  ex-
perience of  all  people.  Other  platitudes,  having  no
definite  meaning  and  no  practical  application,  seem  not
to  be  worth  anybody's  while  to  test ;  and  these  are  quite
sufficiently  estabhshed  by  mere  assertion,  if  it  is  auda-
cious enough  to  begin  with  and  persistent  enough  after-
wards. It  is  in  order  to  distinguish  these  two  kinds  of
platitude  from  one  another,  and  to  make  sure  that  those
which  we  retain  form  a  body  of  doctrine  consistent  with
itself  and  with  the  rest  of  our  beliefs,  that  we  undertake
this  examination  of  obvious  and  widespread  principles.

First  of  all,  then,  what  are  the  facts  ?

We  say  that  it  is  wrong  to  murder,  to  steal,  to  tell
lies,  and  that  it  is  right  to  take  care  of  our  families.
When  we  say  in  this  sense  that  one  action  is  right  and
another  wrong,  we  have  a  certain  feeling  towards  the
action  whicL  is  peculiar  and  not  quite  like  any  other
feeling.  It  is  clearly  a  feehng  towards  the  action  and
not  towards  the  man  who  does  it ;  because  we  speak  of
hating  the  sin  and  loving  the  sinner.  We  might  reason-
ably dislike  a  man  whom  we  knew  or  suspected  to  be  a
murderer,  because  of  the  natural  fear  that  he  might


126  EIGHT  AND  WKONO.

murder  us ;  and  we  might  like  our   own  parents   for
taking  care  of  us.     But  everybody  knows   that  these
feelings  are  something  quite  different  from  the  feehng
which  condemns  murder  as  a  wrong  thing,  and  approves
parental  care  as  a  right  thing.     I  say  nothing  here  about
the  possibihty  of  analysing  this  feehng,  or  proving  that
it  arises  by  combination  of  other  feehngs  ;  all  I  want  to
notice  is  that  it  is  as  distinct  and  recognizable  as  the
feeling  of  pleasure  in  a  sweet  taste  or  of  displeasure  at
a  toothache.     In  speaking  of  right  and  wrong,  we  speak
of  quahties  of  action  which  arouse  definite  feehngs  that
everybody  knows  and  recognizes.     It  is  not  necessary,
then,  to  give  a  definition  at  the  outset ;  we  are  going  to
use  famihar  terms  which  have  a  definite  meaning  in  the
same  sense  in  which  everybody  uses  them.     We  may
ultimately  come  to   something   hke   a   definition  ;  but
what  we  have  to  do  first  is  to  collect  the  facts  and  see
what  can  be  made  of  them,  just  as  if  we  were  going  to
talk  about  hmestone,  or  parents  and  children,  or  fuel.^
It  is  easy  to  conceive  that  murder  and  theft  and
neglect  of  the  young  might  be  considered  wrong  in  a
very  simple  state  of  society.     But  we  find  at  present
that  the  condemnation  of  these  actions  does  not  stand
alone  ;  it  goes  with  the  condemnation  of  a  great  number
of  other  actions  which  seem  to  be  included  with  the  ob-
viously criminal  action  in  a  sort  of  general  rule.     The
wrongness  of  murder,  for  example,  belongs  in  a  less
degree  to  any  form  of  bodily  injury  that  one  man  may
inflict  on  another  ;  and  it  is  even  extended  so  as  to  in-
clude injuries  to  his  reputation  or  his  feehngs.     I  make

*  These  subjects  were  treated  in  the  Lectures  which  immediately  preceded
and  followed  the  present  one.


EIGHT  AND  WEONG.  127

these  more  refined  precepts  follow  in  the  train  of  the
more  obvious  and  rough  ones,  because  this  appears  to
have  been  the  traditional  order  of  their  estabhshment.
*  He  that  makes  his  neighbour  blush  in  public/  says  the
Mishna,  '  is  as  if  he  had  shed  his  blood.'  In  the  same
way  the  rough  condemnation  of  stealing  carries  with  it
a  condemnation  of  more  refined  forms  of  dishonesty :  we
do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  it  is  wrong  for  a  tradesman
to  adulterate  his  goods,  or  for  a  labourer  to  scamp  his
work.  We  not  only  say  that  it  is  wrong  to  tell  lies,  but
that  it  is  wrong  to  deceive  in  other  more  ingenious  ways  ;
wrong  to  use  words  so  that  they  shall  have  one  sense  to
some  people  and  another  sense  to  other  people ;  wrong
to  suppress  the  truth  when  that  suppression  leads  to
false  behef  in  others.  And  again,  the  duty  of  parents
towards  their  children  is  seen  to  be  a  special  case  of  a
very  large  and  varied  class  of  duties  towards  that  great
family  to  which  we  belong — to  the  fatherland  and  them
that  dwell  therein.  The  word  duty  which  I  have  here
used,  has  as  definite  a  sense  to  the  general  mind  as  the
words  right  and  wrong  ;  we  say  that  it  is  right  to  do  our
duty,  and  wrong  to  neglect  it.  These  duties  to  the
community  serve  in  our  minds  to  explain  and  define  our
duties  to  individuals.  It  is  wrong  to  kill  anyone  ;  un-
less we  are  an  executioner,  when  it  may  be  our  duty  to
kill  a  criminal ;  or  a  soldier,  when  it  may  be  our  duty
to  kill  the  enemy  of  our  country  ;  and  in  general  it  is
wrong  to  injure  any  man  in  any  way  in  our  private
capacity  and  for  our  own  sakes.  Thus  if  a  man  injures
us,  it  is  only  right  to  retaliate  on  behalf  of  other  men.
Of  two  men  in  a  desert  island,  if  one  takes  away  the
other's  cloak,  it  may  or  may  not  be  right  for  the  other


128  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

to  let  him  have  his  coat  also  ;  but  if  a  man  takes  away
my  cloak  while  we  both  live  in  society,  it  is  my  duty  to
use  such  means  as  I  can  to  prevent  him  from  taking
away  other  people's  cloaks.  Observe  that  I  am  endea-
vouring to  describe  the  facts  of  the  moral  feelings  of
Englishmen,  such  as  they  are  now.

The  last  remark  leads  us  to  another  platitude  of  ex-
ceedingly ancient  date.  We  said  that  it  was  wrong  to
injure  any  man  in  our  private  capacity  and  for  our  own
sakes.  A  rule  hke  this  differs  from  all  the  others  that
we  have  considered,  because  it  not  only  deals  with  phy-
sical acts,  words  and  deeds  which  can  be  observed  and
known  by  others,  but  also  with  thoughts  which  are
known  only  to  the  man  himself  Who  can  tell  whether
a  given  act  of  punishment  was  done  from  a  private  or
from  a  pubhc  motive  ?  Only  the  agent  himself.  And
yet  if  the  punishment  was  just  and  within  the  law,  we
should  condemn  the  man  in  the  one  case  and  approve
him  in  the  other.  This  pursuit  of  the  actions  of  men
to  their  very  sources,  in  the  feehngs  which  they  only
can  know,  is  as  ancient  as  any  morality  we  know  of,
and  extends  to  the  whole  range  of  it.  Injury  to
another  man  arises  from  anger,  malice,  hatred,  revenge  ;
these  feehngs  are  condemned  as  wrong.  But  feehngs
are  not  immediately  under  our  control,  in  the  same  way
that  overt  actions  are  :  I  can  shake  anybody  by  the
hand  if  I  like,  but  I  cannot  always  feel  friendly  to  him.
Nevertheless  we  can  pay  attention  to  such  aspects  of  the
circumstances,  and  we  can  put  ourselves  in.to  such  condi-
tions, that  our  feehngs  get  gradually  modified  in  one  way
or  the  other  ;  we  form  a  habit  of  checking  our  anger  by
calling  up  certain  images  and  considerations,  whereby


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  129

in  time  the  offending  passion  is  brought  into  subjection
and  control.  Accordingly  we  say  that  it  is  right  to
acquire  and  to  exercise  this  control ;  and  the  control  is
supposed  to  exist  whenever  we  say  that  one  feehng  or
disposition  of  mind  is  right  and  another  wrong.  Thus,
in  connexion  with  the  precept  against  stealing,  we  con-
demn envy  and  covetousness ;  we  applaud  a  sensitive
honesty  whiclr  shudders  at  anything  underhand  or  dis-
honourable. In  connexion  with  the  rough  precept
against  lying,  we  have  built  up  and  are  still  building  a
great  fabric  of  intellectual  moraUty,  whereby  a  man  is
forbidden  to  tell  lies  to  himself,  and  is  commanded  to
practise  candour  and  fairness  and  open-mindedness  in
his  judgments,  and  to  labour  zealously  in  pursuit  of  the
truth.  And  in  connexion  with  the  duty  to  our  families,
we  say  that  it  is  right  to  cultivate  public  spirit,  a  quick
sense  of  sympathy,  and  all  that  belongs  to  a  social
disposition.

Two  other  words  are  used  in  this  connexion  which
it  seems  necessary  to  mention.     When  we  regard  an
action  as  right  or  wrong  for  ourselves,  this  feeling  about
the  action  impels  us  to  do  it  or  not  to  do  it,  as  the  case
may  be.     We  may  say  that  the  moral  sense  acts  in  this
case  as  a  motive  ;   meaning  by  moral  sense  only  the
feeling  in  regard  to  an  action  which  is  considered  as
right  or  wrong,  and  by  motive  something  which  impels
us  to  act.     Of  course  there  may  be  other  motives  at
work  at  the  same  time,  and  it  does  not  at  all  follow  that
we  shall  do  the  right  action  or  abstain  from  the  wrong
one.     This  we  all  know  to  our  cost.     But  still  our  feel-
ing about  the  Tightness  or  wrongness  of  an  action  does
operate  as  a  motive  when  we  think  of  the  action  as  being

VOL.  11.  K


130  EIGHT  AND  WHONG.

done  by  us ;  and  when  so  operating  it  is  called  conscience.
I  have  nothing  to  do  at  present  with  the  questions  about
conscience,  whether  it  is  a  result  of  education,  whether
it  can  be  explained  by  self-love,  and  so  forth  ;  I  am  only
concerned  in  describing  well-known  facts,  and  in  getting
as  clear  as  I  can  about  the  meaning  of  well-known  words.
Conscience,  then,  is  the  whole  aggregate  of  our  feeUngs
about  actions  as  being  right  or  wrong,  regarded  as  tend-
ing to  make  us  do  the  right  actions  and  avoid  the  wrong
ones.  We  also  say  sometimes,  in  answer  to  the  ques-
tion, '  How  do  you  know  that  this  is  right  or  wrong  ? '
*  My  conscience  tells  me  so.'  And  this  way  of  speaking
is  quite  analogous  to  other  expressions  of  the  same
form ;  thus  if  I  put  my  hand  into  water,  and  you  ask
me  how  I  know  that  it  is  hot,  I  might  say,  '  My  feehng
of  warmth  tells  me  so.'

When  we  consider  a  right  or  a  wrong  action  as  done
by  another  person,  we  think  of  that  person  as  worthy
of  moral  approbation  or  reprobation.  He  may  be
punished  or  not ;  but  in  any  case  this  feeling  towards
him  is  quite  diiferent  from  the  feeling  of  dislike  towards
a  person  injurious  to  us,  or  of  disappointment  at  a
machine  which  will  not  go.

Whenever  we  can  morally  approve  or  disapprove  a
man  for  his  action,  we  say  that  he  is  morally  respon-
sible for  it,  and  vice  versd.  To  say  that  a  man  is  not
morally  responsible  for  his  actions  is  the  same  thing  as
to  say  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  praise  or  blame
him  for  them.

The  statement  that  we  ourselves  are  morally  respon-
sible is  somewhat  more  complicated,  but  the  meaning
is  very  easily  made  out ;  namely,  that  another  person


EIGHT  AND  WRONG.  131

may  reasonably  regard  our  actions  as  right  or  wrong,
and  may  praise  or  blame  us  for  them.

We  can  now,  I  suppose,  understand  one  another
pretty  clearly  in  using  the  words  right  and  wrong,  con-
science, responsibility ;  and  we  have  made  a  rapid  sur-
vey of  the  facts  of  the  case  in  our  own  country  at  the
present  time.  Of  course  I  do  not  pretend  that  this
survey  in  any  way  approaches  to  completeness  ;  but  it
will  supply  us  at  least  with  enough  facts  to  enable  us  to
deal  always  with  concrete  examples  instead  of  remain-
ing in  generalities ;  and  it  may  serve  to  show  pretty
fairly  what  the  moral  sense  of  an  Enghshman  is  like.
We  must  next  consider  what  account  we  can  give  of
these  facts  by  the  scientific  method.

But  first  let  us  stop  to  note  that  we  really  have  used
the  scientific  method  in  making  this  first  step  ;  and  also
that  to  the  same  extent  the  method  has  been  used  by  all
serious  moralists.  Some  would  have  us  define  virtue,
to  begin  with,  in  terms  of  some  other  thing  which  is
not  virtue,  and  then  work  out  from  our  definition  all
the  details  of  what  we  ought  to  do.  So  Plato  said  that
virtue  was  knowledge,  Aristotle  that  it  was  the  golden
mean,  and  Bentham  said  that  the  right  action  was  that
which  conduced  to  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
number.  But  so  also,  in  physical  speculations,  Thales
said  that  everything  was  Water,  and  Heraclitus  said  it
was  All-becoming,  and  Empedocles  said  it  was  made  out
of  Four  Elements,  and  Pythagoras  said  it  was  Number.
But  we  only  began  to  know  about  things  when  people
looked  straight  at  the  facts,  and  made  what  they  could
out  of  them  ;  and  that  is  the  only  way  in  which  we  can
know  anything  about  right  and  wrong.     Moreover,  it  is

K  2


132  EIGHT  AND  WRONG.

the  way  in  which  the  great  moralists  have  set  to  work,
when  they  came  to  treat  of  verifiable  things  and  not  of
theories  all  in  the  air.  A  great  many  people  think  of
a  prophet  as  a  man  who,  all  by  himself,  or  from  some
secret  source,  gets  the  belief  that  this  thing  is  right  and
that  thing  wrong.  And  then  (they  imagine)  he  gets  up
and  goes  about  persuading  other  people  to  feel  as  he
does  about  it ;  and  so  it  becomes  a  part  of  their  con-
science, and  a  new  duty  is  created.  This  may  be  in
some  cases,  but  I  have  never  met  with  any  example  of
it  in  history.  When  Socrates  puzzled  the  Greeks  by
asking  them  what  they  precisely  meant  by  Goodness
and  Justice  and  Virtue,  the  mere  existence  of  the  words
shows  that  the  people,  as  a  whole,  possessed  a  moral
sense,  and  felt  that  certain  things  were  right  and  others
wrong.  What  the  moralist  did  was  to  show  the  con-
nexion between  difierent  virtues,  the  likeness  of  virtue  to
certain  other  things,  the  imphcations  which  a  thoughtful
man  could  find  in  the  common  language.  Wherever
the  Greek  moral  sense  had  come  from,  it  was  there  in
the  people  before  it  could  be  enforced  by  a  prophet  or
discussed  by  a  philosopher.  Again,  we  find  a  wonder-
ful collection  of  moral  aphorisms  in  those  shrewd  say-
ings of  the  Jewish  fathers  which  are  preserved  in  the
Mishna  or  oral  law.  Some  of  this  teaching  is  famiUar  to
us  all  from  the  popular  exposition  of  it  which  is  con-
tained in  the  three  first  Gospels.  But  the  very  plain-
ness and  homeliness  of  the  precepts  shows  that  they  are
just  acute  statements  of  what  was  already  felt  by  the
popular  common  sense ;  protesting,  in  many  cases,
against  the  formalism  of  the  ceremonial  law  with  which
they  are  curiously  mixed  up.     The  Rabbis  even  show  a


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  133

jealousy  of  prophetic  interference,  as  if  they  knew  well
that  it  takes  not  one  man,  but  many  men,  to  feel  what
is  right.  When  a  certain  Eabbi  Ehezer,  being  worsted
in  argument,  cried  out,  '  If  I  am  right,  let  heaven  pro-
nounce in  my  favour ! '  there  was  heard  a  Bath-kol  or
voice  from  the  skies,  saying,  '  Do  you  venture  to  dispute
with  Kabbi  Ehezer,  who  is  an  authority  on  all  rehgious
questions  ? '  But  Eabbi  Joshua  rose  and  said,  '  Our  law
is  not  in  heaven,  but  in  the  book  which  dates  from  Sinai,
and  which  teaches  us  that  in  matter3  of  discussion  the
majority  makes  the  law.'  ^

One  of  the  most  important  expressions  of  the  moral
sense  for  all  time  is  that  of  the  Stoic  philosophy,  espe-
cially after  its  reception  among  the  Eomans.  It  is  here
that  we  find  the  enthusiasm  of  humanity — the  caritas
generis  humani — ^which  is  so  large  and  important  a
feature  in  all  modern  conceptions  of  morahty,  and  whose
widespread  influence  upon  Eoman  citizens  may  be
traced  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  In  the  Stoic  em-
perors, also,  we  find  probably  the  earliest  example  of
great  moral  principles  consciously  applied  to  legislation
on  a  large  scale.  But  are  we  to  attribute  this  to  the
individual  insight  of  the  Stoic  philosophers  ?  It  might
seem  at  first  sight  that  we  must,  if  we  are  to  listen  to
that  vulgar  vituperation  of  the  older  culture  which  has
descended  to  us  from  those  who  had  everything  to  gain
by  its  destruction.^      We  hear  enough  of  the  luxurious

^  Treatise  Baba  Bathra,  69  b,  I  deriye  this  story  and  reference  from  a
most  interesting  book, '  K61  Kore  (Vox  Olamantis),  La  Bible,  le  Talmud,  et
I'Evangile ;  par  le  R.  Elie  Soloweyczyk.    Paris  :  E.  Briere.     1870.'

^  Compare  these  passages  from  Merivale  ('  Romans  under  the  Empire,'
vi.),  to  whom  '  it  seems  a  duty  to  protest  against  the  common  tendency  of
Christian  moralists  to  dwell  only  on  the  dark  side  of  Pagan  society,  in  order
to  heighten  by  contrast  the  blessings  of  the  GospeP ; —


134  EIGHT  AND  WRONG.

feasting  of  the  Eoman  capital,  how  it  would  almost  have
taxed  the  resources  of  a  modern  pastrycook ;  of  the
cruelty  of  gladiatorial  shows,  how  they  were  nearly  as
bad  as  autos-da-fe^  except  that  a  man  had  his  fair  chance,
and  was  not  tortured  for  torture's  sake ;  of  the  oppres-
sion of  provincials  by  people  like  Verres,  of  whom  it
may  even  be  said  that  if  they  had  been  the  East  India
Company  they  could  not  have  been  worse  ;  of  the  com-
plaints of  Tacitus  against  bad  and  mad  emperors  (as  Sir
Henry  Maine  says)  ;  and  of  the  still  more  serious  com-
plaints of  the  modern  historian  against  the  excessive
taxation  ^  which  was  one  great  cause  of  the  fall  of  the
empire.  Of  all  this  we  are  told  a  great  deal ;  but  we
are  not  told  of  the  many  thousands  of  honourable  men
who  carried  civiUzation  to  the  ends  of  the  known  world,

*  Much  candour  and  discrimination  are  required  in  comparing-  tlie  sins  of

one  age  with  those  of  another the  cruelty  of  our  inquisitions

and  sectarian  persecutions,  of  our  laws  against  sorcery,  our  serfdom  and  our
slavery ;  the  petty  fraudulence  we  tolerate  in  almost  every  class  and  calling
of  the  community ;  the  bold  front  worn  by  our  open  sensuality  ;  the  deeper
degradation  of  that  which  is  concealed ;  all  these  leave  us  little  room  for
boasting  of  our  modern  discipline,  and  must  deter  the  thoughtful  inquirer
from  too  confidently  contrasting  the  morals  of  the  old  world  and  the  new.'

*  Even  at  Rome,  in  the  worst  of  times  ...  all  the  relations  of  life
were  adorned  in  turn  with  bright  instances  of  devotion,  and  mankind
transacted  their  business  with  an  ordinary  confidence  in  the  force  of  con-
science and  right  reason.  The  steady  development  of  enlightened  legal
principles  conclusively  proves  the  general  dependence  upon  law  as  a  guide
and  corrector  of  manners.  In  the  camp,  however,  more  especially,  as  the
chief  sphere  of  this  purifying  activity,  the  great  qualities  of  the  Eoman
character  continued  to  be  plainly  manifested.  This  history  of  the  Osesars
presents  to  us  a  constant  succession  of  brave,  patient,  resolute,  and  faithful
soldiers,  men  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  duty,  superior  to  vanity,
despisers  of  boasting,  content  to  toil  in  obscurity  and  shed  their  blood  at  the
frontiers  of  the  empire,  unrepining  at  the  cold  mistrust  of  their  masters,  not
clamorous  for  the  honours  so  sparingly  awarded  to  them,  but  satisfied  in  the
daily  work  of  their  hands,  and  full  of  faith  in  the  national  destiny  which
they  were  daily  accomplishing.'

*  Finlay,  *  Greece  under  the  Romans.*


RIGHT  AND  WEONG.  135

and  administered  a  mighty  empire  so  that  it  was  loved
and  worshipped  to  the  furthest  corner  of  it.  It  is  to
these  men  and  their  common  action  that  we  must  attri-
bute the  morality  which  found  its  organized  expression
in  the  writings  of  the  Stoic  philosophers.  From  these
three  cases  we  may  gather  that  Eight  is  a  thing  which
must  be  done  before  it  can  be  talked  about,  although
after  that  it  may  only  too  easily  be  talked  about  with-
out being  done.  Individual  effort  and  energy  may  in-
sist upon  getting  that  done  which  was  already  felt  to
be  right ;  and  individual  insight  and  acumen  may  point
out  consequences  of  an  action  which  bring  it  under
previously  known  moral  rules.  There  is  another  dis-
pute of  the  Eabbis  that  may  serve  to  show  what  is  meant
by  this.  It  was  forbidden  by  the  law  to  have  any  deal-
ings with  the  SabaBan  idolaters  during  the  week  pre-
ceding their  idolatrous  feasts.  But  the  doctors  discussed
the  case  in  which  one  of  these  idolaters  owes  you  a  bill ;
are  you  to  let  him  pay  it  during  that  week  or  not?
The  school  of  Shammai  said  ^  No  ;  for  he  will  want  all
his  money  to  enjoy  himself  at  the  feast.'  But  the
school  of  Hillel  said,  '  Yes,  let  him  pay  it ;  for  how  can
he  enjoy  his  feast  while  his  bills  are  unpaid  ?  '  The
question  here  is  about  the  consequences  of  an  action  ;
but  there  is  no  dispute  about  the  moral  principle,
which  is  that  consideration  and  kindness  are  to  be
shown  to  idolaters,  even  in  the  matter  of  their  idolatrous
rites.

/  It  seems,  then,  that  we  are  no  worse  off  than  any-
body else  who  has  studied  this  subject,  in  finding  our
materials  ready  made  for  us  ;  sufficiently  definite  mean-
ings given  in  the  common  speech  to  the  words  right  and


136  RIGHT  ANP  WRONG.

wrong,  good  and  bad,  with  whicli  we  have  to  deal ;  a
fair  body  of  facts  familiarly  known,  which  we  have  to
organize  and  account  for  as  best  we  can.  But  our
special  inquiry  is,  what  account  can  be  given  of  these
facts  by  the  scientific  method  ?  to  which  end  we  cannot
do  better  than  fix  our  ideas  as  well  as  we  can  upon  the
character  and  scope  of  that  method.

Now  the  scientific  method  is  a  method  of  getting
knowledge  by  inference,  and  that  of  two  difierent  kinds.
One  kind  of  inference  is  that  which  is  used  in  the  phy-
sical and  natural  sciences,  and  it  enables  us  to  go  from
known  phenomena  to  unknown  phenomena.  Because  a
stone  is  heavy  in  the  morning,  I  infer  that  it  will  be
heavy  in  the  afternoon ;  and  I  infer  this  by  assuming  a
certain  uniformity  of  nature.  The  sort  of  uniformity
that  I  assume  depends  upon  the  extent  of  my  scientific
education  ;  the  rules  of  inference  become  more  and  more
definite  as  we  go  on.  At  first  I  might  assume  that  all
things  are  always  ahke ;  this  would  not  be  true,  but  it
has  to  be  assumed  in  a  vague  way,  in  order  that  a  thing
may  have  the  same  name  at  difierent  times.  Afterwards
I  get  the  more  definite  behef  that  certain  particular
quahties,  hke  weight,  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  time
of  day ;  and  subsequently  I  find  that  weight  has  nothing
to  do  with  the  shape  of  the  stone,  but  only  with  the
quantity  of  it.  The  uniformity  which  we  assume,  then,
is  not  that  vague  one  that  we  started  with,  but  a
chastened  and  corrected  uniformity.  I  might  go  on  to
suppose,  for  example,  that  the  weight  of  the  stone  had
nothing  to  do  with  the  place  where  it  was  ;  and  a  great
d^al  might  be  said  for  this  supposition.  It  would,  how-
ever, have  to  be  corrected  when  it  was  found  that  the


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  137

weight   varies  slightly  in  different  latitudes.     On   the
other  hand,  I  should  find  that  this  variation  was  just
the  same  for  my  stone  as  for  a  piece  of  iron  or  wood  ;
that  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  kind  of  matter.     And
so  I  might  be  led  to  the  conclusion  that  all  matter  is
heavy,  and  that  the  weight  of  it  depends  only  on  its
quantity  and  its  position  relative  to  the  earth.     You  see
here  that  I  go  on  arriving  at  conclusions  always  of  this
form ;    that   some   one   circumstance   or   quahty    has
nothing  to  do  with  some  other  circumstance  or  quahty.
I  begin  by  assuming  that  it  is  independent  of  everything  ;
I  end  by  finding  that  it  is  independent  of  some  definite
things.     That  is,   I  begin  by  assuming  a  vague    uni-
formity.    I  always  use  this  assumption  to  infer  from
some  one  fact  a  great  number  of  other  facts  ;  but  as  my
education  proceeds,  I  get  to  know  what  sort  of  things
may  be  inferred  and  what  may  not.     An  observer  of
scientific   mind  takes  note   of  just   those  things  from
which  inferences   may   be   drawn,  and  passes  by  the
rest.     If  an   astronomer,   observing  the  sun,  were  to
record  the  fact  that  at  the  moment  when  a  sun-spot
began  to  shrink  there  was  a  rap  at  his  front  door,  we
should  know  that  he  was  not  up  to  his  work.     But  if  he
records  that  sun-spots  are  thickest  every  eleven  years,
and  that  this  is  also  the  period  of  extra  cloudiness  in
Jupiter,  the  observation  may  or  may  not  be  confirmed,
and  it  may  or  may  not  lead  to  inferences  of  importance  ;
but  still  it  is  the  kind  of  thing  from  which  inferences
may  be   drawn.     There   is   always   a   certain   instinct
among  instructed  people  which  tells  them  in  this  way
what  kinds  of  inferences  may  be  drawn ;  and  this  is  the
unconscious  effect  of  the  definite  uniformity  which  they.


138  RIGHT  AND  WRONO.

have  been  led  to  assume  in  nature.  It  may  subsequently
be  organized  into  a  law  or  general  truth,  and  no  doubt
becomes  a  surer  guide  by  that  process.  Then  it  goesi
to  form  the  more  precise  instinct  of  the  next  genera-
tion.

What  we  have  said  about  this  first  kind  of  inference,
which  goes  from  phenomena  to  phenomena,  is  shortly
this.  It  proceeds  upon  an  assumption  of  uniformity  in
nature ;  and  this  assumption  is  not  fixed  and  made  once
for  all,  but  is  a  changing  and  growing  thing,  becoming
more  definite  as  we  go  on.

If  I  were  told  to  pick  out  some  one  character  which
especially  colours  this  guiding  conception  of  uniformity
in  our  present  stage  of  science,  I  should  certainly  reply,
Atomism.  The  form  of  this  with  which  we  are  most
familiar  is  the  molecular  theory  of  bodies  ;  which  repre-
sents aU  bodies  as  made  up  of  small  elements  of  uniform
character,  each  practically  having  relations  only  with
the  adjacent  ones,  and  these  relations  the  same  all
through — namely,  some  simple  mechanical  action  upon
each  other's  motions.  But  this  is  only  a  particular
case.  A  palace,  a  cottage,  the  tunnel  of  the  under-
ground railway,  and  a  factory  chimney,  are  aU  built  of
bricks ;  the  bricks  are  ahke  in  aU  these  cases,  each
brick  is  practically  related  only  to  the  adjacent  ones,
and  the  relation  is  throughout  the  same,  namely,  two
flat  sides  are  stuck  together  with  mortar.  There  is  an
atomism  in  the  sciences  of  number,  of  quantity,  of
space ;  the  theorems  of  geometry  are  groupings  of  indi-
vidual points,  each  related  only  to  the  adjacent  ones  by
certain  definite  laws.  But  what  concerns  us  chiefly  at
present  is  the  atomism  of  human  physiology.     Just  as


RIGHT  AINB  WRONG.  139

every  solid  is  built  up  of  molecules,  so  the  nervous
system  is  built  up  of  nerve-threads  and  nerve-corpuscles.
We  owe  to  Mr.  Lewes  our  very  best  thanks  for  the
stress  which  he  has  laid  on  the  doctrine  that  nerve-fibre
is  uniform  in  structure  and  function,  and  for  the  word
neurility^  which  expresses  its  common  properties.  And
similar  gratitude  is  due  to  Dr.  Hughlings  Jackson  for
his  long  defence  of  the  proposition  that  the  element  of
nervous  structure  and  function  is  a  sensori-motor
process.  In  structure,  this  is  two  fibres  or  bundles  of
fibres  going  to  the  same  grey  corpuscle  ;  in  function  it
is  a  message  travelling  up  one  fibre  or  bundle  to  the
corpuscle,  and  then  down  the  other  fibre  or  bundle.^
Out  of  this,  as  a  brick,  the  house  of  our  life  is  built.
All  these  simple  elementary  processes  are  ahke,  and  each
is  practically  related  only  to  the  adjacent  ones ;  the
relation  being  in  all  cases  of  the  same  kind,  viz.,  the
passage  from  a  simple  to  a  complex  message,  or  vice
versd.

The  result  of  atomism  in  any  form,  dealing  with  any
subject,  is  that  the  principle  of  uniformity  is  hunted
down  into  the  elements  of  things  ;  it  is  resolved  into  the
uniformity  of  these  elements  or  atoms,  and  of  the  rela-
tions of  those  which  are  next  to  each  other.  By  an
element  or  an  atom  we  do  not  here  mean  something
absolutely  simple  or  indivisible,  for  a  molecule,  a  brick,
and  a  nerve-process  are  all  very  complex  things.  We
only  mean  that,  for  the  purpose  in  hand,  the  properties
of  the  still  more  complex  thing  which  is  made  of
them  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  complexities  or  the

^  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  had  assigned  a  slightly  different  element. — '  Prin-
ciples of  Psychology/  vol.  i.,  p.  28.


140  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

differences  of  these  elements.  The  sohd  made  of  mole-
cules, the  house  made  of  bricks,  the  nervous  system
made  of  sensori-motor  processes,  are  nothing  more  than
collections  of  these  practically  uniform  elements,  having
certain  relations  of  nextness,  and  behaviour  uniformly
depending  on  that  nextness.

The  inference  of  phenomena  from  phenomena,  then,
is  based  upon  an  assumption  of  uniformity,  which  in  the
present  stage  of  science  may  be  called  an  atomic  uni-
formity.

The  other  mode  of  inference  which  belongs  to  the
scientific  method  is  that  which  is  used  in  what  are  called
the  mental  and  moral  sciences  ;  and  it  enables  us  to  go
from  phenomena  to  the  facts  which  underhe  phenomena,
and  which  are  themselves  not  phenomena  at  all.  If  I  pinch
your  arm,  and  you  draw  it  away  and  make  a  face,  I  infer
that  you  have  felt  pain.  I  infer  this  by  assuming  that
you  have  a  consciousness  similar  to  my  own,  and  related
to  your  perception  of  your  body  as  my  consciousness  is
related  to  my  perception  of  my  body.  Now  is  this  the
same  assumption  as  before,  a  mere  assumption  of  the
uniformity  of  nature?  It  certainly  seems  like  it  at
first ;  but  if  we  think  about  it  we  shall  find  that  there  is
a  very  profound  difference  between  them.  In  physical
inference  I  go  from  phenomena  to  phenomena  ;  that  is,
from  the  knowledge  of  certain  appearances  or  represen*
tations  actually  present  to  my  mind  I  infer  certain  other
appearances  that  might  be  present  to  my  mind.  From
the  weight  of  a  stone  in  the  morning — that  is,  from  my
feehng  of  its  weight,  or  my  perception  of  the  process  of
weighing  it,  I  infer  that  the  stone  will  be  heavy  in  the
afternoon — that  is,  I  infer  the  possibility  of  similar  feel-


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  141

ings  and  perceptions  in  me  at  another  time.  The  whole
process  relates  to  me  and  my  perceptions,  to  things  con-
tained in  my  mind.  But  when  I  infer  that  you  are
conscious  from  what  you  say  or  do,  I  pass  from  that
which  is  my  feehng  or  perception,  which  is  in  my  mind
and  part  of  me,  to  that  which  is  not  my  feehng  at  all,
which  is  outside  me  altogether,  namely,  your  feelings  and
perceptions.  Now  there  is  no  possible  physical  infer-
ence, no  inference  of  phenomena  from  phenomena,  that
will  help  me  over  that  gulf.  I  am  obliged  to  admit
that  this  second  kind  of  inference  depends  upon  another
assumption,  not  included  in  the  assumption  of  the  uni-
formity of  phenomena.

How  does  a  dream  differ  from  waking  life  ?  In  a
fairly  coherent  dream  everything  seems  quite  real,  and
it  is  rare,  I  think,  with  most  people  to  know  in  a  dream
that  they  are  dreaming.  Now,  if  a  dream  is  sufficiently
vivid  and  coherent,  all  physical  inferences  are  just  as
valid  in  it  as  they  are  in  waking  hfe.  In  a  hazy  or  im-
perfect dream,  it  is  true,  things  melt  into  one  another
unexpectedly  and  unaccountably ;  we  fly,  remove  moun-
tains, and  stop  runaway  horses  with  a  finger.  But  there
is  nothing  in  the  mere  nature  of  a  dream  to  hinder  it
from  being  an  exact  copy  of  waking  experience.  If  I
find  a  stone  heavy  in  one  part  of  my  dream,  and  infer
that  it  is  heavy  at  some  subsequent  part,  the  inference
will  be  verified  if  the  dream  is  coherent  enough  ;  I  shall
go  to  the  stone,  hft  it  up,  and  find  it  as  heavy  as  before.
And  the  same  thing  is  true  of  all  inferences  of  phenomena
from  phenomena.  For  physical  purposes  a  dream  is  just
as  good  as  real  hfe  ;  the  only  difference  is  in  vividness
and  coherence.


142  RIGHT  AND   WRONG.

What,  then,  hinders  us  from  saying  that  life  is  all  a
dream  ?  If  the  phenomena  we  dream  of  are  just  as  good
and  real  phenomena  as  those  we  see  and  feel  when  we
are  awake,  what  right  have  we  to  say  that  the  material
universe  has  any  more  existence  apart  from  our  minds
than  the  things  we  see  and  feel  in  our  dreams  ?  The
answer  which  Berkeley  gave  to  that  question  was,  No
right  at  all.  The  physical  universe  which  I  see  and
feel,  and  infer,  is  just  my  dream  and  nothing  else ;  that
which  you  see  is  your  dream  ;  only  it  so  happens  that
all  our  dreams  agree  in  many  respects.  This  doctrine
of  Berkeley's  has  now  been  so  far  confirmed  by  the
physiology  of  the  senses,  that  it  is  no  longer  a  meta-
physical speculation,  but  a  scientifically  estabhshed
fact.

But  there  is  a  difference  between  dreams  and  waking
life,  which  is  of  far  too  great  importance  for  any  of  us
to  be  in  danger  of  neglecting  it.  When  I  see  a  man  in
my  dream,  there  is  just  as  good  a  body  as  if  I  were
awake ;  muscles,  nerves,  circulation,  capabihty  of
adapting  means  to  ends.  If  only  the  dream  is  coherent
enough,  no  physical  test  can  establish  that  it  is  a  dream.
In  both  cases  I  see  and  feel  the  same  thing.  In  both
cases  I  assume  the  existence  of  more  than  I  can  see  and
feel,  namely,  the  consciousness  of  this  other  man.  But
now  here  is  a  great  difference,  and  the  only  difference —
in  a  dream  this  assumption  is  wrong  ;  in  waking  life  it
is  right.  The  man  I  see  in  my  dream  is  a  mere  machine,
a  bundle  of  phenomena  with  no  underlying  reality ;
there  is  no  consciousness  involved  except  my  conscious-
ness, no  feeling  in  the  case  except  my  feelings.  The
man  I  see  in  waking  life  is  more  than  a  bundle  of  phe-


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  143

nomena ;  his  body  and  its  actions  are  phenomena,  but
these  phenomena  are  merely  the  symbols  and  represen-
tatives in  my  mind  of  a  reality  which  is  outside  my  mind,
namely,  the  consciousness  of  the  man  himself  which  is
represented  by  the  working  of  his  brain,  and  the  simpler
quasi-mental   facts,  not   woven  into  his  consciousness,
which  are  represented  by  the  working  of  the  rest  of  his
body.     What  makes  life  not  to  be  a  dream  is  the  exist-
ence of  those  facts  which  we  arrive  at  by  our  second
process  of  inference ;  the  consciousness  of  men  and  the
higher  animals,  the  sub-consciousness  of  lower  organisms
and  the   quasi-mental  facts  which  go  along  with  the
motions  of  inanimate  matter.     In  a  book  which  is  very
largely  and  deservedly  known  by  heart,  '  Through  the
Looking-glass,'  there  is   a   very  instructive  discussion
upon  this  point.     Alice  has  been  taken  to  see  the  Eed
King  as  he  Hes  snoring ;  and  Tweedledee  asks,  '  Do  you
know  what  he  is  dreaming  about  ?  '     '  Nobody  can  guess
that,'  replies  Alice.     '  Why,  about  you,'  he  says  trium-
phantly,    '  And  if  he   stopped   dreaming   about  you,
where  do  you  suppose  you'd  be.^  '     '  Where  I  am  now
of  course,'   said  AUce.     'ISTot  you,'   said  Tweedledee,
'  you'd  be  nowhere.     You  are  only  a  sort  of  thing  in
his  dream.'     '  If  that  there  King  was  to  wake,'  added
Tweedledum,  *  you'd  go  out,  bang!  just  like  a  candle.
Alice  was  quite  right  in  regarding  these  remarks   as
unphilosophical.     The  fact  that  she  could  see,   think,
and  feel  was  proof  positive  that  she  was  not  a  sort  of
thing  in  anybody's  dream.     This  is  the  meaning  of  that
saying,  Cogito  ergo  sum,  of  Descartes.     By  him,  and  by
Spinoza  after  him,  the  verb  cogito  and  the  substantive
cogitatio  were  used  to  denote  consciousness  in  general,


144  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

any  kind  of  feeling,  even  what  we  now  call  sub-con-'
sciousness.  The  saying  means  that  feeling  exists  in  andl
for  itself,  not  as  a  quality  or  modification  or  state  on
manifestation  of  anything  else.

We  are  obliged  in  every  hour  of  our  lives  to  act
upon  beUefs  which  have  been  arrived  at  by  inferences
of  these  two  kinds ;  inferences  based  on  the  assumption
of  uniformity  in  nature,  and  inferences  which  add  to
this  the  assumption  of  feehngs  which  are  not  our  own.
By  organizing  the  '  common  sense '  which  embodies  the
first  class  of  inferences,  we  build  up  the  physical
sciences ;  that  is  to  say,  all  those  sciences  which  deal
with  the  physical,  material,  or  phenomenal  universe,
whether  animate  or  inanimate.  And  so  by  organizing
the  common  sense  which  embodies  the  second  class  of
inferences,  we  build  up  various  sciences  of  mind.  The
description  and  classification  of  feelings,  the  facts  of
their  association  with  each  other,  and  of  their  simulta-
neity with  phenomena  of  nerve-action, — all  this  belongs
to  psychology,  which  may  be  historical  and  comparative.
The  doctrine  of  certain  special  classes  of  feehngs  is
organized  into  the  special  sciences  of  those  feehngs;
thus  the  facts  about  the  feelings  which  we  are  now  con-
sidering, about  the  feelings  of  moral  approbation  and
reprobation,  are  organized  into  the  science  of  ethics,  and
the  facts  about  the  feehng  of  beauty  or  ugHness  are
organized  into  the  science  of  gesthetics,  or,  as  it  is  some-
times called,  the  philosophy  of  art.  For  all  of  these  the
uniformity  of  nature  has  to  be  assumed  as  a  basis  of
inference ;  but  over  and  above  that  it  is  necessary  to
assume  that  other  men  are  conscious  in  the  same  way
that  I  am.     Now  in  these  sciences  of  mind,  just  as  in  the


RIGHT   AND  WRONG.  146

physical  sciences,  the  uniforraity  which  is  assumed  in
the  inferred  mental  facts  is  a  growing  thing  which
becomes  more  definite  as  we  go  on,  and  each  successive
generation  of  observers  knows  better  what  to  observe
and  what  sort  of  inferences  maybe  drawn  from  observed
things.  But,  moreover,  it  is  as  true  of  the  mental
sciences  as  of  the  physical  ones  that  the  uniformity  is
in  the  present  stage  of  science  an  atomic  uniformity.
We  have  learned  to  regard  our  consciousness  as  made
up  of  elements  practically  ahke,  having  relations  of  suc-
cession in  time  and  of  contiguity  at  each  instant,  which
relations  are  in  all  cases  practically  the  same.  The
element  of  consciousness  is  the  transference  of  an  impres-
sion into  the  beginning  of  action.  Our  mental  life  is  a
structure  made  out  of  such  elements,  just  as  the  working
of  our  nervous  system  is  made  out  of  sensori-motor  pro-
cesses. And  accordingly  the  interaction  of  the  two
branches  of  science  leads  us  to  regard  the  mental  facts
as  the  realities  or  things-in-themselves,  of  which  the
material  phenomena  are  mere  pictures  or  symbols.  The
final  result  seems  to  be  that  atomism  is  carried  beyond
phenomena  into  the  realities  which  phenomena  repre-
sent ;  and  that  the  observed  uniformities  of  nature,  in
so  far  as  they  can  be  expressed  in  the  language  of
atomism,  are  actual  uniformities  of  things  in  themselves.
So  much  for  the  two  things  which  I  have  promised
to  bring  together ;  the  facts  of  our  moral  feehngs,  and
the  scientific  method.  It  may  appear  that  the  latter
has  been  expounded  at  more  length  than  was  necessary
for  the  treatment  of  this  particular  subject ;  but  the
justification  for  this  length  is  to  be  found  in  certain
common  objections  to  the  claims  of  science  to  be  the

VOL.  II.  L


146  RIGHT   AND  WRONG.

sole  judge  of  mental  and  moral  questions.     Some  of  the
chief  of  these  objections  I  will  now  mention.

/It  is  sometimes  said  that  science  can  only  deal  with
what  is,  but  that  art  and  morals  deal  with  what  ought
to  be.  The  saying  is  perfectly  true,  but  it  is  quite  con-
sistent with  what  is  equally  true,  that  the  facts  of  art
and  morals  are  fit  subject-matter  of  science.  I  may
describe  all  that  I  have  in  my  house,  and  I  may  state
everything  that  I  want  in  my  house ;  these  are  two
very  different  things,  but  they  are  equally  statements  of
facts.  One  is  a  statement  about  phenomena,  about  the
objects  which  are  actually  in  my  possession ;  the  other
is  a  statement  about  my  feelings,  about  my  wants  and
desires.  There  are  facts,  to  be  got  at  by  common  sense,
about  the  kind  of  thing  that  a  man  of  a  certain  charac-
ter and  occupation  will  like  to  have  in  his  house,  and
these  facts  may  be  organized  into  general  statements
on  the  assumption  of  uniformity  in  nature.  Now  the
organized  results  of  common  sense  dealing  with  facts  are
just  science  and  nothing  else.  And  in  the  same  way  I
may  say  what  men  do  at  the  present  day,  how  we  live
now,  or  I  may  say  what  we  ought  to  do,  namely,  what
course  of  conduct,  if  adopted,  we  should  morally  approve  ;
and  no  doubt  these  would  be  two  very  diJfferent  things.
But  each  of  them  would  be  a  statement  of  facts.  One
would  belong  to  the  sociology  of  our  time ;  in  so  far  as
men's  deeds  could  not  be  adequately  described  to  us
without  some  account  of  their  feelings  and  intentions,  it
would  involve  facts  belonging  to  psychology  as  well  as
facts  belonging  to  the  physical  sciences.  But  the  other
would  be  an  account  of  a  particular  class  of  our  feelings,
namely,  those  which  we  feel  towards  an  action  when  it


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  147

is  regarded  as  right  or  wrong.  These  facts  may  be
organized  by  common  sense  on  the  assumption  of
uniformity  in  nature  just  as  well  as  any  other  facts.
And  we  shall  see  farther  on  that  not  only  in  this  sense,
but  in  a  deeper  and  more  abstract  sense,  '  what  ought
to  be  done '  is  a  question  for  scientific  enquiry.

The  same  objection  is  sometimes  put  into  another
form.     It  is  said  that  laws  of  chemistry,  for  example,
are  general  statements  about  what  happens  when  bodies
are  treated  in  a  certain  way,  and  that  such  laws  are  fit
matter  for  science ;  but  that  moral  laws  are  different,
because  they  tell  us  to  do  certain  things,  and  we  may  or
may  not  obey  them.    The  mood  of  the  one  is  indicative,
of  the  other  imperative.     Now  it  is  quite  true  that  the
word  law  in  the  expression  '  law  of  nature,'  and  in  the
expressions  '  law  of  morals,'  '  law  of  the  land,'  has  two
totally  different  meanings,  which  no  educated  person
will  confound ;  and  I  am  not  aware  that  anyone  has
rested  the  claim  of  science  to  judge  moral  questions  on
what  is  no  better  than  a  stale  and  unprofitable  pun.
But  two  difierent  things   may  be   equally  matters  of
scientific  investigation,  even  when  their  names  are  alike
in  sound.     A  telegraph  post  is  not  the  same  thing  as  a
post  in  the  War  Office,  and  yet  the  same  intelligence
may  be  used  to  investigate  the  conditions  of  the  one  and
the  other.     That  such  and  such  things  are  right  or
wrong,  that  such  and  such  laws  are  laws  of  morals  or
laws  of  the  land,  these  are  facts,  just  as  the  laws  of
chemistry  are  facts ;  and  all  facts  belong  to  science,  and
are  her  portion  for  ever.^

Again,  it  is  sometimes  said  that  moral  questions  have
been  authoritatively  settled  by  other  methods  ;  that  we

l2


148  RIGHT   AND   WRONG.

ought  to  accept  this  decision,  and  not  to  question  it  by
any  method  of  scientific  inquiry  ;  and  that  reason  should
give  way  to  revelation  on  such  matters.  I  hope  before
I  have  done  to  show  just  cause  why  we  should  pronounce
on  such  teaching  as  this  no  Hght  sentence  of  moral  con-
demnation :  first,  because  it  is  our  duty  to  form  those
behefs  which  are  to  guide  our  actions  by  the  two
scientific  modes  of  inference,  and  by  these  alone ;  and,
secondly,  because  the  proposed  mode  of  setthng  ethical
questions  by  authority  is  contrary  to  the  very  nature  of
right  and  wrong.

Leaving  this,  then,  for  the  present,  I  pass  on  to  the
most  formidable  objection  that  has  been  made  to  a
scientific  treatment  of  ethics.  The  objection  is  that  the
scientific  method  is  not  applicable  to  human  action,
because  the  rule  of  uniformity  does  not  hold  good.
Whenever  a  man  exercises  his  will,  and  makes  a  volun-
tary choice  of  one  out  of  various  possible  courses,  an
event  occurs  whose  relation  to  contiguous  events  cannot
be  included  in  a  general  statement  applicable  to  all
similar  cases.  There  is  something  wholly  capricious  and
disorderly,  belonging  to  that  moment  only ;  and  we  have
no  right  to  conclude  that  if  the  circumstances  were  ex-
actly repeated,  and  the  man  himself  absolutely  unaltered,
he  would  choose  the  sanie  course.

It  is  clear  that  if  the  doctrine  here  stated  is  true,  the
ground  is  really  cut  from  under  our  feet,  and  we  cannot
deal  with  human  action  by  the  scientific  method.  I
shall  endeavour  to  show,  moreover,  that  in  this  case,
although  we  might  still  have  a  feeUng  of  moral  appro-
bation or  reprobation  towards  actions,  yet  we  could  not
reasonably   praise   or  blame  naen  for  their  deeds,  nor


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  149

regard  them  as  morally  responsible.  So  that,  if  my
contention  is  just,  to  deprive  us  of  the  scientific  method
is  practically  to  deprive  us  of  morals  altogether.  On
both  grounds,  therefore,  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance
that  we  should  define  our  position  in  regard  to  this  con-
troversy ;  if,  indeed,  that  can  be  called  a  controversy  in
which  the  practical  belief  of  all  mankind  and  the  consent
of  nearly  all  serious  writers  are  on  one  side.

Let  us  in  the  first  place  consider  a  little  more  closely
the  connexion  between  conscience  and  responsibiUty.
Words  in  common  use,  such  as  these  two,  have  their
meanings  practically  fixed  before  difficult  controversies
arise ;  but  after  the  controversy  has  arisen  each  party
gives  that  slight  tinge  to  the  meaning  which  best  suits  its
own  view  of  the  question.  Thus  it  appears  to  each  that
the  common  language  obviously  supports  their  own  view,
that  this  is  the  natural  and  primary  view  of  the  matter,
and  that  the  opponents  are  using  words  in  a  new  mean-
ing and  wresting  them  from  their  proper  sense.  Now
this  is  just  my  position.  I  have  endeavoured  so  far  to
use  all  words  in  their  common  every-day  sense,  only
making  this  as  precise  as  I  can  ;  and,  with  two  excep-
tions, of  which  due  warning  will  be  given,  I  shall  do  my
best  to  continue  this  practice  in  future.  I  seem  to  my-
self to  be  talking  the  most  obvious  platitudes ;  but  it
must  be  remembered  that  those  who  take  the  opposite
view  will  think  I  am  perverting  the  English  language.

There  is  a  common  meaning  of  the  word '  responsible,'
which  though  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  phrase  '  mo-
rally responsible,'  may  throw  some  light  upon  it.  If
we  say  of  a  book,  '  A  is  responsible  for  the  preface  and
the  first  half,  and  B  is  responsible  for  the  rest,'  we  mean


150  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

that  A  wrote  the  preface  and  the  first  half.  If  two
people  go  into  a  shop  and  choose  a  blue  silk  dress  to-
gether, it  might  be  said  that  A  was  responsible  for  i^z
being  silk  and  B  for  its  being  blue.  Before  they  chose,
the  dress  was  undetermined  both  in  colour  and  in
material.  A's  choice  fixed  the  material,  and  then  it  was
undetermined  only  in  colour.  B's  choice  fixed  the
colour ;  and  if  we  suppose  that  there  were  no  more
variable  conditions  (only  one  blue  silk  dress  in  the  shop),
the  dress  was  then  completely  determined.  In  this  sense
of  the  word  we  say  that  a  man  is  responsible  for  that
part  of  an  event  which  was  undetermined  when  he  was
left  out  of  account,  and  which  became  determined  when
he  was  taken  account  of.  Suppose  two  narrow  streets,
one  lying  north  and  south,  one  east  and  west,  and
crossing  one  another.  A  man  is  put  down  where  they
cross,  and  has  to  walk.  Then  he  must  walk  either  north,
south,  east,  or  west,  and  he  is  not  responsible  for  that ;
what  he  is  responsible  for  is  the  choice  of  one  of  these
four  directions.  May  we  not  say  in  the  present  sense  of
the  word  that  the  external  circumstances  are  responsible
for  the  restriction  on  his  choice  ?  We  should  mean  only
that  the  fact  of  his  going  in  one  or  other  of  the  four
directions  was  due  to  external  circumstances,  and  not  to
him.  Again,  suppose  I  have  a  number  of  punches  of
various  shapes,  some  square,  some  oblong,  some  oval,
some  round,  and  that  I  am  going  to  punch  a  hole  in  a
piece  of  paper.  Where  1  shall  punch  the  hole  may  be
fixed  by  any  kind  of  circumstances ;  but  the  shape  of
the  hole  depends  on  the  punch  I  take.  May  we  not  say
that  the  punch  is  responsible  for  the  shape  of  the  hole,
but  not  for  the  position  of  it  ?


EIGHT  AND  WRONG.  161

It  may  be  said  that  this  is  not  the  whole  of  the
meaning  of  the  word  '  responsible,'  even  in  its  loosest
sense  ;  that  it  ought  never  to  be  used  except  of  a  con-
scious agent.  Still  this  is  part  of  its  meaning ;  if  we
regard  an  event  as  determined  by  a  variety  of  circum-
stances, a  man's  choice  being  among  them,  we  say  that
he  is  responsible  for  just  that  choice  which  is  left  him
by  the  other  circumstances.

When  we  ask  the  practical  question,  '  Who  is  respon-
sible for  so-and-so  ? '  we  want  to  find  out  who  is  to  be
got  at  in  order  that  so-and-so  may  be  altered.  If  I  want
to  change  the  shape  of  the  hole  I  make  in  my  paper,  I
must  change  my  punch  ;  but  this  will  be  of  no  use  if  I
want  to  change  the  position  of  the  hole.  If  I  want  the
colour  of  the  dress  changed  from  blue  to  green,  it  is  B,
and  not  A,  that  I  must  persuade.

We  mean  something  more  than  this  when  we  say
that  a  man  is  morally  responsible  for  an  action.  It
seems  to  me  that  moral  responsibility  and  conscience  go
together,  both  in  regard  to  the  man  and  in  regard  to
the  action.  In  order  that  a  man  may  be  morally
responsible  for  an  action,  the  man  must  have  a  con-
science, and  the  action  must  be  one  in  regard  to  which
conscience  is  capable  of  acting  as  a  motive,  that  is,  the
action  must  be  capable  of  being  right  or  wrong.  If  a
child  were  left  on  a  desert  island  and  grew  up  wholly
without  a  conscience,  and  then  were  brought  among
men,  he  would  not  be  morally  responsible  for  his  actions
until  he  had  acquired  a  conscience  by  education.  He
would  of  course  be  responsible^  in  the  sense  just  explained,
for  that  part  of  them  which  was  left  undetermined  by
external  circumstances,  and  if  we  wanted  to  alter  his


162  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

actions  in  these  respects  we  should  have  to  do  it  by-
altering  him.  But  it  would  be  useless  and  unreasonable
to  attempt  to  do  this  by  means  of  praise  or  blame,  the
expression  of  moral  approbation  or  disapprobation,  until
he  had  acquired  a  conscience  which  could  be  worked
upon  by  such  means.

It  seems,  then,  that  in  order  that  a  man  may  be
morally  responsible  for  an  action,  three  things  are  ne-
cessary : —

1.  He  might  have  done  something  else ;  that  is  to
say,  the  action  was  not  wholly  determined  by  external
circumstances,  and  he  is  responsible  only  for  the  choice
which  was  left  him.

2.  He  had  a  conscience.

3.  The  action  was  one  in  regard  to  the  doing  or  not
doing  of  which  conscience  might  be  a  sufficient  motive.

These  three  things  are  necessary,  but  it  does  not  fol-
low that  they  are  sufficient.  It  is  very  commonly  said
that  the  action  must  be  a  voluntary  one.  It  will  be
found,  I  think,  that  this  is  contained  in  my  third  con-
dition, and  also  that  the  form  of  statement  I  have
adopted  exhibits  more  clearly  the  reason  why  the  con-
dition is  necessary.  We  may  say  that  an  action  is  in-
voluntary either  when  it  is  instinctive,  or  when  one
motive  is  so  strong  that  there  is  no  voluntary  choice
between  motives.  An  involuntary  cough  produced  by-
irritation  of  the  glottis  is  no  proper  subject  for  blame  or
praise.  A  man  is  not  responsible  for  it,  because  it  is
done  by  a  part  of  his  body  without  consulting  him.
What  is  meant  by  him  in  this  case  will  require  further
investigation.  Again,  when  a  dipsomaniac  has  so  great
and  overmastering  an  inclination  to  drink  that  we  cannot


RIGHT  AND    WRONG.  163

conceive  of  conscience  being  strong  enough  to  conquer
it,  he  is  not  responsible  for  that  act,  though  he  may  be
responsible  for  having  got  himself  into  the  state.  But
if  it  is  conceivable  that  a  very  strong  conscience  fully
brought  to  bear  might  succeed  in  conquering  the  in-
clination, we  may  take  a  lenient  view  of  the  fall  and
say  there  was  a  very  strong  temptation,  but  we  shall  still
regard  it  as  a  fall,  and  say  that  the  man  is  responsible
and  a  wrong  has  been  done.^

But  since  it  is  just  in  this  distinction  between  volun-
tary and  involuntary  action  that  the  whole  crux  of  the
matter  lies,  let  us  examine  more  closely  into  it.  I  say
that  when  I  cough  or  sneeze  involuntarily,  it  is  really
not  I  that  cough  or  sneeze,  but  a  part  of  my  body  which
acts  without  consulting  me.  This  action  is  determined
for  me  by  the  circumstances,  and  is  not  part  of  the  choice
that  is  left  to  me,  so  that  I  am  not  responsible  for  it.
The  question  comes  then  to  determining  how  much  is  to
be  called  circumstances^  and  how  much  is  to  be  called  me.

Now  I  want  to  describe  what  happens  when  I  volun-
tarily do  anything,  and  there  are  two  courses  open  to
me.  I  may  describe  the  things  in  themselves,  my  feel-
ings and  the  general  course  of  my  consciousness,  trust-
ing to  the  analogy  between  my  consciousness  and  yours
to  make  me  understood  ;  or  I  may  describe  these  things
as  nature  describes  them  to  your  senses,  namely  in  terms
of  the  phenomena  of  my  nervous  system,  appealing  to
your  memory  of  phenomena  and  your  knowledge  of  phy-
sical action.     I  shall  do  both,  because  in  some  respects

*  [It  seems  wortli  noting  that  this  very  closely  coincides  with  the
doctrine  of  modern  English  law  on  the  question  when  and  how  far  insanity
excludes  criminal  responsibility.]


154  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

our  knowledge  is  more  complete  from  tlie  one  source,
and  in  some  respects  from  the  other.  When  I  look  back
and  reflect  upon  a  voluntary  action,  I  seem  to  find  that
it  differs  from  an  involuntary  action  in  the  fact  that  a
certain  portion  of  my  character  has  been  consulted.
There  is  always  a  suggestion  of  some  sort,  either  the  end
of  a  train  of  thought  or  a  new  sensation  ;  and  there  is  an
action  ensuing,  either  the  movement  of  a  muscle  or  set
of  muscles,  or  the  fixing  of  attention  upon  something.
But  between  these  two  there  is  a  consultation,  as  it  were,
of  my  past  history.  The  suggestion  is  viewed  in  the
Hght  of  everything  bearing  on  it  that  I  think  of  at  the
time,  and  in  virtue  of  this  Hght  it  moves  me  to  act  in  one
or  more  ways.  Let  us  first  suppose  that  no  hesitation
is  involved,  that  only  one  way  of  acting  is  suggested,
and  I  yield  to  this  impulse  and  act  in  the  particular
way.  This  is  the  simplest  kind  of  voluntary  action.
It  differs  from  involuntary  or  instinctive  action  in  the
fact  that  with  the  latter  there  is  no  such  conscious  con-
sultation of  past  history.  If  we  describe  these  facts  in
terms  of  the  phenomena  which  picture  them  to  other
minds,  we  shall  say  that  in  involuntary  action  a  message
passes  straight  through  from  the  sensory  to  the  motor
centre,  and  so  on  to  the  muscles,  without  consulting  the
cerebrum ;  while  in  voluntary  action  the  message  is
passed  on  from  the  sensory  centre  to  the  cerebrum,  there
translated  into  appropriate  motor  stimuh,  carried  down
to  the  motor  centre,  and  so  on  to  the  muscles.  There
may  be  other  differences,  but  at  least  there  is  this  differ-
ence. Now  on  the  physical  side  that  which  determines
what  groups  of  cerebral  fibres  shall  be  set  at  work  by
the  given  message,  and  what  groups  of  motor  stimuli


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  166

shall  be  set  at  work  by  these,  is  the  mechanism  of  my
brain  at  the  time ;  and  on  the  mental  side  that  which
determines  what  memories  shall  be  called  up  by  the
given  sensation,  and  what  motives  these  memories  shall
bring  into  action,  is  my  mental  character.  We  may
say,  then,  in  this  simplest  case  of  voluntary  action,  that
when  the  suggestion  is  given  it  is  the  character  of  me
which  determines  the  character  of  the  ensuing  action ;
and  consequently  that  I  am  responsible  for  choosing  that
particular  course  out  of  those  which  were  left  open  to
me  by  the  external  circumstances.

This  is  when  I  yield  to  the  impulse.  But  suppose  I
do  not ;  suppose  that  the  original  suggestion,  viewed  in
the  light  of  memory,  sets  various  motives  in  action,  each
motive  belonging  to  a  certain  class  of  things  which  I
remember.  Then  I  choose  which  of  these  motives  shall
prevail.  Those  who  carefully  watch  themselves  j&nd  out
that  a  particular  motive  is  made  to  prevail  by  the  fixing
of  the  attention  upon  that  class  of  remembered  things
which  calls  up  the  motive.  The  physical  side  of  this  is
the  sending  of  blood  to  a  certain  set  of  nerves — namely,
those  whose  action  corresponds  to  the  memories  which
are  to  be  attended  to.  The  sending  of  blood  is  accom-
phshed  by  the  pinching  of  arteries  ;  and  there  are  special
nerves,  called  vaso-motor  nerves,  whose  business  it  is  to
carry  messages  to  the  walls  of  the  arteries  and  get  them
pinched.  Now  this  act  of  directing  the  attention  may
be  voluntary  or  involuntary,  just  like  any  other  act.
When  the  transformed  and  reinforced  nerve-message
gets  to  the  vaso-motor  centre,  some  part  of  it  may  be  so
predominant  that  a  message  goes  straight  oJffto  the  arte-
ries, and  sends  a  quantity  of  blood  to  the  nerves  supply-


156  EIGHT  AND  WRONG.

ing  that  part ;  or  the  call  for  blood  may  be  sent  back  for
revision  by  the  cerebrum,  which  is  thus  again  consulted.
To  say  the  same  thing  in  terms  of  my  feelings,  a  particu-^
lar  class  of  memories  roused  by  the  original  suggestion
may  seize  upon  my  attention  before  I  have  time  to
choose  what  I  will  attend  to  ;  or  the  appeal  may  be
carried  to  a  deeper  part  of  my  character  dealing  with
wider  and  more  abstract  conceptions,  which  views  the
conflicting  motives  in  the  light  of  a  past  experience  of
motives,  and  by  that  light -is  drawn  to  one  or  the  other
of  them.

We  thus  get  to  a  sort  of  motive  of  the  second  order
or  motive  of  motives.  Is  there  any  reason  why  we
should  not  go  on  to  a  motive  of  the  third  order,  and  the
fourth,  and  so  on  ?  None  whatever  that  I  know  of,  ex-
cept that  no  one  has  ever  observed  such  a  thing.  There
seems  plenty  of  room  for  the  requisite  mechanism  on
the  physical  side ;  and  no  one  can  say,  on  the  mental
side,  how  complex  is  the  working  of  his  consciousness.
But  we  must  carefully  distinguish  between  the  intel-
lectual dehberation  about  motives,  which  applies  to
the  future  and  the  past,  and  the  practical  choice  of
motives  in  the  moment  of  will.  The  former  may  be  a
train  of  any  length  and  complexity :  we  have  no
reason  to  believe  that  the  latter  is  more  than  engine
and  tender.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  classify  actions  in  respect
of  the  kind  of  responsibility  which  belongs  to  them ;
namely,  we  have —

1.  Involuntary  or  instinctive  actions.

2.  Voluntary  actions  in  which  the  choice  of  motives
is  involuntary.


RIGHT  AND   WRONG.  157

3.  Voluntary  actions  in  which  the  choice  of  motives
is  voluntary.

In  each  of  these  cases  what  is  responsible  is  that
part  of  my  character  which  determines  what  the  action
shall  be.     For  instinctive  actions  we  do  not  say  that  /
am  responsible,  because  the  choice  is  made  before  I  know
anything  about  it.     For  voluntary  actions  I  am  respon-
sible, because  I  make  the  choice  ;  that  is,  the  character  •
of  me  is  what  determines  the  character  of  the  action.
In  me^  then,  for  this  purpose,  is  included  the  aggregate
of  links  of  association  which  determines  what  memories
shall  be  called  up  by  a  given  suggestion,  and  what  mo-
tives shall  be  set  at  work  by  these  memories.     But  we
distinguish  this  mass  of  passions  and  pleasures,  desire
and  knowledge  and  pain,  which  makes  up  most  of  my
character  at  the  moment,  from  that  inner  and  deeper
motive-choosing  self  which  is  called  Eeason,  and  the
Will,  and  the  Ego  ;  which  is  only  responsible  when  mo-
tives are  voluntarily  chosen  by  directing  attention  to
them.     It  is  responsible  only  for  the  choice  of  one  motive
out  of  those  presented  to  it,  not  for  the  nature  of  the
motives  which  are  presented.

But  again,  I  may  reasonably  be  blamed  for  what  I
did  yesterday,  or  a  week  ago,  or  last  year.  This  is  be-
cause I  am  permanent ;  in  so  far  as  from  my  actions  of
that  date  an  inference  may  be  drawn  about  my  charac-
ter now,  it  is  reasonable  that  I  should  be  treated  as
praiseworthy  or  blameable.  And  within  certain  limits
I  am  for  the  same  reason  responsible  for  what  I  am  now,
because  within  certain  limits  I  have  made  myself.  Even
instinctive  actions  are  dependent  in  many  cases  upon
habits  which  may  be  altered  by  proper  attention  and


158  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

care ;  and  still  more  the  nature  of  the  connexions  be-
tween sensation  and  action,  the  associations  of  memory
and  motive,  may  be  voluntarily  modified  if  I  choose  to
try.  The  habit  of  choosing  among  motives  is  one  which
may  be  acquired  and  strengthened  by  practice,  and  the
strength  of  particular  motives,  by  continually  directing
attention  to  them,  may  be  almost  indefinitely  increased
or  diminished.  Thus,  if  by  me  is  meant  not  the  instan-
taneous me  of  this  moment,  but  the  aggregate  me  of  my
past  life,  or  even  of  the  last  year,  the  range  of  my
responsibihty  is  very  largely  increased.  I  am  responsi-
ble for  a  very  large  portion  of  the  circumstances  which
are  now  external  to  me ;  that  is  to  say,  I  am  responsible
for  certain  of  the  restrictions  on  my  own  freedom.  As
the  eagle  was  shot  with  an  arrow  that  flew  on  its  own
feather,  so  I  find  myself  bound  with  fetters  of  my  proper
forging.

Let  us  now  endeavour  to  conceive  an  action  which
is  not  determined  in  any  way  by  the  character  of  the
agent.  If  we  ask,  '  What  makes  it  to  be  that  action
and  no  other  ? '  we  are  told,  '  The  man's  Ego.'  The
words  are  here  used,  it  seems  to  me,  in  some  non-natural
sense,  if  in  any  sense  at  all.  One  thing  makes  another
to  be  what  it  is  when  the  characters  of  the  two  things
are  connected  together  by  some  general  statement  or  rule.
But  we  have  to  suppose  that  the  character  of  the  action
is  not  connected  with  the  character  of  the  Ego  by  any
general  statement  or  rule.  With  the  same  Ego  and  the
same  circumstances  of  all  kinds,  anything  within  the
limits  imposed  by  the  circumstances  may  happen  at  any
moment.  I  find  myself  unable  to  conceive  any  distinct
sense  in  which  responsibihty  could  apply  in  this  case  ;


EIGHT  AND  WEONG.  159

nor  do  I  see  at  all  how  it  would  be  reasonable  to  use
praise  or  blame.     If  the  action  does  not  depend  on  the
character,  what  is  the  use  of  trying  to  alter  the  charac-
ter ?     Suppose,  however,  that  this  indeterminateness  is
only  partial ;  that  the  character  does  add  some  restric-
tions to  those  already  imposed  by  circumstances,  but
leaves  the  choice  between  certain  actions  undetermined,
and  to  be  settled  by  chance  or  the  transcendental  Ego.
Is  it  not  clear  that  the  man  would  be  responsible  for  pre-
cisely that  part  of  the  character  of  the  action  which  was
determined  by  his  character,  and  not  for  what  was  left
undetermined  by  it  ?     For  it  is  just  that  part  which  was
determined  by  his  character  which  it  is  reasonable  to
try  to  alter  by  altering  him.

We  who  beheve  in  uniformity  are  not  the  only
people  unable  to  conceive  responsibihty  without  it.
These  are  the  words  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  as  quoted  by
Mr.  J.  S.  Mill:— 1

'  Nay,  were  we  even  to  admit  as  true  what  we  can-
not think  as  possible,  still  the  doctrine  of  a  motiveless
vohtion  would  be  only  casuaHsm  ;  and  the  free  acts  of
an  indifferent  are,  morally  and  rationally,  as  worthless
as  the  pre-ordered  passions  of  a  determined  will.'

'  That,  though  inconceivable,  a  motiveless  volition
would,  if  conceived,  be  conceived  as  morally  worthless,
only  shows  our  impotence  more  clearly.'

'  Is  the  person  an  original  undetermined  cause  of  the
determination  of  his  will  ?  If  he  be  not,  then  he  is  not  a
free  agents  and  the  scheme  of  Necessity  is  admitted.  If
he  be,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  the
possibihty  of  this  ;  and  in  the  second,  if  the  fact,  though

*  Examination^  p.  4^6,  '2nd  ed.


160  EIGHT  AND  WRONG.

inconceivable,  be  allowed,  it  is  impossible  to  see  how  a
cause,  undetermined  by  any  motive,  can  be  a  rational,
moral,  and  accountable  cause.'

It  is  true  that  Hamilton  also  says  that  the  scheme
of  necessity  is  inconceivable,  because  it  leads  to  an  in-
finite non-commencement ;  and  that '  the  possibility  of
morahty  depends  on  the  possibihty  of  liberty  ;  for  if  a
man  be  not  a  free  agent,  he  is  not  the  author  of  his
actions,  and  has,  therefore,  no  responsibility — ^no  moral
personahty  at  all.'

^1  know  nothing  about  necessity ;  I  only  beheve  that
nature  is  practically  uniform  even  in  human  action.  I
know  nothing  about  an  infinitely  distant  past;  I  only
know  that  I  ought  to  base  on  uniformity  those  infer-
ences which  are  to  guide  my  actions.  But  that  man  is
a  free  agent  appears  to  me  obvious,  and  that  in  the
natural  sense  of  the  wordsN  We  need  as|i  for  no  better
definition  than  Kant's  : —

^Will  is  a  kind  of  causality  belonging  to  living
agents,  in  so  far  as  they  are  rational ;  and  freedom  is
such  a  property  of  that  causahty  as  enables  them  to  ,be
efiicient  agents  independently  of  outside  causes  deter-
mining them ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  necessity  {Natur-
nothwendigkeit)  is  that  property  of  all  irrational  beings
which  consists  in  their  being  determined  to  activity  by
the  influence  of  outside  causes.'  ^

I  believe  that  I  am  a  free  agent  when  my  actions  are
independent  of  the  control  of  circumstances  outside  me ;
and  it  seems  a  misuse  of  language  to  call  me  a  free
agent  if  my  actions  are^determined  by  a  transcendental
Ego  who  is  independent  of  the  circumstances  inside  me

^  *  Metaphysics  of  Ethics/  chap.  iii.


RIGHT  AND  WEONG.  161

— that  is  to  say,  of  my  character.  The  expression  '  free
will'  has  unfortunately  been  imported  into  mental
science  from  a  theological  controversy  rather  different
from  the  one  we  are  now  considering.  It  is  surely  too
much  to  expect  that  good  and  serviceable  English  words
should  be  sacrificed  to  a  phantom.

In  an  admirable  book, '  The  Methods  of  Ethics,'  Mr.
Henry  Sidgwick  has  stated,  with  supreme  fairness  and
impartiality,  both  sides  of  this  question.  After  setting
forth  the  '  almost  overwhelming  cumulative  proof '  of
uniformity  in  human  action,  he  says  that  it  seems  '  more
than  balanced  by  a  single  argument  on  the  other  side  :
the  immediate  affirmation  of  consciousness  in  the
moment  of  deliberate  volition.'  'No  amount  of  ex-
perience of  the  sway  of  motives  ever  tends  to  make  me
distrust  my  intuitive  consciousness  that  in  resolving,
after  deliberation,  I  exercise  free  choice  as  to  which  of
the  motives  acting  upon  me  shall  prevail.'

The  only  answer  to  this  argument  is  that  it  is  not
'  on  the  other  side.'  There  is  no  doubt  about  the  deliver-
ance of  consciousness ;  and  even  if  our  powers  of  self-
observation  had  not  been  acute  enough  to  discover  it,
the  existence  of  some  choice  between  motives  would  be
proved  by  the  existence  of  vaso-motor  nerves.  But
perhaps  the  most  instructive  way  of  meeting  arguments
of  this  kind  is  to  inquire  what  consciousness  ought  to
say  in  order  that  its  deliverances  may  be  of  any  use  in
the  controversy.  It  is  affirmed,  on  the  side  of  uniformity,
that  the  feelings  in  my  consciousness  in  the  moment  of
voluntary  choice  have  been  preceded  by  facts  out  of  my
consciousness  which  are  related  to  them  in  a  uniform

VOL.  XL  M


162  EIGHT  AND  WROKG.

manner,  so  that  if  the  previous  facts  had  been  accurately
known  the  voluntary  choice  might  have  been  predicted.
On  the  other  side  this  is  denied.  To  be  of  any  use  in  the
controversy,  then,  the  immediate  deliverance  of  my
consciousness  must  be  competent  to  assure  me  of  the
non-existence  of  something  which  by  hypothesis  is  not  in
my  consciousness.  Given  an  absolutely  dark  room,  can
my  sense  of  sight  assure  me  that  there  is  no  one  but
myself  in  it  ?  Can  my  sense  of  hearing  assure  me  that
nothing  inaudible  is  going  on  ?  As  little  can  the  imme-
diate dehverance  of  my  consciousness  assure  me  that
the  uniformity  of  nature  does  not  apply  to  human
actions.

It  is  perhaps  necessary,  in  connexion  with  this
question,  to  refer  to  that  singular  Materialism  of  high
authority  and  recent  date  which  makes  consciousness  a
physical  agent,  '  correlates '  it  with  Light  and  Nerve-
force,  and  so  reduces  it  to  an  objective  phenomenon.
This  doctrine  is  founded  on  a  common  and  very  useful
mode  of  speech,  in  which  we  say,  for  example,  that  a
good  fire  is  a  source  of  pleasure  on  a  cold  day,  and  that
a  man's  feehng  of  chill  may  make  him  run  to  it.  But
so  also  we  say  that  the  sun  rises  and  sets  every  morning
and  night,  although  the  man  in  the  moon  sees  clearly
that  this  is  due  to  the  rotation  of  the  earth.  One
cannot  be  pedantic  all  day.  But  if  we  choose  for  once
to  be  pedantic,  the  matter  is  after  all  very  simple.
Suppose  that  I  am  made  to  run  by  feeling  a  chiU.
When  I  begin  to  move  my  leg,  I  may  observe  if  I  like  a
double  series  of  facts.  I  have  the  feeling  of  effort,  the
sensation  of  motion  in  my  leg;  I  feel  the  pressure
of  my  foot  on  the  ground.     Along  with  this  I  may  see


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  163

with  my  eyes,  or  feel  with  my  hands,  the  motion  of  my
leg  as  a  material  object.  The  first  series  of  facts
belongs  to  me  alone;  the  second  may  be  equally
observed  by  anybody  else.  The  mental  series  began
first ;  I  willed  to  move  my  leg  before  I  saw  it  move.
But  when  I  know  more  about  the  matter,  I  can  trace
the  material  series  further  back,  and  find  nerve-mes-
sages going  to  the  muscles  of  my  leg  to  make  it  move.
But  I  had  a  feehng  of  chill  before  I  chose  to  move  my
leg.  Accordingly,  I  can  find  nerve-messages,  excited
by  the  contraction  due  to  the  low  temperature,  going
to  my  brain  from  the  chilled  skin.  Assuming  the  uni-
formity of  nature,  I  carry  forward  and  backward  both
the  mental  and  the  material  series.  A  uniformity  is
observed  in  each,  and  a  parallehsm  is  observed  between
them,  whenever  observations  can  be  made.  But  some-
times one  series  is  known  better,  and  sometimes  the
other;  so  that  in  telling  a  story  we  quite  naturally
speak  sometimes  of  mental  facts  and  sometimes  of
material  facts.  A  feehng  of  chill  made  a  man  run ;
strictly  speaking,  the  nervous  disturbance  which  co-
existed with  that  feeling  of  chill  made  him  run,  if  we
want  to  talk  about  material  facts  ;  or  the  feeling  of  chill
produced  the  form  of  sub-consciousness  which  coexists
with  the  motion  of  legs,  if  we  want  to  talk  about  mental
facts.  But  we  know  nothing  about  the  special  nervous
disturbance  which  coexists  with  a  feeling  of  chill,
because  it  has  not  yet  been  localized  in  the  brain  ;  and
we  know  nothing  about  the  form  of  sub-consciousness
which  coexists  with  the  motion  of  legs ;  although  there
is  very  good  reason  for  beheving  in  the  existence  of
both.     So  we  talk  about  the  feehng  of  chill  and  the

M  2


164  EIGHT  AND  WRONG.

running,  because  in  one  case  we  know  the  mental  side,
and  in  the  other  the  material  side.  A  man  might  show
me  a  picture  of  the  battle  of  Gravelotte,  and  say, '  You
can't  see  the  battle,  because  it's  all  over,  but  there  is  a
picture  of  it.'  And  then  he  might  put  a  chassepot  into
my  hand,  and  say,  '  We  could  not  represent  the  whole
construction  of  a  chassepot  in  the  picture,  but  you  can
examine  this  one,  and  find  it  out.'  If  I  now  insisted  on
mixing  up  the  two  modes  of  communication  of  know-
ledge, if  I  expected  that  the  chassepots  in  the  picture
would  go  off,  and  said  that  the  one  in  my  hand  was
painted  on  heavy  canvas,  I  should  be  acting  exactly  in
the  spirit  of  the  new  materialism.  For  the  material
facts  are  a  representation  or  symbol  of  the  mental  facts,
just  as  a  picture  is  a  representation  or  symbol  of  a
battle.  And  my  own  mind  is  a  reality  from  which  I
can  judge  by  analogy  of  the  reahties  represented  by
other  men's  brains,  just  as  the  chassepot  in  my  hand  is
a  reality  from  which  I  can  judge  by  analogy  of  the
chassepots  represented  in  the  picture.  When,  there-
fore, we  ask,  '  What  is  the  physical  link  between  the
ingoing  message  from  chilled  skin  and  the  outgoing
message  which  moves  the  leg  ? '  and  the  answer  is,  '  A
man's  Will,'  we  have  as  much  right  to  be  amused  as  if
we  had  asked  our  friend  with  the  picture  what  pigment
was  used  in  painting  the  cannon  in  the  foreground,  and
received  the  answer,  '  Wrought  iron.'  It  will  be  found
excellent  practice  in  the  mental  operations  required  by
this  doctrine  to  imagine  a  train,  the  fore  part  of  which  is
an  engine  and  three  carriages  linked  with  iron  couplings,
and  the  hind  part  three  other  carriages  linked  with  iron
couphngs  ;  the  bond  between  the  two  parts  being  made


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  165

out  of  the  sentiments  of  amity  subsisting  between  the
stoker  and  the  guard.

/  To  sum  up  :  the  uniformity  of  nature  in  human
actions  has  been  denied  on  the  ground  that  it  takes
away  responsibiUty,  that  it  is  contradicted  by  the  testi-
mony of  consciousness,  and  that  there  is  a  physical  cor-
relation between  mind  and  matter.  We  have  replied
that  the  uniformity  of  nature  is  necessary  to  responsi-
bility, that  it  is  affirmed  by  the  testimony  of  conscious-
ness whenever  consciousness  is  competent  to  testify,  and
that  matter  is  the  phenomenon  or  symbol  of  which  mind
or  quasi-mind  is  the  symbolized  and  represented  thingN
We  are  now  free  to  continue  our  inquiries  on  the  suppo-
sition that  nature  is  uniform.

We  began  by  describing  the  moral  sense  of  an
Englishman.  No  doubt  the  description  would  serve
very  well  for  the  more  civihzed  nations  of  Europe  ;
most  closely  for  Germans  and  Dutch.  But  the  fact  that
we  can  speak  in  this  way  discloses  that  there  is  more
than  one  moral  sense,  and  that  what  I  feel  to  be  right
another  man  may  feel  to  be  wrong.  Thus  we  cannot
help  asking  whether  there  is  any  reason  for  preferring
one  moral  sense  to  another ;  whether  the  question,
^  What  is  right  to  do  ?  '  has  in  any  one  set  of  circum-
stances a  single  answer  which  can  be  definitely  known.
Clearly,  in  the  first  rough  sense  of  the  word,  this
is  not  true.  What  is  right  for  me  to  do  now,  seeing
that  I  am  here  with  a  certain  character,  and  a  certain
moral  sense  as  part  of  it,  is  just  what  I  feel  to  be  right.
The  individual  conscience  is,  in  the  moment  of  volition,
the  only  possible  judge  of  what  is  right ;  there  is  no
conflicting   claim.     But   if  we   are   deliberating  about


106  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

the  future,  we  know  that  we  can  modify  our  con-
science gradually  by  associating  with  people,  reading
certain  books,  and  paying  attention  to  certain  ideas
and  feelings ;  and  we  may  ask  ourselves,  *  How  shall
we  modify  our  conscience,  if  at  all?  what  kind  of
conscience  shall  we  try  to  get?  what  is  the  best
conscience  ?  '  We  may  ask  similar  questions  about  our
sense  of  taste.  There  is  no  doubt  at  present  that  the
nicest  things  to  me  are  the  things  I  like ;  but  I  know
that  I  can  train  myself  to  hke  some  things  and  disUke
others,  and  that  things  which  are  very  nasty  at  one  time
may  come  to  be  great  delicacies  at  another.  I  may  ask,
*How  shall  I  train  myself?  What  is  the  best  taste?'
And  this  leads  very  naturally  to  putting  the  question  in
another  form,  namely,  '  What  is  taste  good  for  ?  What
is  the  purpose  or  function  of  taste  ? '  We  should  probably
find  as  the  answer  to  that  question  that  the  purpose
or  function  of  taste  is  to  discriminate  wholesome  food
from  unwholesome  ;  that  it  is  a  matter  of  stomach  and
digestion.  It  will  follow  from  this  that  the  best  taste  is
that  which  prefers  wholesome  food,  and  that  by  culti-
vating a  preference  for  wholesome  and  nutritious  things
I  shall  be  training  my  palate  in  the  way  it  should
go.  In  just  the  same  way  our  question  about  the  best
conscience  will  resolve  itself  into  a  question  about  the
purpose  or  function  of  the  conscience — why  we  have
got  it,  and  what  it  is  good  for.

Now  to  my  mind  the  simplest  and  clearest  and  most
profound  philosophy  that  was  ever  written  upon  this
subject  is  to  be  found  in  the  2nd  and  3rd  chapters  of
Mr.  Darwin's  '  Descent  of  Man.*  In  these  chapters  it
appears   that  just  as  most  physical   characteristics  of


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  167

organisms  have  been  evolved  and  preserved  because
they  were  useful  to  the  individual  in  the  struggle  for
existence  against  other  individuals  and  other  species,  so
this  particular  feehng  has  been  evolved  and  preserved
because  it  is  useful  to  the  tribe  or  community  in  the
struggle  for  existence  against  other  tribes,  and  against
the  environment  as  a  whole.  The  function  of  conscience
is  the  preservation  of  the  tribe  as  a  tribe.  And  we
shall  rightly  train  our  consciences  if  we  learn  to  approve
those  actions  which  tend  to  the  advantage  of  the  com-
munity in  the  struggle  for  existence.

There  are  here  some  words,  however,  which  require
careful  definition.  And  first  the  word  purpose,  A
thing  serves  a  purpose  when  it  is  adapted  to  some  end  ;
thus  a  corkscrew  is  adapted  to  the  end  of  extracting
corks  from  bottles,  and  our  lungs  are  adapted  to  the
end  of  respiration.  We  may  say  that  the  extraction  of
corks  is  the  purpose  of  the  corkscrew,  and  that  respira-
tion is  the  purpose  of  the  lungs.  But  here  we  shall  have
used  the  word  in  two  different  senses.  A  man  made
the  corkscrew  with  a  purpose  in  his  mind,  and  he  knew
and  intended  that  it  should  be  used  for  pulling  out
corks.  But  nobody  made  our  lungs  with  a  purpose  in
his  mind,  and  intended  that  they  should  be  used  for
breathing.  The  respiratory  apparatus  was  adapted  to
its  purpose  by  natural  selection — namely,  by  the  gradual
preservation  of  better  and  better  adaptations,  and  the
killing  off  of  the  worse  and  imperfect  adaptations.  In
using  the  word  purpose  for  the  result  of  this  uncon-
scious process  of  adaptation  by  survival  of  the  fittest,  I
know  that  I  am  somewhat  extending  its  ordinary  sense,
which  implies  consciousness.     But  it  seems  to  me  that


168  RIGHT  ANB  WRONG.

on  the  score  of  convenience  there  is  a  great  deal  to  be
said  for  this  extension  of  meaning.  We  want  a  word
to  express  the  adaptation  of  means  to  an  end,  whether
involving  consciousness  or  not ;  the  word  purpose  will
do  very  well,  and  the  adjective  purposive  has  already
been  used  in  this  sense.  But  if  the  use  is  admitted,  we
must  distinguish  two  kinds  of  purpose.  There  is  the
unconscious  purpose  which  is  attained  by  natural  selec-
tion, in  which  no  consciousness  need  be  concerned  ;  and
there  is  the  conscious  purpose  of  an  intelUgence  which
designs  a  thing  that  it  may  serve  to  do  something  which
he  desires  to  be  done.  The  distinguishing  mark  of  this
second  kind,  design  or  conscious  purpose,  is  that  in  the
consciousness  of  the  agent  there  is  an  image  or  symbol
of  the  end  which  he  desires,  and  this  precedes  and
determines  the  use  of  the  means.  Thus  the  man  who
first  invented  a  corkscrew  must  have  previously  known
that  corks  were  in  bottles,  and  have  desired  to  get  them
out.  We  may  describe  this  if  we  hke  in  terms  of  matter,
and  say  that  a  purpose  of  the  second  kind  imphes  a
complex  nervous  system,  in  which  there  can  be  formed
an  image  or  symbol  of  the  end,  and  that  this  symbol
determines  the  use  of  the  means.  The  nervous  image
or  symbol  of  anything  is  that  mode  of  working  of  part
of  my  brain  which  goes  on  simultaneously  and  is  corre-
lated with  my  thinking  of  the  thing.

Aristotle  defines  an  organism  as  that  in  which  the
part  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  whole.  It  is  not  that  the
existence  of  the  part  depends  on  the  existence  of  the
whole,  for  every  whole  exists  only  as  an  aggregate  of
parts  related  in  a  certain  way  ;  but  that  the  shape  and
nature  of  the  part  are  determined  by  the  wants  of  the


RIGHT  AND  WRONG.  '  169

whole.  Thus  the  shape  and  nature  of  my  foot  are
what  they  are,  not  for  the  sake  of  my  foot  itself,  but  for
the  sake  of  my  whole  body,  and  because  it  wants  to
move  about.  That  which  the  part  has  to  do  for  the
whole  is  called  its  function.  Thus  the  function  of  my
foot  is  to  support  me,  and  assist  in  locomotion.  Not  all
the  nature  of  the  part  is  necessarily  for  the  sake  of  the
whole :  the  comparative  callosity  of  the  skin  of  my  sole
is  for  the  protection  of  my  foot  itself.

Society  is  an  organism,  and  man  in  society  is  part  of
an  organism  according  to  this  definition,  in  so  far  as
some  portion  of  the  nature  of  man  is  what  it  is  for  the
sake  of  the  whole — society.  Now  conscience  is  such  a
portion  of  the  nature  of  man,  and  its  function  is  the
preservation  of  society  in  the  struggle  for  existence.
We  may  be  able  to  define  this  function  more  closely
when  we  know  more  about  the  way  in  which  conscience
tends  to  preserve  society.

Next  let  us  endeavour  to  make  precise  the  meaning
of  the  words  community  and  society.  It  is  clear  that  at
different  times  men  may  be  divided  into  groups  of
greater  or  less  extent — tribes,  clans,  famihes,  nations,
towns.  If  a  certain  number  of  clans  are  struggling
for  existence,  that  portion  of  the  conscience  will  be
developed  which  tends  to  the  preservation  of  the  clan  ;
so,  if  towns  or  families  are  struggling,  we  shall  get  a
moral  sense  adapted  to  the  advantage  of  the  town  or
the  family.  In  this  way  difierent  portions  of  the  moral
sense  may  be  developed  at  difierent  stages  of  progress.
Now  it  is  clear  that  for  the  purpose  of  the  conscience
the  word  community  at  any  time  will  mean  a  group  of
that  size  and   nature  which-  is  being   selected  or   not


170  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

selected  for  survival  as  a  whole.  Selection  may  be
going  on  at  the  same  time  among  many  different  kinds
of  groups.  And  ultimately  the  moral  sense  will  be
composed  of  various  portions  relating  to  various  groups,
the  function  or  purpose  of  each  portion  being  the  advan-
tage of  that  group  to  which  it  relates  in  the  struggle  for
existence.  Thus  we  have  a  sense  of  family  duty,  of
municipal  duty,  of  national  duty,  and  of  duties  towards
all  mankind.

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  part  of  the  nature  of  a
smaller  group  may  be  what  it  is  for  the  sake  of  a  larger
group  to  which  it  belongs  ;  and  then  we  may  speak  of
the  function  of  the  smaller  group.  Thus  it  appears
probable  that  the  family,  in  the  form  in  which  it  now
exists  among  us,  is  determined  by  the  good  of  the  nation  ;
and  we  may  say  that  the  function  of  the  family  is  to
promote  the  advantage  of  the  nation  or  larger  society
in  some  certain  ways.  But  I  do  not  think  it  would
be  right  to  follow  Auguste  Comte  in  speaking  of  the
function  of  humanity ;  because  humanity  is  obviously
not  a  part  of  any  larger  organism  for  whose  sake  it  is
what  it  is.

Now  that  we  have  cleared  up  the  meanings  of  some
of  our  words,  we  are  still  a  great  way  from  the  definite
solution  of  our  question,  ^  What  is  the  best  conscience  ?
or  what  ought  I  to  think  right  ?  '  For  we  do  not  yet
know  what  is  for  the  advantage  of  the  community  in
the  struggle  for  existence.  If  we  choose  to  learn  by
the  analogy  of  an  individual  organism,  we  may  see  that
no  permanent  or  final  answer  can  be  given,  because
the  organism  grows  in  consequence  of  the  struggle,  and
develops  new  wants  while  it  is  satisfying  the  old  ones.


EIGHT  AND  WRONG.  171

But  at  any  given  time  it  has  quite  enough  to  do  to
keep  alive  and  to  avoid  dangers  and  diseases.  So  we
may  expect  that  the  wants  and  even  the  necessities  of
the  social  organism  will  grow  with  its  growth,  and  that
it  is  impossible  to  predict  what  may  tend  in  the  distant
future  to  its  advantage  in  the  struggle  for  existence.
But  still,  in  this  vague  and  general  statement  of  the
functions  of  conscience,  we  shall  find  that  we  have
already  estabhshed  a  great  deal.

In  the  first  place,  right  is  an  affair  of  the  community,
and  must  not  be  referred  to  anything  else.     To  go  back
to  our  analogy  of  taste :  if  I  tried  to  persuade  you  that
the  best  palate  was  that  which  preferred  things  pretty
to  look  at,  you  might  condemn  me  a  'priori  without  any
experience,  by  merely  knowing  that  taste  is  an  affair  of
stomach  and  digestion — that  its  function  is  to  select
wholesome  food.     And  so,  if  anyone  tries  to  persuade
us  that  the  best  conscience  is  that  which  "^thinks  it  right
to  obey  the  will  of  some  individual,  as  a  deity  or  a
monarch,  he  is  condemned  a  priori  in  the  very  nature
of  right  and  wrong.   In  order  that  the  worship  of  a  deity
may  be  consistent  with  natural  ethics,  he  must  be  re-
garded as  the  friend  and  helper  of  humanity,  and  his
character  must  be  judged  from  his  actions  by  a  moral
standard  which  is  independent  of  him.     And   this,  it
must  be  admitted,  is  the  position  which  has  been  taken
by  most  English  divines,  as  long  as  they  were  English-
men first  and   divines  afterwards.     The  worship  of  a
deity  who  is  represented  as  unfair  or  unfriendly  to  any
portion  of  the  community  is  a  wrong  thing,  however
great  may  be  the  threats  and  promises  by  which  it  is
commended.     And  still  wor^e,  the  reference  of  right


172  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

and  wrong  to  his  arbitrary  will  as  a  standard,  the
diversion  of  the  allegiance  of  the  moral  sense  from  the
community  to  him,  is  the  most  insidious  and  fatal  of
social  diseases.  It  was  against  this  that  the  Teutonic
conscience  protested  in  the  Eeformation.  Again,  in
monarchical  countries,  in  order  that  allegiance  to  the
sovereign  may  be  consistent  with  natural  ethics,  he
must  be  regarded  as  the  servant  and  symbol  of  the
national  unity,  capable  of  rebelUon  and  punishable  for
it.  And  this  has  been  the  theory  of  the  English  con-
stitution from  time  immemorial.^

The  first  principle  of  natural  ethics,  then,  is  the  sole
and  supreme  allegiance  of  conscience  to  the  community.
I  venture  to  call  this  piety  in  accordance  with  the  older
meaning  of  the  word.  Even  if  it  should  turn  out
impossible  to  sever  it  from  the  unfortunate  associations
which  have  clung  to  its  later  meaning,  still  it  seems
worth  while  to  try.

An  immediate  deduction  from  our  principle  is  that
there  are  no  self-regarding  virtues  properly  so  called ;
those  quaUties  which  tend  to  the  advantage  and  preser-
vation of  the  individual  being  only  morally  right  in  so
far  as  they  make  him  a  more  useful  citizen.  And  this
conclusion  is  in  some  cases  of  great  practical  importance.
The  virtue  of  purity,  for  example,  attains  in  this  way  a
fairly  exact  definition  :  purity  in  a  man  is  that  course
of  conduct  which  makes  him  to  be  a  good  husband  and
father,  in  a  woman  that  which  makes  her  to  be  a  good
wife  and  mother,  or  which  helps  other  people   so   to

^  [Rex  autem  habet  supeiiorem,  Deum  scilicet.  Item  legem  per  quam
factus  est  rex.  Item  curiam  suam  .  .  .  et  ideo  si  rex  fiierit  sine  fraeno,
id  est  sine  lege,  debent  ei  fraenum  ponere. — Bracton,  fo.  34  <?.]


EIGHT  AND  WEONG.  173

prepare  and  keep  themselves.  It  is  easy  to  see  how
many  false  ideas  and  pernicious  precepts  are  swept
away  by  even  so  simple  a  definition  as  that.

Next,  we  may  fairly  define  our  position  in  regard  to
that  moral  system  which  has  deservedly  found  favour
with  the  great  mass  of  our  countrymen.     In  the  common
statement  of  utilitarianism  the  end  of  right   action  is
defined   to   be  the  greatest  happiness  of  the   greatest
number.     It  seems  to  me  that  the  reason  and  the  ample
justification   of  the   success   of  this    system  is  that  it
explicitly   sets   forth  the  community  as  the   object  of
moral  allegiance.     But  our  determination  of  the  purpose
of  the  conscience  will  oblige  us  to  make  a  change  in  the
statement   of  it.     Happiness   is   not    the  end  of  right
action.     My  happiness  is  of  no  use  to  the  community
except  in  so  far  as  it  makes  me  a  more  efficient  citizen  ;
that  is  to  say,  it  is  rightly  desired  as  a  means  and  not
as  an  end.     The  end  may  be  described  as  the  greatest
efficiency  of  all  citizens  as  such.     No  doubt  happiness
will  in  the  long  run  accrue  to  the  community  as  a  con-
sequence of  right  conduct ;  but  the  right  is  determined
independently  of  the  happiness,  and,  as  Plato  says,  it  is
better  to  suffer  wrong  than  to  do  wrong.

In  conclusion,  I  would  add  some  words  on  the
relation  of  Veracity  to  the  first  principle  of  Piety.  It  is
clear  that  veracity  is  founded  on  faith  in  man  ;  you  tell
a  man  the  truth  when  you  can  trust  him  with  it  and
are  not  afraid.  This  perhaps  is  made  more  evident
by  considering  the  case  of  exception  allowed  by  all
moralists — namely,  that  if  a  man  asks  you  the  way  with
a  view  to  committing  a  murder,  it  is  right  to  tell  a  lie
and  misdirect  him.     The  reason  why  he  must  not  have


174  BIGHT  AND  WRONG.

the  truth  told  him  is  that  he  would  make  a  bad  use  of
it ;  he  cannot  be  trusted  with  it.  y^bout  these  cases  of
exception  an  important  remark  must  be  made  in  passing.
When  we  hear  that  a  man  has  told  a  He  under  such
circumstances,  we  are  indeed  ready  to  admit  that  for
once  it  was  right,  mensonge  admirable ;  but  we  always
have  a  sort  of  feeling  that  it  must  not  occur  again.
And  the  same  thing  applies  to  cases  of  conflicting
obhgations,  when  for  example  the  family  conscience
and  the  national  conscience  disagree.  In  such  cases  no
general  rule  can  be  laid  down  ;  we  have  to  choose  the
less  of  two  evils  ;  but  this  is  not  right  altogether  in  the
same  sense  as  it  is  right  to  speak  the  truth.  There  is
something  wrong  in  the  circumstances,  that  we  should
have  to  choose  an  evil  at  all.  The  actual  course  to  be
pursued  will  vary  with  the  progress  of  society  ;  that  evil
which  at  first  was  greater  will  become  less,  and  in  a
perfect  society  the  conflict  will  be  resolved  into  har-
mony. But  meanwhile  these  cases  of  exception  must
be  carefully  kept  distinct  from  the  straightforward  cases
of  right  and  wrong,  and  they  always  imply  an  obKga-
tion  to  mend  the  circumstances  if  we  cariT^

Veracity  to  an  individual  is  not  only  enjoined  by
piety  in  virtue  of  the  obvious  advantage  which  attends
a  straightforward  and  mutually  trusting  community  as
compared  with  others,  but  also  because  deception  is  in
all  cases  a  personal  injury.  Still  more  is  this  true  of
veracity  to  the  community  itself.  The  conception  of  the
universe  or  aggregate  of  beliefs  which  forms  the  link
between  sensation  and  action  for  each  individual  is  a
pubUc  and  not  a  private  matter ;  it  is  formed  by  society
and  for  society.     Of  what  enormous  importance  it  is  to


EIGHT  AND  WRONa.  175

the  community  that  this  should  be  a  true  conception  I
need  not  attempt  to  describe,  Now  to  the  attainment
of  this  true  conception  two  things  are  necessary.

First,  if  we  study  the  history  of  those  methods  by
which  true  behefs  and  false  beliefs  have  been  attained,
we  shall  see  that  it  is  our  duty  to  guide  our  beliefs  by  in-
ference from  experience  on  the  assumption  of  uniformity
of  nature  and  consciousness  in  other  men,  and  by  this
only.  Only  upon  this  moral  basis  can  the  foundations
of  the  empirical  method  be  justified.

/Secondly,  veracity  to  the  community  depends  upon
faith  in  man.     Surely  I  ought  to  be  talking  platitudes
when  I  say  that  it  is  not  Enghsh  to  tell  a  man  a  lie,  or
to  suggest  a  lie  by  your  silence  or  your  actions,  because
you  are  afraid  that  he  is  not  prepared  for  the  truth,
because  you  don't  quite  know  what  he  will  do  when  he
knows  it,  because  perhaps  after  all  this  lie  is  a  better
thing  for  him  than  the  truth  would  be,  this  same  man
being  all  the  time  an  honest  fellow-citizen  whom  you
have  every  reason  to  trust.     Surely  I  have  heard  that
this  craven  crookedness  is  the  object  of  our  national
detestation.     And  yet  it  is  constantly  whispered  that  it
would  be  dangerous  to  divulge  certain   truths  to  the
masses.     '  I  know  the  whole  thing  is  untrue :  but  then  it
is  so  useful  for  the  people  ;  you  don't  know  what  harm
you  might  do  by  shaking  their  faith  in  it.'     Crooked
ways  are  none  the  less  crooked  because  they  are  meant
to  deceive  great  masses  of  people  instead  of  individuals.
If  a  thing  is  true,  let  us  all  beUeve  it,  rich  and  poor,
men,  women^  and  children.     If  a  thing  is  untrue,  let
us  all  disbelieve  it,  rich  and  poor,  men,  women,  and
children.     Truth  is  a  thing   to   be   shouted   from  the


176  RIGHT  AND  WRONG.

housetops,  not  to  be  whispered  over   rose-water  after
dinner  when  the  ladies  are  gone  awayN

Even  in  those  whom  I  would  most  reverence,  who
would  shrink  with  horror  from  such  actual  deception  as  I
have  just  mentioned,  I  find  traces  of  a  want  of  faith  in
man.  Even  that  noble  thinker,  to  whom  we  of  this
generation  owe  more  than  I  can  tell,  seemed  to  say  in
one  of  his  posthumous  essays  that  in  regard  to  questions
of  great  public  importance  we  might  encourage  a  hope
in  excess  of  the  evidence  (which  would  infallibly  grow
into  a  belief  and  defy  evidence)  if  we  found  that  life  was
made  easier  by  it.  As  if  we  should  not  lose  infinitely
more  by  nourishing  a  tendency  to  falsehood  than  we
could  gain  by  the  delusion  of  a  pleasing  fancy.  Life
must  first  of  all  be  made  straight  and  true  ;  it  may  get
easier  through  the  help  this  brings  to  the  common-
wealth. And  the  great  historian  of  materialism  ^  says
that  the  amount  of  false  belief  necessary  to  morality  in
a  given  society  is  a  matter  of  taste.  I  cannot  believe
that  any  falsehood  whatever  is  necessary  to  morahty.
It  cannot  be  true  of  my  race  and  yours  that  to  keep
ourselves  from  becoming  scoundrels  we  must  needs
believe  a  lie.  The  sense  of  right  grew  up  among  healthy
men  and  was  fixed  by  the  practice  of  comradeship.  It
has  never  had  help  from  phantoms  and  falsehoods,  and
it  never  can  want  any.  By  faith  in  man  and  piety
towards  men  we  have  taught  each  other  the  right
hitherto ;  with  faith  in  man  and  piety  towards  men  we
shall  never  more  depart  from  it.

*  Lange,  *  GescMclite  des  Materialismus.'


177


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF}

I, — The  Duty  of  Inquiry.

A  SHIPOWNER  was  about  to  send  to  sea  an  emigrant-ship.
He  knew  that  she  was  old,  and  not  over-well  built  at
the  first ;  that  she  had  seen  many  seas  and  climes,  and
often  had  needed  repairs.  Doubts  had  been  suggested
to  him  that  possibly  she  was  not  seaworthy.  These
doubts  preyed  upon  his  mind,  and  made  him  unhappy ;
he  thought  that  perhaps  he  ought  to  have  her  thoroughly
overhauled  and  refitted,  even  though  this  should  put
him  to  great  expense.  Before  the  ship  sailed,  however,
he  succeeded  in  overcoming  these  melancholy  reflec-
tions. He  said  to  himself  that  she  had  gone  safely
through  so  many  voyages  and  weathered  so  many
storms  that  it  was  idle  to  suppose  she  would  not  come
safely  home  from  this  trip  also.  He  would  put  his
trust  in  Providence,  which  could  hardly  fail  to  protect
all  these  unhappy  families  that  were  leaving  their
fatherland  to  seek  for  better  times  elsewhere.  He
would  dismiss  from  his  mind  all  ungenerous  suspicions
about  the  honesty  of  builders  and  contractors.  In  such
ways  he  acquired  a  sincere  and  comfortable  conviction
that  his  vessel  was  thoroughly  safe  and  seaworthy ;  he
watched  her  departure  with  a  light  heart,  and  benevo-
lent wishes  for  the  success  of  the  exiles  in  their  strange

1  Contemporary  Heview,  January,  1877,
.      VOL.  II.  N


178  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

new  home  that  was  to  be ;  and  he  got  his  insurance-
money  when  she  went  down  in  mid-ocean  and  told  no
tales.

What  shall  we  say  of  him?  Surely  this,  that  he
was  verily  guilty  of  the  death  of  those  men.  It  is
admitted  that  he  did  sincerely  believe  in  the  soundness
of  his  ship ;  but  the  sincerity  of  his  conviction  can  in
no  wise  help  him,  because  he  had  no  right  to  believe  on
such  evidence  as  was  before  him.  He  had  acquired  his
belief  not  by  honestly  earning  it  in  patient  investigation,
but  by  stifling  his  doubts.  And  although  in  the  end  he
may  have  felt  so  sure  about  it  that  he  could  not  think
otherwise,  yet  inasmuch  as  he  had  knowingly  and  will-
ingly worked  himself  into  that  frame  of  mind,  he  must
be  held  responsible  for  it.

Let  us  alter  the  case  a  little,  and  suppose  that  the
ship  was  not  unsound  after  all ;  that  she  made  her  voy-
age safely,  and  many  others  after  it.  Will  that  diminish
the  guilt  of  her  owner  ?  Not  one  jot.  When  an  action
is  once  done,  it  is  right  or  wrong  for  ever ;  no  accidental
failure  of  its  good  or  evil  fruits  can  possibly  alter  that.
The  man  would  not  have  been  innocent,  he  would  only
have  been  not  found  out.  The  question  of  right  or
wrong  has  to  do  with  the  origin  of  his  belief,  not  the
matter  of  it ;  not  what  it  was,  but  how  he  got  it ;  not
whether  it  turned  out  to  be  true  or  false,  but  whether
he  had  a  right  to  believe  on  such  evidence  as  was  before
him.

There  was  once  an  island  in  which  some  of  the
inhabitants  professed  a  religion  teaching  neither  the
doctrine  of  original  sin  nor  that  of  eternal  punishment.
A   suspicion   got  abroad   that   the   professors   of  this


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  179

religion  had  made  use  of  unfair  means  to  get  their
doctrines  taught  to  children.  They  were  accused  of
wresting  the  laws  of  their  country  in  such  a  way  as  to
remove  children  from  the  care  of  their  natural  and
legal  guardians ;  and  even  of  steahng  them  away  and
keeping  them  concealed  from  their  friends  and  relations.
A  certain  number  of  men  formed  themselves  into  a
society  for  the  purpose  of  agitating  the  pubhc  about
this  matter.  They  published  grave  accusations  against
individual  citizens  of  the  highest  position  and  character,
and  did  all  in  their  power  to  injure  these  citizens  in  the
exercise  of  their  professions.  So  great  was  the  noise
they  made,  that  a  Commission  was  appointed  to  investi-
gate the  facts  ;  but  after  the  Commission  had  carefully
inquired  into  all  the  evidence  that  could  be  got,  it
appeared  that  the  accused  were  innocent.  Not  only
had  they  been  accused  on  insufficient  evidence,  but  the
evidence  of  their  innocence  was  such  as  the  agitators
might  easily  have  obtained,  if  they  had  attempted  a
fair  inquiry.  After  these  disclosures  the  inhabitants  of
that  country  looked  upon  the  members  of  the  agitating
society,  not  only  as  persons  whose  judgment  was  to  be
distrusted,  but  also  as  no  longer  to  be  counted  honour-
able men.  For  although  they  had  sincerely  and  con-
scientiously believed  in  the  charges  they  had  made,
yet  they  had  no  right  to  believe  on  such  evidence  as  was
before  them.  Their  sincere  convictions,  instead  of  being
honestly  earned  by  patient  inquiring,  were  stolen  by
listening  to  the  voice  of  prejudice  and  passion.

Let  us  vary  this  case  also,  and  suppose,  other  things
remaining  as  before,  that  a  still  more  accurate  investi-
gation proved  the  accused  to  have  been  really  guilty.

K  2


180  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

Would  this  make  any  difference  in  the  guilt  of  the
accusers  ?  Clearly  not ;  the  question  is  not  whether
their  behef  was  true  or  false,  but  whether  they  enter-
tained it  on  wrong  grounds.  They  would  no  doubt
say,  ^Now  you  see  that  we  were  right  after  all ;  next
time  perhaps  you  will  beUeve  us.'  And  they  might
be  believed,  but  they  would  not  thereby  become
honourable  men.  They  would  not  be  innocent,  they
would  only  be  not  found  out.  Every  one  of  them,  if
he  chose  to  examine  himself  in  foro  conscientice^  would
know  that  he  had  acquired  and  nourished  a  behef,
when  he  had  no  right  to  beheve  on  such  evidence  as
was  before  him ;  and  therein  he  would  know  that  he
had  done  a  wrong  thing.

It  may  be  said,  however,  that  in  both  of  these
supposed  cases  it  is  not  the  behef  which  is  judged
to  be  wrong,  but  the  action  following  upon  it.  The
shipowner  might  say,  '  I  am  perfectly  certain  that  my
ship  is  sound,  but  still  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  have  her
examined,  before  trusting  the  Uves  of  so  many  people
to  her.'  And  it  might  be  said  to  the  agitator,
'  However  convinced  you  were  of  the  justice  of  your
cause  and  the  truth  of  your  convictions,  you  ought
not  to  have  made  a  pubUc  attack  upon  any  man's
character  until  you  had  examined  the  evidence  on  both
sides  with  the  utmost  patience  and  care.'

In  the  first  place,  let  us  admit  that,  so  far  as  it
goes,  this  view  of  the  case  is  right  and  necessary  ;  right,
because  even  when  a  man's  behef  is  so  fixed  that  he
cannot  think  otherwise,  he  still  has  a  choice  in  regard
to  the  action  suggested  by  it,  and  so  cannot  escape  the
duty  of  investigating  on  the  ground  of  the  strength


THE   ETHICS   OF  BELIEF.  181

of  his  convictions  ;  and  necessary,  because  those  who
are  not  yet  capable  of  controUing  their  feehngs  and
thoughts  must  have  a  plain  rule  deahng  with  overt
acts.

But  this  being  premised  as  necessary,  it  becomes
clear  that  it  is  not  sufficient,  and  that  our  previous
judgment  is  required  to  supplement  it.  For  it  is  not
possible  so  to  sever  the  belief  from  the  action  it
suggests  as  to  condemn  the  one  without  condemning  the
other.  No  man  holding  a  strong  belief  on  one  side  of  a
question,  or  even  wishing  to  hold  a  belief  on  one  side,
can  investigate  it  with  such  fairness  and  completeness
as  if  he  were  really  in  doubt  and  unbiassed ;  so  that
the  existence  of  a  belief  not  founded  on  fair  inquiry
unfits  a  man  for  the  performance  of  this  necessary
duty.

Nor  is  that  truly  a  belief  at  all  which  has  not  some
influence  upon  the  actions  of  him  who  holds  it.  He
who  truly  believes  that  which  prompts  him  to  an  action
has  looked  upon  the  action  to  lust  after  it,  he  has
committed  it  already  in  his  heart.  If  a  belief  is  not
realized  immediately  in  open  deeds,  it  is  stored  up  for
the  guidance  of  the  future.  It  goes  to  make  a  part
of  that  aggregate  of  beliefs  which  is  the  link  between
sensation  and  action  at  every  moment  of  all  our  lives,
and  which  is  so  organized  and  compacted  together  that
no  part  of  it  can  be  isolated  from  the  rest,  but  every
new  addition  modifies  the  structure  of  the  whole.  No
real  belief,  however  trifling  and  fragmentary  it  may
seem,  is  ever  truly  insignificant ;  it  prepares  us  to
receive  more  of  its  like,  confirms  those  which  resembled
it  before,  and  weakens  others ;  and  so  gradually  it  lays


182  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

a  stealthy  train  in  our  inmost  thoughts,  which  may
some  day  explode  into  overt  action,  and  leave  its  stamp
upon  our  character  for  ever.

And  no  one  man's  belief  is  in  any  case  a  private  matter
which  concerns  himself  alone.  Our  lives  are  guided  by
that  general  conception  of  the  course  of  things  which
has  been  created  by  society  for  social  purposes.  Our
words,  our  phrases,  our  forms  and  processes  and  modes
of  thought,  are  common  property,  fashioned  and  per-
fected from  age  to  age  ;  an  heirloom  which  every  suc-
ceeding generation  inherits  as  a  precious  deposit  and  a
sacred  trust  to  be  handed  on  to  the  next  one,  not  un-
changed but  enlarged  and  purified,  with  some  clear  marks
of  its  proper  handiwork.  Into  this,  for  good  or  ill,  is
woven  every  belief  of  every  man  who  has  speech  of  his
fellows.  An  awful  privilege,  and  an  awful  responsibihty,
that  we  should  help  to  create  the  world  in  which
posterity  will  live.

In  the  two  supposed  cases  which  have  been  con-
sidered,  it  has  been  judged  wrong  to  believe  on
insufficient  evidence,  or  to  nourish  belief  by  suppressing
doubts  and  avoiding  investigation.  The  reason  of  this
judgment  is  not  far  to  seek :  it  is  that  in  both  these
cases  the  belief  held  by  one  man  was  of  great  im-
portance to  other  men.  But  forasmuch  as  no  belief
held  by  one  man,  however  seemingly  trivial  the
belief,  and  however  obscure  the  believer,  is  ever
actually  insignificant  or  without  its  effect  on  the  fate  of
mankind,  we  have  no  choice  but  to  extend  our  judgment
to  all  cases  of  belief  whatever.  Belief,  that  sacred
faculty  which  prompts  the  decisions  of  our  will,  and
knits  into  harmonious  working  all  the  compacted  energies


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  183

of  our  being,  is  ours  not  for  ourselves,  but  for  humanity.
It  is  rightly  used  on  truths  which  have  been  established
by  long  experience  and  waiting  toil,  and  which  have
stood  in  the  fierce  light  of  free  and  fearless  questioning.
Then  it  helps  to  bind  men  together,  and  to  strengthen
and  direct  their  common  action.  It  is  desecrated  when
given  to  unproved  and  unquestioned  statements,  for  the
solace  and  private  pleasure  of  the  believer  ;  to  add  a
tinsel  splendour  to  the  plain  straight  road  of  our  life
and  display  a  bright  mirage  beyond  it ;  or  even  to
drown  the  common  sorrows  of  our  kind  by  a  self-
deception  which  allows  them  not  only  to  cast  down,  but
also  to  degrade  us.  Whoso  would  deserve  well  of  his
fellows  in  this  matter  will  guard  the  purity  of  his
belief  with  a  very  fanaticism  of  jealous  care,  lest  at  any
time  it  should  rest  on  an  unworthy  object,  and  catch  a
stain  which  can  never  be  wiped  away.

It  is  not  only  the  leader  of  men,  statesman,  philo-
sopher, or  poet,  that  owes  this  bounden  duty  to  man-
kind.  Every  rustic  who  delivers  in  the  village  alehouse
his  slow,  infrequent  sentences,  may  help  to  kill  or  keep
alive  the  fatal  superstitions  which  clog  his  race.  Every
hard-worked  wife  of  an  artisan  may  transmit  to  her
children  beliefs  which  shall  knit  society  together,  or
rend  it  in  pieces.  No  simplicity  of  mind,  no  obscurity  of
station,  can  escape  the  universal  duty  of  questioning  all
that  we  believe.

It  is  true  that  this  duty  is  a  hard  one,  and  the  doubt
which  comes  out  of  it  is  often  a  very  bitter  thing.  It
leaves  us  bare  and  powerless  where  we  thought  that  we
were  safe  and  strong.  To  know  all  about  anything  is
to  know  how  to  deal  with  it  under  all  circumstances.


184  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

We  feel  much  happier  and  more  secure  when  we  think
we  know  precisely  what  to  do,  no  matter  what  happens,
than  when  we  have  lost  our  way  and  do  not  know  where
to  turn.  And  if  we  have  supposed  ourselves  to  know
all  about  anything,  and  to  be  capable  of  doing  what  is
fit  in  regard  to  it,  we  naturally  do  not  like  to  find  that
we  are  really  ignorant  and  powerless,  that  we  have  to
begin  again  at  the  beginning,  and  try  to  learn  what  the
thing  is  and  how  it  is  to  be  dealt  with — if  indeed  any-
thing can  be  learnt  about  it.  It  is  the  sense  of  power
attached  to  a  sense  of  knowledge  that  makes  men
desirous  of  believing,  and  afraid  of  doubting.

This  sense  of  power  is  the  highest  and  best  of
pleasures  when  the  belief  on  which  it  is  founded  is  a
true  belief,  and  has  been  fairly  earned  by  investigation.
For  then  we  may  justly  feel  that  it  is  common  property,
and  holds  good  for  others  as  well  as  for  ourselves.  Then
we  may  be  glad,  not  that  /  have  learned  secrets  by
which  I  am  safer  and  stronger,  but  that  we  men  have
got  mastery  over  more  of  the  world  ;  and  we  shall  be
strong,  not  for  ourselves,  but  in  the  name  of  Man  and
in  his  strength.  But  if  the  belief  has  been  accepted  on
insufiicient  evidence,  the  pleasure  is  a  stolen  one.  Not
only  does  it  deceive  ourselves  by  giving  us  a  sense  of
power  which  we  do  not  really  possess,  but  it  is  sinful,
because  it  is  stolen  in  defiance  of  our  duty  to  mankind.
That  duty  is  to  guard  ourselves  from  such  beliefs  as
from  a  pestilence,  which  may  shortly  master  our  own
body  and  then  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  town.  What
would  be  thought  of  one  who,  for  the  sake  of  a  sweet
fruit,  sliould  dehberately  run  the  risk  of  bringing  a
plague  upon  his  family  and  his  neighbours  ?


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  185

And,  as  in  other  such  cases,  it  is  not  the  risk  only
Avhich  has  to  be  considered  ;  for  a  bad  action  is  always
bad  at  the  time  when  it  is  done,  no  matter  what  happens
afterwards.      Every  time  we  let  ourselves  beheve  for
unworthy  reasons,  we  weaken  our  powers  of  self-control,
of  doubting,  of  judicially  and  fairly  weighing  evidence.
We  all  suffer  severely  enough  from  the  maintenance  and
support  of  false  behefs  and  the  fatally  wrong  actions
which  they  lead  to,  and  the  evil  born  when  one  such
belief  is  entertained  is  great  and  wide.     But  a  greater
and  wider  evil  arises  when  the  credulous  character  is
maintained  and  supported^  when  a  habit  of  believing  for
unworthy  reasons  is  fostered  and  made  permanent.     If
I  steal  money  from  any  person,  there  may  be  no  harm
done  by  the  mere  transfer  of  possession  ;  he  may  not
feel   the  loss,  or  it  may  prevent   him  from  using  the
money   badly.     But   1   cannot   help   doing   this  great
wrong   towards   Man,  that   I   make   myself  dishonest.
What  hurts  society  is  not  that  it  should  lose  its  property,
but  that  it  should  become  a  den  of  thieves  ;  for  then  it
must  cease  to  be  society.     This  is  why  we  ought  not  to
do  evil  that  good  may  come  ;  for  at  any  rate  this  great
evil  has  come,  that  we  have  done  evil  and  are  made
wicked  thereby.     In  like  manner,  if  I  let  myself  beheve
anything  on  insufficient  evidence,  there  may  be  no  great
harm  done  by  the  mere  belief ;  it  may  be  true  after  all,
or  I  may  never  have  occasion  to  exhibit  it  in  outward
acts.     But  I  cannot  help  doing  this  great  wrong  towards
Man,  that   I  make  myself  credulous.     The  danger  to
society  is  not  merely  that  it  should  believe  wrong  things,
though  that  is  great  enough ;  but  that  it  should  be-
come credulous,  and  lose  the  habit  of  testing  things  and


186  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

inquiring  into  them  ;  for  then  it  must  sink  back  into
savagery.

The  harm  which  is  done  by  creduhty  in  a  man  is
not  confined  to  the  fostering  of  a  credulous  character
in  others,  and  consequent  support  of  false  beliefs.
Habitual  want  of  care  about  what  I  believe  leads  to
habitual  want  of  care  in  others  about  the  truth  of  what
is  told  to  me.  Men  speak  the  truth  to  one  another
when  each  reveres  the  truth  in  his  own  mind  and  in
the  other's  mind  ;  but  how  shall  my  friend  revere  the
truth  in  my  mind  when  I  myself  am  careless  about  it,
when  I  beheve  things  because  I  want  to  believe  them,
and  because  they  are  comforting  and  pleasant  ?  Will
he  not  learn  to  cry,  '  Peace,'  to  me,  when  there  is  no
peace  ?  By  such  a  course  I  shall  surround  myself  with
a  thick  atmosphere  of  falsehood  and  fraud,  and  in  that
I  must  live.  It  may  matter  little  to  me,  in  my  cloud-
castle  of  sweet  illusions  and  darling  lies  ;  but  it  matters
much  to  Man  that  I  have  made  my  neighbours  ready
to  deceive.  The  credulous  man  is  father  to  the  liar  and
the  cheat ;  he  hves  in  the  bosom  of  this  his  family,  and
it  is  no  marvel  if  he  should  become  even  as  they  are.
So  closely  are  our  duties  knit  together,  that  whoso  shall
keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in  one  point,  he  is
guilty  of  all.

To  sum  up :  it  is  wrong  always,  everywhere,  and
for  anyone,  to  believe  anything  upon  insufficient  evi-
dence.

If  a  man,  holding  a  belief  which  he  was  taught  in
childhood  or  persuaded  of  afterwards,  keeps  down  and
pushes  away  any  doubts  which  arise  about  it  in  his
mind,  purposely  avoids  the  reading  of  books  and  the


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  187

company  of  men  that  call  in  question  or  discuss  it,  and
regards  as  impious  those  questions  which  cannot  easily
be  asked  without  disturbing  it — the  life  of  that  man  is
one  long  sin  against  mankind.

If  this  judgment  seems  harsh  when  apphed  to  those
simple  souls  who  have  never  known  better,  who  have
been  brought  up  from  the  cradle  with  a  horror  of  doubt,
and  taught  that  their  eternal  welfare  depends  on  what
they  believe,  then  it  leads  to  the  very  serious  question.
Who  hath  made  Israel  to  sin  ?

It  may  be  permitted  me  to  fortify  this  judgment
with  the  sentence  of  Milton  ^ —

'  A  man  may  be  a  heretic  in  the  truth  ;  and  if  he
believe  things  only  because  his  pastor  says  so,  or  the
assembly  so  determine,  without  knowing  other  reason,
though  his  belief  be  true,  yet  the  very  truth  he  holds
becomes  his  heresy.'

And  with  this  famous  aphorism  of  Coleridge  ^ —

'  He  who  begins  by  loving  Christianity  better  than
Truth,  will  proceed  by  loving  his  own  sect  or  Church
better  than  Christianity,  and  end  in  loving  himself  better
than  all.'

Inquiry  into  the  evidence  of  a  doctrine  is  not  to  be
made  once  for  all,  and  then  taken  as  finally  settled.  It
is  never  lawful  to  stifle  a  doubt ;  for  either  it  can  be
honestly  answered  by  means  of  the  inquiry  already
made,  or  else  it  proves  that  the  inquiry  was  not  com-
plete.

'  But,'  says  one,  '  I  am  a  busy  man  ;  I  have  no  time
for  the  long  course  of  study  which  would  be  necessary
to  make  me  in  any  degree  a  competent  judge  of  certain

^  Areopagitica.  ^  Aids  to  JReflection.


188  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

questions,  or  even  able  to  understand  the  nature  of
the  arguments.'  Then  he  should  have  no  time  to
believe.

//. — The  Weight  of  Authority,

Are  we  then  to  become  universal  sceptics,  doubting
everything,  afraid  always  to  put  one  foot  before  the
other  until  we  have  personally  tested  the  firmness  of  the
road  ?  Are  we  to  deprive  ourselves  of  the  help  and
guidance  of  that  vast  body  of  knowledge  which  is  daily
growing  upon  the  world,  because  neither  we  nor  any
other  one  person  can  possibly  test  a  hundredth  part  of  it
by  immediate  experiment  or  observation,  and  because  it
would  not  be  completely  proved  if  we  did  ?  Shall  we
steal  and  tell  lies  because  we  have  had  no  personal  ex-
perience wide  enough  to  justify  the  belief  that  it  is
wrong  to  do  so  ?

There  is  no  practical  danger  that  such  consequences
will  ever  follow  from  scrupulous  care  and  self-control  in
the  matter  of  behef.  Those  men  who  have  most  nearly
done  their  duty  in  this  respect  have  found  that  certain
great  principles,  and  these  most  fitted  for  the  guidance
of  life,  have  stood  out  more  and  more  clearly  in  propor-
tion to  the  care  and  honesty  with  which  they  were
tested,  and  have  acquired  in  this  way  a  practical
certainty.  The  beliefs  about  right  and  wrong  which
guide  our  actions  in  deahng  with  men  in  society,  and
the  beliefs  about  physical  nature  which  guide  our
actions  in  dealing  with  animate  and  inanimate  bodies,
these  never  suffer  from  investigation ;  they  can  take
care    of   themselves,  without   being    propped    up   by


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  189

'  acts  of  faith,'  the  clamour  of  paid  advocates,  or  the
suppression  of  contrary  evidence.  Moreover  there  are
many  cases  in  which  it  is  our  duty  to  act  upon  proba-
bilities, although  the  evidence  is  not  such  as  to  justify
present  belief ;  because  it  is  precisely  by  such  action,
and  by  observation  of  its  fruits,  that  evidence  is  got
which  may  justify  future  belief.  So  that  we  have  no
reason  to  fear  lest  a  habit  of  conscientious  inquiry
should  paralyse  the  actions  of  our  daily  life.

But  because  it  is  not  enough  to  say,  '  It  is  wrong  to
believe  on  unworthy  evidence,'  without  saying  also  what
evidence  is  worthy,  we  shall  now  go  on  to  inquire
under  what  circumstances  it  is  lawful  to  believe  on  the
testimony  of  others  ;  and  then,  further,  we  shall  inquire
more  generally  when  and  why  we  may  believe  that
which  goes  beyond  our  own  experience,  or  even  beyond
the  experience  of  mankind.

In  what  cases,  then,  let  us  ask  in  the  first  place,  is
the  testimony  of  a  man  unworthy  of  belief?  He  may
say  that  which  is  untrue  either  knowingly  or  unknow-
ingly. In  the  first  case  he  is  lying,  and  his  moral
character  is  to  blame  ;  in  the  second  case  he  is  ignorant
or  mistaken,  and  it  is  only  his  knowledge  or  his  judg-
ment which  is  in  fault.  In  order  that  we  may  have  the
right  to  accept  his  testimony  as  ground  for  believing
what  he  says,  we  must  have  reasonable  grounds  for
trusting  his  veracity^  that  he  is  really  trying  to  speak
the  truth  so  far  as  he  knows  it ;  his  knowledge^  that  he
has  had  opportunities  of  knowing  the  truth  about  this
matter  ;  and  his  judgment^  that  he  has  made  proper  use
of  those  opportunities  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  which
he  affirms.


190  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

However  plain  and  obvious  these  reasons  may  be,  so
that  no  man  of  ordinary  intelhgence,  reflecting  upon  the
matter,  could  fail  to  arrive  at  them,  it  is  nevertheless
true  that  a  great  many  persons  do  habitually  disregard
them  in  weighing  testimony.  Of  the  two  questions,
equally  important  to  the  trustworthiness  of  a  witness,
'Is  he  dishonest?'  and  'May  he  be  mistaken?'  the
majority  of  mankind  are  perfectly  satisfied  if  one  can,
with  some  show  of  probability,  be  answered  in  the  nega-
tive. The  excellent  moral  character  of  a  man  is  alleged
as  ground  for  accepting  his  statements  about  things
which  he  cannot  possibly  have  known,  A  Mohammedan,
for  example,  will  tell  us  that  the  character  of  his
Prophet  was  so  noble  and  majestic  that  it  commands
the  reverence  even  of  those  who  do  not  beheve  in  his
mission.  So  admirable  was  his  moral  teaching,  so
wisely  put  together  the  great  social  machine  which
he  created,  that  his  precepts  have  not  only  been
accepted  by  a  great  portion  of  mankind,  but  have
actually  been  obeyed.  His  institutions  have  on  the  one
hand  rescued  the  negro  from  savagery,  and  on  the  other
hand  have  taught  civilization  to  the  advancing  West ;
and  although  the  races  which  held  the  highest  forms  of
his  faith,  and  most  fully  embodied  his  mind  and  thought,
have  all  been  conquered  and  swept  away  by  barbaric
tribes,  yet  the  history  of  their  marvellous  attainments
remains  as  an  imperishable  glory  to  Islam,  Are  we  to
doubt  the  word  of  a  man  so  great  and  so  good  ?  Can
we  suppose  that  this  magnificent  genius,  this  splendid
moral  hero,  has  lied  to  us  about  the  most  solemn  and
sacred  matters  ?  The  testimony  of  Mohammed  is  clear,
that  there  is  but  one  God,  and  that  he,  Mohammed,  is  his


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  191

prophet ;  that  if  we  beheve  in  him  we  shall  enjoy
everlasting  felicity,  but  that  if  we  do  not  we  shall
be  damned.  This  testimony  rests  on  the  most  awful
of  foundations,  the  revelation  of  heaven  itself;  for  was
he  not  visited  by  the  angel  Gabriel,  as  he  fasted  and
prayed  in  his  desert  cave,  and  allowed  to  enter  into  the
blessed  fields  of  Paradise?  Surely  God  is  God  and
Mohammed  is  the  Prophet  of  God.

What  should  we  answer  to  this  Mussulman  ?     First,
no   doubt,  we  should   be  tempted    to  take  exception
against  his  view  of  the  character  of  the  Prophet  and
the  uniformly  beneficial  influence  of  Islam :  before  we
could  go  with  him  altogether  in  these  matters  it  might
seem  that  we  should  have  to  forget  many  terrible  things
of  which  we  have  heard  or  read.     But  if  we  chose  to
grant  him  all  these  assumptions,  for  the  sake  of  argu-
ment, and  because  it  is  difficult  both  for  the  faithful  and
for  infidels  to  discuss  them  fairly  and  without  passion,
still  we  should  have  something  to  say  which  takes  away
the  ground  of  his  belief,  and  therefore  shows  that  it  is
wrong  to  entertain  it.     Namely  this :  the  character  of
Mohammed  is  excellent  evidence  that  he  was  honest
and  spoke  the  truth  so  far  as  he  knew  it ;  but   it  is
no  evidence  at  all  that  he  knew  what  the  truth  was.
What  means  could  he  have  of  knowing  that  the  form
which  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  angel  Gabriel  was  not
a  hallucination,  and  that  his  apparent  visit  to  Paradise
was  not  a  dream  ?     Grant  that  he  himself  was  fully  per-
suaded and  honestly  believed  that  he  had  the  guidance
of  heaven,  and  was  the  vehicle  of  a  supernatural  reve-
lation, how  could  he  know  that  this  strong  conviction
was  not  a  mistake  ?     Let  us  put  ourselves  in  his  place  ;


193  THE  ETHICS  OF   BELIEF.

we  shall  find  that  the  more  completely  we  endeavour  to
reahze  what  passed  through  his  mind,  the  more  clearly
we  shall  perceive  that  the  Prophet  could  have  had  no
adequate  ground  for  the  belief  in  his  own  inspiration.
It  is  most  probable  that  he  himself  never  doubted  of  the
matter,  or  thought  of  asking  the  question ;  but  we  are
in  the  position  of  those  to  whom  the  question  has  been
asked,  and  who  are  bound  to  answer  it.  It  is  known
to  medical  observers  that  solitude  and  want  of  food  are
powerful  means  of  producing  delusion  and  of  fostering
a  tendency  to  mental  disease.  Let  us  suppose,  then,
that  I,  hke  Mohammed,  go  into  desert  places  to  fast  and
pray  ;  what  things  can  happen  to  me  which  will  give
me  the  right  to  believe  that  I  am  divinely  inspired  ?
Suppose  that  I  get  information,  apparently  from  a  celes-
tial visitor,  which  upon  being  tested  is  found  to  be
correct.  I  cannot  be  sure,  in  the  first  place,  that  the
celestial  visitor  is  not  a  figment  of  my  own  mind,  and
that  the  information  did  not  come  to  me,  unknown  at
the  time  to  my  consciousness,  through  some  subtle
channel  of  sense.  But  if  my  visitor  were  a  real  visitor,
and  for  a  long  time  gave  me  information  which  was
found  to  be  trustworthy,  this  would  indeed  be  good
ground  for  trusting  him  in  the  future  as  to  such  matters
as  fall  within  human  powers  of  verification  ;  but  it  would
not  be  ground  for  trusting  his  testimony  as  to  any  other
matters.  For  although  his  tested  character  would  justify
me  in  beheving  that  he  spoke  the  truth  so  far  as  he
knew,  yet  the  same  question  would  present  itself — what
ground  is  there  for  supposing  that  he  knows  ?

Even  if  my  supposed  visitor  had  given  me  such  in-
formation, subsequently  verified  by  me,  as  proved  him


THE  ETHICS   OF  BELIEF.  193

to  have  means  of  knowledge  about  verifiable  matters
far  exceeding  my  own  ;  this  wonld  not  justify  me  in
beheving  what  he  said  about  matters  that  are  not  at
present  capable  of  verification  by  man.  It  would  be
ground  for  interesting  conjecture,  and  for  the  hope  that,
as  the  fruit  of  our  patient  inquiry,  we  might  by-and-by
attain  to  such  a  means  of  verification  as  should  rightly
turn  conjecture  into  belief.  For  belief  belongs  to  man,
and  to  the  guidance  of  human  affairs :  no  behef  is  real
unless  it  guide  our  actions,  and  those  very  actions  supply
a  test  of  its  truth.

But,  it  may  be  replied,  the  acceptance  of  Islam  as  a
system  is  just  that  action  which  is  prompted  by  behef  -
in  the  mission  of  the  Prophet,  and  which  will  serve  for
a  test  of  its  truth.  Is  it  possible  to  beheve  that  a  system
which  has  succeeded  so  well  is  really  founded  upon  a
delusion?  Not  only  have  individual  saints  found  joy
and  peace  in  beheving,  and  verified  those  spiritual  ex-
periences which  are  promised  to  the  faithful,  but  nations
also  have  been  raised  from  savagery  or  barbarism  to  a
higher  social  state.  Surely  we  are  at  liberty  to  say  that
the  belief  has  been  acted  upon,  and  that  it  has  been
verified.

It  requires,  however,  but  httle  consideration  to  show
that  what  has  really  been  verified  is  not  at  all  the
supernal  character  of  the  Prophet's  mission,  or  the  trust-
worthiness of  his  authority  in  matters  which  we  ourselves
cannot  test,  but  only  his  practical  wisdom  in  certain
very  mundane  things.  The  fact  that  believers  have
found  joy  and  peace  in  beheving  gives  us  the  right  to  say
that  the  doctrine  is  a  comfortable  doctrine,  and  pleasant
to  the  soul ;  but  it  does  not  give  us  the  right  to  say  that

VOL.  n.  0


194  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

it  is  true.  And  the  question  which  our  conscience  is
always  asking  about  that  which  we  are  tempted  to
beheve  is  not,  '  Is  it  comfortable  and  pleasant  ? '  but,  '  Is
it  true  ?  '  That  the  Prophet  preached  certain  doctrines,
and  predicted  that  spiritual  comfort  would  be  found  in
them,  proves  only  his  sympathy  with  human  nature  and
his  knowledge  of  it ;  but  it  does  not  prove  his  super-
human knowledge  of  theology.

And  if  we  admit  for  the  sake  of  argument  (for  it
seems  that  we  cannot  do  more)  that  the  progress  made
by  Moslem  nations  in  certain  cases  was  really  due  to
the  system  formed  and  sent  forth  into  the  world  by
Mohammed,  we  are  not  at  hberty  to  conclude  from  this
that  he  was  inspired  to  declare  the  truth  about  things
which  we  cannot  verify.  We  are  only  at  liberty  to  infer
the  excellence  of  his  moral  precepts,  or  of  the  means
which  he  devised  for  so  working  upon  men  as  so  get
them  obeyed,  or  of  the  social  and  political  machinery
which  he  set  up.  And  it  would  require  a  great  amount
of  careful  examination  into  the  history  of  those  nations
to  determine  which  of  these  things  had  the  greater  share
in  the  result.  So  that  here  again  it  is  the  Prophet's
knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  his  sympathy  with  it,
that  are  verified  ;  not  his  divine  inspiration,  or  his
knowledge  of  theology.

If  there  were  only  one  Prophet,  indeed,  it  might  well
seem  a  difficult  and  even  an  ungracious  task  to  decide
upon  what  points  we  would  trust  him,  and  on  what  we
would  doubt  his  authority ;  seeing  what  help  and
furtherance  all  men  have  gained  in  all  ages  from  those
who  saw  more  clearly,  who  felt  more  strongly,  and
who  sought  the  truth  with  more  single  heart  than  their


THE  ETHICS  OE  BELIEF.  195

weaker  brethren.  But  there  is  not  only  one  Prophet ;
and  while  the  consent  of  many  upon  that  which,  as  men,
they  had  real  means  of  knowing  and  did  know,  has
endured  to  the  end,  and  been  honourably  built  into  the
great  fabric  of  human  knowledge,  the  diverse  witness
of  some  about  that  which  they  did  not  and  could  not
know  remains  as  a  warning  to  us  that  to  exaggerate
the  prophetic  authority  is  to  misuse  it,  and  to  dishonour
those  who  have  sought  only  to  help  and  further  us  after
their  power.  It  is  hardly  in  human  nature  that  a  man
should  quite  accurately  gauge  the  hmits  of  his  own
insight ;  but  it  is  the  duty  of  those  who  profit  by  his
work  to  consider  carefully  where  he  may  have  been
carried  beyond  it.  If  we  must  needs  embalm  his
possible  errors  along  with  his  soUd  achievements,  and
use  his  authority  as  an  excuse  for  believing  what  he
cannot  have  known,  we  make  of  his  goodness  an  oc-
casion to  sin.

To  consider  only  one  other  such  witness :  the
followers  of  the  Buddha  have  at  least  as  much  right  to
appeal  to  individual  and  social  experience  in  support  of
the  authority  of  the  Eastern  saviour.  The  special  mark
of  his  religion,  it  is  said,  that  in  which  it  has  never  been
surpassed',  is  the  comfort  and  consolation  which  it  gives
to  the  sick  and  sorrowful,  the  tender  sympathy  with
which  it  soothes  and  assuages  all  the  natural  griefs  of
men.  And  surely  no  triumph  of  social  morality  can  be
greater  or  nobler  than  that  which  has  kept  nearly  half
the  human  race  from  persecuting  in  the  name  of  religion.
If  we  are  to  trust  the  accounts  of  his  early  followers,  he
believed  himself  to  have  come  upon  earth  with  a  divine
and  cosmic  mission  to  set  rolhng  the  wheel  of  the  law.

0  2


196  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

Being  a  prince,  he  divested  himself  of  his  kingdom,  and
of  his  free  will  became  acquainted  with  misery,  that  he
might  learn  how  to  meet  and  subdue  it.  Could  such  a
man  speak  falsely  about  solemn  things  ?  And  as  for  his
knowledge,  was  he  not  a  man  miraculous  with  powers
more  than  man's  ?  He  was  born  of  woman  without  the
help  of  man ;  he  rose  into  the  air  and  was  transfigured
before  his  kinsmen;  at  last  he  went  up  bodily  into
heaven  from  the  top  of  Adam's  Peak.  Is  not  his  word
to  be  believed  in  when  he  testifies  of  heavenly  things  ?

If  there  were  only  he,  and  no  other,  with  such
claims !  But  there  is  Mohammed  with  his  testimony  ;
we  cannot  choose  but  hsten  to  them  both.  The  Prophet
tells  us  that  there  is  one  God,  and  that  we  shall  live  for
ever  in  joy  or  misery,  according  as  we  believe  in  the
Prophet  or  not.  The  Buddha  says  that  there  is  no  God,
and  that  we  shall  be  annihilated  by-and-by  if  we  are
good  enough.  Both  cannot  be  infalhbly  inspired  ;  one
or  the  other  must  have  been  the  victim  of  a  delusion,
and  thought  he  knew  that  which  he  really  did  not  know.
Who  shall  dare  to  say  which  .^  and  how  can  we  justify
ourselves  in  believing  that  the  other  was  not  also
deluded  ?

We  are  led,  then,  to  these  judgments  following.
The  goodness  and  greatness  of  a  man  do  not  justify  us
in  accepting  a  beUef  upon  the  warrant  of  his  authority,
unless  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for  supposing  that
he  knew  the  truth  of  what  he  was  saying.  And  there
can  be  no  grounds  for  supposing  that  a  man  knows  that
which  we,  without  ceasing  to  be  men,  could  not  be
supposed  to  verify.

If  a  chemist  tells  me,  who  am  no  chemist,  that  a


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  197

certain  substance  can  be  made  by  putting  together
other  substances  in  certain  proportions  and  subjecting
them  to  a  known  process,  I  am  quite  justified  in  believ-
ing this  upon  his  authority,  unless  I  know  anything
against  his  character  or  his  judgment.  For  his  pro-
fessional training  is  one  which  tends  to  encourage
veracity  and  the  honest  pursuit  of  truth,  and  to  produce
a  disUke  of  hasty  conclusions  and  slovenly  investigation.
And  I  have  reasonable  ground  for  supposing  that  he
knows  the  truth  of  what  he  is  saying,  for  although  I  am
no  chemist,  I  can  be  made  to  understand  so  much  of  the
methods  and  processes  of  the  science  as  makes  it  con-
ceivable to  me  that,  without  ceasing  to  be  man,  I  might
verify  the  statement.  I  may  never  actually  verify  it,  or
even  see  any  experiment  which  goes  towards  verifying
it ;  but  still  I  have  quite  reason  enough  to  justify  me  in
believing  that  the  verification  is  within  the  reacTi  of
human  appliances  and  powers,  and  in  particular  that
it  has  been  actually  performed  by  my  informant.  His
result,  the  belief  to  which  he  has  been  led  by  his  in-
quiries, is  valid  not  only  for  himself  but  for  others  ;  it
is  watched  and  tested  by  those  who  are  working  in  the
same  ground,  and  who  know  that  no  greater  service
can  be  rendered  to  science  than  the  purification  of
accepted  results  from  the  errors  which  may  have  crept
into  them.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  result  becomes
common  property,  a  right  object  of  belief,  which  is  a
social  affair  and  matter  of  public  business.  Thus  it  is  to
be  observed  that  his  authority  is  valid  because  there  are
those  who  question  it  and  verify  it ;  that  it  is  precisely
this  process  of  examining  and  purifying  that  keeps
alive  among  investigators  the  love  of  that  which  shall


198  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

stand  all  possible  tests,  the  sense  of  public  responsibility
as  of  those  whose  work,  if  well  done,  shall  remain  as  the
enduring  heritage  of  mankind.

But  if  my  chemist  tells  me  that  an  atom  of  oxygen
has  existed  unaltered  in  weight  and  rate  of  vibration
throughout  all  time,  I  have  no  right  to  beheve  this  on
his  aiithority,  for  it  is  a  thing  which  he  cannot  know
without  ceasing  to  be  man.  He  may  quite  honestly
believe  that  this  statement  is  a  fair  inference  from  his
experiments,  but  in  that  case  his  judgment  is  at  fault.
A  very  simple  consideration  of  the  character  of  experi-
ments would  show  him  that  they  never  can  lead  to
results  of  such  a  kind ;  that  being  themselves  only
approximate  and  limited,  they  cannot  give  us  knowledge
which  is  exact  and  universal.  No  eminence  of  charac-
ter and  genius  can  give  a  man  authority  enough  to
justify  us  in  believing  him  when  he  makes  statements
implying  exact  or  universal  knowledge.

Again,  an  Arctic  explorer  may  tell  us  that  in  a  given
latitude  and  longitude  he  has  experienced  such  and  such
a  degree  of  cold,  that  the  sea  was  of  such  a  depth,  and
the  ice  of  such  a  character.  We  should  be  quite  right
to  beheve  him,  in  the  absence  of  any  stain  upon  his
veracity.  It  is  conceivable  that  we  might,  without
ceasing  to  be  men,  go  there  and  verify  his  statement ;
it  can  be  tested  by  the  witness  of  his  companions,  and
there  is  adequate  ground  for  supposing  that  he  knows
the  truth  of  what  he  is  saying.  But  if  an  old  whaler
tells  us  that  the  ice  is  three  hundred  feet  thick  all  the
way  up  to  the  Pole,  we  shall  not  be  justified  in  behev-
ing  him.  For  although  the  statement  may  be  capable
of  verification  by  man,  it  is  certainly  not  capable  of


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  199

verification  by  him^  with  any  means  and  appliances
which  he  has  possessed ;  and  he  must  have  persuaded
himself  of  the  truth  of  it  by  some  means  which  does
not  attach  any  credit  to  his  testimony.  Even  if,  there-
fore, the  matter  affirmed  is  within  the  reach  of  human
knowledge,  we  have  no  right  to  accept  it  upon  authority
unless  it  is  within  the  reach  of  our  informant's  know-
ledge.

What  shall  we  say  of  that  authority,  more  venerable
and  august  than  any  individual  witness,  the  time-
honoured  tradition  of  the  human  race?  An  atmo-
sphere of  beliefs  and  conceptions  has  been  formed  by
the  labours  and  struggles  of  our  forefathers,  which
enables  us  to  breathe  amid  the  various  and  complex
circumstances  of  our  life.  It  is  around  and  about  us
and  within  us ;  we  cannot  think  except  in  the  forms
and  processes  of  thought  which  it  supplies.  Is  it  pos-
sible to  doubt  and  to  test  it?  and  if  possible,  is  it
right  ?

We  shall  find  reason  to  answer  that  it  is  not  only
possible  and  right,  but  our  bounden  duty ;  that  the  main
purpose  of  the  tradition  itself  is  to  supply  us  with  the
means  of  asking  questions,  of  testing  and  inquiring  into
things  ;  that  if  we  misuse  it,  and  take  it  as  a  collection
of  cut-and-dried  statements,  to  be  accepted  without
further  inquiry,  we  are  not  only  injuring  ourselves  here,
but  by  refusing  to  do  our  part  towards  the  building  up
of  the  fabric  which  shall  be  inherited  by  our  children,
we  are  tending  to  cut  ofi*  ourselves  and  our  race  from
the  human  hne.

Let  us  first  take  care  to  distinguish  a  kind  of  tradi-
tion which  especially  requires  to  be  examined  and  called

\


200  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

in  question,  because  it  especially  shrinks  from  inquiry.
Suppose  that  a  medicine-man  in  Central  Africa  tells  his
tribe  that  a  certain  powerftil  medicine  in  his  tent  will  be
propitiated  if  they  kill  their  cattle ;  and  that  the  tribe
beheve  him.  Whether  the  medicine  was  propitiated
or  not,  there  are  no  means  of  verifying,  but  the  cattle
are  gone.  Still  the  behef  may  be  kept  up  in  the  tribe
that  propitiation  has  been  effected  in  this  way ;  and  in
a  later  generation  it  will  be  all  the  easier  for  another
medicine-man  to  persuade  them  to  a  similar  act.  Here
the  only  reason  for  belief  is  that  everybody  has  beUeved
the  thing  for  so  long  that  it  must  be  true.  And  yet  the
belief  was  founded  on  fraud,  and  has  been  propagated
by  credulity.  That  man  will  undoubtedly  do  right,  and
be  a  friend  of  men,  who  shall  call  it  in  question  and  see
that  there  is  no  evidence  for  it,  help  his  neighbours  to
see  as  he  does,  and  even,  if  need  be,  go  into  the  holy
tent  and  break  the  medicine.

The  rule  which  should  guide  us  in  such  cases  is
simple  and  obvious  enough  :  that  the  aggregate  testi-
mony of  our  neighbours  is  subject  to  the  same  conditions
as  the  testimony  of  any  one  of  them.  Namely,  we  have
no  right  to  believe  a  thing  true  because  everybody  says
so,  unless  there  are  good  grounds  for  beheving  that
some  one  person  at  least  has  the  means  of  knowing
what  is  true,  and  is  speaking  the  truth  so  far  as  he
knows  it.  However  many  nations  and  generations  of
men  are  brought  into  the  witness-box,  they  cannot
testify  to  anything  which  they  do  not  know.  Every
man  who  has  accepted  the  statement  from  somebody
else,  without  himself  testing  and  verifying  it,  is  out  of
court  ;  his  word  is  worth  nothing  at  all.     And  when  we


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  201

get  back  at  last  to  the  true  birth  and  beginning  of  the
statement,  two  serious  questions  must  be  disposed  of  in
regard  to  him  who  first  made  it :  was  he  mistaken  in
thinking  that  he  knew  about  this  matter,  or  was  he
lying  ?

This  last  question  is  unfortunately  a  very  actual  and
practical  one  even  to  us  at  this  day  and  in  this  country.
We  have  no  occasion  to  go  to  La  Salette,  or  to  Centrar
Africa,  or  to  Lourdes,  for  examples  of  immoral  and  de-
basing superstition.  It  is  only  too  possible  for  a  child
to  grow  up  in  London  surrounded  by  an  atmosphere
of  behefs  fit  only  for  the  savage,  which  have  in  our
own  time  been  founded  in  fraud  and  propagated  by
credulity.

Laying  aside,  then,  such  tradition  as  is  handed  on
without  testing  by  successive  generations,  let  us  consi-
der that  which  is  truly  built  up  out  of  the  common  ex-
perience of  mankind.  This  great  fabric  is  for  the  gui-
dance of  our  thoughts,  and  through  them  of  our  actions,
both  in  the  moral  and  in  the  material  world.  In  the
moral  world,  for  example,  it  gives  us  the  conceptions  of
right  in  general,  of  justice,  of  truth,  of  beneficence,  and
the  like.  These  are  given  as  conceptions,  not  as  state-
ments or  propositions ;  they  answer  to  certain  definite
instincts,  which  are  certainly  within  us,  however  they
came  there.  That  it  is  right  to  be  beneficent  is  matter
of  immediate  personal  experience ;  for  when  a  man  re-
tires within  himself  and  there  finds  something,  wider
and  more  lasting  than  his  sohtary  personahty,  which
says,  '  I  want  to  do  right,'  as  well  as, '  I  want  to  do  good
to  man,'  he  can-  verify  by  direct  observation  that  ouq
instinct  is  founded  upon  and  agrees  fully  with  the  other.


202  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

And  it  is  his  duty  so  to  verify  this  and  all  similar  state-
ments.

The  tradition  says  also,  at  a  definite  place  and  time,
that  such  and  such  actions  are  just,  or  true,  or  benefi-
cent. For  all  such  rules  a  further  inquiry  is  necessary,
since  they  are  sometimes  estabUshed  by  an  authority
other  than  that  of  the  moral  sense  founded  on  experience.
Until  recently,  the  moral  tradition  of  our  own  country —
and  indeed  of  all  Europe — taught  that  it  was  beneficent
to  give  money  indiscriminately  to  beggars.  But  the
questioning  of  this  rule,  and  investigation  into  it,  led
men  to  see  that  true  beneficence  is  that  which  helps  a
man  to  do  the  work  which  he  is  most  fitted  for,  not  that
which  keeps  and  encourages  him  in  idleness ;  and  that
to  neglect  this  distinction  in  the  present  is  to  prepare
pauperism  and  misery  for  the  future.  By  this  testing
and  discussion,  not  only  has  practice  been  purified  and
made  more  beneficent,  but  the  very  conception  of
beneficence  has  been  made  wider  and  wiser.  Now  here
the  great  social  heirloom  consists  of  two  parts  :  the  in-
stinct of  beneficence,  which  makes  a  certain  side  of  our
nature,  when  predominant,  wish  to  do  good  to  men ;
and  the  intellectual  conception  of  beneficence,  which  we
can  compare  with  any  proposed  course  of  conduct  and
ask,  '  Is  this  beneficent  or  not  ? '  By  the  continual  ask-
ing and  answering  of  such  questions  the  conception
grows  in  breadth  and  distinctness,  and  the  instinct  be-
comes strengthened  and  purified.  It  appears  then  that
the  great  use  of  the  conception,  the  intellectual  part  of
the  heirloom,  is  to  enable  us  to  ask  questions  ;  that  it
grows  and  is  kept  straight  by  means  of  these  questions  ;
and  if  we  do  not  use  it  for  that  purpose  we  shall  gradu-


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  203

ally  lose  it  altogether,  and  be  left  with  a  mere  code  of
regulations  which  cannot  rightly  be  called  morality  at
all.

Such  considerations  apply  even  more  obviously  and
clearly,  if  possible,  to  the  store  of  behefs  and  conceptions
which  our  fathers  have  amassed  for  us  in  respect  of  the
material  world.     We  are  ready  to  laugh  at  the  rule  of
thumb  of  the  Austrahan,  who  continues  to  tie  his  hat-
chet to  the  side  of  the  handle,  although  the  Birmingham
fitter  has  made  a  hole  on  purpose  for  him  to  put  the
handle  in.    His  people  have  tied  up  hatchets  so  for  ages :
who  is  he  that  he  should  set  himself  up  against  their
wisdom  ?     He  has  sunk  so  low  that  he  cannot  do  what
some  of  them  must  have  done  in  the  far  distant  past —
call  in  question  an  established  usage,  and  invent  or  learn
something  better.     Yet  here,  in  the  dim  beginning  of
knowledge,  where  science  and  art  are  one,  we  find  only
the  same  simple  rule  which  applies  to  the  highest  and
deepest  growths  of  that  cosmic   Tree  ;  to  its  loftiest
flower-tipped  branches  as  well  as  to  the  profoundest  of
its  hidden  roots  ;  the  rule,  namely,  that  what  is  stored
up  and  handed  down  to  us  is  rightly  used  by  those  who
act  as  the  makers  acted,  when  they  stored  it  up ;  those
who  use  it  to  ask  further  questions,  to  examine,  to  in-
vestigate ;  who  try  honestly  and  solemnly  to  find  out
what  is  the  right  way  of  looking  at  things  and  of  dealing
with  them.

A  question  rightly  asked  is  already  half  answered,
said  Jacobi ;  we  may  add  that  the  method  of  solution  is
the  other  half  of  the  answer,  and  that  the  actual  result
counts  for  nothing  by  the  side  of  these  two.  For  an
example  let  us  go  to  the  telegraph,  where  theory  and


204  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELHilF.

practice,  grown  each  to  years  of  discretion,  are  mar-
vellously wedded  for  the  fruitful  service  of  men.  Ohm
found  that  the  strength  of  an  electric  current  is  directly
proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  battery  which  pro-
duces it,  and  inversely  as  the  length  of  the  wire  along
which  it  has  to  travel.  This  is  called  Ohm's  law ;  but
the  result,  regarded  as  a  statement  to  be  believed,  is
not  the  valuable  part  of  it.  The  first  half  is  the  ques-
tion :  what  relation  holds  good  between  these  quantities?
So  put,  the  question  involves  already  the  conception  of"
strength  of  current,  and  of  strength  of  battery,  as
quantities  to  be  measured  and  compared ;  it  hints
clearly  that  these  are  the  things  to  be  attended  to  in  the
study  of  electric  currents.  The  second  half  is  the
method  of  investigation  ;  how  to  measure  these  quan-
tities, what  instruments  are  required  for  the  experiment,
and  how  are  they  to  be  used  ?  The  student  who  begins
to  learn  about  electricity  is  not  asked  to  believe  in
Ohm's  law :  he  is  made  to  understand  the  question,  he  is
placed  before  the  apparatus,  and  he  is  taught  to  verify
it.  He  learns  to  do  things,  not  to  think  he  knows  things  ;
to  use  instruments  and  to  ask  questions,  not  to  accept  a
traditional  statement.  The  question  which  required  a
genius  to  ask  it  rightly  is  answered  by  a  tyro.  If  Ohm's
law  were  suddenly  lost  and  forgotten  by  all  men,  while
the  question  and  the  method  of  solution  remained,  the
result  could  be  rediscovered  in  an  hour.  But  the  result
by  itself,  if  known  to  a  people  who  could  not  compre-
hend the  value  of  the  question  or  the  means  of  solving
it,  would  be  like  a  watch  in  the  hands  of  a  savage  who
could  not  wind  it  up,  or  an  iron  steamship  worked  by
Spanish  engineers.


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  206

In  regard,  then,  to  the  sacred  tradition  of  humanity,
we  learn  that  it  consists,  not  in  propositions  or  state-
ments which  are  to  be  accepted  and  believed  on  the
authority  of  the  tradition,  but  in  questions  rightly  asked,
in  conceptions  which  enable  us  to  ask  further  questions,
and  in  methods  of  answering  questions.     The  value  of
all  these  things  depends  on  their  being  tested  day  by
day.     The    very   sacredness   of    the   precious   deposit
imposes  upon  us  the  duty  and  the  responsibility  of  test-
ing it,  of  purifying  and  enlarging  it  to  the  utmost  of  our
power.     He  who  makes  use  of  its  results  to  stifle  his
own  doubts,  or  to  hamper  the   inquiry   of  others,   is
guilty  of  a  sacrilege  which  centuries  shall  never  be  able
to   blot  out.     When  the  labours  and    questionings   of
honest  and  brave  men  shall  have  built  up  the  fabric  of
known  truth  to  a  glory  which  we  in  this  generation  can
neither  hope  for  nor   imagine,  in  that  pure  and  holy
temple  he  shall  have  no  part  nor  lot,  but  his  name  and^
his  works  shall  be  cast  out  into  the  darkness  of  oblivion
for  ever.

///. — The  Limits  of  Inference,

The  question  in  what  cases  we  may  beUeve  that
which  goes  beyond  our  experience,  is  a  very  large  and
delicate  one,  extending  to  the  whole  range  of  scientific
method,  and  requiring  a  considerable  increase  in  the
application  of  it  before  it  can  be  answered  with  anything
approaching  to  completeness.  But  one  rule,  lying  on
the  threshold  of  the  subject,  of  extreme  simphcity  and
vast  practical  importance,  may  here  be  touched  upon
and  shortly  laid  down.


206  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

A  little  reflection  will  show  us  that  every  belief,
even  the  simplest  and  most  fundamental,  goes  beyond
experience  when  regarded  as  a  guide  to  our  actions.  A
burnt  child  dreads  the  fire,  because  it  beheves  that  the
fire  will  burn  it  to-day  just  as  it  did  yesterday  ;  but  this
belief  goes  beyond  experience,  and  assumes  that  the
unknown  fire  of  to-day  is  like  the  known  fire  of  yester-
day. Even  the  beHef  that  the  child  was  burnt  yester-
day goes  beyond  present  experience,  which  contains  only
the  memory  of  a  burning,  and  not  the  burning  itself;  it
assumes,  therefore,  that  this  memory  is  trustworthy,
although  we  know  that  a  memory  may  often  be  mis-
taken. But  if  it  is  to  be  used  as  a  guide  to  action,  as  a
hint  of  what  the  future  is  to  be,  it  must  assume  some-
thing about  that  future,  namely,  that  it  will  be  consis-
tent with  the  supposition  that  the  burning  really  took
place  yesterday;  which  is  going  beyond  experience.
Even  the  fundamental  '  I  am,' which  cannot  be  doubted,
is  no  guide  to  action  until  it  takes  to  itself  '  I  shall  be,'
which  goes  beyond  experience.  The  question  is  not,
therefore,  '  May  we  believe  what  goes  beyond  experi-
ence ?  '  for  this  is  involved  in  the  very  nature  of  behef ;
but  *  How  far  and  in  what  manner  may  we  add  to  our
experience  in  forming  our  beliefs  ? '

And  an  answer,  of  utter  simpUcity  and  universaHty,
is  suggested  by  the  example  we  have  taken :  a  burnt
child  dreads  the  fire.  We  may  go  beyond  experience
by  assuming  that  what  we  do  not  know  is  like  what
we  do  know ;  or,  in  other  words,  we  may  add  to  our
experience  on  the  assumption  of  a  uniformity  in  nature.
What  this  uniformity  precisely  is,  how  we  grow  in  the
knowledge  of  it  from  generation  to  generation,  these  are


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  207

questions  which  for  the  present  we  lay  aside,  being
content  to  examine  two  instances  which  may  serve  to
make  plainer  the  nature  of  the  rule.

From  certain  observations  made  with  the  spectro-
scope, we  infer  the  existence  of  hydrogen  in  the  sun.
By  looking  into  the  spectroscope  when  the  sun  is  shining
on  its  sht,  we  see  certain  definite  bright  lines  :  and
experiments  made  upon  bodies  on  the  earth  have  taught
us  that  when  these  bright  hues  are  seen  hydrogen  is  the
-  source  of  them.  We  assume,  then,  that  the  unknown
bright  lines  in  the  sun  are  hke  the  known  bright  lines
of  the  laboratory,  and  that  hydrogen  in  the  sun  behaves
as  hydrogen  under  similar  circumstances  would  behave
on  the  earth.*

But  are  we  not  trusting  our  spectroscope  too  much  ?
Surely,  having  found  it  to  be  trustworthy  for  terrestrial
substances,  where  its  statements  can  be  verified  by  man,
we  are  justified  in  accepting  its  testimony  in  other  like
cases ;  but  not  when  it  gives  us  information  about
things  in  the  sun,  where  its  testimony  cannot  be  directly
verified  by  man  ?

Certainly,  we  want  to  know  a  little  more  before  this
inference  can  be  justified  ;  and  fortunately  w;e  do  know
this.  The  spectroscope  testifies  to  exactly  the  same
thing  in  the  two  cases ;  namely,  that  hght-vibrations  of
a  certain  rate  are  being  sent  through  it.  Its  construc-
tion is  such  that  if  it  were  wrong  about  this  in  one  case,
it  would  be  wrong  in  the  other.  When  we  come  to
look  into  the  matter,  we  find  that  we  have  really  as-
sumed the  matter  of  the  sun  to  be  like  the  matter  of
the  earth,  made  up  of  a  certain  number  of  distinct  sub-
stances ;  and  that  each  of  these,  when  very  hot,  has  a


208  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

distinct  rate  of  vibration,  by  which  it  may  be  recognized
and  singled  out  from  the  rest.  But  this  is  the  kind  of
assumption  which  we  are  justified  in  using  when  we
add  to  our  experience.  It  is  an  assumption  of  unifor-
mity in  nature,  and  can  only  be  checked  by  comparison
with  many  similar  assumptions  which  we  have  to  make
in  other  such  cases.

But  is  this  a  true  belief,  of  the  existence  of  hydrogen
in  the  sun  ?  Can  it  help  in  the  right  guidance  of  human
action  ?

Certainly  not,  if  it  is  accepted  on  unworthy  grounds,
and  without  some  understanding  of  the  process  by
which  it  is  got  at.  But  when  this  process  is  taken  in
as  the  ground  of  the  belief,  it  becomes  a  very  serious
and  practical  matter.  For  if  there  is  no  hydrogen  in
the  sun,  the  spectroscope — that  is  to  say,  the  measure-
ment of  rates  of  vibration — must  be  an  uncertain  guide
in  recognizing  diiferent  substances  ;  and  consequently  it
ought  not  to  be  used  in  chemical  analysis — in  assaying,
for  example — to  the  great  saving  of  time,  trouble,  and
money.  Whereas  the  acceptance  of  the  spectroscopic
method  as  trustworthy  has  enriched  us  not  only  with
new  metals,  which  is  a  great  thing,  but  with  new
processes  of  investigation,  which  is  vastly  greater.

For  another  example,  let  us  consider  the  way  in
which  we  infer  the  truth  of  an  historical  event — say
the  siege  of  Syracuse  in  the  Peloponnesian  war.  Our
experience  is  that  manuscripts  exist  which  are  said  to
be  and  which  call  themselves  manuscripts  of  the  history
of  Thucydides  ;  that  in  other  manuscripts,  stated  to  be
by  later  historians,  he  is  described  as  living  during  the
time   of  the  war ;  and   that  books,  supposed  to  date


THE    ETHICS  OF   BELIEF.  209

from  the  revival  of  learning,  tell  us  how  these  manu-
scripts had  been  preserved  and  were  then  acquired.
We  find  also  that  men  do  not,  as  a  rule,  forge  books
and  histories  without  a  special  motive  ;  we  assume  that
in  this  respect  men  in  the  past  were^  hke  men  in  the
present ;  and  we  observe  that  in  this  case  no  special
motive  was  present.  That  is,  we  add  to  our  experience
on  the  assumption  of  a  uniformity  in  the  characters  of
men.  Because  our  knowledge  of  this  uniformity  is  far
less  complete  and  exact  than  our  knowledge  of  that
which  obtains  in  physics,  inferences  of  the  historical
kind  are  more  precarious  and  less  exact  than  inferences
in  many  other  sciences.

But  if  there  is  any  special  reason  to  suspect  the
character  of  the  persons  who  wrote  or  transmitted  cer-
tain books,  the  case  becomes  altered.  If  a  group  of
documents  give  internal  evidence  that  they  were  pro-
duced among  people  who  forged  books  in  the  names  of
others,  and  who,  in  describing  events,  suppressed  those
things  which  did  not  suit  them,  while  they  amplified
such  as  did  suit  them ;  who  not  only  committed  these
crimes,  but  gloried  in  them  as  proofs  of  humility  and
zeal ;  then  we  must  say  that  upon  such  documents  no
true  historical  inference  can  be  founded,  but  only  un-
satisfactory conjecture.

We  may,  then,  add  to  our  experience  on  the  assump-
tion of  a  uniformity  in  nature ;  we  may  fill  in  our
picture  of  what  is  and  has  been,  as  experience  gives  it
us,  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  the  whole  consistent  with
this  uniformity.  And  practically  demonstrative  ^infer-
ence— that  which  gives  us  a  right  to  believe  in  the
result  of  it — is  a  clear  showing  that  in  no  other  way

VOL.  II.  p


210  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.

than  by  the  truth  of  this  result  can  the  uniformity  of
nature  be  saved.

No  evidence,  therefor*^,  can  justify  us  in  believing
the  truth  of  a  statemer'^  which  is  contrary  to,  or  outside
of,  the  uniformity  of  nature.  If  our  experience  is  such
that  it  cannot  be  filled  up  consistently  with  uniformity,
all  we  have  a  right  to  conclude  is  that  there  is  some-
thing wrong  somewhere  ;  but  the  possibility  of  inference
is  taken  away ;  we  must  rest  in  our  experience,  and  not
go  beyond  it  at  all.  If  an  event  really  happened  which
was  not  a  part  of  the  uniformity  of  nature,  it  would
have  two  properties  :  no  evidence  could  give  the  right
to  beUeve  it  to  any  except  those  whose  actual  experi-
ence it  was ;  and  no  inference  worthy  of  belief  could  be
founded  upon  it  at  all.

Are  we  then  bound  to  beheve  that  nature  is  abso-
lutely and  universally  uniform  ?  Certainly  not ;  we
have  no  right  to  beheve  anything  of  this  kind.  The
rule  only  tells  us  that  in  forming  behefs  which  go
beyond  our  experience,  we  may  make  the  assumption
that  nature  is  practically  uniform  so  far  as  we  are  con-
cerned. Within  the  range  of  human  action  and  veri-
fication, we  may  form,  by  help  of  this  assumption,
actual  behefs  ;  beyond  it,  only  those  hypotheses  which
serve  for  the  more  accurate  asking  of  questions.

To  sum  up  : —

We  may  beheve  what  goes  beyond  our  experience,
only  when  it  is  inferred  from  that  experience  by  the
assumption  that  what  we  do  not  know  is  hke  what  we
know.

We  may  beheve  the  statement  of  another  person,
when  there  is  reasonable  ground  for  supposing  that  he


THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIEF.  211

knows  the  matter  of  which  he  speaks,  and  that  he  is
speaking  the  truth  so  far  as  he  knows  it.

It  is  wrong  in  all  cases  to  beheve  on  insufficient
evidence ;  and  where  it  is  presumption  to  doubt  and
to  investigate,  there  it  is  worse  than  presumption  to
believe.


p  2


212


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.'

The  word  religion  is  used  in  many  different  meanings,
and  there  have  been  not  a  few  controversies  in  which
the  main  difference  between  the  contending  parties  was
only  this,  that  they  understood  by  religion  two  different
things.  I  will  therefore  begin  by  setting  forth  as  clearly
as  I  can  one  or  two  of  the  meanings  which  the  word
appears  to  have  in  popular  speech.

^  First,  then,  it  may  mean  a  body  of  doctrines,  as  in
the  common  phrase,  '  The  truth  of  the  Christian  reh-
gion  ; '  or  in  this  sentence,  '  The  religion  of  the  Buddha
teaches  that  the  soul  is  not  a  distinct  substance.'
Opinions  differ  upon  the  question  what  doctrines  may
properly  be  called  religious  ;  some  people  holding  that
there  can  be  no  rehgion  without  belief  in  a  Grod  and  in
a  future  life,  so  that  in  their  judgment  the  body  of  doc-
trines must  necessarily  include  these  two  ;  while  others
would  insist  upon  other  special  dogmas  being  included,
before  they  could  consent  to  call  the  system  by  this
name.  But  the  number  of  such  people  is  daily  diminish-
ing, by  reason  of  the  spread  and  the  increase  of  our
knowledge  about  distant  countries  and  races.  To  me,
indeed,  it  would  seem  rash  to  assert  of  any  doctrine  or
its  contrary  that  it  might  not  form  part  of  a  religion.
But,  fortunately,  it  is  not  necessary  to  any  part  of  the

*  Fortnightly  Hevmv,  July,  1877.


THE  ETHICS  OF  EELIGION.  213

discussion  on  which  I  propose  to  enter  that  this  ques-
tion should  be  settled.

^  Secondly,  rehgion  may  mean  a  ceremonial  or  cult^
involving  an  organized  priesthood  and  a  machinery  of
sacred  things  and  places.'^  In  this  sense  we  speak  of  the
clergy  as  ministers  of  religion,  or  of  a  state  as  tolerating
the  practice  of  certain  rehgions.  There  is  a  somewhat
wider  meaning  which  it  will  be  convenient  to  consider
together  with  this  one,  and  as  a  mere  extension  of  it,
namely,  that  in  which  rehgion  stands  for  the  influence
of  a  certain  priesthood.  A  religion  is  sometimes  said  to
have  been  successful  when  it  has  got  its  priests  into
power ;  thus  some  writers  speak  of  the  wonderfully
rapid  success  of  Christianity.  A  nation  is  said  to  have
embraced  a  religion  when  the  authorities  of  that  nation
have  granted  privileges  to  the  clergy,  have  made  them
as  far  as  possible  the  leaders  of  society,  and  have  given
them  a  considerable  share  in  the  management  of  public
affairs.  So  the  northern  nations  of  Europe  are  said  to
have  embraced  the  Catholic  rehgion  at  an  early  date.
The  reason  why  it  seems  to  me  convenient  to  take  these
two  meanings  together  is,  that  they  are  both  related  to
the  priesthood.  Although  the  priesthood  itself  is  not
called  religion,  so  far  as  I  know,  yet  the  word  is  used
for  the  general  influence  and  professional  acts  of  the
priesthood.

/  Thirdly,  rehgion  may  mean  a  body  of  precepts  or
code  of  rules,  intended  to  guide  human  conduct,\  as  in
this  sentence  of  the  authorized  version  of  the  New  Tes-
tament :  '  Pure  rehgion  and  undefiled  before  God  and
the  Father  is  this,  to  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in
their  affliction,  and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the


214  THE  ETHICS  OF  KELIGION.

world '  (James,  i.  27).  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  draw
the  line  between  this  meaning  and  the  last,  for  it  is  a
mark  of  the  great  majority  of  rehgions  that  they  con-
found ceremonial  observances  with  duties  having  real
moral  obUgation.  Thus  in  the  Jewish  decalogue  the
command  to  do  no  work  on  Saturdays  is  found  side  by
side  with  the  prohibition  of  murder  and  theft.  It  might
seem  to  be  the  more  correct  as  well  as  the  more  philo-
sophical course  to  foUow  in  this  matter  the  distinction
made  by  Butler  between  moral  and  positive  commands,
and  to  class  all  those  precepts  which  are  not  of  universal
moral  obhgation  under  the  head  of  ceremonial.  And,
in  fact,  when  we  come  to  examine  the  matter  from  the
point  of  view  of  moraUty,  the  distinction  is  of  the
utmost  importance.  But  from  the  point  of  view  of
religion  there  are  difficulties  in  making  it.  In  the  first
place,  the  distinction  is  not  made,  or  is  not  understood,
by  rehgious  folk  in  general.  Innumerable  tracts  and
pretty  stories  impress  upon  us  that  Sabbath-breaking  is
rather  worse  than  steahng,  and  leads  naturally  on  to
materiahsm  and  murder.  Less  than  a  hundred  years
ago  sacrilege  was  punishable  by  burning  in  France,  and
murder  by  simple  decapitation.  In  the  next  place,  if
we  pick  out  a  religion  at  haphazard,  we  shall  find  that
it  is  not  at  all  easy  to  divide  its  precepts  into  those
which  are  really  of  moral  obligation  and  those  which
are  indifferent  and  of  a  ceremonial  character.  We  may
find  precepts  unconnected  with  any  ceremonial,  and
yet  positively  immoral;  and  ceremonials  may  be  im-
moral in  themselves,  or  constructively  immoral  on  ac-
count of  their  known  symboHsm.  On  the  whole,  it  seems
to  me  most  convenient  to  draw  the  plain  and  obvious


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  215

distinction  between  those  actions  which  a  religion  pre-
scribes to  all  its  followers,  whether  the  actions  are
ceremonial  or  not,  and  those  which  are  prescribed  only
as  professional  actions  of  a  sacerdotal  class.  The  latter
will  come  under  what  I  have  called  the  second  meaning
of  religion,  the  professional  acts  and  the  influence  of  a
priesthood.  In  the  third  meaning  will  be  included  all
that  practically  guides  the  hfe  of  a  layman,  in  so  far  as
this  guidance  is  supplied  to  him  by  his  religion.

Fourthly,  and  lastly,  there  is  a  meaning  of  the  word
religion  which  has  been  coming  more  and  more  promi-
nently forward  of  late  years,  till  it  has  even  threatened
to  supersede  all  the  others.  Eeligion  has  been  defined
as  morality  touched  with  emotion,  I  will  not  here  adopt
this  definition,  because  I  wish  to  deal  with  the  concrete
in  the  first  place,  and  only  to  pass  on  to  the  abstract  in
so  far  as  that  previous  study  appears  to  lead  to  it.  I
wish  to  consider  the  facts  of  religion  as  we  find  them,
and  not  ideal  possibilities.  '  Yes,  but,'  everyone  will
say,  '  if  you  mean  my  own  religion,  it  is  already,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  morality  touched  with  emotion.  It  is
the  highest  morality  touched  with  the  purest  emotion,
an  emotion  directed  towards  the  most  worthy  of  objects.'
Unfortunately  we  do  not  mean  your  religion  alone,  but
all  manner  of  heresies  and  heathenisms  along  with  it  :
the  religions  of  the  Thug,  of  the  Jesuit,  of  the  South  Sea
cannibal,  of  Confucius,  of  the  poor  Indian  with  his  un-
tutored mind,  of  the  Peculiar  People,  of  the  Mormons,
and  of  the  old  cat-worshipping  Egyptian.  It  must  be
clear  that  we  shall  restrict  ourselves  to  a  very  narrow
circle  of  what  are  commonly  called  religious  facts,  unless
we  include   in   our   considerations   not   only  morality


216  THE  ETHICS  OF  EELIGION.

touched  with  emotion,  but  also  immorality  touched  with
emotion.  In  fact,  what  is  really  touched  with  emotion
in  any  case  is  that  body  of  precepts  for  the  guidance  of
a  layman's  life  which  we  have  taken  to  be  the  third
meaning  of  rehgion.  In  that  collection  of  precepts  there
may  be  some  agreeable  to  morality,  and  some  repugnant
to  it,  and  some  indifferent,  but  being  all  enjoined  by  the
religion  they  will  all  be  touched  by  the  same  religious
emotion.  Shall  we  then  say  that  rehgion  means  a  feel-
ing, an  emotion,  an  habitual  attitude  of  mind  towards
some  object  or  objects,  or  towards  Hfe  in  general,  which
has  a  bearing  upon  the  way  in  which  men  regard  the
rules  of  conduct  ?  I  think  the  last  phrase  should  be  left
out.  An  habitual  attitude  of  mind,  of  a  rehgious  char-
acter, does  always  have  some  bearing  upon  the  way  in
which  men  regard  the  rules  of  conduct ;  but  it  seems
sometimes  as  if  this  were  an  accident,  and  not  the
essence  of  the  rehgious  feeling.  Some  devout  people
prefer  to  have  their  devotion  pure  and  simple,  without
admixture  of  any  such  apphcation — they  do  not  want
to  hsten  to  '  cauld  morahty.'  And  it  seems  as  if  the
religious  feehng  of  the  Greeks,  and  partly  also  of  our
own  ancestors,  was  so  far  divorced  from  morality  that
it  affected  it  only,  as  it  were,  by  a  side-wind,  through
the  influence  of  the  character  and  example  of  the  Gods.
So  that  it  seems  only  hkely  to  create  confusion  if  we
mix  up  morality  with  this  fourth  meaning  of  rehgion.
Sometimes  rehgion  means  a  code  of  precepts,  and  some-
times it  means  a  devotional  habit  of  mind  ;  the  two  things
are  sometimes  connected,  but  also  they  are  sometimes
quite  distinct.  But  that  the  connexion  of  these  two
things  is  more  and  more  insisted  on,  that  it  is  the  key-


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  217

note  of  the  apparent  revival  of  religion  which  has  taken
place  in  this  century,  is  a  very  significant  fact,  about
which  there  is  more  to  be  said.

As  to  the  nature  of  this  devotional  habit  of  mind,
there  are  no  doubt  many  who  would  hke  a  closer
definition.  But  I  am  not  at  all  prepared  to  say  what
attitude  of  mind  may  properly  be  called  rehgious,  and
what  may  not.  Some  will  hold  that  religion  must  have
a  person  for  its  object ;  but  the  Buddha  was  filled  with
religious  feeling,  and  yet  he  had  no  personal  object.
Spinoza,  the  God-intoxicated  man,  had  no  personal
object  for  his  devotion.  It  might  be  possible  to  frame
a  definition  which  would  fairly  include  all  cases,  but  it
would  require  the  expenditure  of  vast  ingenuity  and
research,  and  would  not,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  be  of
much  use  when  it  was  obtained.

Nor  is  the  difficulty  to  be  got  over  by  taking  any
definite  and  well-organized  sect,  whose  principles  are
settled  in  black  and  white ;  for  example,  the  Eoman
Catholic  Church,  whose  seamless  unity  has  just  been
exhibited  and  protected  by  an  (Ecumenical  Council.
Shall  we  listen  to  Mr.  Mivart,  who  '  execrates  without
reserve  Marian  persecutions,  the  Massacre  of  St.
Bartholomew,  and  all  similar  acts  '  ?  or  to  the  editor  of
the  Dublin  Beview^  who  thinks  that  a  teacher  of  false
doctrines  '  should  be  visited  by  the  law  with  just  that
amount  of  severity  which  the  public  sentiment  will
bear '  ?  For  assuredly  common-sense  morahty  will
pass  very  difierent  judgments  on  these  two  distinct
religions,  although  it  appears  that  experts  have  found
room  for  both  of  them  within  the  limits  of  the  Vatican
definitions.


218  THE  ETHICS  OF  KELIGION.

Moreover,  there  is  very  great  good  to  be  got  by
widening  our  view  of  what  may  be  contained  in  rehgion.
If  we  go  to  a  man  and  propose  to  test  his  own  rehgion
by  the  canons  of  common-sense  morahty,  he  will  be,
most  likely,  offended,  for  he  will  say  that  his  rehgion  is
far  too  sublime  and  exalted  to  be  affected  by  considera-
tions of  that  sort.  But  he  will  have  no  such  objection
in  the  case  of  other  people's  rehgion.  And  when  he  has
found  that  in  the  name  of  rehgion  other  people,  in  other
circumstances,  have  beheved  in  doctrines  that  were
false,  have  supported  priesthoods  that  were  social  evils,
have  taken  wrong  for  right,  and  have  even  poisoned
the  very  sources  of  morahty,  he  may  be  tempted  to  ask
himself,  '  Is  there  no  trace  of  any  of  these  evils  in  my
own  religion,  or  at  least  in  my  own  conception  and
practice  of  it  ? '  And  that  is  just  what  we  want  him
to  do.  Bring  your  doctrines,  your  priesthoods,  your
precepts,  yea,  even  the  inner  devotion  of  your  soul,
before  the  tribunal  of  conscience ;  she  is  no  man's  and
no  God's  vicar,  but  the  supreme  judge  of  men  and
Gods.

Let  us  enquire,  then,  what  morality  has  to  say  in
regard  to  religious  doctrines.  It  deals  with  the  manner
of  rehgious  belief  directly,  and  with  the  matter  in-
directly. /Eeligious  beliefs  must  be  founded  on
evidence ;  if  they  are  not  so  founded,  it  is  wrong  to
hold  them.  The  rule  of  right  conduct  in  this  matter  is
exactly  the  opposite  of  that  impHed  in  the  two  famous
texts :  '  He  that  beheveth  not  shall  be  damned,'  and
*  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet  have
believed,'  For  a  man  who  clearly  felt  and  recognized
the  duty  of  intellectual  honesty,   of  carefully  testing


THE   ETHICS  OF  EELIGION.  219

every  belief  before  he  received  it,  and  especially  before
he  recommended  it  to  others,  it  would  be  impossible
to  ascribe   the  profoundly  immoral  teaching  of  these
texts  to  a  true  prophet  or  worthy  leader  of  humanity^
It   will  comfort  those  who  wish  to  preserve  their  re-
verence   for    the    character    of    a    great    teacher   to
remember  that  one  of  these  sayings  is  in  the  well-known
forged  passage  at  the  end  of  the  second  gospel,  and  that
the  other  occurs  only  in  the  late  and  legendary  fourth
gospel;  both  being  described  as  spoken  under  utterly
impossible   circumstances.     These   precepts   belong   to
the   Church   and   not  to   the    Gospel.     But  whoever
wrote   either   of  them  down  as  a  deliverance   of  one
whom  he  supposed  to  be  a  divine  teacher,  has  thereby
written   down   himself  as   a  man   void  of  intellectual
honesty,  as  a  man  whose  word  cannot  be  trusted,  as  a
man  who  would  accept  and  spread  about  any  kind  of
baseless  fiction  for  fear  of  believing  too  little.

So  far  as  to  the  manner  of  religious  belief.  Let  us
now  inquire  what  bearing  morahty  has  upon  its  matter.
We  may  see  at  once  that  this  can  only  be  indirect ;
for  the  rightness  or  wrongness  of  behef  in  a  doctrine  de-
pends only  upon  the  nature  of  the  evidence  for  it,  and
not  upon  what  the  doctrine  is.  But  there  is  a  very
important  way  in  which  religious  doctrine  may  lead
to  morahty  or  immorality,  and  in  which,  therefore,
morality  has  a  bearing  upon  doctrine.  It  is  when  that
doctrine  declares  the  character  and  actions  of  the  Gods
who  are  regarded  as  objects  of  reverence  and  worship.
If  a  God  is  represented  as  doing  that  which  is  clearly
wrong,  and  is  still  held  up  to  the  reverence  of  men,
they  will  be  tempted  to  think  that  in  doing  this  wrong


220  THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION,

thing  they  are  not  so  very  wrong  after  all,  but  are  only
following  an  example  which  all  men  respect.  So  says
Plato :— 1

'  We  must  not  tell  a  youthful  hstener  that  he  will  be
doing  nothing  extraordinary  if  he  commit  the  foulest
crimes,  nor  yet  if  he  chastise  the  crimes  of  a  father  in
the  most  unscrupulous  manner,  but  will  simply  be  doing
what  the  first  and  greatest  of  the  Gods  have  done  before
him.     .     .     .

'  Nor  yet  is  it  proper  to  say  in  any  case— what  is
indeed  untrue — that  Gods  wage  war  against  Gods,  and
intrigue  and  fight  among  themselves  ;  that  is,  if  the
future  guardians  of  our  state  are  to  deem  it  a  most  dis-
graceful thing  to  quarrel  hghtly  with  one  another :  far
less  ought  we  to  select  as  subjects  for  fiction  and
embroidery  the  battles  of  the  giants,  and  numerous
other  feuds  of  all  sorts,  in  which  Gods  and  heroes  fight
against  their  own  kith  and  kin.  But  if  there  is  any
possibihty  of  persuading  them  that  to  quarrel  with
one's  fellow  is  a  sin  of  which  no  member  of  a  state  was
ever  guilty,  such  ought  rather  to  be  the  language  held
to  our  children  from  the  first,  by  old  men  and  old
women,  and  all  elderly  persons ;  and  such  is  the  strain
in  which  our  poets  must  be  compelled  to  write.  But
stories  like  the  chaining  of  Hera  by  her  son,  and  the
flinging  of  Hephaistos  out  of  heaven  for  trying  to  take
his  mother's  part  when  his  father  was  beating  her,  and
all  those  battles  of  the  Gods  which  are  to  be  found  in
Homer,  must  be  refused  admittance  into  our  state,
whether  they  be  allegorical  or  not.  For  a  child
cannot  discriminate  between  what  is  allegory  and  what

1  Rep.  ii.  378.    Tr.  Dayies  and  Vaughan.


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  221

is  not ;  and  whatever  at  that  age  is  adopted  as  a  matter
of  belief  has  a  tendency  to  become  fixed  and  indehble,
and  therefore,  perhaps,  we  ought  to  esteem  it  of  the
greatest  importance  that  the  fictions  which  children
first  hear  should  be  adapted  in  the  most  perfect  manner
to  the  promotion  of  virtue.'

And  Seneca  says  the  same  thing,  with  still  more
reason  in  his  day  and  country :  '  What  else  is  this
appeal  to  the  precedent  of  the  Gods  for,  but  to
inflame  our  lusts,  and  to  furnish  licence  and  excuse  for
the  corrupt  act  under  the  divine  protection?'  And
again,  of  the  character  of  Jupiter  as  described  in  the
popular  legends  :  '  This  has  led  to  no  other  result  than
to  deprive  sin  of  its  shame  in  man's  eyes,  by  showing
him  the  God  no  better  than  himself.'  In  Imperial  Rome,
the  sink  of  all  nations,  it  was  not  uncommon  to  find
'  the  intending  sinner  addressing  to  the  deified  vice
which  he  contemplated  a  prayer  for  the  success  of  his
design  ;  the  adulteress  imploring  of  Venus  the  favours  of
her  paramour  ;  .  .  .  the  thief  praying  to  Hermes  Dolios
for  aid  in  his  enterprise,  or  offering  up  to  him  the  first
fruits  of  his  plunder  ;  .  .  .  youths  entreating  Hercules
to  expedite  the  death  of  a  rich  uncle.'  ^

When  we  reflect  that  criminal  deities  were  wor-
shipped all  over  the  empire,  we  cannot  but  wonder  that
any  good  people  were  left ;  that  man  could  still  be  holy,
although  every  God  was  vile.  Yet  this  was  undoubtedly
the  case  ;  the  social  forces  worked  steadily  on  wherever
there  was  peace  and  a  settled  government  and  municipal
freedom ;  and  the  wicked  stories  of  theologians  were
somehow   explained   away   and    disregarded.     If  men

1  North  British  JReview,  1867,  p.  284.


2^  THE  ETHICS  OF  EELIGION.

were  no  better  than  their  rehgions,  the  world  would  be
a  hell  indeed.

It  is  very  important,  however,  to  consider  what
really  ought  to  be  done  in  the  case  of  stories  like  these.
When  the  poet  sings  that  Zeus,  kicked  Hephaistos  out  of
heaven  for  trying  to  help  his  mother,  Plato  says  that
this  fiction  must  be  suppressed  by  law.  We  cannot
follow  him  there,  for  since  his  time  we  have  had  too
much  of  trying  to  suppress  false  doctrines  by  law.
Plato  thinks  it  quite  obviously  clear  that  God  cannot
produce  evil,  and  he  would  stop  everybody's  mouth
who  ventured  to  say  that  he  can.  But  in  regard  to  the
doctrine  itself,  we  can  only  ask,  '  Is  it  true  ? '  And  that
is  a  question  to  be  settled  by  evidence.  Did  Zeus  commit
this  crime,  or  did  he  not  ?  We  must  ask  the  apologists,
the  reconcilers  of  religion  and  science,  what  evidence
they  can  produce  to  prove  that  Zeus  kicked  Hephaistos
out  of  heaven.  That  a  doctrine  may  lead  to  immoral
consequences  is  no  reason  for  disbelieving  it.  But
whether  the  doctrine  were  true  or  false,  one  thing  does
clearly  follow  from  its  moral  character:  namely  this,
that  if  Zeus  behaved  as  he  is  said  to  have  behaved,
he  ought  not  to  be  worshipped.  To  those  who  com-
plain of  his  violence  and  injustice,  it  is  no  answer  to
say  that  the  divine  attributes  are  far  above  human
comprehension ;  that  the  ways  of  Zeus  are  not  our  ways,
neither  are  his  thoughts  our  thoughts.  If  he  is  to  be
worshipped,  he  must  do  something  vaster  and  nobler
and  greater  than  good  men  do,  but  it  must  be  like  what
they  do  in  its  goodness.  His  actions  must  not  be
merely  a  magnified  copy  of  what  bad  men  do.  So  soon
as  they  are  thus  represented,  morahty  has  something  to


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  223

say.  Not  indeed  about  the  fact ;  for  it  is  not  conscience,
but  reason,  that  has  to  judge  matters  of  fact ;  but  about
the  worship  of  a  character  so  represented.  If  there
really  is  good  evidence  that  Zeus  kicked  Hephaistos
out  of  heaven,  and  seduced  Alkmene  by  a  mean  trick,
say  so  by  all  means ;  but  say  also  that  it  is  wrong  to
salute  his  priests  or  to  make  offerings  in  his  temple.

When  men  do  their  duty  in  this  respect,  morahty
has  a  very  curious  indirect  effect  on  the  religious
doctrine  itself.  As  soon  as  the  offerings  become  less
frequent,  the  evidence  for  the  doctrine  begins  to  fade
away  ;  the  process  of  theological  interpretation  gradu-
ally brings  out  the  true  inner  meaning  of  it,  that  Zeus
did  not  kick  Hephaistos  out  of  heaven,  and  did  not
seduce  Alkmene.

Is  this  a  merely  theoretical  discussion  about  far-
away things  ?  Let  us  come  back  for  a  moment  to  our
own  time  and  country,  and  think  whether  there  can
be  any  lesson  for  us  in  this  refusal  of  common-sense
morality  to  worship  a  deity  whose  actions  are  a  magni-
fied copy  of  what  bad  men  do.  There  are  three
doctrines  which  find  very  wide  acceptance  among  our
countrymen  at  the  present  day :  the  doctrines  of
original  sin,  of  a  vicarious  sacrifice,  and  of  eternal
punishments.  We  are  not  concerned  with  any  refined
evaporations  of  these  doctrines  which  are  exhaled  by
courtly  theologians,  but  with  the  naked  statements
which  are  put  into  the  minds  of  children  and  of  ignorant
people,  which. are  taught  broadcast  and  without  shame
in  denominational  schools.  Father  Faber,  good  soul,
persuaded  himself  that  after  all  only  a  very  few  people
would  be  really  damned,  and  Father  Oxenham  gives


224  THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.

one  the  impression  that  it  will  not  hurt  even  them  very
much.  But  one  learns  the  practical  teaching  of  the
Church  from  such  books  as  '  A  GHmpse  of  Hell/  where
a  child  is  described  as  thrown  between  the  bars  upon
the  burning  coals,  there  to  writhe  for  ever.  The
masses  do  not  get  the  elegant  emasculations  of  Father
Faber  and  Father  Oxenham ;  they  get  '  a  Ghmpse  of
Hell'

Now  to  condemn  all  mankind  for  the  sin  of  Adam
and  Eve ;  to  let  the  innocent  suffer  for  the  guilty ;  to
keep  anyone  ahve  in  torture  for  ever  and  ever ;  these
actions  are  simply  magniJ&ed  copies  of  what  bad  men
do.  No  jugghng  with  '  divine  justice  and  mercy '  can
make  them  anything  else.  This  must  be  said  to  all
kinds  and  conditions  of  men :  that  if  God  holds  all
mankind  guilty  for  the  sin  of  Adam,  if  he  has  visited
upon  the  innocent  the  punishment  of  the  guilty,  if  he
is  to  torture  any  single  soul  for  ever,  then  it  is  wrong  to
worship  him.

But  there  is  something  to  be  said  also  to  those  who
think  that  religious  behefs  are  not  indeed  true,  but  are
useful  for  the  masses ;  who  deprecate  any  open  and
public  argument  against  them,  and  think  that  all  scepti-
cal books  should  be  pubhshed  at  a  high  price ;  who  go
to  church,  not  because  they  approve  of  it  themselves,
but  to  set  an  example  to  the  servants.  Let  us  ask  them
to  ponder  the  words  of  Plato,  who,  like  them,  thought
that  all  these  tales  of  the  Gods  were  fables,  but  still
fables  which  might  be  useful  to  amuse  children  with  :
'  We  ought  to  esteem  it  of  the  greatest  importance  that  the
fictions  which  children  first  hear  should  be  adapted  in  the
most  perfect  manner  to  the  promotion  of  virtue,^    If  we


THE   ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  225

grant  to  you  that  it  is  good  for  poor  people  and  children
to  believe  some  of  these  fictions,  is  it  not  better,  at  least,
that  they  should  believe  those  which  are  adapted  to  the
promotion  of  virtue  ?  Now  the  stories  which  you  send
your  servants  and  children  to  hear  are  adapted  to  the
promotion  of  vice.  So  far  as  the  remedy  is  in  your  own
hands,  you  are  bound  to  apply  it ;  stop  your  voluntary
subscriptions  and  the  moral  support  of  your  presence
from  any  place  where  the  criminal  doctrines  are  taught.
You  will  find  more  men  and  better  men  to  preach
that  which  is  agreeable  to  their  conscience,  than  to
thunder  out  doctrines  under  which  their  minds  are
always  uneasy,  and  which  only  a  continual  self-decep-
tion can  keep  them  from  feeling  to  be  wicked.

Let  us  now  go  on  to  enquire  what  morality  has  to
say  in  the  matter  of  religious  ministrations^  the  ofiicial
acts  and  the  general  influence  of  a  priesthood.  This
question  seems  to  me  a  more  difiicult  one  than  the
former ;  at  any  rate  it  is  not  so  easy  to  find  general
principles  which  are  at  once  simple  in  their  nature  and
clear  to  the  conscience  of  any  man  who  honestly
considers  them.  One  such  principle,  indeed,  there  is,
which  can  hardly  be  stated  in  a  Protestant  country
without  meeting  with  a  cordial  response  ;  being  indeed
that  characteristic  of  our  race  which  made  the  Eeform-
ation  a  necessity,  and  became  the  soul  of  the  Protes-
tant movement.  I  mean  the  principle  which  forbids  the
priest  to  come  between  a  man  and  his  conscience.  If  it  be
true,  as  our  daily  experience  teaches  us,  that  the  moral
sense  gains  in  clearness  and  power  by  exercise,  by  the
constant  endeavour  to  find  out  and  to  see  for  ourselves
what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  it  must  be  nothing

VOL.  II.  Q


226  THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.

short  of  a  moral  suicide  to  delegate  our  conscience  to
another  man.  It  is  true  that  when  we  are  in  difficulties
and  do  not  altogether  see  our  way,  we  quite  rightly
seek  counsel  and  advice  of  some  friend  who  has  more
experience,  more  wisdom  begot  by  it,  more  devotion  to
the  right  than  ourselves,  and  who,  not  being  involved
in  the  difficulties  which  encompass  us,  may  more  easily
see  the  way  out  of  them.  But  such  counsel  does  not
and  ought  not  to  take  the  place  of  our  private  judg-
ment ;  on  the  contrary,  among  wise  men  it  is  asked  and
given  for  the  purpose  of  helping  and  supporting  private
judgment.  I  should  go  to  my  friend,  not  that  he  may
tell  me  what  to  do,  but  that  he  may  help  me  to  see  what
is  right.

Now,  as  we  all  know,  there  is  a  priesthood  whose  in-
fluence is  not  to  be  made  Ught  of,  even  in  our  own  land,
which  claims  to  do  two  things  :  to  declare  with  infalhble
authority  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  and  to  take
away  the  guilt  of  the  sinner  after  confession  has  been
made  to  it.  The  second  of  these  claims  we  shall  come
back  upon  in  connexion  with  another  part  of  the  sub-
ject. But  that  claim  is  one  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,
ought  to  condemn  the  priesthood  making  it  in  the  eyes
of  every  conscientious  man.  We  must  take  care  to  keep
this  question  to  itself,  and  not  to  let  it  be  confused  with
quite  different  ones.  The  priesthood  in  question,  as  we
all  know,  has  taught  that  as  right  which  is  not  right,
and  has  condemned  as  wrong  some  of  the  hohest  duties
of  mankind.  But  this  is  not  what  we  are  here  concerned
with.  Let  us  put  an  ideal  case  of  a  priesthood  which,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  taught  a  morality  agreeing  with  the
healthy  conscience  of  all  men  at  a  given  time  ;  but  which.


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  227

nevertheless,  taught  this  as  an  infallible  revelation.  The
tendency  of  such  teaching,  if  really  accepted,  would  be
to  destroy  morality  altogether,  for  it  is  of  the  very  essence
of  the  moral  sense  that  it  is  a  common  perception  by  men
of  what  is  good  for  man.  It  arises,  not  in  one  man's
mind  by  a  flash  of  genius  or  a  transport  of  ecstasy,  but
in  all  men's  minds,  as  the  fruit  of  their  necessary  inter-
course and  united  labour  for  a  common  object.  When
an  infalUble  authority  is  set  up,  the  voice  of  this  natural
human  conscience  must  be  hushed  and  schooled,  and
made  to  speak  the  words  of  a  formula.  Obedience  be-
comes the  whole  duty  of  man  ;  and  the  notion  of  right
is  attached  to  a  lifeless  code  of  rules,  instead  of  being
the  informing  character  of  a  nation.  The  natural  con-
sequence is  that  it  fades  gradually  out  and  ends  by  dis-
appearing altogether.  I  am  not  describing  a  purely
conjectural  state  of  things,  but  an  effect  which  has
actually  been  produced  at  various  times  and  in  con-
siderable populations  by  the  influence  of  the  Catholic
Church.  It  is  true  that  we  cannot  find  an  actually
crucial  instance  of  a  pure  morality  taught  as  an  infallible
revelation,  and  so  in  time  ceasing  to  be  morality  for  that
reason  alone.  There  are  two  circumstances  which  pre-
vent this.  One  is  that  the  Catholic  priesthood  has
always  practically  taught  an  imperfect  morahty,  and
that  it  is  difiicult  to  distinguish  between  the  effects  of
precepts  which  are  wrong  in  themselves,  and  precepts
which  are  only  wrong  because  of  the  manner  in  which
they  are  enforced.  The  other  circumstance  is  that  the
priesthood  has  very  rarely  found  a  population  willing
to  place  itself  completely  and  absolutely  under  priestly
control.     Men  must  live  together  and  work  for  common

q2


223  THE  ETHICS  OF  BELIGION.

objects  even  in  priest-ridden  countries  ;  and  those  condi-
tions which  in  the  course  of  ages  have  been  able  to  create
the  moral  sense  cannot  fail  in  some  degree  to  recall  it
to  men's  minds  and  gradually  to  reinforce  it.  Thus  it
comes  about  that  a  great  and  increasing  portion  of  life
breaks  free  from  priestly  influences,  and  is  governed
upon  right  and  rational  grounds.  The  goodness  of  men
shows  itself  in  time  more  powerful  than  the  wickedness
of  some  of  their  rehgions.

The  practical  inference  is,  then,  that  we  ought  to  do
all  in  our  power  to  restrain  and  diminish  the  influence
of  any  priesthood  which  claims  to  rule  consciences.  But
when  we  attempt  to  go  beyond  this  plain  Protestant
principle,  we  find  that  the  question  is  one  of  history  and
politics.  The  question  which  we  want  to  ask  ourselves
— '  Is  it  right  to  support  this  or  that  priesthood  ?  ' — can
only  be  answered  by  this  other  question,  ^  What  has  it
done  or  got  done  ?  '

In  asking  this  question,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that
the  word  priesthood^  as  we  have  used  it  hitherto,  has  a
very  wide  meaning — namely,  it  means  any  body  of  men
who  perform  special  ceremonies  in  the  name  of  religion  ;
a  ceremony  being  an  act  which  is  prescribed  by  religion
to  that  body  of  men,  but  not  on  account  of  its  intrinsic
rightness  or  wrongness.  It  includes,  therefore,  not  only
the  priests  of  Catholicism,  or  of  the  Obi  rites,  who  lay
claim  to  a  magical  character  and  powers,  but  the  more
famihar  clergymen  or  ministers  of  Protestant  denomina-
tions, and  the  members  of  monastic  orders.  But  there
is  a  considerable  diflerence,  pointed  out  by  Hume,  be-
tween a  priest,  who  lays  claim  to  a  magical  character
and  powers,  and  a  clergyman,  in  the  English  sense,  as  it


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELiaiON.  229

was  understood  in  Hume's  day,  whose  office  was  to  re-
mind people  of  their  duties  every  Sunday,  and  to  repre-
sent a  certain  standard  of  culture  in  remote  country
districts.  It  will,  perhaps,  conduce  to  clearness  if  we
use  the  word  priest  exclusively  in  the  first  sense.

There  is  another  confusion  which  we  must  en-
deavour to  avoid,  if  we  would  really  get  at  the  truth  of
this  matter.  When  one  ventures  to  doubt  whether  the
Cathohc  clergy  has  really  been  an  unmixed  blessing  to
Europe,  one  is  generally  met  by  the  reply,  '  You  cannot
find  any  fault  with  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.'  Now  it
would  be  too  much  to  say  that  this  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  question  we  were  proposing  to  ask,  for  there
is  a  sense  in  which  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  and  the
Cathohc  clergy  have  something  to  do  with  each  other.
The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  admitted  on  all  hands  to
be  the  best  and  most  precious  thing  that  Christianity
has  offered  to  the  world  ;  and  it  cannot  be  doubted  that
the  Catholic  clergy  of  East  and  West  were  the  only
spokesmen  of  Christianity  until  the  Eeformation,  and  are
the  spokesmen  of  the  vast  majority  of  Christians  at  this
moment.  But  it  must  surely  be  unnecessary  to  say  in
a  Protestant  country  that  the  Catholic  Church  and  the
Gospel  are  two  very  different  things.  The  moral  teach-
ing of  Christ,  as  partly  preserved  in  the  three  first
gospels,  or — ^which  is  the  same  thing — the  moral  teach-
ing of  the  great  Eabbi  Hillel,  as  partly  preserved  in  the
Pirke  Aboth,  is  the  expression  of  the  conscience  of  a
people  who  had  fought  long  and  heroically  for  their
national  existence.  In  that  terrible  conflict  they  had
learned  the  supreme  and  overwhelming  importance  of
conduct,  the  necessity  for  those  who  would  survive  of


230  THE  ETHICS  OF  EELIGION.

fighting  manfully  for  their  lives  and  making  a  stand
against  the  hostile  powers  around  ;  the  weakness  and
uselessness  of  solitary  and  selfish  efforts,  the  necessity
for  a  man  who  would  be  a  man  to  lose  his  poor  single
personahty  in  the  being  of  a  greater  and  nobler  com-
batant— the  nation.  And  they  said  all  this,  after  their
fashion  of  short  and  potent  sayings,  perhaps  better  than
any  other  men  have  said  it  before  or  since.  '  If  I  am
not  for  myself,'  said  the  great  Hillel,  '  who  is  for  me  ?
And  if  I  am  only  for  myself,  where  is  the  use  of  me  ?
And  if  not  now^  when  ? '  It  would  be  hard  to  find  a
more  striking  contrast  than  exists  between  the  sturdy
unselfish  independence  of  this  saying,  and  the  abject
and  selfish  servihty  of  the  priest-ridden  claimant  of  the
skies.  It  was  this  heroic  people  that  produced  the
morahty  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  But  it  was  not
they  who  produced  the  priests  and  the  dogmas  of
Catholicism.  Shaven  crowns,  linen  vestments,  and  the
claim  to  priestly  rule  over  consciences,  these  were
dwellers  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  The  gospel  indeed
came  out  of  Judasa,  but  the  Church  and  her  dogmas
came  out  of  Egypt.  Not,  as  it  is  written, '  Out  of  Egypt
have  I  called  my  son,'  but,  '  Out  of  Egypt  have  I  called
my  daughter.'  St.  Gregory  of  Nazianzum  remarked  with
wonder  that  Egypt,  having  so  lately  worshipped  buUs,
goats,  and  crocodiles,  was  now  teaching  the  world  the
worship  of  the  Trinity  in  its  truest  form.^  Poor,
simple  St.  Gregory !  it  was  not  that  Egypt  had  risen
higher,  but  that  the  world  had  sunk  lower.  The
empire,  which  in  the  time  of  Augustus  had  dreaded,
and  with  reason,  the  corrupting  influence  of  Egyptian

^  See  Sharpe,  *  Egyptian  Mythology  and  Egyptian  Christianity/  p.  114.


THE  ETHICS  OF  llELIGION.  231

superstitions,  was  now  eaten  up  by  them,  and  rapidly-
rotting  away.

Then,  when  we  ask  what  has  been  the  influence  of
the  Cathohc  clergy  upon  European  nations,  we  are  not
inquiring  about  the  results  of  accepting  the  morahty  of
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;  we  are  inquiring  into  the
effect  of  attaching  an  Egyptian  priesthood,  which  teaches
Egyptian  dogmas,  to  the  life  and  sayings  of  a  Jewish
prophet.

In  this  inquiry,  which  requires  the  knowledge  of
facts  beyond  our  own  immediate  experience,  we  must
make  use  of  the  great  principle  of  authority,  which
enables  us  to  profit  by  the  experience  of  other  men.
The  great  civilized  countries  on  the  continent  of  Europe
at  the  present  day — Prance,  Germany,  Austria,  and
Italy — have  had  an  extensive  experience  of  the
Catholic  clergy  for  a  great  number  of  centuries,  and
they  are  forced  by  strong  practical  reasons  to  form  a
judgment  upon  the  character  and  tendencies  of  an
institution  which  is  sufficiently  powerful  to  command
the  attention  of  all  who  are  interested  in  pubhc  affairs.
We  might  add  the  experience  of  our  forefathers  three
centuries  ago,  and  of  Ireland  at  this  moment ;  but  home
pohtics  are  apt  to  be  looked  upon  with  other  eyes  than
those  of  reason.  Let  us  hear,  then,  the  judgment  of  the
civilized  people  of  Europe  on  this  question.

It  is  a  matter  of  notoriety  that  an  aider  and  abettor
of  clerical  pretensions  is  regarded  in  France  as  an  enemy
of  France  and  of  Frenchmen  ;  in  Germany  as  an  enemy
of  Germany  and  of  Germans  ;  in  Austria  as  an  enemy  of
Austria  and  Hungary,  of  both  Austrians  and  Magyars ;
and  in  Italy  as  an  enemy  of  Italy  and  the  Italians.     He


232  THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.

is  SO  regarded,  not  by  a  few  wild  and  revolutionary  en-
thusiasts who  have  cast  away  all  the  beliefs  of  their
childhood  and  all  bonds  connecting  them  with  the  past,
but  by  a  great  and  increasing  majority  of  sober  and  con-
scientious men  of  all  creeds  and  persuasions,  who  are
filled  with  a  love  for  their  country,  and  whose  hopes  and
aims  for  the  future  are  animated  and  guided  by  the
examples  of  those  who  have  gone  before  them,  and  by  a
sense  of  the  continuity  of  national  life.  The  profound
conviction  and  determination  of  the  people  in  all  these
countries,  that  the  clergy  must  be  restricted  to  a  purely
ceremonial  province,  and  must  not  be  allowed  to  inter-
fere, as  clergy,  in  public  affairs — this  conviction  and  de-
termination, I  say,  are  not  the  effect  of  a  rejection  of  the
Catholic  dogmas.  Such  rejection  has  not  in  fact  been
made  in  Catholic  countries  by  the  great  majority.  It
involves  many  difficult  speculative  questions,  the  pro-
found disturbance  of  old  habits  of  thought,  and  the  toil-
some consideration  of  abstract  ideas.  But  such  is  the
happy  inconsistency  of  human  nature,  that  men  who
would  be  shocked  and  pained  by  a  doubt  about  the  cen-
tral doctrines  of  their  religions  are  far  more  really  and
practically  shocked  and  pained  by  the  moral  conse-
quences of  clerical  ascendency.  About  the  dogmas  they
do  not  know ;  they  were  taught  them  in  childhood,  and
have  not  inquired  into  them  since,  and  therefore  they
are  not  competent  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  them.  But
about  the  priesthood  they  do  know,  by  daily  and  hourly
experience ;  and  to  its  character  they  are  competent
witnesses.  No  man  can  express  his  convictions  more
forcibly  than  by  acting  upon  them  in  a  great  and  solemn
matter  of  national  importance.     In  all  these  countries


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  233

the  conviction  of  the  serious  and  sober  majority  of  the
people  is  embodied,  and  is  being  daily  embodied,  in
special  legislation,  openly  and  avowedly  intended  to
guard  against  clerical  aggression.  The  more  closely  the
legislature  of  these  countries  reflects  the  popular  will,
the  more  clear  and  pronounced  does  this  tendency  be-
come. It  may  be  thwarted  or  evaded  for  the  moment
by  constitutional  devices  and  parhamentary  tricks,  but
sooner  or  later  the  nation  will  be  thoroughly  represented
in  all  of  them  :  and  as  to  what  is  then  to  be  expected,
let  the  panic  of  the  clerical  parties  make  answer.

This  is  a  state  of  opinion  and  of  feeling  which  we  in
our  own  country  find  it  hard  to  understand,  although  it
is  one  of  the  most  persistent  characters  of  our  nation  in
past  times.     We  have  spoken  so  plainly  and  struck  so
hard  in  the  past,  that  we  seem  to  have  won  the  right  to
let  this  matter  alone.     We  think  our  enemies  are  dead,
and  we  forget  that  our  neighbour's  enemies  are  plainly
alive:  and  then  we  wonder  that  he  does  not  sit  down
and  be  quiet  as  we  are.     We  are  not  much  accustomed
to  be  afraid,  and  we  never  know  when  we  are  beaten.
But  those  who  are  nearer  to  the  danger  feel  a  very  real
and,  it  seems  to  me,  well-grounded  fear.     The  whole
structure  of  modern  society,  the  fruit  of  long  and  painful
efibrts,  the  hopes  of  further  improvement,  the  triumphs
of  justice,  of  freedom,  and  of  light,  the  bonds  of  patriot-
ism which  make  each  nation  one,  the  bonds  of  humanity
which  bring  different  nations  together — all  these  they
see  to  be  menaced  with  a  great  and  real  and  even  press-
ing danger.     For  myself  I  confess  that  I  cannot  help
feeling  as  they  feel.     It  seems  to  me  quite  possible  that
the  moral  and  intellectual  culture  of  Europe,  the  light


234  THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGIOIS.

and  the  right,  what  makes  life  worth  having  and  men
worthy  to  have  it,  may  be  clean  swept  away  by  a  revival
of  superstition.  We  are,  perhaps,  ourselves  not  free
from  such  a  domestic  danger ;  but  no  one  can  doubt  that
the  danger  would  speedily  arise  if  all  Europe  at  our  side
should  become  again  barbaric,  not  with  the  weakness
and  dociUty  of  a  barbarism  which  has  never  known
better,  but  with  the  strength  of  a  past  civilization  per-
verted to  the  service  of  evil.

Those  who  know  best,  then,  about  the  Catholic  priest-
hood at  present,  regard  it  as  a  standing  menace  to  the
state  and  to  the  moral  fabric  of  society.

Some  would  have  us  believe  that  this  condition  of
things  is  quite  new,  and  has  in  fact  been  created  by  the
Vatican  Council.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  they  say,  the
Church  did  incalculable  service  ;  or  even  if  you  do  not
allow  that,  yet  the  ancient  Egyptian  priesthood  invented
many  useful  arts  ;  or  if  you  have  read  anything  which
is  not  to  their  credit,  there  were  the  Babylonians  and
Assyrians  who  had  priests,  thousands  of  years  ago  ;  and
in  fact,  the  more  you  go  back  into  prehistoric  ages,  and
the  further  you  go  away  into  distant  countries,  the  less
you  can  find  to  say  against  the  priesthoods  of  those
times  and  places.  This  statement,  for  which  there  is
certainly  much  foundation,  may  be  put  into  another
form  :  the  more  you  come  forward  into  modern  times
and  neighbouring  countries,  where  the  facts  can  actually
be  got  at,  the  more  complete  is  the  evidence  against  the
priesthoods  of  these  times  and  places,  But  the  whole
argument  is  founded  upon  what  is  at  least  a  doubtful
view  of  human  nature  and  of  society.  Just  as  an  early
school  of  geologists  were  accustomed  to  explain  the  pre-


THE  ETHICS  OE  RELIGION.  235

sent  state  of  the  earth's  surface  by  supposing  that  in
primitive  ages  the  processes  of  geologic  change  were  far
more  violent  and  rapid  than  they  are  now — so  cata-
strophic, indeed,  as  to  constitute  a  thoroughly  different
state  of  things — so  there  is  a  school  of  historians  who
think  that  the  intimate  structure  of  human  nature,  its
capabilities  of  learning  and  of  adapting  itself  to  society,
have  so  far  altered  within  the  historic  period  as  to  make
the  present  processes  of  social  change  totally  different  in
character  from  those  even  of  the  moderately  distant  past.
They  think  that  institutions  and  conditions  which  are
plainly  harmful  to  us  now  have  at  other  times  and  places
done  good  and  serviceable  work.  War,  pestilence,  priest-
craft, and  slavery  have  been  represented  as  positive
boons  to  an  early  state  of  society.  They  are  not
blessings  to  us,  it  is  true  ;  but  then  times  have  altered
very  much.

On  the  other  hand,  a  later  school  of  geologists  have
seen  reason  to  think  that  the  processes  of  change  have
never,  since  the  earth  finally  solidified,  been  very  differ-
ent from  what  they  are  now.  More  rapid,  indeed,  they
must  have  been  in  early  times,  for  many  reasons  ;  but
not  so  very  much  more  rapid  as  to  constitute  an  entirely
different  state  of  things.  And  it  does  seem  to  me  in
like  manner  that  a  wider  and  more  rational  view  of  his-
tory will  recognize  more  and  more  of  the  permanent,  and
less  and  less  of  the  changeable,  element  in  human  nature.
No  doubt  our  ancestors  of  a  thousand  generations  back
were  very  different  beings  from  ourselves ;  perhaps  fifty
thousand  generations  back  they  were  not  men  at  all.
But  the  historic  period  is  hardly  to  be  stretched  beyond
two  hundred  generations ;  and  it  seems  unreasonable  to


236  THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.

expect  that  in  such  a  tiny  page  of  our  biography  we  can
trace  with  clearness  the  growth  and  progress  of  a  long
life.  Compare  Egypt  in  the  time  of  King  Menes,  say
six  thousand  years  ago,  with  Spain  in  this  present  cen-
tury, before  EngUshmen  made  any  railways  there  :  I
suppose  the  main  difference  is  that  the  Egyptians  washed
themselves.  It  seems  more  analogous  to  what  we  find
in  other  fields  of  inquiry  to  suppose  that  there  are  cer-
tain great  broad  principles  of  human  hfe  which  have
been  true  all  along  ;  that  certain  conditions  have  always
been  favourable  to  the  health  of  society,  and  certain
other  conditions  always  hurtful.

Now,  although  I  have  many  times  asked  for  it  from
those  who  said  that  somewhere  and  at  some  time  man-
kind had  derived  benefits  from  a  priesthood  laying  claim
to  a  magical  character  and  powers,  I  have  never  been
able  to  get  any  evidence  for  their  statement.  Nobody
will  give  me  a  date,  and  a  latitude  and  longitude,  that  I
may  examine  into  the  matter.  '  In  the  Middle  Ages
the  priests  and  monks  were  the  sole  depositaries  of
learning..'  Quite  so  ;  a  man  burns  your  house  to  the
ground,  builds  a  wretched  hovel  on  the  ruins,  and  then
takes  credit  for  whatever  shelter  there  is  about  the
place.  In  the  Middle  Ages  nearly  all  learned  men  were
obKged  to  become  priests  and  monks.  '  Then  again,
the  bishops  have  sometimes  acted  as  tribunes  of  the
people,  to  protect  them  against  the  tyranny  of  kings.'
No  doubt,  when  Pope  and  Caesar  fall  out,  honest  men
may  come  by  their  own.  If  two  men  rob  you  in  a  dark
lane,  and  then  quarrel  over  the  plunder,  so  that  you
get  a  chance  to  escape  with  your  life,  you  will  of  course
be  very  grateful  to  each  of  them  for  having  prevented


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  237

the  other  from  kilhng  you ;  but  you  would  be  much
more  grateful  to  a  pohceman  who  locked  them  both  up.
Two  powers  have  sought  to  enslave  the  people,  and
have  quarrelled  with  each  other ;  certainly  we  are  very
much  obhged  to  them  for  quarrelhng,  but  a  condition
of  still  greater  happiness  and  security  would  be  the
non-existence  of  both.

I  can  find  no  evidence  that  seriously  mihtates  against
the  rule  that  the  priest  is  at  all  times  and  in  all  places
the  enemy  of  all  men — Sacerdos  semper^  ubique^  et  omni-
bus inimicus.  I  do  not  deny  that  the  priest  is  very  often
a  most  earnest  and  conscientious  man,  doing  the  very
best  that  he  knows  of  as  well  as  he  can  do  it.  Lord
Amberley  is  quite  right  in  saying  that  the  blame  rests
more  with  the  laity  than  with  the  priesthood  ;  that  it
has  insisted  on  magic  and  mysteries,  and  has  forced  the
priesthood  to  produce  them.  But  then,  how  dreadful
is  the  system  that  puts  good  men  to  such  uses  !

And  although  it  is  true  that  in  its  origin  a  priest-
hood is  the  effect  of  an  evil  already  existing,  a  symptom
of  social  disease  rather  than  a  cause  of  it,  yet,  once
being  created  and  made  powerful,  it  tends  in  many  ways
to  prolong  and  increase  the  disease  which  gave  it  birth.
One  of  these  ways  is  so  marked  and  of  such  practical
importance  that  we  are  bound  to  consider  it  here :  I
m  ean  the  education  of  children.  If  there  is  one  lesson
which  history  forces  upon  us  in  every  page,  it  is  this  :
Keep  your  children  away  from  the  priest^  or  he  will  make
them  the  enemies  of  mankind.  It  is  not  the  Catholic
clergy  and  those  like  them  who  are  alone  to  be  dreaded
in  this  matter  ;  even  the  representatives  of  apparently
harmless  religions  may  do  incalculable  mischief  if  they


238  THE  ETHICS  OF  IlELIGION.

get  education  into  their  hands.  To  the  early  Moham-
medans the  mosque  was  the  one  pubhc  building  in  every
place  where  pubhc  business  could  be  transacted ;  and
so  it  was  naturally  the  place  of  primary  education,  which
they  held  to  be  a  matter  of  supreme  importance.  By-
and-by,  as  the  clergy  grew  up,  the  mosque  was  gradu-
ally usurped  by  them,  and  primary  education  fell  into
their  hands.  Then  ensued  a  '  revival  of  religion ; '
reUgion  became  a  fanaticism:  books  were  burnt  and
universities  were  closed ;  the  empire  rotted  away  in
East  and  West,  until  it  was  conquered  by  Turkish
savages  in  Asia  and  by  Christian  savages  in  Spain.

The  labours  of  students  of  the  early  history  of  institu-
tions— notably  Sir  Henry  Maine  and  M.  de  Laveleye —
have  disclosed  to  us  an  element  of  society  which  appears
to  have  existed  in  all  times  and  places,  and  which  is  the
basis  of  our  own  social  structure.  The  village  commu-
nity, or  commune,  or  township,  found  in  tribes  of  the
most  varied  race  and  time,  has  so  modified  itself  as  to
get  adapted  in  one  place  or  another  to  all  the  different
conditions  of  human  existence.  This  union  of  men  to
work  for  a  common  object  has  transformed  them  from
wild  animals  into  tame  ones.  Century  by  century  the
educating  process  of  the  social  life  has  been  working  at
human  nature  ;  it  has  built  itself  into  our  inmost  soul.
Such  as  we  are — moral  and  rational  beings — thinking
and  talking  in  general  conceptions  about  the  facts  that
make  up  our  life,  feeUng  a  necessity  to  act,  not  for  our-
selves, but  for  Ourself,  for  the  larger  hfe  of  Man  in
which  we  are  elements ;  such  moral  and  rational  beings,
I  say,  Man  has  made  us.  By  Man  I  mean  men  organized
into  a  society,  which  fights  for  its  Ufe,  not  only  as  a  mere


THE   ETHICS  OF  EELIGION.  239

collection  of  men  who  must  separately  be  kept  alive,  but
as  a  society.  It  must  fight,  not  only  against  external
enemies,  but  against  treason  and  disruption  within  it.
Hence  comes  the  unity  of  interest  of  all  its  members  ;
each  of  them  has  to  feel  that  he  is  not  himself  only  but
a  part  of  all  the  rest.  Conscience — the  sense  of  right
and  wrong — springs  out  of  the  habit  of  judging  things
from  the  point  of  view  of  all  and  not  of  one.  It  is  Our-
self,  not  ourselves,  that  makes  for  righteousness.

The  codes  of  morality,  then,  which  are  adopted  into
various  religions,  and  afterwards  taught  as  parts  of  reli-
gious systems,  are  derived  from  secular  sources.  The
most  ancient  version  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  what-
ever the  investigations  of  scholars  may  make  it  out  to
be,  originates,  not  in  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  but  in  the
peaceful  hfe  of  men  on  the  plains  of  Chaldgea.  Con-
science is  the  voice  of  Man  ingrained  into  our  hearts,
commanding  us  to  work  for  Man.

Eeligions  differ  in  the  treatment  which  they  give  to
this  most  sacred  heirloom  of  our  past  history.  Some-
times they  invert  its  precepts — telling  men  to  be  sub-
missive under  oppression  because  the  powers  that  be
are  ordained  of  God  ;  telling  them  to  believe  where  they
have  not  seen,  and  to  play  with  falsehood  in  order  that
a  particular  doctrine  may  prevail,  instead  of  seeking  for
truth  whatever  it  may  be  ;  telling  them  to  betray  their
country  for  the  sake  of  their  church.  But  there  is  one
great  distinction  to  which  I  wish,  in  conclusion,  to  call
special  attention — a  distinction  between  two  kinds  of
religious  emotion  which  bear  upon  the  conduct  of  men.

We  said  that  conscience  is  the  voice  of  Man  within
us,  commanding  us  to  work  for  Man.    We  do  not  know


^0  THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.

this  immediately  by  our  own  experience ;  we  only  know
that  something  within  us  commands  us  to  work  for  Man.
This  fact  men  have  tried  to  explain ;  and  they  have
thought,  for  the  most  part,  that  this  voice  was  the  voice
of  a  God.  But  the  explanation  takes  two  diiFerent  forms  :
the  God  may  speak  in  us  for  Man's  sake,  or  for  his  own
sake.  If  he  speaks  for  his  own  sake — and  this  is  what
generally  happens  when  he  has  priests  who  lay  claim  to
a  magical  character  and  powers — our  allegiance  is  apt
to  be  taken  away  from  Man,  and  transferred  to  the  God.
When  we  love  our  brother  for  the  sake  of  our  brother,
we  help  all  men  to  grow  in  the  right ;  but  when  we
love  our  brother  for  the  sake  of  somebody  else,  who  is
very  Ukely  to  damn  our  brother,  it  very  soon  comes  to
burning  him  aUve  for  his  soul's  health.  When  men
respect  human  hfe  for  the  sake  of  Man,  tranquilhty,
order,  and  progress  go  hand  in  hand  ;  but  those  who
only  respected  human  life  because  God  had  forbidden
murder  have  set  their  mark  upon  Europe  in  fifteen
centuries  of  blood  and  fire.

These  are  only  two  examples  of  a  general  rule.
Wherever  the  allegiance  of  men  has  been  diverted  firom
Man  to  some  divinity  who  speaks  to  men  for  his  own
sake  and  seeks  his  own  glory,  one  thing  has  happened.
The  right  precepts  might  be  enforced,  but  they  were
enforced  upon  wrong  grounds,  and  they  were  not
obeyed.  But  right  precepts  are  not  always  enforced ;
the  fact  that  the  fountains  of  morahty  have  been  poisoned
makes  it  easy  to  substitute  wrong  precepts  for  right
ones.

To  this  same  treason  against  humanity  belongs  the
plaim  of  the  priesthood  to  take  away  the  guilt  of  a  sinner


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  241

after  confession  has  been  made  to  it.  The  CathoUc
priest  professes  to  act  as  an  ambassador  for  his  God,  and
to  absolve  the  guilty  man  by  conveying  to  him  the  for-
giveness of  heaven.  If  his  credentials  were  ever  so  sure,
if  he  were  indeed  the  ambassador  of  a  superhuman
power,  the  claim  would  be  treasonable.  Can  the  favour
of  the  Czar  make  guiltless  the  murderer  of  old  men  and
women  and  children  in  Circassian  valleys  ?  Can  the
pardon  of  the  Sultan  make  clean  the  bloody  hands  of  a
Pasha  ?  As  httle  can  any  God  forgive  sins  committed
against  man.  When  men  think  he  can,  they  compound
for  old  sins  which  the  God  did  not  like  by  committing
new  ones  which  he  does  like.  Many  a  remorsefal  despot
has  atoned  for  the  levities  of  his  youth  by  the  persecu-
tion of  heretics  in  his  old  age.  That  frightful  crime,
the  adulteration  of  food,  could  not  possibly  be  so  com-
mon amongst  us  if  men  were  not  taught  to  regard  it  as
merely  objectionable  because  it  is  remotely  connected
with  stealing,  of  which  God  has  expressed  his  disapproval
in  the  Decalogue  ;  and  therefore  as  quite  naturally  set
right  by  a  punctual  attendance  at  church  on  Sundays.
When  a  Eituahst  breaks  his  fast  before  celebrating  the
Holy  Communion,  his  deity  can  forgive  him  if  he  likes,
for  the  matter  concerns  nobody  else  ;  but  no  deity  can
forgive  him  for  preventing  his  parishioners  from  setting
up  a  public  hbrary  and  reading-room  for  fear  they
should  read  Mr.  Darwin's  works  in  it.  That  sin  is  com-
mitted against  the  people,  and  a  God  cannot  take  it
away.

I  call  those  religions  which  undermine  the  supreme
allegiance  of  the  conscience  to  Man  ultramontane  re-
ligions, because  they  seek  their  springs  of  action  ultra

VOL.  II.  R


242  THE   ETHICS   OF  EELIGION.

monteSy  outside  of  the  cominon  experience  and  daily  life
of  man.  And  I  remark  about  them  that  they  are  espe-
cially apt  to  teach  wrong  precepts,  and  that  even  when
they  command  men  to  do  the  right  things  they  put  the
command  upon  wrong  motives,  and  do  not  get  the
things  done.

/But  there  are  forms  of  rehgious  emotion  which  do
not  thus  undermine  the  conscience.  Far  be  it  from  me
to  undervalue  the  help  and  strength  which  many  of  the
bravest  of  our  brethren  have  drawn  from  the  thought
of  an  unseen  helper  of  men.  He  who,  wearied  or
stricken  in  the  fight  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  asks
himself  in  a  solitary  place,  '  Is  it  all  for  nothing  ?  shall
we  indeed  be  overthrown  ?  ' — he  does  find  something
which  may  justify  that  thought.  In  such  a  moment  of
utter  sincerity,  when  a  man  has  bared  his  own  soul
before  the  immensities  and  the  eternities,  a  presence  in
which  his  own  poor  personality  is  shrivelled  into  no-
thingness arises  within  him,  and  says,  as  plainly  as
words  can  say,  '  I  am  with  thee,  and  I  am  greater  than
thou.'  Many  names  of  Gods,  of  many  shapes,  have  men
given  to  this  presence  ;  seeking  by  names  and  pictures
to  know  more  clearly  and  to  remember  more  continually
the  guide  and  the  helper  of  men.  No  such  comradeship
with  the  Great  Companion  shall  have  anything  but
reverence  from  me,  who  have  known  the  divine  gentle-
ness of  Denison  Maurice,  the  strong  and  healthy  practi-
cal instinct  of  Charles  Kingsley,  and  who  now  revere
with  all  my  heart  the  teaching  of  James  Martineau.
They  seem  to  me,  one  and  all,  to  be  reaching  forward
with  loving  anticipation  to  a  clearer  vision  which  is  yet
to    come — tendentesque    mantis    ripce  ulterioris  amove.


THE  ETHICS  OF  RELIGION.  24S

For,  after  all,  such  a  helper  of  men,  outside  of  humanity,
the  truth  will  not  allow  us  to  see.  The  dim  and
shadowy  outhnes  of  the  superhuman  deity  fade  slowly
away  from  before  us ;  and  as  the  mist  of  his  presence
floats  aside,  we  perceive  with  greater  and  greater  clear-
ness the  shape  of  a  yet  grander  and  nobler  figure — of
Him  who  made  all  Gods  and  shall  unmake  them.  From
the  dim  dawn  of  history,  and  from  the  inmost  depth  of
every  soul,  the  face  of  our  father  Man  looks  out  upon
us  with  the  fire  of  eternal  youth  in  his  eyes,  and  says,
'  Before  Jehovah  was,  I  am !  '^


R  2


244


THE  INFLUENCE  UPON  MORALITY  OF  A  DECLINE
IN  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.

FROM    'A   MODERN    SYMPOSIUM.'

{In  No,  2  of '  The  Mneteenth  Century,'' )

In  the  third  of  the  preceding  discourses^  there  is  so
much  which  I  can  fully  and  fervently  accept,  that  I
should  find  it  far  more  grateful  to  rest  in  that  feeling  of
admiration  and  sympathy  than  to  attend  to  points  of
difference  which  seem  to  me  to  be  of  altogether  second-
ary import.  But  for  the  truth's  sake  this  must  first  be
done,  because  it  will  then  be  more  easy  to  point  out
some  of  the  bearings  of  the  position  held  in  that  dis-
course upon  the  question  which  is  under  discussion.

That  the  sense  of  duty  in  a  man  is  the  prompting  of
a  self  other  than  his  own,  is  the  very  essence  of  it.  Not
only  would  morals  not  be  self-sufficing,  if  there  were  no
such  prompting  of  a  wider  self,  but  they  could  not
exist :  one  might  as  well  suppose  a  fire  without  heat.
Not  only  is  a  sense  of  duty  inherent  in  the  constitution
of  our  nature,  but  the  prompting  of  a  wider  self  than
that  of  the  individual  is  inherent  in  a  sense  of  duty.  It
is  no  more  possible  to  have  the  right  without  unsel-
fishness than  to  have  man  without  a  feehng  for  the
right.

We  may  explain  or  account  for  these  facts  in  various

*  By  Dr.  Martineau.


DECLINE  IN  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.  245

ways,  but  we  shall  not  thereby  alter  the  facts.  No
theories  about  heat  and  light  will  ever  make  a  cold  fire.
And  no  doubt  or  disproof  of  any  existing  theory  can
any  more  extinguish  that  self  other  than  myself,  which
speaks  to  me  in  the  voice  of  conscience,  than  doubt  or
disproof  of  the  wave-theory  of  Ught  can  put  out  the
noonday  sun.

One  such  theory  is  defended  in  the  discourse  here
dealt  with,  and,  if  I  may  venture  to  say  so,  is  not
quite  sufficiently  distinguished  from  the  facts  which  it
is  meant  to  explain.  The  theory  is  this :  that  the  voice
of  conscience  in  my  mind  is  the  voice  of  a  conscious
being  external  to  me  and  to  all  men,  who  has  made  us
and  all  the  world.  When  this  theory  is  admitted,  the
observed  discrepancy  between  our  moral  sense  and  the
government  of  the  world  as  a  whole  makes  it  necessary
to  suppose  another  world  and  another  life  in  it  for  men,
whereby  this  discord  shall  be  resolved  in  a  final
harmony.

I  fully  admit  that  the  theistic  hypothesis,  so
grounded,  and  considered  apart  from  objections  other-
wise arising,  is  a  reasonable  hypothesis  and  an  explana-
tion of  the  facts.  *  The  idea  of  an  external  conscious  be-
ing is  unavoidably  suggested,  as  it  seems  to  me,  by  the
categorical  imperative  of  the  moral  sense  ;  and  more-
over, in  a  way  quite  independent,  by  the  aspect  of
nature,  which  seems  to  answer  to  our  questionings  with
an  intelligence  akin  to  our  own.  It  is  more  reasonable
to  assume  one  consciousness  than  two,  if  by  that  one
assumption  we  can  explain  two  distinct  facts  ;  just  as  if
we  had  been  led  to  assume  an  ether  to  explain  light,
and  an  ether  to  explain  electricity,  we  might  have  run


246  INFLUENCE  UPON  MORALITY  OF

before  experiment  and  guessed  that  these  two  ethers
were  but  one.  But  since  there  is  a  discordance  between
nature  and  conscience,  the  theory  of  their  common
origin  in  a  mind  external  to  humanity  has  not  met  with
such  acceptance  as  that  of  the  divine  origin  of  eacn^  A
large  number  of  theists  have  rejected  it,  and  taken
refuge  in  Manichaeism  and  the  doctrine  of  the  Demiurgus
in  various  forms ;  while  others  have  endeavoured,  as
aforesaid,  to  redress  the  balance  of  the  old  world  by
calling  into  existence  a  new  one.

It  is,  however,  a  very  striking  and  significant  fact
that  the  great  majority  of  mankind  who  have  thought
about  these  questions  at  all,  while  acknowledging
the  existence  of  divine  beings  and  their  influence  in
the  government  of  the  world,  have  sought  for  the
spring  and  sanction  of  duty  in  something  above  and
beyond  the  Gods.  The  reUgions  of  Brahmanism  and  of
Buddhism,  and  the  moral  system  of  Confucius,  have
together  ruled  over  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  human
race  during  the  historic  period  ;  and  in  all  of  these  the
moral  sense  is  regarded  as  arising  indeed  out  of  a
universal  principle,  but  not  as  personified  in  any  coii-
scious  being.  This  vast  body  of  dissent  might  well,  it
should  seem,  make  us  ask  if  there  is  not  something
unsatisfying  in  the  theory  which  represents  the  voice  of
conscience  as  the  voice  of  a  God,

Although,  as  I  have  said,  the  idea  of  an  external
conscious  being  is  unavoidably  suggested  by  the  moral
sense,  yet,  if  this  idea  should  be  found  untrue,  it  does
not  follow  that  nature  has  been  fooling  us.  The  idea
is  not  in  the  facts,  but  in  our  inference  from  the
facts.     A  mirror  unavoidably  suggests  the  idea  of  a


A  DECLINE  IN  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.  247

room  behind  it ;  but  it  is  not  our  eyes  that  deceive
us,  it  is  only  the  inference  we  draw  from  their  testimony.
Further  consideration  may  lead  to  a  different  inference
of  far  greater  practical  value.

Now,  whether  or  no  it  be  reasonable  and  satisfying
to  the  conscience,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  theistic
behef  is  a  comfort  and  a  solace  to  those  who  hold  it,  and
that  the  loss  of  it  is  a  very  painful  loss.  It  cannot  be
doubted,  at  least,  by  many  of  us  in  this  generation,  who
either  profess  it  now,  or  received  it  in  our  childhood  and
have  parted  from  it  since  with  such  searching  trouble
as  only  cradle-faiths  can  cause.  We  have  seen  the
spring  sun  shine  out  of  an  empty  heaven,  to  light  up  a
soulless  earth  ;  we  have  felt  with  utter  lonehness  that
the  Great  Companion  is  dead.  Our  children,  it  may  be
hoped,  will  know  that  sorrow  only  by  the  reflex  light
of  a  wondering  compassion.  But  to  say  that  theistic
belief  is  a  comfort  and  a  solace,  and  to  say  that  it  is
the  crown  or  coping  of  morality,  these  are  different
things.

For  in  what  way  shall  behef  in  God  strengthen  my
sense  of  duty  ?  He  is  a  great  one  working  for  the  right.
But  I  already  know  so  many,  and  I  know  these  so  well.
His  righteousness  is  unfathomable ;  it  transcends  all  ideals.
But  I  have  not  yet  fathomed  the  goodness  of  living  men
whom  I  know  :  still  less  of  those  who  have  lived,  and
whom  I  know.  And  the  goodness  of  all  these  is  a
striving  for  something  better ;  now  it  is  not  the  goal,
but  the  striving  for  it,  that  matters  to  me.  The  essence
of  their  goodness  is  the  losing  of  the  individual  self  in
another  and  a  wider  self ;  but  God  cannot  do  this  ;  his
goodness  must  be  something  different.     He  is  infinitely


248  INFLUENCE  UPON  MORALITY   OF

great  and  powerful^  and  he  lives  for  ever.  I  do  not
understand  this  mensuration  of  goodness  by  foot-pounds
and  seconds  and  cubic  miles.  A  little  field-mouse,
which  busies  itself  in  the  hedge,  and  does  not  mind  my
company,  is  more  to  me  than  the  longest  ichthyosaurus
that  ever  lived,  even  if  he  hved  a  thousand  years.  When
we  look  at  a  starry  sky,  the  spectacle  whose  awfulness
Kant  compared  with  that  of  the  moral  sense,  does  it
help  out  our  poetic  emotion  to  reflect  that  these  specks
are  really  very  very  big,  and  very  very  hot,  and  very
very  far  away  ?  Their  heat  and  their  bigness  oppress
us  ;  we  should  hke  them  to  be  taken  still  farther  away,
the  great  blazing  lumps.  But  when  we  think  of  the
unseen  planets  that  surround  them,  of  the  wonders  of
life,  of  reason,  of  love  that  may  dwell  therein,  then
indeed  there  is  something  subhme  in  the  sight.  Fitness
and  kinship ;  these  are  the  truly  great  things  for  us,
not  force  and  massiveness  and  length  of  days.

Length  of  days,  said  the  old  Rabbi,  is  measured  not
by  their  number,  but  by  the  work  that  is  done  in  them.
We  are  all  to  be  swept  away  in  the  final  ruin  of  the
earth.  The  thought  of  that  ending  is  a  sad  thought ;
there  is  no  use  in  trying  to  deny  this.  But  it  has
nothing  to  do  with  right  and  wrong ;  it  belongs  to
another  subject.  Like  All-father  Odin,  we  must  ride
out  gaily  to  do  battle  with  the  wolf  of  doom,  even
if  there  be  no  Balder  to  come  back  and  continue  our
work.  At  any  rate  the  right  will  have  been  done  ;  and
the  past  is  safer  than  all  storehouses.    .

The  conclusion  of  the  matter  is  that  belief  in  God
and  in  a  future  life  is  a  source  of  refined  and  elevated
pleasure  to  those  who  can  hold  it.     But  the  foregoing


A  DECLINE  IN  BELIGIOUS  BELIEF.  249

of  a  refined  and  elevated  pleasure,  because  it  appears
that  we  have  no  right  to  indulge  in  it,  is  not  in  itself,
and  cannot  produce  as  its  consequence,  a  decline  of
morality.

There  is  another  theory  of  the  facts  of  the  moral
sense  set  forth  in  the  succeeding  discourse,^  and  this  seems
to  me  to  be  the  true  one.  The  voice  of  conscience  is
the  voice  of  our  Father  Man  who  is  within  us  ;  the
accumulated  instinct  of  the  race  is  poured  into  each  one
of  us,  and  overflows  us,  as  if  the  ocean  were  poured  into  a
cup.  ^  Our  evidence  for  this  explanation  is  that  the  cause
assigned  is  a  vera  causa^  it  undoubtedly  exists ;  there
is  no  perhaps  about  that.  And  those  who  have  tried
tell  us  that  it  is  sufficient :  the  explanation,  like  the
fact,  '  covers  the  whole  voluntary  field.'  The  lightest
and  the  gravest  action  may  be  consciously  done  in  and
for  Man.  And  the  sympathetic  aspect  of  nature  is
explained  to  us  in  the  same  way.  In  so  far  as  our  con-
ception of  nature  is  akin  to  our  minds  that  conceive  it,
Man  made  it ;  and  Man  made  us,  with  the  necessity
to  conceive  it  in  this  way.^

I  do  not,  however,  suppose  that  morality  would
practically  gain  much  from  the  wide  acceptance  of  true
views  about  its  nature,  except  in  a  way  which  I  shall
presently  suggest.  I  neither  admit  the  moral  influence
of  theism  in  the  past,  nor  look  forward  to  the  moral
influence  of  humanism  in  the  future.     Virtue  is  a  habit,

^  By  Mr.  Frederic  Harrison.

^  Schopenhauer.  There  is  a  most  remarkable  article  on  the  'Natural
History  of  Morals '  in  the  No7'th  British  Heview,  Dec.  1867.

^  Por  an  admirable  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  the  social  origin  of  our
conceptions,  see  Professor  Groom  Robertson's  paper, '  How  we  come  by  our
Knowledge,'  in  the  first  number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.


250  INFLUENCE  UPON  MOKALITY  OF

not  a  sentiment  or  an  -ism.  The  doctrine  of  total  de-
pravity seems  to  have  been  succeeded  by  a  doctrine  of
partial  depravity,  according  to  which  there  is  hope  for
human  affairs,  but  still  men  cannot  go  straight  unless
some  tremendous  all-embracing  theory  has  a  finger  in
the  pie.  Theories  are  most  important  and  excellent
things  when  they  help  us  to  see  the  matter  as  it  really
is,  and  so  to  judge  what  is  the  right  thing  to  do  in
regard  to  it.  They  are  the  guides  of  action,  but  not  the
springs  of  it.  Now  the  spring  of  virtuous  action  is  the
social  instinct,  which  is  set  to  work  by  the  practice  of
comradeship.  The  union  of  men  in  a  common  effort
for  a  common  object — hand-work^  if  I  may  venture  to
translate  co-operation  into  Enghsh — this  is  and  always
has  been  the  true  school  of  character.  Except  in  times
of  severe  struggle  for  national  existence,  the  practice  of
virtue  by  masses  of  men  has  always  been  coincident  with
municipal  freedom,  and  with  the  vigour  of  such  unions
as  are  not  large  enough  to  take  from  each  man  his  con-
scious share  in  the  work  and  in  the  direction  of  it.

What  really  affects  moraUty  is  not  religious  behef,
but  a  practice  which,  in  some  times  and  places,  is
thought  to  be  rehgious — namely,  the  practice  of  sub-
mitting human  hfe  to  clerical  control.  The  apparently
destructive  tendency  of  modern  times,  which  arouses
fear  and  the  foreboding  of  evil  in  the  minds  of  many  of
the  best  of  men,  seems  to  me  to  be  not  mainly  an  intel-
lectual movement.  It  has  its  intellectual  side,  but  that
side  is  the  least  important,  and  touches  comparatively
few  souls.  The  true  core  of  it  is  a  firm  resolve  of  men
to  know  the  right  at  first  hand,  which  has  grown  out  of
the  strong  impulse  given  to  the  moral  sense  by  political


A  DECLINE  IN  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF.  251

freedom.     Sucli   a  resolve  is  a  necessary  condition  to

the  existence  of  a  pure  and  noble  theism  like  that  of

the  third  discourse,^  which  learns  what  God  is  like  by

thinking  of  man's  love  for  man.   Although  that  doctrine

has  been  prefigured  and  led  up  to  for  many  ages  by  the

best  teaching   of  Enghshmen,   and — ^what  is  far  more

important — by  the  best  practice  of  Enghshmen,  yet  it

cannot  be  accepted  on  a  large  scale  without  what  will

seem  to  many  a  decline  of  rehgious  beUef.     For  assuredly

if  men  learn  the  nature  of  God  from  the  moral  sense

of  man,  they  cannot  go  on  beheving  the  doctrines  of

popular  theology.     Such  change   of  belief  is  of  small

account  in  itself,  for  any   consequences   it   can   bring

about ;  but  it  is  of  vast  importance  as  a  symptom  of  the

increasing  power  and  clearness  of  the  sense  of  duty.

On  the  other  hand  there  is  one  '  dechne  of  religious
belief,'  inseparable  from  a  revolution  in  human  conduct,
which  would  indeed  be  a  frightful  disaster  to  mankind.
A  revival  of  any  form  of  sacerdotal  Christianity  would
be  a  matter  of  practice  and  not  a  matter  of  theory.     The
system  which  sapped  the  foundations  of  patriotism  in
the  old  world  ;  which  well-nigh  eradicated  the  sense  of
intellectual  honesty,  and  seriously  weakened  the  habit  of
truth-speaking  ;  which  lowered  men's  reverence  for  the
marriage-bond  by  placing  its  sanctions  in  a  realm  out-
side of  nature  instead  of  in  the  common  life  of  men,  and
by  the  institutions  of  monasticism  and  a  celibate  clergy  ;
which  stunted  the  moral  sense  of  the  nations  by  putting
a  priest  between  every  man  and  his  conscience ;  this
system,   if  it   should   ever   return  to  power,  must  be
expected  to  produce  worse  evils  than  those  which  it  has

^  Dr.  Martineau'a.


262  INiTiUENCE  UPON  MOEALITY,  ETC,

worked  in  the  past.  The  house  which  it  once  made
desolate  has  been  partially  swept  and  garnished  by  the
free  play  gained  for  the  natural  goodness  of  men.  It
would  come  back  accompanied  by  social  diseases  perhaps
worse  than  itself,  and  the  wreck  of  civihzed  Europe
would  be  darker  than  the  darkest  of  past  ages.


253


COSMIC  EMOTION.'

By  a  cosmic  emotion — the  phrase  is  Mr.  Henry  Sidgwick's
— ^I  mean  an  emotion  which  is  felt  in  regard  to  the
universe  or  sum  of  things,  viewed  as  a  cosmos  or  order.
There  are  two  kinds  of  cosmic  emotion — one  having
reference  to  the  Macrocosm  or   universe  surrounding
and  containing  us,  the  other  relating  to  the  Microcosm
or  universe  of  our  own  souls.     When  we  try  to  put
together  the  most  general  conceptions  that  we  can  form
about  the  great   aggregate  of  events  that  are  always
going  on,  to  strike  a  sort  of  balance  among  the  feelings
which  these  events  produce  in  us,  and  to  add  to  these
the  feeling  of  vastness  associated  with  an  attempt  to
represent  the  whole  of  existence,  then  we  experience  a
cosmic   emotion  of  the   first  kind.     It   may  have  the
character  of  awe,  veneration,  resignation,  submission ;
or  it  may  be  an  overpowering  stimulus  to  action,  like
the  effect  of  the  surrounding  orchestra  upon  a  musician
who  is  thereby  caught  up  and  driven  to  play  his  proper
part  with  force  and  exactness  of  time  and  tune.     If,  on
the  other  hand,  we  consider  the  totality  of  our  own
actions  and  of  the  feelings  that  go  with  them  or  spring
out  of  them,  if  we  frame  the  highest  possible  general-
ization to  express  the  character  of  those  which  we  call
good,  and  if  we  contemplate  this  with  the  feehng  of

*  Nineteenth  Century,  October,  1877.


2,54  COSMIC  EMOTION.

vastness  which  belongs  to  that  which  concerns  all
things  that  all  men  do,  we  shall  experience  a  cosmic
emotion  of  the  second  kind.  Such  an  emotion  finds
voice  in  Wordsworth's  Ode  to  Duty  :

Stern  daughter  of  the  voice  of  God !
0  Duty,  if  that  name  thou  love,
Who  art  a  light  to  guide,  a  rod

To  check  the  erring,  and  reprove ;
Thou  who  art  victory  and  law
When  empty  terrors  overawe ;
From  vain  temptations  dost  set  free
And  calm'st  the  weary  strife  of  frail  humanity  !

A  special  form  of  each  of  these  kinds  of  cosmic
emotion  has  been  expressed  in  a  sentence  by  Immanuel
Kant,  which  has  been  perfectly  translated  by  Lord
Houghton :

Two  things  I  contemplate  with  ceaseless  awe ;
The  stars  of  Heaven,  and  Man's  sense  of  Law.

For  the  star-full  sky  on  a  clear  night  is  the  most  direct
presentation  of  the  sum  of  things  that  we  can  find,  and
from  the  nature  of  the  circumstances  is  fitted  to  pro-
duce a  cosmic  emotion  of  the  first  kind.  And  the  moral
faculty  of  man  was  thought  of  by  Kant  as  possessing
universality  in  a  peculiar  sense  ;  for  the  form  of  all  right
maxims,  according  to  him,  is  that  they  are  fit  for  uni-
versal law,  appHcable  to  all  intelhgent  beings  whatever.
This  mode  of  viewing  the  faculty  is  clearly  well  adapted
for  producing  cosmic  emotion  of  the  second  kind.

The  character  of  the  emotion  with  which  men  con-
template the  world,  the  temper  in  which  they  stand  in
the  presence  of  the  immensities  and  the  eternities,  must
depend  first  of  all  on  what  they  think  the  world  is.


COSMIC  EMOTION.  265

The  theory  of  the  universe,  the  view  of  things,  preva-
lent at  any  time  and  place,  will  rouse  appropriate
feelings  in  those  who  contemplate  it ;  not  the  same  in
all,  for  temperament  varies  with  the  individual,  and  the
same  facts  stir  differently  different  souls,  yet  so  that,  on
the  whole,  the  character  of  cosmic  emotion  depends  on
the  nature  of  cosmic  ideas.

When,  therefore,  the  inevitable  progress  of  know-
ledge has  changed  the  prevalent  cosmic  ideas,  so  that
the  world  as  we  know  it  is  not  the  world  which  our
fathers  knew,  the  oldest  cosmic  emotions  are  no  longer
found  to  fit.     Knowledge   must  have   been   in   men's
possession  for  a  long  time  before  it  has  acquired  the
certainty,  the  precision,  the  famiharity,  the  wide  diffu-
sion  and   comprehension   which   make  it  fit  to  rouse
feelings  strong  enough   and  general   enough   for  true
poetic  expression.     For  the  true  poetry  is  that  which
expresses  our  feelings,  and  not  my  feelings  only — that
which  appeals  to  the  universal  in  the  heart  of  each  one  of
us.    So  it  has  come  about  that  the  world  of  the  poet,  the
world  in  its  emotional  aspect,  always  lags  a  little  behind
the  world  of  science,  not  merely  as  it  appears  to  the  few
who  are  able  to  assist  at  the  birth  of  its  conceptions,  but
even  as  it  is  roughly  and  in  broad  strokes  revealed  to
the  many.     We  always  know  a  Httle  more  than  our
imaginations  have  thoroughly  pictured.    To  some  minds
there  is  hope  and  renewing  of  youth  in  the  sense  that
the  last  word  is  not  yet  spoken,  that  greater  mysteries
yet  lie  behind  the  veil.     The  prophet  himself  may  say
with  gladness,  '  He  that  cometh  after  me  shall  be  pre-
ferred before  me.'     But  others  see  in  the  clearer  and
wider  vision  that  approaches  them  the  end  of  all  beauty


256  OOSAHO  EMOTION.

and  joy  in  the  earth  ;  because  their  old  feeUngs  are  not
suited  to  the  new  learning,  they  think  that  learning  can
stir  no  feehngs  at  all.  Even  the  great  poet  already
quoted,  whom  no  science  will  put  out  of  date,  com-
plained of  the  prosaic  effects  of  explanation,  and  said,
'  We  murder  to  dissect.'

I  propose  to  consider  and  compare  an  ancient  and  a
modern  system  of  cosmic  ideas,  and  to  show  how  the
emotions  suited  to  the  latter  have  already  in  part
received  poetic  expression.

In  the  early  part  of  the  fifth  century  of  our  era
the  Neoplatonic  philosopher  Hierokles  was  teaching  at
Alexandria.  He  was  an  Alexandrian  by  birth,  and
had  studied  with  Proklos,  or  a  little  before  him,  under
Plutarch  at  Athens.  He  was  a  man  of  great  eloquence,
and  of  better  Greek  than  most  of  his  contemporaries.
He  astonished  his  hearers  everywhere,  says  Suidas,  by
the  calm,  the  magnificence,  the  width  of  his  superlative
intellect,  and  by  the  sweetness  of  his  speech,  full  of  the
most  beautiful  words  and  things,  A  man  of  manly
spirit  and  courage ;  for  being  once  at  Byzantium  he
came  into  collision  with  the  ecclesiastical  authorities
(rots  Kparovai)  and  was  scourged  in  court ;  then,  stream-
ing with  blood,  he  caught  some  of  it  in  his  hand  and
threw  it  at  the  magistrate,  with  this  verse  of  the  Odyssey  :
'  Here^  Cyclops^  drink  wine^  since  you  eat  human  fiesh  1 '
For  which  contempt  of  court  he  was  banished,  but  sub-
sequently made  his  way  back  to  Alexandria.  Here  he
lectured  on  various  topics,  foreknowledge,  will,  and  fate,
expounding  also  some  of  the  dialogues  of  Plato  and  other
philosophical  writings.

But  the  matter  of  one  course  of  lectures  is  preserved


COSMIC  EMOTION.  257

to  US.  It  is  a  commentary  on  a  document  in  hexameter
verse  belonging  to  the  Pythagorean  scriptures,  dating
apparently  from  the  third  century  B.C.  These  Unes
were  called  by  Jambhchus  the  Golden  Verses ;  but
Gregory  of  Nazianzum  did  them  the  honour  to  say  they
were  rather  made  of  lead.  They  are  not  elegant  as
poetry ;  the  form  of  verse  seems  to  have  been  adopted
as  an  aid  to  the  memory.  More  than  half  of  them  con-
sist of  a  sort  of  versified  '  duty  to  God  and  my  neighbour/
except  that  it  is  not  designed  by  the  rich  to  be  obeyed
by  the  poor,  that  it  lays  stress  on  the  laws  of  health,
and  that  it  is  just  such  sensible  counsel  for  the  good
and  right  conduct  of  life  as  an  Enghsh  gentleman  might
now-a-days  give  to  his  son.  We  need  not  be  astonished
that  the  step  from  the  Mediterranean  to  Great  Britain,
over  two  thousand  years  of  time,  should  make  no  great
difference  in  the  validity  of  maxims  hke  these.  We
might  go  back  four  thousand  years  further,  and  find  the
same  precepts  handed  down  at  Memphis  as  the  wisdom
of  a  hoar  antiquity.  '  There's  some  things  as  IVe  never
felt  i'  the  dark  about,'  says  Mrs.  Winthrop,  '  and  they're
mostly  what  comes  i'  the  day's  work.'

There  are  curious  indications  that  the  point  of  view
of  the  commentator  is  not  that  of  the  verses  themselves.
'  Before  all  things  honour  the  immortal  Gods,  as  they
are  ordained  by  law,'  begin  the  verses,  with  the  frank
Erastianism  of  the  Greeks,  who  held  that  every  man
should  worship  the  Gods  in  the  manner  belonging  to  his
city  and  country;  that  matter  being  settled  for  themselves
by  the  oracle  of  the  Delphian  Apollo.  But  this  did  not
suit  the  Neoplatonist  of  the  fifth  century,  whom  the
law  of  his  country  required  to  worship  images  of  Mary

VOL.  II.  s


258  COSMIC  EMOTION.

and  her  son  (to  be  sure,  they  might  be  adapted  figures
of  Isis  and  Horus)  and  the  miraculous  toe-nails  of  some
filthy  and  ignorant  monk.  The  law  named  in  the  verses
could  not  be  that  which  had  scourged  and  banished  a
philosopher  ;  so  it  is  explained  to  mean  the  demiurgic
law,  which  assigns  to  the  Gods  their  several  orders,  the
law  of  the  divine  nature.  We  are  to  honour  the  im-
mortal Gods,  says  the  commentator,  in  the  order  which
is  assigned  to  them  by  the  law  of  their  being.  For
Hierokles  there  is  one  supreme  deity  and  three  orders
of  angels — the  immortal  Gods,  the  illustrious  heroes,  and
the  terrestrial  demons  or  partially  deified  souls  of  men.
The  bishops,  as  we  all  know,  multiplied  these  numbers
by  three.

As  to  the  kind  of  worship,  our  commentator  quotes
some  old  Pythagorean  maxims.  You  shall  honour  the
God  best  by  becoming  godlike  in  your  thoughts.  Whoso
giveth  God  honour  as  to  one  that  needeth  it^  that  man  in
his  folly  hath  made  himself  greater  than  God.  The  wise
man  only  is  a  priest^  is  a  lover  of  God^  is  skilled  to  pray.
'  For,'  he  says,  '  that  man  only  knows  how  to  worship
who  does  not  confound  the  relative  dignity  of  worship-
ful things,  who  begins  by  offering  himself  as  the  victim,
fashions  his  own  soul  into  a  divine  image,  and  furnishes
his  mind  as  a  temple  for  the  reception  of  the  divine
light.'  ^The  whole  force  of  worship,' he  says  in  another
place, 'lies  in  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  that  which  is
worshipped/

(It  is  interesting  to  compare  this  last  maxim  with
the  proposition  of  Spinoza :  ^  '  He  who  clearly  and  dis-

*  Qui  se  suosque  affectus  clare  et  distincte  intelligit,  Deum  amat,  et  eo
ma^,  quo  se  suosque  affectus  magis  intelligit.'— -&^^.  v,  prop.  xr.  Of.
Affectuum  definitiones  ad  fin.  part.  iii.


COSMIC   EMOTION.  259

tinctly  understands  himself  and  his  own  emotions,  loves
God,  and  that  the  more,  the  more  he  understands  him-
self and  his  own  emotions/  For  to  understand  clearly
and  distinctly  is  to  contemplate  in  relation  to  God,  to
the  cosmic  idea.  When  the  mind  contemplates  itself
in  relation  to  God,  it  necessarily  rises  from  a  lower  to  a
higher  grade  of  perfection.  Now  joy  is  the  passage  from
a  lower  to  a  higher  grade  of  perfection,  and  love  is  joy
associated  with  the  idea  of  an  external  cause.  He,  then,
that  rises  to  higher  perfection  in  the  presence  of  the
idea  of  God,  loves  God.)

But  it  is  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  Golden  Verses
that  we  find  a  general  view  of  life  and  of  nature  assigned
as  the  ground  of  the  precepts  which  have  gone  before.
There  are  in  all  seventy-one  lines  ;  of  the  last  thirty-two
I  venture  to  subjoin  a  translation  as  nearly  literal  as  is
consistent  with  intelligibility.^

'  Let  not  soft  sleep  come  upon  thy  eyelids,  till  thou
hast  pondered  thy  deeds  of  the  day  :

'  Wherein  have  I  sinned  ?  What  work  have  I  done  ?
What  left  undone  that  I  was  bound  to  do  ?

'  Beginning  at  the  first,  go  through  even  unto  the  last ;
and  then  let  thy  heart  smite  thee  for  the  evil  deed,  but
rejoice  in  the  good  work.

'  Work  at  these  commandments,  and  think  upon
them ;  these  commandments  shalt  thou  love.

'  They  shall  surely  set  thee  in  the  way  of  divine
righteousness  ;  yea,  by  Him  who  gave  into  our  soul  the
Tetrad,  well-spring  of  Nature  everlasting.

^  The  text  followed  is  that  of  MuUacli,  in  the  Fragmenta  Philosophorum
Orcecm'um,  Paris,  1860,  from  the  prolegomena  to  which  my  information  is
derived.

s  2


260  COSMIC  EMOTION.

'  Set  to  thy  work  with  a  will,  beseeching  the  Gods  for
the  end  thereof.

*  And  when  thou  hast  mastered  these  commandments,
thou  shalt  know  the  being  of  the  Gods  that  die  not,  and
of  men  that  die  ;  thou  shalt  know  of  things,  wherein
they  are  diverse,  and  the  kinship  that  binds  them  in  one

'  Know,  so  far  as  is  permitted  thee,  that  Nature  in  all
things  is  hke  unto  herself :

'  That  thou  mayest  not  hope  that  of  which  there  is
no  hope,  nor  be  ignorant  of  that  which  may  be.

'  Know  thou  also  that  the  woes  of  men  are  the  work
of  their  own  hands  :

'  Miserable  are  they,  because  they  see  not  and  hear
not  the  good  that  is  very  nigh  them  ;  and  the  way  of
escape  from  evil,  few  there  be  that  understand  it.

'Like  rollers  they  roll  to  and  fro,  having  endless
trouble ;  so  hath  fate  broken  the  wits  ^  of  mortal  men.

'  A  baneful  strife  lurketh  inborn  in  us,  and  goeth  on
the  way  with  us  to  hurt  us  ;  this  let  not  a  man  stir  up,
but  avoid  and  flee.

'  Verily,  Father  Zeus,  thou  wouldst  free  all  men  from
much  evil,  if  thou  wouldst  teach  all  men  what  manner
of  spirit  they  are  of.

'  But  do  thou  be  of  good  cheer  ;  for  they  are  Gods'
kindred  whom  holy  Nature  leadeth  onward,  and  in  due
order  showeth  them  all  things.

'  And  if  thou  hast  any  part  with  them,  and  keepest
these  commandments,  thou  shalt  utterly  heal  thy  soul,
and  save  it  from  travail.

'Keep  from  the  meats  aforesaid,  using  judgment
both  in  cleansing  and  in  setting  free  thy  soul.

*  *  My  brains  are  broken.' — Sir  Walter  Raleigh.


COSMIC  EMOTION.  261

'  Give  heed  to  every  matter,  and  set  Reason  on  high,
who  best  holdeth  the  reins  of  guidance.

'  Then,  when  thou  leavest  the  body,  and  comest  into

the  free  aether,  thou  shalt  be  a  God  undying,  everlasting,

neither  shall  death  have  any  more  dominion  over  thee.'

It  is  worth  while  to  notice  the  comment  of  Hierokles

on  the  self-judgment  enjoined  in  the  first  of  these  lines.

'  The  judge  herein  appointed,'  he  says,  '  is  the  most
just  of  all,  and  the  one  which  is  most  at  home  with
us  ;  namely  conscience  itself,  and  right  reason.  And
each  man  is  to  be  judged  by  himself,  before  whom  our
bringing-up  has  taught  us  to  be  more  shamefast  than
before  any  other.  (As  a  previous  verse  commands  ;  of
all  men  be  most  shamefast  before  thyself :  iravrcov  Se
[jLokiarT  alcrx^veo  cravrov-)  For  what  is  there  of  which
one  man  can  so  admonish  another,  as  he  can  himself?
For  the  free  will,  misusing  the  liberty  of  its  nature,
turns  away  from  the  counsels  of  others,  when  it  does
not  wish  to  be  led  by  them ;  but  a  man's  own  reason
must  needs  obey  itself.'

Whether  the  clear  statement  of  this  doctrine  of  the
conscience,  dominans  ille  deus  in  nobis^  as  Cicero  calls
it,  is  originally  Stoic  or  Pythagorean,  must  be  left
for  the  learned  to  decide.  Hierokles,  however,  says
expressly  that  the  image  of  Eeason  guiding  the  lower
faculties  as  the  charioteer  guides  his  chariot  was  derived
by  Plato  from  the  Pythagoreans.

Very  remarkable  indeed  is  the  view  of  Nature  set
forth  in  the  subsequent  verses.  '  Know,  so  far  as  is
permitted  thee,  that  Nature  is  in  all  things  uniform '
{(pvcriv  TTept  TTavTos  ofjiOLTjp).  TMs  conccption  of  the
world  as  a  great  cosmos  or  order  is  the  primary  con-


262  COSMIC  EMOTION.

dition  of  human  progress.  In  the  earhest  steps  of  pri-
mitive men  in  the  simplest  arts  of  hfe  there  is  involved  a
dim  recognition  and  practical  use  of  it  to  the  extent  of
its  apphcation  in  that  stage.  Every  step  forward  is
an  increase  in  the  range  of  its  apphcation.  In  the
industrial  arts,  in  the  rules  of  health,  the  methods  of
heaUng,  the  preparation  of  food,  in  morals  and  politics,
every  advance  is  an  apphcation  of  past  experience  to
new  circumstances,  in  accordance  with  an  observed
order  of  nature.  Philosophy  consists  in  the  conscious
recognition  of  this  method,  and  in  the  systematic  use  of
it  for  the  complete  guidance  of  life.  Aberration  from
it  is  the  death  of  the  rational  soul ;  not,  says  Hierokles,
that  it  ceases  thereby  to  exist,  but  that  it  falls  away
from  harmony  with  divine  Nature  and  with  reason.  This
fatal  falhng  away  brings  about  endless  waste  and  per-
version of  strenuous  effort ;  a  hoping  for  things  of  which
there  is  no  hope,  an  ignorance  of  what  may  be  ;  a
perpetual  striving  to  clamber  up  the  back  stairs  of  a
universe  that  has  no  back  stairs.  The  Neoplatonists
were  not  wholly  spotless  in  this  regard.  They  had
learned  evil  things  of  the  Egyptians  :  magic,  astrology,
converse  with  spirits,  theurgy,  and  the  endeavour  by
trances  and  ecstasies  to  arrive  at  feehngs  and  ideas  which
are  ahen  to  the  healthy  and  wakeful  mind.  And  so  the
uniformity  of  nature  gives  our  commentator  some  little
trouble,  and  requires  to  be  interpreted.

'Know  so  far  as  is  permitted  thee  {rj  defies  ia-ri)^'  say
the  verses.  '  For  we  ought  not  to  yield  to  unreasoning
prejudice,  and  accommodate  the  order  and  dignity  of
things  to  our  fancies ;  but  to  keep  within  the  bounds
of  truth  and  know  all  things  as  it  is  permitted^  namely,


COSMIC   EMOTION.  263

as  the  Demiurgic  law  has  assigned  to  every  one  its
place/

So  the  commentator,  reading  into  the  verses  more
than  the  writer  put  there,  not  without  edification.  We,
then,  on  our  part,  may  read  into  them  this — that  it  is
not  '  permitted  '  to  regard  the  uniformity  of  nature  as
a  dogma  known  with  certainty,  or  exactness,  or  univer-
sality :  but  only  within  the  range  of  human  conduct,  as
a  practical  rule  for  the  guidance  of  the  same,  and  as
the  only  source  of  beliefs  that  will  not  lead  astray.  For
to  affirm  any  general  proposition  of  this  kind  to  be
certainly,  or  exactly,  or  universally  true,  is  to  make  a
mistake  about  the  nature  and  limits  of  human  knowledge.
But  at  present  it  is  a  venial  mistake,  because  the  doctrine
of  the  nature  of  human  knowledge,  Erhenntniss-theorie^
Ken-lore,  is  only  now  being  thoroughly  worked  out,  so
that  our  children  will  know  a  great  deal  more  about  it
than  we  do,  and  have  what  they  know  much  better  and
more  simply  expressed.  It  is  almost  infinitely  more
important  to  keep  in  view  that  the  uniformity  of  nature
is  practically  certain,  practically  exact,  practically
universal,  and  to  make  this  conception  the  guide  of  our
lives,  than  to  remember  that  this  certainty,  exactness,
and  universality  are  only  known  practically,  not  in  a
theoretical  or  absolute  way.

How  far  away  is  the  doctrine  of  uniformity  from
fatalism  !  It  begins  directly  to  remind  us  that  men
suffer  from  preventible  evils,  that  the  people  perisheth
for  lack  of  knowledge.  '  Miserable  are  they,  because
they  see  not  and  hear  not  the  good  that  is  very  nigh
them ;  and  the  way  of  escape  from  evil,  few  there  be
that  understand  it.'     The  practical  lesson  is  not  that  of


264:  COSMIC  EMOTION.

the  pessimist,  that  we  should  give  up  the  contest,  recog-
nize that  hfe  is  an  evil,  and  get  out  of  it  as  best  we  may ;
but  on  the  contrary,  that  having  found  anything  wrong,
we  should  set  to  work  to  mend  it ;  for  the  woes  of  men
are  the  work  of  their  own  hands,

'  But  be  thou  of  good  cheer,  for  they  are  of  Gods'
kindred  whom  holy  Nature  leadeth  onward,  and  in  due
order  showeth  them  all  things.'

The  expression  {lepa  irpo^ipovcra  .  .  .  S^lkvvctiv
c/cao-ra)  belongs  to  the  rite  of  initiation  into  the  mys-
teries. Nature  is  represented  as  the  hierophant,  the
guiding  priest  by  whom  the  faithful  were  initiated  into
the  divine  secrets  one  by  one.  The  history  of  mankind
is  conceived  as  such  a  mystic  progress  under  the  guid-
ance of  divine  Nature.  It  has  been  sometimes  said
that  the  ancient  world  was  entirely  devoid  of  the  con-
ception of  progress.  But  like  most  sweeping  antitheses
between  ancient  and  modern^  East  and  West^  and  the
like,  when  we  come  to  look  a  little  closely  into  this  as-
sertion it  becomes  difficult  to  beUeve  that  any  definite
meaning  can  ever  have  been  assigned  to  it.  Certainly
in  the  matter  of  physical  science  there  is  no  case  of
firmer  faith  in  progress  than  that  of  Hipparchus,  who
having  made  the  great  step  of  determining  the  solar  and
lunar  motions,  and  having  failed  to  extend  the  same
methods  to  the  planets,  stored  up  observations  in  the
sure  and  certain  hope  that  a  more  fortunate  successor
would  accomplish  that  work ;  which  indeed  was  done
by  Ptolemy.  And  it  is  very  important  to  notice  that
the  exact  sciences  were  regarded  as  the  standard  to
which  the  others  should  endeavour  to  attain,  as  appears
by  the  commentary  on  a  subsequent  passage  in  these


COSMIC  EMOTION.  265

very  verses.  On  the  phrase  '  using  judgment  both  in
cleansing  and  in  setting  free  thy  soul,'  Hierokles  explains
that  the  cleansing  or  lustration  of  the  rational  soul
means  the  mathematic  sciences,  and  that  the  upward-
leading  hberation  (ai^aycoyo?  Xvcrts),  the  freedom  that  is
progressive,  is  scientific  inquiry^  or  a  scientific  view  of
things  (SiaXefcrtfc^  tSv  ovtcov  iTroirTeia),  the  clear  and
exact  vision  of  one  who  has  attained  the  highest  grade
of  initiation.  Accordingly,  the  medical  sciences  never
lost  the  tradition  of  progress  by  continuous  observation
impressed  on  them  by  Hippocrates  ;  and  in  the  Alexan-
drian museum  were  trained  that  galaxy  of  famous  phy-
sicians and  naturahsts  which  kept  the  school  illustrious
until  the  claims  of  culture  were  restored  by  the  Arab
conquest.  Nor  is  it  possible  to  deny  the  conception  and
practice  of  political  progress  to  the  great  jurists  of
Eome,  any  more  than  that  of  ethical  progress  to  the
Stoic  moralists.  To  the  best  minds,  with  whatever  sub-
ject  occupied,  there  was  present  this  conception  of
divine  Nature  patiently  educating  the  human  race,
ready  to  bring  out  of  her  storehouse  good  things  with-
out number  in  the  proper  time.

Nor  was  this  hope  of  continued  progress  altogether
a  vain  one,  if  we  will  only  look  in  the  right  place  for  the
fulfilment  of  it.  Greek  polity  and  culture  had  been
planted  in  the  East  by  Alexander's  conquests  from  the
Nile  to  the  Indus,  there  to  suck  up  and  gather  together
the  wisdom  of  centuries  and  of  continents.  When  the
light  and  the  right  were  driven  out  of  Europe  by  the
Church,  they  found  in  the  far  East  a  home  with  the
Omaiyad  and  Abbasside  Caliphs,  whose  reign  gave  peace
and  breathing  time  to  the  old  and  young  civilization  that


266  COSMIC  EMOTION.

was  ready  to  grow.  Across  the  north  of  Africa  came
again  the  progressive  culture  of  Greece  and  Eome,  en-
riched with  precious  jewels  of  old-world  lore  ;  it  took
firm  ground  in  Spain,  and  the  light  and  the  right  were
flashed  back  into  Europe  from  the  blades  of  Saracen
swords.  From  Bagdad  to  Cordova,  in  the  great  days  of
the  Caliphate,  the  best  minds  had  faith  in  human  pro-
gress to  be  made  by  observation  of  the  order  of  nature.
Here  again  the  true  culture  was  overridden  and  de-
stroyed by  the  development  of  the  Mohammedan  reli-
gion ;  but  not  until  the  sacred  torch  had  been  safely
handed  on  to  the  new  nations  of  convalescent  Europe.

If  the  singer  of  the  Golden  Verses  could  have  con-
templated on  these  lines  the  history  of  the  two  thou-
sand years  that  were  to  succeed  him,  he  would  have
seen  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  naturahsts  and  phy-
sicians, philosophers  and  statesmen,  all  steadily  reaching
forward  to  the  good  things  that  were  before,  never
losing  hold  of  what  had  already  been  attained.  And
we,  looking  back,  may  see  that  through  overwhelming
difficulties  and  dangers  and  diseases  holy  Nature  has
indeed  been  leading  onward  the  kindred  of  the  Gods,
slowly  but  surely  unfolding  to  them  the  roll  of  the
heavenly  mysteries.

Of  course,  if  we  restrict  our  view  to  Europe  itself,
we  meet  with  a  far  more  complex  and  difficult  problem  ;
a  problem  of  pathology  as  opposed  to  one  of  healthy
growth.  We  have  to  explain  the  apparent  anomaly  of
two  epochs  of  comparative  sanity  and  civilization  sepa-
rated by  the  disease  and  deUrium  of  the  Catholic
episode.

Just  as  the  traveller,  who  has  been  worn  to  the  bone


COSMIC  EMOTION.  2C)7

by  years  of  weary  striving  among  men  of  another  skin,
suddenly  gazes  with  doubting  eyes  upon  the  white  face
of  a  brother,  so,  if  we  travel  backwards  in  thought  over
the  darker  ages  of  the  history  of  Europe,  we  at  length
reach  back  with  such  bounding  of  heart  to  men  who
had  like  hopes  with  ourselves  ;  and  shake  hands  across
that  vast  with  the  singers  of  the  Golden  Verses^  our  OAvn
true  spiritual  ancestors.

Well  may  Greece  sing  to  the  earth  her  mother,  in
the  Litany  of  Nations  : —

I  am  she  that  made  thee  lovely  with  my  beauty

From  north  to  south  :
Mine,  the  fairest  lips,  took  first  the  fire  of  duty

From  thine  own  mouth.
Mine,  the  fairest  eyes,  sought  first  thy  laws  and  knew  them

Truths  undefiled ;
Mine,  the  fairest  hands,  took  freedom  first  into  them,

A  weanling  child.  ^

Let  US  now  put  together  the  view  of  Nature  and  of
Life  which  is  presented  to  us  by  the  Golden  Verses^  with
a  view  to  considering  its  fitness  for  cosmic  emotion.  We
are  taught  therein  to  look  upon  Nature  as  a  divine
Order  or  Cosmos,  acting  uniformly  in  all  of  its  diverse
parts ;  which  order,  by  means  of  its  uniformity,  is  con-
tinually educating  us  and  teaching  us  to  act  rightly.
The  ideal  character,  that  which  is  best  fitted  to  receive
the  teaching  of  Nature,  is  one  which  has  Conscience  for
its  motive  power  and  Eeason  for  its  guide.  The  main
point  to  be  observed  is  that  the  two  kinds  of  cosmic
emotion  run  together  and  become  one.  The  macrocosm
is  viewed  only  in  relation  to  human  action  ;  nature  is
presented  to  the  emotions  as  the  guide  and  teacher  of

^  Swinburne,  Songs  before  Sunrise.


268  COSMIC  EMOTION.

humanity.  And  the  microcosm  is  viewed  only  as
tending  to  complete  correspondence  with  the  external ;
human  conduct  is  a  subject  for  reverence  only  in  so  far
as  it  is  consonant  to  the  demiurgic  law,  in  harmony
with  the  teaching  of  divine  Nature.  This  union  of  the
two  sides  of  cosmic  emotion  belongs  to  the  essence  of
the  philosophic  life,  as  the  corresponding  intellectual
conception  is  of  the  essence  of  the  scientific  view  of
things.

There  were  other  parts  of  the  Pythagorean  concep-
tion of  Nature  and  Man  which  we  cannot  at  present  so
easily  accept.  And  even  so  much  as  is  here  suggested
we  cannot  hold  as  the  Pythagoreans  held  it,  because
there  are  the  thoughts  and  the  deeds  of  two  thousand
years  between.  These  ideas  fall  in  very  well  with  the
furniture  of  our  minds ;  but  a  great  deal  of  the  furniture
is  new  since  their  time,  and  changes  their  place  and
importance.  Of  the  detailed  machinery  of  the  Pytha-
gorean creed  these  verses  say  nothing.  Of  the  sacred
fire,  the  hearth  of  the  universe,  with  sun  and  planets
and  the  earth's  double  antichthon  revolving  round  it,
the  whole  enclosed  in  a  crystal  globe  with  nothing  out-
side— of  the  '  Great  Age '  of  the  world,  after  which
everything  occurs  over  again  in  exactly  the  same  order
— of  the  mystic  numbers,  and  so  forth,  we  find  no  men-
tion in  these  verses,  and  they  do  not  lose  much  by  it,
though  on  that  account  Zeller  calls  them  '  colourless.'
But  a  remembrance  of  these  doctrines  will  help  us  to
appreciate  the  change  that  has  come  over  our  view  of
the  world.

First,  then,  the  cosmos  that  we  have  to  do  with  is
no   longer   a   definite   whole   including  absolutely   all


COSMIC  EMOTION.  269

existence.  The  old  cosmos  had  a  boundary  in  space,  a
finite  extent  in  time ;  for  the  Great  Age  might  be  regarded
as  a  circle,  on  which  you  return  to  the  same  point  after
going  once  round.  Beyond  the  crystal  sphere  of  the
fixed  stars  was  nothing  ;  outside  that  circle  of  time  no
history.  But  now  the  real  universe  extends  at  least  far
beyond  the  cosmos,  the  order  that  we  actually  know  of.
The  sum  total  of  our  experience  and  of  the  inferences
that  can  fairly  be  drawn  from  it  is  only,  after  all,  a  part
of  something  larger.  So  sings  one  whom  great  poets
revere  as  a  poet,  but  to  whom  writers  of  excellent  prose,
and  even  of  leading  articles,  refuse  the  name  : —

I  open  my  scuttle  at  night  and  see  the  far-sprinkled  systems,
And  all  I  see,  multiplied  as  high  as  I  can  cipher,  edge  but  the  rim
of  the  farther  systems.

Wider  and  wider  they  spread,  expanding  always  expanding,
Outward  and  outward,  and  for  ever  outward.

There  is  no  stoppage,  and  never  can  be  stoppage  ;

If  I,  you,  and  the  worlds,  and  all  beneath  or  upon  their  surfaces,
were  this  moment  reduced  back  to  a  pallid  float,  it  would  not  avail  in
the  long  run ;

We  should  surely  bring  up  again  where  we  now  stand,

And  as  surely  go  as  much  farther — and  then  farther  and  farther.

A  few  quadrillions  of  eras,  a  few  octillions  of  cubic  leagues,  do  not
hazard  the  span,  or  make  it  impatient ;

They  are  but  parts — anything  is  but  a  part.

See  ever  so  far,  there  is  limitless  space  outside  of  that ;

Count  ever  so  much,  there  is  limitless  time  around  that.^

Whatever  conception,  then,  we  can  form  of  the  ex-
ternal cosmos  must  be  regarded  as  only  provisional  and
not  final,  as  waiting  revision  when  we  shall  have  pushed
the  bounds  of  our  knowledge  further  away  into  time
and  space.     It  must  always,  therefore,  have  a  character

^  Whitman^  Leaves  of  Grass,


270  COSMIC  EMOTION.

of  incompleteness  about  it,  a  want,  a  stretching  out  for
something  better  to  come,  the  expectation  of  a  further
lesson  from  the  universal  teacher.  Experience.  And
this  not  only  by  way  of  extension  of  space  and  time,
but  by  increase  of  our  knowledge  even  about  this  part
that  we  know  of.  Our  conception  of  the  universe  is  for
us,  and  not  for  our  children,  any  more  than  it  was  for
our  fathers.

But  again,  this  incompleteness  does  not  belong  to  our
conception  of  the  external  cosmos  alone,  but  to  that  of
the  internal  cosmos  also.  Human  nature  is  fluent,  it  is
constantly  though  slowly  changing,  and  the  universe
of  human  action  is  changing  also.  Whatever  general
conception  we  may  form  of  good  actions  and  bad  ones,
we  must  regard  it  as  quite  vahd  only  for  ourselves ;  the
next  generation  will  have  a  slightly  modified  form  of  it,
but  not  the  same  thing.  The  Kantian  universality  is  no
longer  possible.  No  maxim  can  be  vaUd  at  all  times
and  places  for  all  rational  beings  ;  a  maxim  vaHd  for  us
can  only  be  valid  for  such  portions  of  the  human  race
as  are  practically  identical  with  ourselves.

Here  then  we  have  two  limitations  to  keep  in  mind
when  we  form  our  cosmic  conceptions.  On  both  sides
they  are  provisional ;  instead  of  picturing  to  ourselves
a  universe,  we  represent  only  a  changing  part ;  instead
of  contemplating  an  eternal  order,  and  absolute  right,
we  find  only  a  changing  property  of  a  shifting  organ-
ism.

Are  we  then  to  be  disappointed  ?  I  think  not ;  for
if  we  consider  these  limitations  a  little  more  closely,  we
shall  perceive  an  advantage  in  each  of  them.

First,  of  the  external  cosmos.     Our  conception  is


COSMIC  EMOTION.  271

limited  to  a  part  of  things.  But  to  what  part  ?  Why,
precisely  to  the  part  that  concerns  us.  The  universe  we
have  to  consider  is  the  whole  of  that  knowledge  which  can
rightly  influence  human  action.  For,  wherever  there  is
a  question  of  guiding  human  action,  there  is  a  possibihty
of  profiting  by  experience  on  the  assumption  that  nature
is  uniform  ;  that  is,  there  is  room  for  the  application  of
science.  All  practical  questions,  therefore,  are  within
the  domain  of  science.  And  we  may  show  conversely
that  all  questions  in  the  domain  of  science,  all  questions,
that  is,  which  have  a  real  intelhgible  meaning,  and
which  may  be  answered  either  now  or  at  some  future
time  by  inferences  founded  on  the  uniformity  of  nature,
are  practical  questions  in  a  very  real  and  important
sense.  For  the  interrogation  of  nature,  without  and
within  him,  is  a  most  monientous  part  of  the  work  of
man  on  this  earth,  seeing  how  all  his  progress  has  de-
pended upon  conscious  or  unconscious  labour  at  this
task.  And  although  the  end  of  all  knowledge  is  action,
and  it  is  only  for  the  sake  of  action  that  knowledge  is
sought  by  the  human  race,  yet,  in  order  that  it  may  be
gained  in  sufficient  breadth  and  depth,  it  is  necessary
that  the  individual  should  seek  knowledge  for  its  own
sake.  The  seeking  of  knowledge  for  its  own  sake  is  a
practical  pursuit  of  incalculable  value  to  humanity.  The
pretensions  of  those  who  would  presume  to  clothe  genius
in  a  strait-waistcoat,  who  would  forbid  it  to  attempt
this  task  because  Descartes  failed  in  it,  and  that  one
because  Comte  knew  nothing  about  it,  would  be  fatally
mischievous  if  they  could  be  seriously  considered  by
those  whom  they  might  affect.  No  good  work  in
science  has  ever  been  done  under  such  conditions ;  and


272  COSMIC  EMOTION.

no  good  worker  can  fail  to  see  the  utter  futility  and
short-sightedness  of  those  who  advocate  them.  For
there  is  no  field  of  inquiry,  however  apparently  insigni-
ficant, that  does  not  teach  the  worker  in  it  to  distrust
his  own  powers  of  prevision  as  to  what  he  is  likely  to
find ;  to  expect  the  unexpected  ;  to  be  suspicious  of  his
own  accuracy  if  everything  conies  out  quite  as  it '  ought
to ; '  but  not  to  hazard  the  shadow  of  a  guess  about  the
degree  of  '  utility '  that  may  result  from  his  investiga-
tions. Man's  creative  energy  may  be  checked  and
hindered,  or  perverted  fi:om  the  truth ;  but  it  is  not  to
be  regulated  by  a  pedantic  schoolmaster  who  thought
he  could  whip  the  centuries  with  his  birch  broom.

The  cosmos,  then,  which  science  now  presents  to  our
minds,  is  only  a  part  of  something  larger  which  includes
it.  But  at  the  same  time  it  is  the  whole  of  what
concerns  us,  and  no  more  than  what  concerns  us.
Wherever  human  knowledge  establishes  itself,  that
point  becomes  thenceforward  a  centre  of  practical  human
interest.  It,  and  whatever  vahd  inference  can  be  con-
nected with  it,  is  the  business  of  all  mankind.

So  also,  if  we  consider  the  limitation  imposed  on  our
idea  of  the  internal  cosmos  by  the  changing  character
of  human  nature,  we  shall  find  that  we  have  gained
more  than  we  have  lost  by  it.  It  is  true  that  we  can  no
longer  think  of  conscience  and  reason  as  testifying  to  us
of  things  eternal  and  immutable.  Human  nature  is  no
longer  there,  a  definite  thing  from  age  to  age,  persisting
unaltered  through  the  vicissitudes  of  cities  and  peoples.
Very  nearly  constant  it  is,  practically  constant  for  so
many  centuries  ;  but  not  constant  through  that  range  of
time  which  it  practically  concerns  us  to  know  about  and


COSMIC  EMOTION.  273

to  ponder.  But,  on  the  other  side,  what  a  flood  of  hght
is  let  in  by  this  very  fact,  not  only  on  human  nature,
but  on  the  whole  world  !  It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate
the  efiect  of  the  doctrine  of  evolution  on  our  conception
of  man  and  of  nature.  Suppose  all  moving  things  to  be
suddenly  stopped  at  some  instant,  and  that  we  could  be
brought  fresh,  without  any  previous  knowledge,  to  look
at  this  petrified  scene.  The  spectacle  would  be  in-
ensely  absurd.  Crowds  of  people  would  be  senselessly
standing  on  one  leg  in  the  street,  looking  at  one  another's
backs  ;  others  would  be  wasting  their  time  by  sitting  in
a  train  in  a  place  difficult  to  get  at,  nearly  all  with  their
mouths  open  and  their  bodies  in  some  contorted,  unrest-
ful  posture.  Clocks  would  stand  with  their  pendulums
on  one  side.  Everthing  would  be  disorderly,  conflicting,
in  its  wrong  place.  But  once  remember  that  the  world
is  in  motion,  is  going  somewhere,  and  everything  will  be
accounted  for  and  found  just  as  it  should  be.  Just  so
great  a  change  of  view,  just  so  complete  an  explanation,
is  given  to  us  when  we  recognize  that  the  nature  of  man
and  beast  and  of  all  the  world  is  chamging,  is  going
somewhere.  The  silly  maladaptations  in  organic  nature
are  seen  to  be  steps  towards  the  improvement  or  dis-
carding of  imperfect  organs.  The  baneful  strife  which
lurketh  inborn  in  us^  and  goeth  on  the  way  with  us  to  hurt
us^  is  found  to  be  the  reUc  of  a  time  of  savage  or  even
lower  condition.

It  is  probable  that  the  doctrine  of  evolution  fills  a
somewhat  larger  space  in  our  attention  than  belongs  to
its  ultimate  influence.  In  the  next  century,  perhaps,
men  will  not  think  so  much  about  it ;  they  wiU  be
paying  a  new  attention  to  some  new  thing.     But  it  will

VOL.  II.  T


274  COSMIC  EMOTIOX.

have  seized  upon  their  minds,  and  will  dominate  all
their  thoughts  to  an  extent  that  we  cannot  as  yet  con-
ceive. When  the  sun  is  rising  we  pay  special  attention
to  him  and  admire  his  glories  ;  but  when  he  is  well
risen  we  forget  him,  because  we  are  busy  walking  about
in  his  hght.

Meanwhile,  the  doctrine  of  evolution  may  be  made
to  compensate  us  for  the  loss  of  the  immutable  and
eternal  verities  by  supplying  us  with  a  general  concep-
tion of  a  good  action,  in  a  wider  sense  than  the  ethical
one.

If  I  have  evolved  myself  out  of  something  Uke  an
amphioxus,  it  is  clear  to  me  that  I  have  become  better
by  the  change ;  I  have  risen  in  the  organic  scale ;  I
have  become  more  organic.  Of  all  the  changes  that  I
have  undergone,  the  greater  part  must  have  been
changes  in  the  organic  direction  ;  some  in  the  opposite
direction,  some  perhaps  neutral.  But  if  I  could  only
find  out  which,  I  should  say  that  those  changes  which
have  tended  in  the  direction  of  greater  organization
were  good,  and  those  which  tended  in  the  opposite
direction  bad.  Here  there  is  no  room  for  proof;  the
words  *  good  *  and  '  bad  '  belong  to  the  practical  reason,
and  if  they  are  defined,  it  is  by  pure  choice.  I  choose
that  definition  of  them  which  must  on  the  whole  cause
those  people  who  act  upon  it  to  be  selected  for  survival.
The  good  action,  then,  is  a  mode  of  action  which
distinguishes  organic  from  inorganic  things,  and  which
makes  an  organic  thing  more  organic,  or  raises  it  in  the
scale.  I  shall  try  presently  to  determine  more  pre-
cisely what  is  the  nature  of  this  action ;  we  must  now
merely  remember  that  my  actions  are  to  be  regarded  as


COSMIC  EMOTION.  275

good  or  bad  according  as  they  tend  to  improve  me  as
an  organism,  to  make  me  move  further  away  from  those
intermediate  forms  through  which  my  race  has  passed,
or  to  make  me  retrace  these  upward  steps  and  go  down
again.  Here  we  have  our  general  principle  for  the
internal  cosmos,  the  world  of  our  own  actions.

What  now  is  our  principle  for  the  external  cosmos  ?
We  consider  here  again  not  a  statical  thing,  but  a  vast
series  of  events.  We  want  to  contemplate  not  the
nature  of  the  external  universe  as  it  now  is,  but  the
history  of  its  changes  ;  not  a  perpetual  cycle  of  similar
events,  with  nothing  new  under  the  sun,  but  a  drama,
whose  beginning  is  different  from  its  middle,  and  the
middle  from  the  end.  For  practical  purposes,  which  are
what  concern  us,  the  solar  system  is  a  quite  sufficient
cosmos.  We  have  certainly  a  history  of  it,  furnished
to  us  by  the  nebular  hypothesis  ;  and  the  truth  of
this  hypothesis  is  a  matter  of  practical  interest,  be-
cause the  failure  of  the  inferences  on  which  it  is
founded  would  modify  our  actions  very  considerably.
Still  the  great  use  is  to  show  that  the  life  upon  the
earth  must  have  been  evolved  from  inorganic  matter ;
for  the  evolution  of  life  is  that  part  of  the  history  of  the
cosmos  which  directly  concerns  us.  Now  here  we  have
the  enormous  series  of  events  which  bridges  over  the
gulf  between  the  smallest  piece  of  colloid  matter  and
the  human  organism ;  this  is  our  external  cosmos,
Must  we  leave  it  as  a  series  of  events  ?  or  can  we  find  a
general  principle  by  which  the  series  shall  be  represented
as  a  single  event  constantly  going  on  ?  Clearly  we  can,
for  the  single  event  is  a  mode  of  action  which  distin-
guishes organic  from  inorganic  things,  and  which  make^

T  2


270  COSMIC  EMOTION.

organic  things  more  organic.  We  may  regard  this
mode  of  action  as  the  generating  principle  which  has
produced  all  the  life  upon  the  earth.

We  arrive  thus  at  a  common  principle,  which  at
once  distinguishes  good  actions  from  bad  in  the  internal
world,  and  which  has  created  the  external  world,  so  far
as  it  is  hving.  This  principle  is,  then,  a  fit  object  for
cosmic  emotion  if  we  can  only  get  rid  of  the  vagueness
of  its  definition.  And  it  has  this  great  advantage,  that
it  does  not  need  to  be  personified  for  poetical  purposes.
For  we  may  regard  the  result  of  this  mode  of  action,  ex-
tended over  a  great  length  of  time,  as  in  some  way  an
embodiment  of  the  action  itself.  In  this  way  the  human
race  embodies  in  itself  all  the  ages  of  organic  action
that  have  gone  to  its  evolution.  The  nature  of  organic
action,  then,  is  to  personify  itself,  and  it  has  personified
itself  most  in  the  human  race.

But  before  we  go  further  two  things  must  be
remarked.  First,  the  very  great  influence  of  life  in
modifying  the  surface  of  the  earth,  so  great  as  in  many
cases  to  be  comparable  to  the  effects  of  far  ruder
changes.  Thus  we  have  rocks  composed  entirely  of
organic  remains,  and  chmate  changed  by  the  presence
or  absence  of  forests.  Secondly,  although  we  have  re-
stricted our  cosmos  to  the  earth  in  space,  and  to  the
history  of  life  upon  it  in  time,  there  is  no  necessity  to
maintain  the  restriction.  For  we  must  suppose  that
organic  action  will  always  take  place  when  the  elements
which  are  capable  of  it  are  present  under  the  requisite
physical  conditions  of  temperature,  light,  and  environ-
ment. It  is  therefore  in  the  last  degree  improbable
that  it  is  confined  to  our  own  planet.


COSMIC  EMOTION.  277

In  this  principle,  therefore,  we  must  recognize
the  mother  of  hfe,  and  especially  of  human  life ;
powerful  enough  to  subdue  the  elements,  and  yet
always  working  gently  against  them  ;  biding  her  time
in  the  whole  expanse  of  heaven,  to  make  the  highest
cosmos  out  of  inorganic  chaos  ;  the  actor,  not  of  all  the
actions  of  hving  things,  but  only  of  the  good  actions ;
for  a  bad  action  is  one  by  which  the  organism  tends  to
become  less  organic,  and  acts  for  the  time  as  if  inorganic.

To  this  mother  of  hfe,  personifying  herself  in  the
good  works  of  humanity,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  may
fitly  address  a  splendid  hymn  of  Mr.  Swinburne's,  whose
meaning  if  I  mar  or  mistake  by  such  application,  let  the
innocency  of  my  intent  plead  for  pardon  with  one  into
whose  work  it  is  impossible  to  read  more  or  more
fruitful  meaning  than  he  meant  in  the  writing  of  it : —

Mother  of  man's  time-travelling  genemtions,
Breath  of  his  nostrils,  heart-blood  of  his  heart,

God  above  all  Gods  worshipped  of  all  nations,
Light  above  light,  law  beyond  law,  thou  art.

Thy  face  is  as  a  sword  smiting  in  sunder

Shadows  and  chains  and  dreams  and  iron  things ;

The  sea  is  dumb  before  thy  face,  the  thunder
Silent,  the  skies  are  narrower  than  thy  wings.

All  old  grey  histories  hiding  thy  clear  features,
O  secret  spirit  and  sovereign,  all  men's  tales,

Creeds  woven  of  men  thy  children  and  thy  creatures,
They  have  woven  for  vestures  of  thee  and  for  veils.

Thine  hands,  without  election  or  exemption,
Feed  all  men  fainting  from  false  peace  or  strife,

O  thou,  the  resurrection  and  redemption,
The  godhead  and  the  manhood  and  the  life.^

*  S<mgs  before  Sunrise*


278  COSMIC  EMOTION.

Still  our  conception  is  very  vague.  We  have  only
said  '  good  action  has  created  the  life  of  the  world,  and
in  so  doing  has  personified  itself  as  humanity ;  so  we
call  it  the  mother  of  Hfe  and  of  man.'  And  we  have
defined  good  action  to  be  that  which  makes  an  organism
more  organic.  We  want,  therefore,  to  know  something
more  definite  about  the  kind  of  action  which  makes  an
organism  more  organic.

This  we  can  find,  and  of  a  nature  suitable  for  cosmic
emotion,  by  paying  attention  to  the  difference  between
molar  and  molecular  movement.  We  know  that  the
particles  even  of  bodies  which  appear  to  be  at  rest  are
really  in  a  state  of  very  rapid  agitation,  called  mole-
cular motion,  and  that  heat  and  nerve-discharge  are
cases  of  such  motion.  But  molar  motion  is  the  move-
ment in  one  piece  of  masses  large  enough  to  be  seen.

Now  the  pecuharity  of  hving  matter  is  that  it  is
capable  of  combining  together  molecular  motions,
which  are  invisible,  into  molar  motions,  which  can  be
seen.  It  therefore  appears  to  have  the  property  of
moving  spontaneously,  without  help  from  anything  else.
So  it  can  for  a  little  while ;  but  it  is  then  obhged  to
take  molecular  motion  firom  the  surrounding  things  if
it  is  to  go  on  moving.  So  that  there  is  no  real  spon-
taneity in  the  case.  But  still  its  changes  of  shape,  due
to  aggregation  of  molecular  motion,  may  fairly  be  called
action  from  within^  because  the  energy  of  the  motion  is
supplied  by  the  substance  itself,  and  not  by  any  external
thing.  If  we  suppose  the  same  thing  to  be  true  for  a
complex  organism  that  is  true  for  a  small  speck  of
living  matter — that  those  changes  in  it  which  are
directly  initiated  by  the  living  part  of  the  organism  are


COSMIC  EMOTION.  279

the  ones  which  distinguish  it  from  inorganic  things,  and
tend  to  make  it  more  organic — then  we  shall  have  here
the  nearer  definition  of  organic  action.  It  is  probable
that  the  definition  as  I  have  stated  it  is  rather  too
precise — that  the  nature  of  the  action,  in  fact,  varies
with  circumstances  in  the  complex  organism,  but  is
always  nearly  as  stated.

Let  us  consider  what  this  means  from  the  internal
point  of  view.  When  I  act  from  within,  or  in  an  or-
ganic manner,  what  seems  to  me  to  happen  ?  I  must
appear  to  be  perfectly  free,  for,  if  I  did  not,  I  must  be
made  to  act  by  something  outside  of  me.  '  We  think
ourselves  free,'  says  Spinoza,  '  being  conscious  of  our
actions,  and  not  of  the  causes  which  determine  them.'
But  we  have  seen  reason  to  believe  that  although  there  is
no  physical  spontaneity,  yet  the  energy  for  such  an  action
is  taken  out  of  myself — i,e,  out  of  the  living  matter  in
my  body.  As,  therefore,  the  immediate  origin  of  my
action  is  in  myself,  I  really  am  free  in  the  only  useful
sense  of  the  word.  '  Freedom  is  such  a  property  of  the
will,'  says  Kant,  '  as  enables  living  agents  to  originate
events  independently  of  foreign  determining  causes.'

The  character  of  an  organic  action,  then,  is  freedom
— that  is  to  say,  action  from  within.  The  action  which
has  its  immediate  antecedents  within  the  organism  has  a
tendency,  in  so  far  as  it  alters  the  organism,  to  make  it
more  organic,  or  to  raise  it  in  the  scale.  The  action
which  is  determined  by  foreign  causes  is  one  in  regard
to  which  the  organism  acts  as  if  inorganic,  and  in  so  far
as  the  action  tends  to  alter  it,  it  tends  also  to  lower  it
in  the  scale.

It  is  important  to  remember  that  only  a  part  of  the


280  COSMIC  EMOTION.

body  of  a  complex  organism  is  actually  living  matter.
This  living  matter  carries  about  a  quantity  of  formed  or
dead  stuff;  as  Epictetus  says,  ^^tv^dpiov  ci  fida-ratpv
veKpov — '  a  little  soul  for  a  little  bears  up  this  corpse
which  is  man/  ^  Only  actions  originating  in  the  hving
part  of  the  organism  are  to  be  regarded  as  actions  from
within  ;  the  dead  part  is  for  our  purposes  a  portion  of
the  external  world.  And  so,  from  the  internal  point  of
view,  there  are  rudiments  and  survivals  in  the  mind
which  are  to  be  excluded  from  that  me^  whose  free
action  tends  to  progress ;  that  baneful  strife  which
lurheth  inborn  in  us  is  the  foe  of  freedom — this  let  not  a
man  stir  up^  but  avoid  and  flee.

The  way  in  which-  freedom,  or  action  from  within,
has  effected  the  evolution  of  organisms,  is  clearly  brought
out  by  the  theory  of  Natural  Selection.  For  the  im-
provement of  a  breed  depends  upon  the  selection  of
sports — that  is  to  say,  of  modifications  due  to  the  over-
flowing energy  of  the  organism,  which  happen  to  be
useful  to  it  in  its  special  circumstances.  Modifications
may  take  place  by  direct  pressure  of  external  circum-
stances ;  the  whole  organism  or  any  organ  may  lose  in
size  and  strength  from  failure  of  the  proper  food,  but
such  modifications  are  in  the  downward,  not  in  the  up-
ward, direction.  Indirectly  external  circumstances  may
of  course  produce  upward  changes  ;  thus  the  drying  up
of  axolotl  ponds  caused  the  survival  of  individuals
which  had  '  sported '  in  the  direction  of  lungs.    But  the

*  Swinburne,  Poems  and  Ballads,  I  am  aware  of  the  difficulties  which
beset  Dr.  Beale's  theory  of  germinal  matter,  as  they  are  stated  by  Mr.  G.  H,
Lewes ;  but  however  hard  it  may  be  to  decide  what  is  living  matter,  and
what  is  formed  stuff,  the  distinction  appears  to  me  to  be  a  real  one,  to  the
extent,  at  least,  of  the  use  here  made  of  it.


COSMIC  EMOTION.  281

immediate  cause  of  change  in  the  direction  of  higher
organization  is  always  the  internal  and  quasi-spontane-
ous action  of  the  organism.

Freedom  we  call  it,  for  holier

Name  of  the  soul  there  is  none ;
Surelier  it  labours,  if  slowlier,

Than  the  metres  of  star  or  of  sun ;

Slowlier  than  life  into  breath,

Surelier  than  time  into  death,
It  moves  till  its  labour  be  done.*

The  highest  of  organisms  is  the  social  organism.  To
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  who  has  done  so  much  for  the
whole  doctrine  of  evolution  and  for  all  that  is  connected
with  it,  we  owe  the  first  clear  and  rational  statement
of  the  analogy  between  the  individual  and  the  social
organism,  which,  indeed,  is  more  than  an  analogy,  being
in  many  respects  a  true  identity  of  process  and  structure
and  function.  Our  main  business  is  with  one  property
which  the  social  organism  has  in  common  with  the
individual — namely,  this,  that  it  aggregates  molecular
motions  into  molar  ones.  The  molecules  of  a  social
organism  are  the  individual  men,  women,  and  children
of  which  it  is  composed.  By  means  of  it,  actions  which,
as  individual,  are  insignificant,  are  massed  together  into
the  important  movements  of  a  society.  Co-operation,  or
band-worh,  is  the  life  of  it.  Thus  it  is  able  to  '  originate
events  independently  of  foreign  determining  causes,'  or
to  act  with  freedom.

Freedom  in  a  society,  then,  is  a  very  difierent  thing
from  anarchy.  It  is  the  organic  action  of  the  society  as
such  ;  the  union  of  its  elements  in  a  common  work.  As
Mr.  Spencer  points  out,  society  does  not  resemble  those

*  Swinburne,  Songs  before  Sunrise,


262  COSMIC  EMOTION.

organisms  which  are  so  highly  centralized  that  the  unity
of  the  whole  is  the  important  thing,  and  every  part  must
die  if  separated  from  the  rest,  but  rather  those  which
will  bear  separation  and  reunion,  because  although  there
is  a  certain  union  and  organization  of  the  parts  in  regard
to  one  another,  yet  the  far  more  important  fact  is  the
life  of  the  parts  separately.  The  true  health  of  society
depends  upon  the  communes,  the  villages  and  townships,
infinitely  more  than  on  the  form  and  pageantry  of  an
imperial  government.  If  in  them  there  is  band-work,
union  for  a  common  effort,  converse  in  the  working  out
of  a  common  thought,  then  the  EepubKc  ^^,  and  needs
not  to  be  made  with  hands,  though  Caesar  have  his  guns
in  every  citadel.  None  the  less  it  will  be  part  of  the
business  of  the  Kepublic,  as  she  grows  in  strength,  to
remove  him.  So  long  as  two  or  three  are  gathered  to-
gether, freedom  is  there  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  it  is
not  until  society  is  utterly  divided  into  its  elements  that
she  departs : —

Courage  yet !  my  brother  or  my  sister  !

Keep  on !     Liberty  is  to  be  subserved,  whatever  occui*s ;

That  is  nothing,  that  is  quell'd  by  one  or  two  failures,  or  any  number
of  failures,

Or  by  the  indifference  or  ingratitude  of  the  people,  or  by  any  unfaith-
fulness,

Or  the  show  of  the  tushes  of  power,  soldiers,  cannon,  penal  statutes.

Kevolt !  and  still  revolt  I  revolt .'

What  we  believe  in  waits  latent  forever  through  aU  the  continents,
and  all  the  islands  and  archipelagos  of  the  sea ;

What  we  believe  in  invites  no  one,  promises  nothing,  sits  in  calmness
and  light,  is  positive  and  composed,  knows  no  discouragement,

Waiting  patiently,  waiting  its  time.

When  liberty  goes  out  of  a  place,  it  is  not  the  first  to  go,  nor  the

second  or  third  to  go.
It  waits  for  all  the  rest  to  go — it  is  the  last.


COSMIC  EMOTION.  283

When  there  are  no  more  memories  of  heroes  and  martyrs,

And  when  all  life,  and  all  the  souls  of  men  and  women  are  discharged

from  any  part  of  the  earth,
Then  only  shall  liberty,  or  the  idea  of  liberty,  be  discharged  from  that

part  of  the  earth,
And  the  infidel  come  into  full  possession.  *

So  far  our  cosmic  conception  is  external.  Starting
with  organic  action,  as  that  which  has  affected  the
evolution  of  hfe  and  all  the  works  of  Hfe,  we  have  found
it  to  have  the  character  of  freedom,  or  action  from
within,  and  in  the  case  of  the  social  organism  we  have
seen  that  freedom  is  the  organic  action  of  society  as  such,
which  is  what  we  call  the  Eepubhc.  The  Eepubhc  is
the  visible  embodiment  and  personification  of  freedom
in  its  highest  external  type.

But  the  Eepubhc  is  itself  still  further  personified,  in
a  way  that  leads  us  back  with  new  light  to  the  concep-
tion of  the  internal  cosmos.  The  practice  of  band-work,
or  comradeship,  the  organic  action  of  society,  has  so
moulded  the  nature  of  man  as  to  create  in  it  two
specially  human  faculties— the  conscience  and  the
intellect.  Conscience  is  an  instinctive  desire  for  those
things  which  conduce  to  the  welfare  of  society ;  intellect
is  an  apparatus  for  connecting  sensation  and  action,  by
means  of  a  symbolic  representation  of  the  external  world,
framed  in  common  and  for  common  purposes  by  the
social  intercourse  of  men.  Conscience  and  reason  form
an  inner  core  in  the  human  mind,  having  an  origin  and
a  nature  distinct  from  the  merely  animal  passions  and
perceptions ;  they  constitute  the  soul  or  spirit  of  man,
the  universal  part  in  every  one  of  us.  In  these  are
bound  up,  embalmed  and  embodied,  all  the  struggles

^  Whitman,  Leaves  of  Grass,  p.  363.


284  COSMIC  EMOTION.

and  searchings  of  spirit  of  the  countless  generations
which  have  made  us  what  we  are.  Action  which  arises
out  of  that  inner  core,  which  is  prompted  by  conscience
and  guided  by  reason,  isfree  in  the  highest  sense  of  all ;
this  at  last  is  good  in  the  ethical  sense.  And  yet,  when
we  act  with  this  most  perfect  freedom,  it  may  be  said
that  it  is  not  we  that  act,  but  Man  that  worketh  in  us.
He  whose  hfe  is  habitually  governed  by  reason  and
conscience  is  the  free  and  wise  man  of  the  philosophers
of  all  ages.  The  highest  freedom,  then,  is  identical  with
the  Spirit  of  Man —

The  earth-god  Freedom,  the  lonely
Face  lightening,  the  footprint  unshod,

Kot  as  one  man  crucified  only
Nor  scourged  with  but  one  life's  rod ;

The  soul  that  is  substance  of  nations,

Reincarnate  with  fresh  generations ;
The  great  god  Man,  which  is  God.*

The  social  organism  itself  is  but  a  part  of  the  univer-
sal cosmos,  and  Uke  all  else  is  subject  to  the  uniformity
of  nature.  The  production  and  distribution  of  wealth,
the  growth  and  eflfect  of  administrative  machinery,
the  education  of  the  race,  these  are  cases  of  general
laws  which  constitute  the  science  of  sociology.  The
discovery  of  exact  laws  has  only  one  purpose — the
guidance  of  conduct  by  means  of  them.  The  laws  of
political  economy  are  as  rigid  as  those  of  gravitation ;
wealth  distributes  itself  as  surely  as  water  finds  its  level.
But  the  use  we  have  to  make  of  the  laws  of  gravitation
is  not  to  sit  down  and  cry  '  Kismet ! '  to  the  flowing
stream,  but  to  construct  irrigation  works.  And  the  use
which  the  Kepublic  must  make  of  the  laws  of  sociology

*  Swinburne,  Songs  before  Sunrise.


COSMIC  EMOTION.  285

is  to  rationally  organize  society  for  the  training  of  the
best  citizens.  Much  patient  practice  of  comradeship  is
necessary  before  society  will  be  quaHfied  to  organize
itself  in  accordance  with  reason.  But  those  who  can
read  the  signs  of  the  times  read  in  them  that  the  king-
dom of  Man  is  at  hand.


286


VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEAGHim  OF  SCIENCE.'

The  jubilee  meeting  of  German  naturaKsts  and  phy-
sicians at  Munich  last  year  (1877)  was  marked  by  an
incident  which  has  deservedly  attracted  attention  in  this
country.  Addresses  were  delivered  to  the  Association,
among  others,  by  three  very  eminent  men,  and,  as  was
natural  on  such  an  occasion,  each  of  them  took  the  form
of  a  review  of  the  situation  of  science  at  this  moment.
Hackel,  of  Jena,  led  the  way  by  a  discourse  on  the  pre-
sent position  of  the  evolution  theory  ;  on  the  nature  of
the  evidence  for  various  parts  of  it ;  the  bearing  of  it
upon  mental  science  or  psychology,  upon  education,  and
upon  morals.  He  was  followed  by  NageH,  of  Munich,
*  On  the  Limits  of  Natural  Knowledge,'  who  pointed  out
that  we  have  a  limited  number  of  senses,  and  that  we
cannot  deal  with  things  which  are  too  large,  or  too  small,
or  too  far  away,  or  with  events  which  happened  too
long  ago ;  but  that  if  we  will  be  satisfied  with  such
kind  of  knowledge  as  we  can  get,  we  do  really  know
something,  and  may  come  to  know  a  great  deal  more.

But  the  words  most  Kstened  to  and  most  repeated
were  undoubtedly  those  of  Virchow,  of  Berlin,  '  On  the
liberty  of  Science  in  the  Modern  State.'  He  recalled
the  early  days  of  the  Association,  when  it  had  to  meet
in  secret  for  fear  of  the  authorities  ;  and  he  warned  his

'  Nineteenth  Century,  April  1878.


VIROHaW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  287

colleagues  that  their  present  liberty  was  not  a  secure
possession,  that  a  reaction  was  possible,  and  that  they
should  endeavour  to  make  sure  of  the  ground  by  a  wise
moderation,  by  a  putting  forward  of  those  things  which
are  established  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  rather  than  of
individual  opinions.  He  divided  scientific  doctrines
into  those  which  are  actually  proved  and  perfectly  de-
termined, which  we  may  give  out  as  real  science  in  the
strictest  sense  of  the  word  ;  and  those  which  are  still  to
be  proved,  but  which,  in  the  meantime,  may  be  taught
with  a  certain  amount  of  probabihty,  in  order  to  fill  up
gaps  in  our  knowledge.  Doctrines  of  the  former  class
must  be  completely  admitted  into  the  scientific  treasure
of  the  nation,  and  must  become  part  of  the  nation  itself ;
they  must  modify  the  whole  method  of  thinking.  For
an  example  of  such  a  doctrine  he  took  the  great  in-
crease in  our  knowledge  of  the  eye  and  its  working
which  has  come  to  us  in  recent  times,  and  the  doctrine
of  perception  founded  upon  it.  Things  so  well  known
as  this,  he  said,  must  be  taught  to  children  in  the
schools.  '  If  the  theory  of  descent  is  as  certain  as  Pro-
fessor H'ackel  thinks  it  is,  then  we  must  demand  its  ad-
mission into  the  school,  and  this  demand  is  a  necessary
one.'  And  this,  even  although  there  is  danger  of  an
alliance  between  socialism  and  the  doctrine  of  evolu-
tion.

But,  he  went  on  to  say,  there  are  parts  of  the  evo-
lution theory  which  are  not  yet  estabhshed  scientific
doctrines  in  the  sense  that  they  ought  to  be  taught  dog-
matically in  schools.  Of  these  he  specially  named  two  :
the  spontaneous  generation  of  living  matter  out  of  inor-
ganic bodies,  without  the  presence  of  previously  hving


288  VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

matter  ;  and  the  descent  of  man  from  some  non-human
vertebrate  animal.  These,  he  said,  are  problems  ;  we
may  think  it  ever  so  probable  that  living  matter  has
been  formed  out  of  non-Hving  matter,  and  that  man  has
descended  from  an  ape-Uke  ancestor ;  we  may  fully
expect  that  evidence  will  shortly  be  forthcoming  to
establish  these  statements ;  but  meanwhile  we  must  not
teach  them  as  known  and  established  scientific  facts.
We  ought  to  say,  '  Do  not  take  this  for  established  truth,
be  prepared  to  find  that  it  is  otherwise  ;  only  for  the
moment  we  are  of  opinion  that  it  may  be  true.'

Th^re  is  something,  I  think,  very  natural  and  very
charming  in  this  scene.  The  young  apostle  is  full  of
faith  and  hope,  he  has  fought  his  way,  undaunted  by
httle  stumbles  and  disappointments,  through  great  mo-
rasses of  difficulty,  and  always  he  has  seen  his  gospel
steadily  marching  on  to  its  triumphant  subjugation  of
the  ideal  world  ;  and  before  this  gospel  accordingly  he
summons  the  practical  world  to  bow  down.  '  Not  so
fast,'  says  the  veteran,  who,  in  his  time,  indeed,  has  been
bold  enough,  and  taken  sober  men's  breath  away  ;  but
who  now  marches  with  careful  steps,  and  is  conscious  of
his  balance.  '  Don't  be  quite  so  sure  about  it ;  you  will
turn  everything  upside  down.'  One  is  glad  that  on  a
great  occasion  both  sides  had  their  say,  and  that  the
word  of  caution  came  last,  being  prompted  by  the
word  of  courage ;  and  one  hopes  that  on  all  similar  oc-
casions there  may  be  courage  enough  to  justify  a  like
word  of  caution.

It  is  also  very  natural  that  this  speech  should  have
been  a  source  of  great  rehef  and  comfort  to  many  who
did  not  want  to  beheve  in  the  doctrine  of  descent,  and


VIKCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  ^89

who  feared  that,  somehow,  they  were  going  to  be  made
to  beheve  in  it.  It  seemed  to  them,  in  Dr.  Tyndall's
words,  that  '  the  world — even  the  clerical  world — had
for  the  most  part  settled  down  in  the  beUef  that  Mr.
Darwin's  book  {The  Origin  of  Species)  simply  reflects
the  truth  of  nature ; '  and  that,  on  the  penalty  of
appearing  somewhat  singular,  they  would  have  to  settle
down  in  the  same  behef  themselves.  But  here  is  a  very
eminent  scientific  man  who  says  he  is  not  quite  sure
about  it ;  so  the  world,  having  only  settled  down  under
the  supposed  weight  of  an  authority  which  it  is  not  yet
very  fond  of,  begins  to  unsettle  itself  again  ;  and  one
need  not  be  at  all  singular  in  saying  that  there  is  really
nothing  in  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  because  it  is  not
yet  supported  by  facts.  Indeed,  the  world  has  become
so  much  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  rule  that
you  should  not  teach  as  a  known  fact  that  which  is  not
a  known  fact,  that  we  may  almost  expect  to  hear  a
bishop  declare  from  his  cathedral  pulpit  that  the  author-
ship of  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  a  doubtful  question,  and
that  a  man  would  be  rash  who  fully  made  up  his  mind
to  ascribe  it  to  the  apostle  John.

It  may  therefore  not  seem  amis^  in  one  who  is  no
biologist,  who  is  therefore  a  layman  in  regard  to  this
question  of  organic  evolution,  if  he  should  endeavour
to  lay  to  heart  the  warnings  of  Virchow,  and  inquire
what  practical  bearing  they  have  on  the  state  of  things
in  our  own  country.  This  is  what  I  now  propose  to
do  ;  but  I  shall  confine  myself  in  the  main  to  the
question  of  school  teaching.  I  speak  as  a  householder
to  householders,  on  this  matter  of  grave  and  common
concern:  what  shall  we  have  taught  to  pur  children?

VOL,  II.  u


290       \t:rohow  on  the  teaching  of  science.

Of  all  the  questions  discussed  in  Virchow's  speech,  this
seems  to  me  the  most  practical,  and  the  most  interesting
to  us  as  a  people.

For  I  do  not  think  that  we  in  England  have  much
cause  to  fear  either  a  reaction  which  shall  stop  the
mouth  of  the  scientific  teacher,  or  a  socialist  revolution
founded  on  the  doctrine  of  descent.  It  is  true  that
there  are  some  among  us  who  seriously  dishke  '  science,'
and  who  look  with  dread  and  suspicion  on  the  teachers
of  it.  I  am  not  attaching  importance  to  the  person-
ahties  of  orthodox  polemic,  which,  having  *  no  case,'
is  compelled  to  '  abuse  the  plaintiff's  attorney.'  This
symptom  is  of  weight  only  as  a  symptom,  and  as  such
is  understood  by  the  intelhgent  pubhc.  But  there  are
men  high  in  literature,  in  statesmanship,  and  in  art,
whose  good  opinion,  founded  on  knowledge,  every  man
of  sense  must  count  desirable,  who  yet  withhold  that
good  opinion  from  the  scientific  teacher  and  the  work
that  he  is  doing.  Notwithstanding  this  fact,  I  have
no  fear  that  the  attitude  of  mind  of  these  men  will  be
intensified,  or  will  become  more  general;  because  it
seems  to  me  to  be  clearly  traceable  to  two  circum-
stances, both  of  which  are  disappearing.  I  mean  that
there  are  faults  on  both  sides,  and  that  both  faults  are
being  mended.

The  first  fault  is  on  the  side  of  the  scientific  student ;
and  yet  it  is  not  altogether  his  fault,  because  it  comes
of  the  great  change  which  is  passing  over  our  educa-
tional system.  We  have  all  been  learning  science — that
is,  organized  common  sense — at  school  for  some  cen-
turies, and  did  not  know  what  it  was.  But  of  recent
times   our   science   has   received    enormous   additions.


VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  291

partly  new  sense,  partly  fresh  organized ;  and  these
have  now  to  be  taught.  The  first  generation  of  teachers
of  the  new  science  could  naturally  not  learn  it  in  places
where  the  old  science,  which  we  called  a  hberal  educa-
tion, was  to  be  learned.  Some  of  them  learned  both,
with  much  labour,  and  searching,  and  picking  up  out  of
stray  corners  ;  but  some  went  without  a  liberal  educa-
tion altogether.  And  perhaps  a  few  of  these,  when
they  found  what  a  demand  there  was  for  them  and  how
important  they  were,  may  have  fallen  into  a  mistake,
and  taken  their  half-  or  quarter-culture  for  a  whole
culture.  Now  when  a  man  not  only  mistakes  his  half-
or  quarter-culture  for  a  whole  culture,  but  thinks  that
the  culture  which  he  does  not  possess  is  silly  and  worth-
less, then  people  who  have  received  a  liberal  education
are  apt  to  think  him  a  bore.  And  it  would  be  a  hard
matter  to  prove  them  altogether  in  the  wrong.

But  this  race,  which  bores  a  few  and  educates  the
many,  is  patiently  and  surely  exterminating  itself  As
the  new  science  makes  itself  at  home  in  the  school-house
of  the  old,  as  it  is  more  taught  and  in  a  more  civilized
manner,  the  mind  of  the  student  balances  itself,  and
recovers  its  sense  of  proportion*  Exact  observation
goes  naturally  enough  with  justice  and  simplicity  of
statement;  the  great  inductions  of  human  life  and
feeling  lighten  up  by  resemblance  and  contrast  the
great  inductions  of  physics.  Dynamics  and  Prose
Composition  have  met  together  ;  Literature  and  Biology
have  kissed  each  other.  Perhaps  not  yet,  but  the  good
time  is  coming.  And  in  that  time  every  scientific  teacher
will  have  received  such  a  many-sided  culture,  and  will
be  no  longer  a  bore  to  anybody.     Above  all,  he  will

V  2


292  VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

have  studied  that  History  of  Culture  itself,  which  is
the  great  unifier  and  justifier  and  purifier  of  all  our
teaching.

The  other  fault  is  on  the  side  of  those  who  dishke
the  new  science ;  it  is  the  fault  of  being  profoundly
ignorant  of  it.  No  pubhc  school  boy  thinks  a  man
uncanny  because  he  knows  a  great  deal  of  Greek ;
no  member  of  ParHament  imagines  that  a  careful  study  of
ancient  history,  or  even  a  revolutionary  view  about  the
niad^  might  become  a  dangerous  ally  of  sociahsm.  It
is  because  he  has  learned  a  httle  Greek  himself,  and
knows  what  it  is  like.  But  if  a  man  has  morphology  at
his  fingers'  ends,  or  is  profound  about  organic  radicles,
that  is  a  man  to  beware  of.  There  is  no  knowing  what
theories  he  does  not  secretly  foster.  Or  else  he  is  a
mere  impostor,  and  gets  a  great  reputation  for  pottering
away  at  some  silly  trifles,  being  really  no  better  than
an  official  in  the  Herald's  Office :  so  hinted  some
irreverent  young  scapegrace  in  the  prologue  to  the
Westminster  Play.  Now  it  is  clear  that  a  statesman
who  thinks  a  decimal  coinage  means  the  keeping  of
shilhng  and  pence  accounts  in  terms  of  decimal  fractions,
or  a  musician  who  really  sees  no  difference  between
Graham  Bell's  telephone  and  Wheatstone's  telephonic
concert,  may  well  be  expected  to  misjudge  exact
students,  and  their  studies,  and  their  aims.  But  in  the
good  time  coming,  when  *  there  shall  be  no  Member  of
ParHament  who  does  not  know  as  much  of  science  as  a
scholar  in  one  of  our  elementary  schools,'  when  also
benevolent  old  ladies  may  be  expected  to  know  one  end
of  a  guinea-pig  from  the  other,  all  this  will  be  changed.
The  man  of  science  will  be  no  more  uncanny  than  the


VIECHOW  ON  THE  TEACHINa  OF  SCIENCE.  293

Greek  scholar  is  now.  And  we  may  be  quite  sure  that
the  average  Englishman  is  not  going  to  see  a  man
bulhed  for  merely  knowing  a  little  more  of  what  he
himself  learned  a  httle  of  at  school.  When  he  has
learned  a  httle  science  himself,  and  knows  what  it  is
hke,  he  will  have,  it  is  true,  a  less  superstitious  reverence
for  the  authority  of  the  investigator  ;  but  then  also  he
will  regard  him  as  a  citizen,  having  as  good  a  right  to
be  trusted  and  respected,  and  to  say  his  say  upon  matters
of  common  interest,  as  anybody  else.

Such  distrust  or  dislike  of  science,  then,  as  is  to  be
found  among  us,  is  due  to  circumstances  which  are
rapidly  disappearing,  to  misunderstandings  and  imper-
fect training,  and  not  to  that  which  alarmed  our
Prussian  colleague,  a  tendency  in  the  expounders  of
scientific  doctrine  to  make  too  sure  of  things,  to  put
forward  as  known  fact  that  which  is  not  yet  known
fact,  but  only  conjecture.  Indeed,  our  own  scientific
teachers,  notably  Huxley  and  Tyndall,  have  for  years
been  impressing  upon  us  this  very  thing,  by  example
and  precept,  in  season  and  out  of  season — if  indeed  it  is
possible  for  such  warning  to  be  out  of  season.  And  to
their  testimony  I  shall  hope  to  return  presently.

As  to  that  other  fear  of  Virchow's,  that  some  cari-
cature of  the  true  doctrine  of  evolution  may  become  a
dangerous  weapon  in  the  hands  of  the  sociahst,  it  is  a
thing  somewhat  difiicult  for  us  to  understand.  We
have  a  way  of  suspecting  that  when  sociahsm  is
dangerous,  somebody  or  other  is  being  badly  treated.
We  can  conceive  that  it  should  cause  uneasiness  to  a
repressive  and  meddling  protectionist  Government.  But
in  this  country,  where  it  would  probably  mean  a  kind


294         VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACfflNG  OF  SCIENCE.

of  alliance  between  co-operative  stores  and  that  very-
respectable  institution,  the  Metropohtan  Board  of  Works,
we  cannot  undertake  to  be  much  alarmed  about  it.
Before  any  sociahst  measure  could  enter  into  practical
politics  at  all,  it  would  have  so  far  to  commend  itself
to  the  country  as  to  be  supported  by  a  considerable
number  of  votes  in  the  House  of  Commons  ;  and  a
measure  which  can  do  that  is  a  thing  not  to  be  shud-
dered at,  but  to  be  calmly  discussed.

What  really  remains  for  us  to  consider,  then,  as  of
Enghsh  interest,  is,  as  I  said  before,  that  question  about
the  teaching  of  our  children.  The  principle  laid  down
by  Virchow  I  shall  assume  as  the  basis  of  the  discussion  :
we  ought  not  to  teach  to  little  children^  as  a  known  fact^
that  which  is  not  a  known  fact.  And  the  questions  to  be
discussed  are,  in  what  respects  this  canon  is  disobeyed
or  in  danger  of  being  disobeyed  :  and  what  means  we
should  adopt  that  our  system  of  teaching  may  be  more
perfectly  conformed  to  it.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  second
question  answers  itself  in  the  process  of  considering  the
first  one.  I  shall  therefore  now  proceed  to  those  doctrines
which,  in  Virchow's  view,  are  in  danger  of  being  taught
with  an  assurance  which  is  in  advance  of  the  actual
evidence  for  them.

And  first,  let  us  consider  that  very  important
doctrine  of  the  descent  of  man  from  some  non-human
ancestor.  *  There  are,  at  this  time,  few  students  of
nature  who  are  not  of  opinion  that  man  stands  in  some
connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  animal  world,  and  that
such  a  coDnexion  may  possibly  be  discovered,  if  not  with
the  apes,  yet  perhaps,  as  Dr.  Vogt  now  supposes,  at
some  other  point.'     Notwithstanding  this,  Virchow  says :


VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  295

'  We  cannot  teach,  we  cannot  pronounce  it  to  be  a  con-
quest of  science,  that  man  descends  from  the  ape  or  any-
other  animal.'   He  bases  this  decision  upon  the  absence  of
such  evidence  from  palaeontology  in  the  case  of  man  as
is  found  in  the  case  of  the  horse.     The  horse  (asses  and
zebras  being  included  under  this  name)  is  a  one-toed
beast,  thereby  difiering  from  all  other  mammals ;  but,
as  he  has  many  points  showing  relationship  with  them,
it  is  probable  that  he  is  descended  from  a  five-toed
ancestor.     The  problem  is  to  find  this  ancestor.    There
is  no  trace  of  him  in  the  quaternary  strata.     If  the
naturalist  were  confined  to  the  evidence  of  those  strata,
and  were  not  particularly  careful  of  his  logic,  he  might
'declare  that  every  positive   advance  which  we  have
made  in  the  domain  of  prehistoric  hippology  has  actually
removed  us  further  from  the  proof  of  such  a  connexion.'
The  doctrine  of  the  descent  of  the  horse  from  a  five-toed
ancestor  would,  in  fact,  rest  upon  other  grounds  than
the  actual  discovery  of  the  ancestral  form.     But  the
ancestor  of  the  horse  has  been  found  in  the  tertiary-
strata.     He  has  three  toes  in  the  more  recent  strata,  and
four  toes  in  the  earlier ;    and,  curiously  enough,  the
complete  series  is  found  in  America,  where  there  were
no  horses  at  the  time  of  its  discovery  by  Europeans.
Now  Man,  on  the   other  hand,  is  a  complex-brained
animal,  difiering  in  this  way  and  in  some  others  from  all
other  mammals ;  but  since  in  other  respects  his  whole
structure  shows  relationship  with  them,  and  especially
with  the  apes,  it  is  probable  that  he  is  descended  from
an  ancestor  with   a    simpler    brain   and   a  structure
generally  bearing   more   resemblance  to  the  common
Simian  type.      The  problem  is  to  find  this  ancestor.


296  VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

There  is  no  trace  of  him  in  the  quaternary  strata,
because  the  quaternary  men  are  still  men  so  far  as  their
bony  structure  is  concerned,  and  we  have  no  evidence
about  the  complexity  of  their  brains,  the  pointedness  of
their. ears,  or  the  hairy  covering  of  their  bodies.  Nor,
as  yet,  has  any  decisive  discovery  been  made  of  the
remains  of  man,  or  of  any  sufficiently  man-like  animal  to
count  as  his  ancestor,  in  the  tertiary  strata.  Until  we
find  the  missing  Unk,  says  Virchow,  the  descent  of  man
from  an  ape-hke  ancestor  is  not  a  conquest  of  science.
When  we  do  find  the  missing  link,  it  will  be  a  conquest
of  science.

It  will  naturally,  I  think,  strike  anyone  who,  though
a  layman,  has  gained  a  certain  amount  of  secondhand
knowledge  of  this  subject  from  books,  that  in  this  view
of  the  two  cases  the  evidence  of  fossils  is  made  rather
too  much  of,  while  other  kinds  of  evidence  are  wholly
ignored.  It  is  a  bold  thing  to  criticise  the  judgment  of
a  pathologist  upon  general  doctrines  of  biology,  when
one  is  oneself  not  a  biologist  in  any  respect.  I  will
therefore  shelter  myself  under  authority.

'  When  we  confine  our  attention  to  any  one  form
(says  Darwin)  we  are  deprived  of  the  weighty  arguments
derived  from  the  nature  of  the  affinities  which  connect
together  whole  groups  of  organisms — their  geographical
distribution  in  past  and  present  times,  and  their  geolo-
gical succession.  The  homological  structure,  embryolo-
gical  development,  and  rudimentary  organs  of  a  species,
whether  it  be  man  or  any  other  animal,  to  which  our
attention  may  be  directed,  remain  to  be  considered  ;  but
these  great  classes  of  facts  affi:)rd,  as  it  appears  to  me,


VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  297

ample  and  conclusive  evidence  in  favour  of  the  principle
of  gradual  evolution.'  ^

For  example,  it  happens  that  the  missing  hnk
between  man  and  the  anthropoids  has  not  yet  been
found ;  but  there  is  a  Miocene  link  which  bridges  a
greater  gulf  between  two  other  families  of  apes,'^  So
that  kinds  of  evidence  may  exist  in  regard  to  an  order
of  animals  which  are  wanting  in  the  case  of  an  indivi-
dual family  of  the  order.  But  both  the  general  analogy
of  Nature,  and  the  three  great  classes  of  facts  considered
by  Darwin  in  the  special  case  of  Man,  are  apparently
reckoned  by  Virchow  as  of  no  practical  weight,  until  the
bones  of  the  missing  link  are  safe  in  the  glass  cases  of
a  geological  museum.  I  say  apparently^  because  it
would  be  insulting  a  great  man  to  suppose  that  he  really
held  such  an  opinion,  which,  moreover,  is  inconsistent
with  the  preface  to  the  English  translation  of  his  speech.
In  fact,  this  admirable  speech,  in  so  many  ways  like  that
of  a  cabinet  minister  reassuring  his  Opposition,  contains
more  than  one  passage  which,  especially  when  isolated
and  printed  in  capitals,  it  is  easy  for  the  Opposition  to
interpret  in  a  sense  more  favourable  to  its  own  views
than  that  which  the  speaker  had  in  his  mind.

Not  only,  however,  are  important  kinds  of  evidence
left  out  of  count,  but  as  it  seems  to  me — under  guidance,
as  before — the  cogency  of  the  evidence  from  fossils  is
somewhat  overrated.  We  must  be  very  careful  not  to
be  too  sure  of  these  conclusions,  lest  we  should  teach  as
established  results  of  science  what  are,  after  all,  remote
and  precarious  inferences.

*  Preface  to  Descent  of  Man,  *  Descent  of  Man,  i.  197.


298         VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

'  We  must  recollect  (says  Huxley)  that  any  human
belief,  however  broad  its  basis,  however  defensible  it
may  seem,  is,  after  all,  only  a  probable  belief,  and  that
our  widest  and  safest  generalizations  are  simply  state-
ments of  the  highest  degree  of  probabihty.  Though  we
are  quite  clear  about  the  constancy  of  the  order  of  Nature,
at  the  present  time,  and  in  the  present  state  of  things,
it  by  no  means  necessarily  follows  that  we  are  justified
in  expanding  this  generaHzation  into  the  infinite  past,
and  in  denying,  absolutely,  that  there  may  have  been  a
time  when  Nature  did  not  follow  a  fixed  order,  when
the  relations  of  cause  and  effect  were  not  definite,  and
when  extra-natural  agencies  interfered  with  the  general
course  of  Nature.'^

The  fact  is,  we  are  not  absolutely  and  theoretically
certain  that  these  old  three-toed  and  four-toed  horse-
bones  were  not  made,  on  purpose  to  deceive  us,  by  the
devil ;  himself,  according  to  Cuvier,  a  horned  and  hoofed,
and  therefore  graminivorous  animal,  with  more  than  one
toe  on  the  hinder  limb.^

This  kind  of  tangible  evidence,  which  gives  us  some-
thing definite  to  lay  hold  of,  is  peculiarly  apt  to  produce
conviction  without  being  properly  understood.  '  Is  it
really  true  that  our  horses  are  descended  from  an  ances-
tor with  three  toes,  who  lived  a  long  time  ago  ? '  '  Why,
of  course  it  is  ;  here's  his  hock/  It  is  something  like
what  occurs  in  the  stage-plays,  when  somebody  rushes
in  to  the  hero,  and  says  :  '  Take  these  papers  and  guard

^  American  Addresses,  p.  3.

'^  The  devil  is  said  to  have  appeared  to  Cuvier  and  threatened  to  eat
him.  '  Horns  ?  Hoofs  ? '  said  Cuvier.  *  Graminivorous.  Can't  eat  me.'
*  All  flesh  is  grass/  replied  the  devil,  with  that  fatal  hahit  of  misapplying
Scripture  which  haa  always  clung  to  him.


VIROHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.         299

them  carefully ;  they  prove  that  you  are  a  prince.'
The  sight  of  the  bundle  neatly  done  up  in  red  tape  pro-
duces conviction  in  a  moment.  But  we  subsequently
reflect  that  it  may  be  a  somewhat  delicate  and  difficult
matter  to  prove  by  the  aid  of  papers  that  a  man  is  him-
self or  anybody  else ;  and  that  there  are  other  methods
of  establishing  personal  identity,  which  are  not  less  vahd
in  the  courts.

I  am  not  disparaging  this  palseontological  evidence
for  the  descent  of  the  horse,  or  saying  a  word  inconsistent
with  Huxley's  conclusion  that  it  is  demonstration,  in  the
only  sense  in  which  demonstration  can  apply  to  an  his-
torical fact.     What  I  wish  to  point  out  is  that  it  con-
tains many  steps  of  reasoning  which  are  rather  difficult
to  the  apprehension  of  anyone  who  is  not  a  specialist,
and  which  involve  considerations  somewhat  abstract  and
remote  from  the  tangible  facts  on  which  they  are  founded.
The  succession  of  strata  in  time,  and  the  mode  of  their
deposition,  especially  the  relations  of  European  strata
with  American  ;    these,   and  some  other  doctrines  of
geology,  are  involved  in  the  argument.     Wow,  however
certain  they  may  be,  the  evidence  upon  which  they  are
established   is  circumstantial   and  remote.     It  is  easy
enough  to  the  geologist,  who  is  accustomed  to  it,  but  it
does  require  special  study  to  master  it  fully.     And  there
is  no  trace  whatever  of  these  difficulties  in  the  statement
'  Here's  his  hock.'     Convincing  as  that  statement  is,  it
does  not  carry  along  with  the  conviction  a  fair  estimate
of  the  evidence  on  which  it  is  based.

With  this  consideration  in  mind,  let  us  compare
again  the  evidence  for  the  descent  of  man  with  that  for
the  descent  of  the  horse.     The  generation  of  men  of


SOO         VIROHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

any  given  race  now  existing  is  descended  from  parents
who  on  the  average  differed  imperceptibly  from  them-
selves. This  has  not  gone  on  for  ever,  because  physical
evidence  proves  a  beginning  to  the  present  state  of  the
earth.  Were  the  first  men  also  the  offspring  of  parents
who  differed  imperceptibly  from  themselves,  yet  so  that
the  imperceptible  difference  came  just  where  we  draw
the  line  between  man  and  not-man  ?  Such  a  line  would
of  course  be  arbitrary,  but  we  may  suppose  a  certain
hundred  generations,  the  change  in  each  being  imper-
ceptible, but  still  such  that  we  should  call  the  first  not-
men  and  the  last  men.  This  is  the  supposition  of  a
non-human  ancestor,  as  made  by  the  evolutionist.  If
this  supposition  is  rejected,  the  first  men  may  have  ori-
ginated (1)  from  parents  differing  largely  from  them  in
structure  ;  (2)  from  non-hving  matter,  or  (3)  from  non-
existence, being  men  from  the  moment  they  began  to
be.  We  are  not  bound  to  make  any  supposition  at  all
about  the  origin  of  the  first  men ;  but  if  we  do  make
any  supposition,  it  must  be  one  of  these.

Suppose,  however,  that  we  want  not  merely  to  make
a  supposition,  but  to  infer  from  the  facts  before  us  what
actually  happened.  Then  we  must  make  the  assumption
that  there  is  some  sort  of  uniformity  in  nature.  Without
this  we  cannot  infer  at  all,  for  inference  consists  in
transferring  the  experience  which  we  have  had  under
certain  conditions  to  events  happening  under  like  con-
ditions, of  which  we  have  not  had  experience.  It  is
true  that  we  cannot  be  absolutely  sure  of  the  uniformity
of  nature,  or  that  our  present  conception  of  it  is  right  :
but  still  it  is  the  only  thing  we  have  to  go  upon.
Human  knowledge  is  never  absolutely  and  theoretically


VIROHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  301

certain,  but  a  great  deal  of  it  is  practically  certain,
which  is  all  we  want.

Now  the  production  of  man  from  non-living  matter,
or  the  coming  of  any  kind  of  matter  into  existence  out
of  nothing,  are  things  so  entirely  without  parallel  in  our
existing  experience  that  we  cannot  infer  them  unless
our  experience  entirely  changes  its  character.  If  clay
or  mould  would  form  itself  into  a  human  body  a  few
times,  we  might  learn  something  about  the  conditions
under  which  such  a  transformation  takes  place,  which
would  enable  us  to  infer  that  it  had  taken  place  before.
If  matter  would  occasionally  come  into  existence  out  of
nothing,  we  might  say  what  kind  of  matter  was  most
likely  to  do  such  a  thing  ;  whether  buttons  or  sovereigns
were  most  gifted  with  this  faculty,  and  so  on.  But  even
so,  some  time  must  elapse  before  we  could  infer,  because
our  whole  conception  of  the  order  of  things  would  be
turned  topsy-turvy.

If,  therefore,  we  are  to  infer  anything  at  all  about
the  origin  of  the  first  men,  we  must  infer  that  they
descended  from  non-human  ancestors.  What  sort  of
ancestors  these  were,  is,  in  the  present  state  of  know-
ledge, matter  of  conjecture  merely.  To  guide  this  con-
jecture, we  have  '  the  homological  structure,  embryo-
logical  development,  and  rudimentary  organs '  of  exist-
ing men.  The  evidence  of  this  kind  set  forth  by  Darwin
seems  to  point  with  very  great  probability  to  an  ancestor
more  ape-like  than  man.  Still  these  indications  are  not
so  clear  and  unmistakable  that  a  less  ape-like  ancestor,
as  Vogt  supposes,  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  unifor-
mity of  nature.  We  are  dealing  with  a  long  series  of
similar  events,  the  descent  of  each  successive  generation


S02         VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACfflNG  OF  SCIENCE.

from  one  very  like  it ;  and  though  each  event  is  an  ex-
ample of  what  occurs  habitually  in  our  experience,  yet
the  effect  of  the  whole  series  of  such  events  is  something
of  which  we  can  only  get  knowledge  by  means  of  palseon-
tological  evidence.  We  can  only,  therefore,  infer  with
a  very  moderate  amount  of  probabiUty  that  men  are
descended  from  this  sort  of  animal  or  that  sort  of  animal.
This  is  the  point  which  will  be  set  at  rest  by  the  missing
hnk.  But  I  venture  to  think  that  the  evidence  for  the
descent  of  man  from  some  non-human  ancestor  will  be
but  very  slightly  strengthened  by  that  discovery ;  and
that  it  is  now  not  perceptibly  less  cogent  than  that  for
the  descent  of  the  horse.

For  observe  that  each  aHke  depends  on  the  assump-
tion of  the  uniformity  of  Nature.  That  being  given,
the  descent  of  man  follows  from  the  originally  fluid
condition  of  the  earth,  proved  by  physical  observation
and  reasoning.  Failing  that,  the  evidence  for  the  descent
of  the  horse  vanishes  into  thin  air.  It  is  not  the  least
bit  more  likely  that  man  arose  out  of  the  dust  of  the
earth  than  that  the  devil  made  the  American  horse-
bones.  Worse  than  this,  quaternary  man  goes  too.
'  Quaternary  man,'  says  Virchow, '  is  no  longer  a  problem,
but  a  real  doctrine.'  But  how  do  you  know  that  the
devil  did  not  make  the  fossil  men  and  all  the  flint  imple-
ments ?  This  also  is  quite  as  likely  as  that  a  human
body  was  ever  formed  by  the  direct  transformation  of
non-living  matter.

*  Well  then,'  I  hear  my  anxious  friend  say,  with  a
sigh  of  relief,  '  we  need  not  beUeve  even  in  the  antiquity
of  man,  or  the  evolution  of  horses.  They  are  all  doubt-
ful together.'  My  good  soul,  no  student  of  science  wants


VIECHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.         803

you  to  believe  anything  unless  you  understand  the
nature  of  the  evidence  for  it,  and  then  only  to  the
extent  which  is  warranted  by  the  evidence.  There  is
no  occasion  for  you  to  form  an  opinion  about  these
questions.  You  need  have  no  fear  of  being  singular.
There  is  always  the  defence  of  the  ensign  who  was
asked  if  he  had  seen  Punch :  '  Well,  you  know,  the  fact
is,  I  am  not  a  reading  man.'  But  if  you  wish  to  form
an  opinion,  there  are  many  excellent  manuals  in  which
you  may  learn  the  nature  of  the  evidence  and  the  methods
of  reasoning  on  which  such  an  opinion  should  be  based.
If  your  opinion  should  be  adverse  to  the  views  held  by
other  scientific  students,  you  will  do  great  service  by
stating  your  objections.  Do  not  suppose  for  a  moment
that  we  want  you  to  believe  on  any  other  terms.

But  what  we  do  hope,  for  your  sake,  is  this  :  that
you  will  not  allow  any  dishonest  person  to  persuade  you
to  &beHeve  strongly  in  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  because
Virchow  has  admitted  that  certain  parts  of  it  are  not
yet  absolutely  proved.  It  is  one  thing  to  believe  that  a
doctrine  is  false,  and  quite  another  thing  to  admit  a
theoretical  doubt  about  it.

I  say  a  theoretical  doubt,  because  it  is  a  doubt  founded
on  the  necessary  imperfection  of  all  human  knowledge,
and  not  on  any  practical  defect  of  the  evidence.  For  a
doubt  precisely  similar  in  kind,  though  rather  greater  in
degree,  attaches  to  the  statement  that  the  Eussians  took
Plevna  last  year.  The  evidence  for  the  truth  of  this
statement  is,  I  admit,  very  strong,  and  I  suppose  no  sane
man  would  be  disposed  to  question  it  for  a  moment.
We  have  the  testimony  of  all  the  newspaper  corre-
spondents, the  course  of  subsequent  events,  the  special


S04         VIROHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

information  of  the  Government,  and  literally  a  whole
army  of  witnesses  besides.  Still,  the  Eussians  may  have
been  one  and  all  under  a  continuous  hallucination,  and
be  even  now  in  imminent  danger  from  Osman  Pasha.
Or  those  rascally  papers  may  have  laid  their  heads
together  to  deceive  the  whole  British  nation,  down  to
this  hour.  Either  of  these  suppositions  is  a  great  deal
more  Ukely  than  that  the  devil  made  the  old  horse-bones,
or  that  clay  was  transformed  into  a  human  body.  To
be  sure,  they  contradict  our  experience  of  the  uniform-
ities of  human  action  to  such  an  extent  that  we  cannot
seriously  entertain  them.  But  the  uniformities  of
human  action  are  known  with  far  less  accuracy  and
completeness  than  the  uniformities  which  characterize
the  generation  of  hving  bodies.  One  man  under  an
hallucination  is  common  enough  ;  one  newspaper  wrong
in  its  facts  is  well  within  our  experience.  So  that  we
have  something  to  go  upon  in  conceiving  a  widespread
delusion.  But  a  man  without  any  mother  at  all,  a  real
son  of  the  soil,  is  a  thing  our  experience  gives  us  no
help  towards  conceiving.

If  you  went  to  a  man  of  the  world  with  this  doubt
about  Plevna,  urging  upon  him  that  newspapers  were
often  mistaken,  and  begging  him  to  consider  it  in  buying
stocks,  he  would  either  take  you  for  a  lunatic  and
humour  your  fancy,  or  he  would  say :  '  Don't  be  so
silly ;  I  have  no  patience  with  you.'  But  the  student
of  science  is  obliged  to  have  a  great  deal  of  patience,
and  desires  to  have  more.

It  seems,  then,  that  the  difference  between  the
doctrines  of  the  descent  of  horses  and  of  the  descent  of
men  is  not  that  one  is  a  known  fact  and  the  other  a  con-


VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  305

jecture,  because  each  of  them  is  practically  as  certain
as  such  a  doctrine  can  be,  though  subject  to  the  theo-
retical doubt  which  attaches  to  all  human  knowledge.
And  yet  there  certainly  is  a  great  difference  between
the  highly  abstract  and  general  considerations  which  go
to  estabhsh  the  one,  and  the  more  concrete,  but  still
rather  difficult,  arguments  which  prove  the  other.  The
evidence  in  the  two  cases  appeals  to  two  different  classes
of  minds.  The  inference  from  a  modern  horse-bone  to
the  horse  whose  bone  it  was  is  a  tolerably  easy  one,
which  can  be  brought  home  to  many  minds.  From  a
fossil  bone  to  the  ancient  animal  is  a  more  remote  infer-
ence, which  was  at  first  made  with  considerable  diffi-
culty ;  yet  still  any  person  of  ordinary  intelligence  may
be  expected  to  grasp  it.  Then  the  geological  inferences,
from  stratified  rocks  to  the  sea  or  river  which  deposited
them,  from  successive  position  to  successive  age,  and  so
on,  may  have  their  way  smoothed  by  concrete  examples
so  as  to  carry  their  due  weight  without  much  mental
strain.  The  biological  inferences  which  connect  the
modern  horse  with  his  fossil  representative,  based  on
the  structure  of  corresponding  parts  and  the  develop-
ment of  the  colt,  involve  reasoning  of  a  rather  more
abstract  kind.  But  the  whole  of  this  evidence  may  be
fairly  presented  to  a  mind  which  is  still  incompetent  to
form  that  general  conception  of  the  uniformity  of  nature
which  makes  the  directly  inorganic  origin  of  man  a
supposition  not  to  be  seriously  entertained  for  a  moment.
To  grasp  the  idea  of  any  law  of  nature  requires  a  con-
siderable effort  of  abstraction,  and  that  the  idea  may  be
of  any  real  use  it  must  be  founded  on  acquaintance  with
the  facts  that  come  under  the  law.     The  general  con-

VOL.  II.  X


806  VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

ception  of  law  which  is  contravened  by  the  supposition
in  question  has  to  be  abstracted  from  a  knowledge  of
many  different  laws,  dynamical,  physical,  chemical,  bio-
logical. This  conception,  therefore,  implies  a  very  wide
and  many-sided  training  in  facts,  a  very  deep  and
thorough  training  in  logic,  as  its  foundation.  Much
education  is  required  to  enable  the  learner  really  to
estimate  the  evidence  for  the  many-toed  horse  ;  much
more  is  wanted  for  the  clear  comprehension  of  the
evidence  for  the  simpler-brained  man.

Here  the  education  question,  which  has  been  under-
lying our  whole  discussion,  is  brought  to  the  front.  It
is  clear  that  the  evidence  for  these  doctrines  cannot  be
taught  until  a  late  period  in  education.  What  are  we
to  do  in  the  earlier  periods  ?  Shall  we  say  :  '  Horses
had  three-toed  and  four-toed  ancestors  ;  by-and-by  you
will  learn  how  this  was  found  out.  We  think,  but  are
not  quite  sure,  that  men  had  simpler-brained  ancestors  ;
by-and-by  you  will  learn  why  we  think  so '  ?

It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  the  very  worst  thing  we
can  do ;  that  if  we  say  this,  we  shall  not  only  confuse
the  child's  head  at  the  time  with  abstractions  which  it
is  impossible  that  he  should  really  grasp,  but  we  shall
effectually  prevent  him  from  learning  them  properly  in
the  future.  The  true  rule,  I  beheve,  is  this :  Before
teaching  any  doctrine^  wait  until  the  nature  of  the  evidence
for  it  can  be  understood.

This  appears  at  first  sight  a  very  hard  thing  to  do.
Yet  it  is  really  involved  in  Pestalozzi's  great  principle
that  children  should  be  made  to  find  out  things  for
themselves.  To  make  clearer  the  reasons  for  it,  I  will
consider  a  case  which  has  the  advantage  of  not  being  at


VIRCHOW  ON  THE   TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  307

the  present  moment  in  controversy ;  the  case  of  the
teaching  of  chemistry.  Suppose  we  were  to  begin
teaching  chemistry  by  saying  that  carbon  is  made  up  of
atoms  which  have  four  hooks  or  hands  by  which  they
can  hold  on  to  other  atoms ;  that  oxygen  atoms  have
two  hooks,  and  hydrogen  atoms  one.  Consequently  we
can  hook  two  hydrogen  atoms  to  an  oxygen  atom,  and
this  makes  water ;  or  we  can  hook  two  oxygen  atoms
to  a  carbon  atom,  making  carbonic  acid ;  or  we  can
hook  four  hydrogen  atoms  to  a  carbon  atom,  making
marsh-gas.  Then  we  should  utterly  confuse  the  learner's
mind,  and  prevent  him  from  learning  chemistry  after-
wards. These  statements  belong  to  the  doctrine  of
atomicities.  Nobody  doubts  that  these  statements  re-
present, in  highly  metaphorical  language,  real  facts  of
chemical  action  ;  only  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  says  that  since
the  hydrogen  atoms  occur  always  in  even  numbers  in
compounds  made  of  carbon,  oxygen,  and  hydrogen,  we
ought  to  fasten  them  together  in  pairs,  and  call  each
pair  an  atom  with  two  hooks.  What  sort  of  thing  we
should  find,  if  we  knew  all  about  these  atoms,  answering
to  the  metaphor  of  the  hooks,  nobody  knows.  Without
a  knowledge  of  the  facts  which  they  symbolize,  these
statements  are  mere  -useless  nonsense  in  anybody's
mind.  They  are  worse  than  useless ;  for  they  make
him  think  he  knows  the  facts,  and  so  prevent  him  from
really  getting  to  know  them.

On  the  other  hand,  we  may  follow  Dr.  Williamson's
method,  show  the  children  how  to  make  carbonic  acid,
and  then  pour  it  on  a  candle  to  put  it  out ;  burn  hydro-
gen to  produce  water,  and  so  forth.  When  a  few  of
the  commoner  substances  are  real  things  to  them,  whose

X  2


308  VIECHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

properties  they  are  familiar  with,  they  may  learn  to
weigh  and  measure.  Then  the  law  of  definite  propor-
tions becomes  legitimate  teaching,  and  the  law  of  gaseous
volumes.  It  is  only  necessary  to  verify  these  in  a  few
cases,  that  the  nature  of  the  evidence  for  them  may  be
understood.

Here  arises  a  typical  question.  How,  at  this  point,
shall  we  deal  with  the  doctrine  of  molecules  ?  The
chemical  evidence  for  it  may  now  be  clearly  under-
stood ;  but  the  chemical  evidence  leaves  it  still  a  hypo-
thesis. It  becomes  quite  clear  that  the  hypothesis
explains  the  facts,  and  hnks  them  together  :  but  it  does
not  become  clear  that  no  other  hypothesis  will  explain
the  facts.  I  think  there  is  every  reason  why  it  should
be  taught  as  a  hypothesis  \  there  are  materials  in  the
pupil's  mind  for  estimating  the  value  of  the  hypothesis
in  making  the  facts  clear  to  him,  and  also  for  under-
standing why,  at  present,  it  is  only  hypothesis.  And  I
further  think  that,  at  this  stage,  no  great  harm  will  be
done  by  telhng  him  that  when  he  has  learned  enough
about  heat  and  motion,  he  will  find  the  hypothesis
turned  into  a  demonstrated  fact.

The  doctrine  of  atomicities  depends  upon  the  various
combinations  of  the  same  set  of  elements  with  one
another.  The  facts  on  which  it  is  based  may  be
described  without  introducing  any  totally  new  concep-
tions ;  the  nature  of  the  evidence  for  it  may  therefore
be  understood  by  a  pupil  at  this  stage,  without  any
further  experiment.  I  am  not,  of  course,  speaking  of
the  training  of  a  speciahst,  but  of  that  which  should
form  a  part  of  general  culture.

Of  these  two  methods  of  teaching,  .there  can  be  no


VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  309

doubt  that  the  latter  will  commend  itself  to  the  common
sense  of  every  reasonable  man.  It  insures  that  the
pupil  shall  learn  to  do  things,  that  is,  either  to  deal
practically  with  certain  objects,  or  to  use  in  thinking
certain  conceptions  ;  not  to  think  he  knows  things  of
which  he  is  really  ignorant.  And  all  the  time  it
cultivates  a  habit  of  accepting  behefs  on  the  strength  of
the  evidence  for  them,  of  preferring  true  and  honest
knowledge  to  sham  knowledge.  And  it  secures  us
against  the  teaching,  as  known  fact,  of  that  which  is  not
known  fact.  The  only  danger  in  this  respect  is  in  the
doctrine  of  molecules  ;  and  here  we  must  impress  very
carefully  on  our  teachers  that  they  should  not  miss  the
important  lesson  in  logic  and  in  scientific  procedure
involved  in  the  conception  of  ,a  hypothesis,  and  in
recognizing  the  imperfection  of  the  evidence  which
fails  to  exclude  all  other  hypotheses.

Now  let  us  go  back  from  this  chemical  doctrine  of
atomicities  to  the  doctrine  of  evolution.  In  what  form
shall  we  have  the  doctrine  of  evolution  taught  to  our
children  ?  Certainly  not  as  a  dogma  to  be  accepted  on
the  authority  of  the  teacher,  evidence  for  which  may  be
forthcoming  afterwards.  Certainly  not  at  all  until  our
children  are  competent  to  understand  the  nature  of  the
evidence  for  it.  Certainly  not,  therefore,  first  in  its
most  general  form,  and  afterwards  in  special  appHcations  ;
but  first  in  those  special  cases  where  the  evidence  is  of
the  simplest  kind,  most  closely  related  to  the  facts  ;  and
then,  as  a  consequence  of  the  comparison  of  these  cases,
the  general  doctrine  may  suggest  itself.

Nevertheless,  the  teacher,  knowing  what  is  to  come
in  the  end,  may  so  select  the  portions  of  various  subjects


310  VIKCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING   OF  SCIENCE.

which  he  teaches  at  an  earlier  stage  that  they  shall
supply  m  a  later  stage  a  means  of  understanding
and  estimating  the  evidence  on  some  question  of
evolution.  He  may,  for  instance,  pay  special  attention
to  hands  and  feet  when  he  is  teaching  biology,
because  these  parts  are  of  great  importance  in  the
questions  of  the  evolution  of  the  horse  and  of  the
relationship  of  man  with  the  apes.  Or  in  teaching
sociology,  which  is  all  about  papa  and  mama,  clothes,
houses,  shops,  policemen,  halfpence,  and  such  hke,  he
may  specially  single  out  those  points  in  which  civihzed
folk  differ  from  barbaric  and  savage  folk,  in  order  to
prepare  the  way  for  the  historic  and  pre-historic
evidence  which  proves  that  we  are  a  risen  race  and  not
a  fallen  one.  In  other  cases  the  doctrine  of  evolution
may  guide  the  teacher  in  his  methods.  So  much  as  the
psychologist  may  already  infer  with  safety  about  the
evolution  of  mind,  will  lead  him  to  found  all  abstract
notions  on  previously  formed  concrete  ones ;  to  build
his  houses  out  of  carefully  made  bricks,  instead  of  trying
to  pull  bricks  out  of  castles  in  the  air.  And  he  will
endeavour  to  give  clearness  and  solidity  to  the  dawning
moral  sense  by  leading  to  the  easy  observation  that  the
affairs  of  the  nursery  or  the  Kindergarten  cannot  go  on
unless  we  tell  the  truth  and  let  alone  other  folk's  things.
The  affairs  should  of  course  be  such  that  a  failure  in
them  would  seem  to  the  child  a  calamity  too  portentous
to  be  thought  about.

In  fact,  as  Hackel  says,  the  effect  of  the  doctrine  of
evolution  upon  teaching  and  the  methods  of  teaching
cannot  fail  to  be  enormous  and  widespread,  quite  in-


VIRCHOW   ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  311

dependently  of  the  direct  teaching  of  any  portions  of
the  doctrine  itself.

Let  us  now  go  on  to  examine,  in  respect  of  their
fitness  for  education,  certain  other  doctrines  mentioned
by  Virchow ;  taking  next  the  doctrine  of  Spontaneous
Generation.

'  If  you  ask  me  (says  Tyndall)  whether  there  exists
the  least  evidence  to  prove  that  any  form  of  life  can  be
developed  out  of  matter  independently  of  antecedent
life,  my  reply  is  that  evidence  considered  directly  con-
clusive by  many  has  been  adduced,  and  that  were  we  to
follow  a  common  example  and  accept  testimony  because
it  falls  in  with  our  belief,  we  should  eagerly  close  with
the  evidence  referred  to.  But  there  is  in  the  true  man
of  science  a  desire  stronger  than  the  wish  to  have  his
beliefs  upheld ;  namely,  the  desire  to  have  them  true.
And  this  stronger  wish  causes  him  to  reject  the  most
plausible  support,  if  he  has  reason  to  suspect  that  it  is
vitiated  by  error.  Those  to  whom  I  refer  as  having
studied  this  question,  believing  the  evidence  oiTered  in
favour  of ''  spontaneous  generation  "  to  be  thus  vitiated,
cannot  accept  it.  They  know  full  well  that  the  chemist
now  prepares  from  inorganic  matter  a  vast  array  of
substances,  which  were  some  time  ago  regarded  as  the
sole  products  of  vitality.  They  are  intimately  ac-
quainted with  the  structural  power  of  matter,  as
evidenced  in  the  phenomena  of  crystallization.  They
can  justify  scientifically  their  belief  in  its  potency,  under
the  proper  conditions,  to  produce  organisms.  But  in
reply  to  your  question,  they  will  frankly  admit  their
inability  to  point  to  any  satisfactory  experimental  proof


312  VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

that  life  can  be  developed,  save  from  demonstrable
antecedent  life.'  ^

What  is  the  justification  for  this  belief  that  non-
hving  matter  can,  under  proper  conditions,  produce
organisms  ?

There  is  a  substance  called  acetylene^  the  molecule
of  which  is  made  of  two  atoms  of  carbon,  holding
together  by  two  hooks  from  each,  and  four  atoms  of
hydrogen  each  holding  on  by  its  one  hook  to  a  carbon
atom.  It  is  made  by  driving  hydrogen  between  the
tremendously  hot  carbon  points  of  an  electric  Hght ;
directly,  therefore,  from  the  elements.  If  we  make
acetylene  pass  through  a  red-hot  tube,  we  shall  get
what  is  called  benzene.  A  molecule  of  benzene  is  a  game
of  round-the-mulberry-tree  played  by  six  carbon  atoms,
each  one  holding  by  two  hooks  to  its  right-hand  neigh-
bour and  one  to  its  left,  while  it  keeps  the  remaining  hook
for  a  hydrogen  atom.  It  is  therefore  made  of  three  mole-
cules of  acetylene,  each  of  which  has  dropped  two
hydrogen  atoms  in  order  to  join  hands  with  the  other  two
molecules.  How  does  this  molecule  of  benzene  get
made  out  of  the  three  molecules  of  acetylene  ?

There  are  two  answers.  If  anybody  likes  to  assert
that  benzene  can  never  be  made  out  of  acetylene  without
the  presence  of  pre-existing  benzene,  it  is  impossible  to
disprove  his  statement.  We  should  have  no  means  of
discovering  the  presence  of  two  or  three  molecules  of
benzene  vapour  in  the  original  hydrogen  that  we  made
the  acetylene  of.  It  is  known  that  the  first  step  is  often
a  difficulty  in  the  formation  of  chemical  compounds,  and
that  when  the  process  has  once  begun,  the  new  com-

^  Belfast  Address.


VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  313

pound  has  the  property  of  assisting  the  formation  of  its
hke.     Nobody  knows  why  this  is.

No  chemist,  however,  will,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  make
this  supposition  about  benzene.  It  is  generally  held
that  the  benzene  molecule  is  formed  by  the  collision  of
three  acetylene  molecules  in  favourable  positions.  This
collision  is  a  coincidence.  Each  molecule  meets  another
molecule  many  millions  of  times  in  a  second  ;  but  I  am
not  aware  that  anybody  has  calculated  the  number  of
times  it  meets  two  other  molecules  at  once.  We  must
know  a  great  deal  more  of  the  constitution  of  atoms
before  we  can  calculate  what  proportion  of  these  triple
colhsions  is  favourable  to  the  formation  of  a  benzene
molecule  ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  coinci-
dence takes  place  an  enormous  number  of  times  per
second  in  every  cubic  centimetre  of  the  gas,  because  a
perceptible  quantity  of  benzene  is  obtained.

There  is  another  substance  which  can  be  made  out
of  six  carbon  atoms  and  six  hydrogen  atoms,  by  fastening
them  together  in  a  different  way.  I  forget  the  name  of
it,  but  it  is  an  unstable  and  explosive  substance,  which
breaks  itself  up  on  the  shghtest  provocation.  We  do
not  find  this  mixed  up  with  the  benzene,  although  the
coincidence  which  formed  it  may  have  occurred  quite
as  often  as  that  which  formed  benzene.  It  becomes
extinct  because  it  is  not  adapted  to  the  conditions.

On  the  other  hand,  we  do  find  some  more  comply
compounds  mixed  up  with  the  benzene.  These  may
have  been  partly  made  by  collision  of  benzene  molecules
with  acetylene  molecules  :  partly  by  coincidences  of  a
more  elaborate  character,  such  as  the  collision  of  four
or  five  acetylene  molecules.     These  are  all  stable ;  that


314  VmOHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

is  to  say,  they  are  suited  to  the  conditions,  and  therefore
they  survive.

Observe,  then,  that  in  this  very  simple  case  of  the
formation  of  an  organic  body  (in  large  quantities  ben-
zene is  always  prepared  from  coal-tar)  it  is  produced
by  a  coincidence,  and  preserved  by  natural  selection

If  we  take  thirteen  carbon  atoms  instead  of  six,  and
combine  them  only  in  the  simplest  ways,  so  as  to  form
an  open  chain  with  branches,  it  has  been  calculated  by
Cayley  that  799  compounds  are  possible.  How  many
of  these  are  stable  at  a  given  pressure  and  temperature,
nobody  knows.  In  a  gaseous  mixture  of  paraffins,  the
coincidence  necessary  to  form  each  one  of  them  may
occur  many  thousand  times  a  second.  Only  those  can
survive  which  are  stable  under  the  given  conditions.
Such  natural  selection  determines,  for  example,  the
compound  ethers  which  go  to  make  up  the  jflavour  of  a
pear.

Now  those  persons  who  believe  that  living  matter,
such  as  protein,  arises  out  of  non-Uving  matter  in  the
sea,  suppose  that  it  is  formed  like  all  other  chemical
compounds.  That  is  to  say,  it  originates  in  a  coinci-
dence, and  is  preserved  by  natural  selection.  Only  in
this  case  the  coincidence  is  of  the  most  elaborate  and
complex  character.  I  once  saw  an  estimate  of  the
number  of  carbon  atoms  in  a  molecule  of  albumen.  I
cannot  now  lay  my  hands  on  the  book  in  which  I  found
it,  but  there  were  three  figures  in  it.  I  do  not  believe,
on  the  strength  of  that  estimate,  that  there  are  over
a  hundred  carbon  atoms  in  a  molecule  of  albumen ;
because,  from  the  nature  of  the  substance,  I  cannot
imagine  any  evidence  on  which  it  might  be   securely


YIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.  815

founded.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  all  the  forms
of  living  matter  are  enormously  complex  in  chemical
constitution.  Now  there  may,  of  course,  be  half-way
houses,  less  complex  forms  out  of  which  they  may  be
built  up,  just  as  acetylene  forms  a  half-way  house  to
benzene.  Still,  the  coincidence  involved  in  the  forma-
tion of  a  molecule  so  complex  as  to  be  called  living^
must  be,  so  far  as  we  can  mate  out,  a  very  elaborate
coincidence.  How  often  does  it  happen  in  a  cubic  mile
of  sea-water  ?  Perhaps  once  a  week ;  perhaps  once  in
many  centuries ;  perhaps  also,  many  million  times  a
day.  From  this  living  molecule  to  a  speck  of  protoplasm
visible  in  the  microscope  is  a  very  far  cry  ;  involving,
it  may  be,  a  thousand  years  or  so  of  evolution.  Possibly,
however,  the  molecule  has  from  the  beginning  that
power  which  belongs  to  other  chemical  bodies,  and
certainly  to  itself  when  existing  in  sensible  masses,  of
assisting  the  formation  of  its  like.  Once  started,  how-
ever, there  it  is  ;  the  spontaneous  generation,  believed
in  as  a  possibility  by  the  evolutionist,  has  taken  place.

Why  then  do  the  experiments  all  '  go  against '
spontaneous  generation  ?  What  the  experiments  really
prove  is  that  the  coincidence  which  would  form  a  Bac-
terium— already  a  definite  structure  reproducing  its  like
• — does  not  occur  in  a  test-tube  during  the  periods  yet
observed.  Such  a  coincidence  is  the  nearest  thing  to  a
^  special  creation  '  that  can  be  distinctly  conceived.  The
experiments  have  nothing  whatever  to  say  to  the  pro-
duction of  enormously  simpler  forms,  in  the  vast  range
of  the  ocean,  during  the  ages  of  the  earth's  existence.

Allowing  that  this  makes  the  thing  possible,  does  it
give  any  reason  for  believing  that  it  has  actually  taken


316         VIECHOW  ON   THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

place  ?  We  might  get  a  direct  demonstration  if  we
knew  the  constitution  of  protein,  and  could  calculate
the  chances  of  the  coincidence  which  would  lead  to  its
formation  in  the  sea.  But  on  the  other  hand  we  have
an  argument  precisely  like  that  which  we  used  in  the
case  of  the  descent  of  man.  We  know  from  physical
reasons  that  the  earth  was  once  in  a  liquid  state  from
excessive  heat.  Then  there  could  have  been  no  living
matter  upon  it.  Now  there  is.  Consequently  non-
living matter  has  been  turned  into  living  matter  some-
how. We  can  only  get  out  of  spontaneous  generation
by  the  supposition  made  by  Sir  W.  Thomson,  in  jest
or  earnest,  that  some  piece  of  living  matter  came  to
the  earth  from  outside,  perhaps  with  a  meteorite.  I  wish
to  treat  all  hypotheses  with  respect,  and  to  have  no
preferences  which  are  not  entirely  founded  on  reason  ;
and  yet,  whenever  I  contemplate  this

simpler  protoplastic  shape
Wbicli  came  down  in  a  fire-escape,

an  internal  monitor,  of  which  I  can  give  no  rational
account,  invariably  whispers  '  Fiddlesticks  ! '

I  think,  however,  that  the  nature  of  the  evidence
which  makes  spontaneous  generation  probable  is  such
that  we  cannot  teach  it  in  schools  except  to  very
advanced  pupils.  And  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of
the  doctrine  of  evolution  as  a  whole,  regarded  as  involv-
ing the  nebular  hypothesis.

'  Those  who  hold  (says  Tyndall)  the  doctrine  of
evolution  are  by  no  means  ignorant  of  the  uncertainty  of
their  data,  and  they  only  yield  to  it  a  provisional  assent.
They  regard  the  nebular  hypothesis  as  probable,  and  in
the  utter  absence  of  any  proof  of  the  illegality  of  the


TIRCHOW   ON   THE  TEACHING   OF  SCIENCE.  317

act,  they  prolong  the  method  of  nature  from  the  present
into  the  past.  Here  the  observed  uniformity  of  nature
is  their  only  guide.  Having  determined  the  elements
of  their  curve  in  a  world  of  observation  and  experiment,
they  prolong  that  curve  into  an  antecedent  world,  and
accept  as  probable  the  unbroken  sequence  of  develop-
ment from  the  nebula  to  the  present  time.'

When  I  was  seven  or  eight  years  old,  I  came  across
an  article  in  Chambers'  Journal  upon  Plateau's  experi-
ments with  rotating  oil-drops,  and  their  bearing  on  the
nebular  hypothesis.  I  was  highly  delighted  with  this,
and  made  notes  of  it  on  the  fly-leaves  of  a  book  of  Bible
stories.  My  notion  was  that  creation  was  precisely  a
large  Plateau's  experiment.  Now  I  am  pretty  sure  that
this  unfortunate  circumstance  retarded  my  knowledge
of  the  nebular  hypothesis  by  some  years,  because  it
gave  me  an  idea  that  I  knew  all  about  it  already.

Besides  the  nebular  hypothesis,  there  are  other
doctrines  about  the  origin  of  the  world  which  it  seems
undesirable  to  have  taught  to  our  children.  One  ^  is  an
account  of  a  wet  beginning  of  things,  after  which  the
waters  were  divided  by  a  firm  canopy  of  sky,  and  the
dry  land  appeared  underneath.  Plants,  and  animals,
and  men,  were  successively  formed  by  the  word  of  a
deity  enthroned  above  the  canopy.  Another  account  is
of  a  dry  beginning  of  things,  namely  a  garden,  subse-
quently watered  by  a  mist,  in  which  there  were  no
plants  until  a  man  was  put  there  to  till  it.  This  man
was  made  from  the  dust  of  the  ground  by  a  deity,  who
walked  about  on  the  earth,  and  had  divine  associates,

^  See  that  admirable  book,  The  Bible  for  Young  People  (Williams  &
Norgate,  1873).


318  VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.

jealous  of  the  man  for  sharing  their  privilege  of  knowing
good  from  evil,  and  fearful  that  he  would  gain  that  of
immortality  also.  The  deity  had  taken  a  rib  out  of  the
man,  and  made  a  woman  of  it.

I  do  not  see  that  we  should  mind  the  teaching  of
these  stories,  so  long  as  others  are  taught  along  with
them,  such  as  that  of  the  Chaldee  God  Bel,  who  cut  off
his  head,  moistened  the  clay  with  his  blood,  and  then
made  men  out  of  it ;  or  of  the  Gods  of  our  own  race,
Odin,  Vale,  and  Ve,  who  walked  about  the  earth  until
they  found  two  trees,  one  of  which  they  made  into  a  man,
and  the  other  into  a  woman  ;  or  of  Deucahon  and
Pyrrha,  who  threw  stones  over  their  heads,  which
became  men  and  women.  As  soon  as  ever  they  can
understand  them  children  may  be  taught  the  reasons  why
the  first  two  stories  are  quite  different  from  the  others,
and,  though  contradictory,  both  of  them  true  ;  as,  for
example,  the  nature  of  the  evidence  which  connects  or
disconnects  the  stories  with  Moses,  and  which  proves
that  Moses  could  have  known  anything  about  the  origin
of  the  world.  But  we  ought  not,  I  think,  to  allow  either
of  these  stories  to  be  taught  to  our  children  as  a  known
fact.  It  will  be  better  to  prepare  them  that  they  may
by-and-by  understand  the  attitude  of  the  lover  of  ti:uth
towards  these  problems.

'  If  you  ask  him  whence  is  this  "  matter  "...  who
or  what  divided  it  into  molecules,  and  impressed  upon
them  this  necessity  of  running  into  organic  forms,  he  has
no  answer.  Science  is  mute  in  reply  to  such  questions.
But  if  the  materialist  is  confounded,  and  science  is
rendered  dumb,  who  else  is  prepared  with  an  answer  ?


VmCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING  OF  SCIENCE.         319

Let  US  lower  our  heads  and  acknowledge  our  ignorance,
priest  and  philosopher,  one  and  all.

'  His  (the  scientific  man's)  refusal  of  the  creative
hypothesis  is  less  an  assertion  of  knowledge  than  a
protest  against  the  assumption  of  knowledge  which  must
long,  if  not  for  ever,  lie  beyond  us,  and  the  claim  to
which  is  the  source  of  perpetual  confusion  upon  earth'  ^

I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  here  those  difficult
questions  which  were  raised  by  Hackel  and  Nageli  about
the  relation  of  body  and  mind  ;  because  I  hope  soon  to
have  an  opportunity  of  dealing  with  them  separately.
But  in  regard  to  the  teaching  in  schools  of  abstract  and
general  conclusions  derived  from  this  branch  of  science
still  so  very  imperfect,  so  much  in  the  air,  it  seems  to
me  that  Virchow  has  spoken  with  the  utmost  practical
wisdom.  The  basis  of  it,  indeed,  the  one  point  of  firm
ground  on  which  the  structure  of  mind-and-body  lore
can  be  built,  is  fully  suited  for  teaching,  as  Virchow
himself  has  pointed  out.  The  theory  of  the  eye,  slowly
elaborated  from  Lionardo  to  Kepler,  from  Kepler  to
Helmholtz,  and  the  doctrine  of  perception  founded
upon  it,  these  supply  a  safe  foundation  for  whatever
more  may  come.  But  the  Plastidule-soul  can  take  no
harm  by  waiting  awhile,  until  we  are  a  little  more
clear  about  what  we  mean  by  it.

And  this  same  judgment  applies  necessarily  to
another  abstract  and  general  conclusion  from  an  un-
proved doctrine  about  body  and  mind  ;  the  conclusion
that  a  man's  consciousness  survives  the  decay  of  his
body.  Such  a  conclusion  can  be  at  best,  in  the  present
state  of  knowledge,  a  hope,  a  conjecture,  an  aspiration ;

1  Tyndall,  FragmmtSy  pp.  421,  548,


320         VIRCHOW  ON  THE  TEACHING   OF  SCIENCE.

it  can  have  no  claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  known  fact.
Those  who  hold  to  it  may  think  it  highly  probable,  they
may  strongly  desire  that  it  should  be  true,  they  may
eagerly  expect  that  better  evidence  will  shortly  be
forthcoming ;  but  they  cannot  be  justified  in  teaching
it  to  httle  children  as  a  known  fact*  Of  such  a  doctrine,
surely,  if  of  any  doctrine,  we  ought  to  say :  '  Do  not
take  this  for  established  truth  ;  be  prepared  to  find  that
it  is  otherwise  ;  only  for  the  moment  we  are  of  opinion
that  it  may  possibly  be  so.'

And  in  this  case  the  reasons  for  such  caution  are
deeper  and  stronger  than  the  merely  intellectual  ones,
because  of  the  vast  hold  of  this  doctrine  upon  the
hearts,  and  its  serious  influence  upon  the  actions,  of  men.
You,  who  teach  it  to  your  children,  do  so  from  the
highest  of  motives,  because  you  beheve  that  it  will  in-
fluence their  character  for  good,  and  strengthen  them
in  the  course  of  right  conduct.  But  there  are  two
things  which  you  should  carefully  consider.  The  first
is,  that  by  teaching  the  doctrine  too  early  you  weaken
its  effect,  because  you  teach  it  while  it  can  be  only  half
reaUzed,  and  so  prevent  it  from  being  realized  afterwards.
Dr.  Martineau  testifies  to  the  greater  power  of  a  belief
in  immortality  gained  by  the  behever  for  himself,  and
strengthening  a  moral  sense  which  has  been  formed  on  a
different  basis.  Teach  your  children  to  do  good  and  to
eschew  evil ;  if  in  later  life  they  can  find  hope  of  an
eternity  of  such  action,  it  will  make  them  happier  and
may  make  them  better.  But  the  experience  of  centuries
condemns  the  practice  of  teaching  the  doctrine  to  little
children,  so  as  to  make  it  familiar  as  an  ill-understood
conception,  to   weaken   the  power   it  might  have   for


VmCHOW   ON  THE  TEACHING    OF  SCIENCE.  821

good,  and  to  help  the  perversion  of  it  to  superstitious
uses.

The  second  point  to  be  considered  is  the  frightful
loss  and  disappointment  you  prepare  for  your  child  if,
as  is  most  probable  in  these  days,  he  becomes  convinced
that  the  doctrine  is  founded  on  insufficient  evidence.
It  is  not  merely  that  you  have  brought  him  up  as  a
prince,  to  find  himself  a  pauper  at  eighteen.  He  may
have  allowed  this  doctrine  to  get  inextricably  intertwined
with  his  feelings  of  right  and  wrong.  Then  the  over-
throw of  one  will,  at  least  for  a  time,  endanger  the  other.
You  leave  him  the  sad  task  of  gathering  together  the
wrecks  of  a  hfe  broken  by  disappointment,  and  wonder-
ing whether  honour  itself  is  left  to  him  among  them.
Leave  him  free  of  this  doctrine,  and  his  conscience  will
rest  upon  its  true  base,  safe  against  all  storms  ;  for  it  is
built  upon  a  rock.  Then  he  can  never  reproach  you
with  raising  hopes  in  him  which  knowledge  is  fated  to
blast,  and  with  them,  it  may  be,  to  blast  the  promise  of
his  ]ife.


THE   END.


LONDON  :    PRINTED    BY

SPOTTISWOODB    AND    CO.,    NBW-STHEKT    SQUARB

AND    PARLIAMENT    STREET


VOL.  II.


BY    THE    SAME    AUTHOR.


ELEMENTS   OF   DYNAMIC.

An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Motion  and  Rest  in  Solid  and  Fluid  Bodies;^

PART  I.  KINEMATIC.

Crown  8vo.  75.  6d,


SEEING   AND   THINKING.

8vo.  [In  the  press.


MATHEMATICAL   PAPEES.

[In  the  press.


MACMILLAN  &  CO.,  LondoB.


MACMILLM  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.


OUTLINES   of  COSSnO  PHILOSOPHY,   based  on  the

Doctrine  of  Evolution,  with  Criticisms  on  the  Positive  Philosophy.    By  John
f-':^     FiSKE,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  formerly  Lecturer  on  Philosophy  at  Harvard  University.
2  vols,  8vo.    25s.

THE   PEINCIPLES  of  SCIENCE:   a  Treatise  on  Logic

and  Scientific  Method.  By  W.  S.  Jevons,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of
Political  Economy,  University  College,  London.  New  Edition.  Crown  8vo.
125.  6d.

LAY    SEEMONS,    ADDKESSES    and    EEVEEWS.     By

Professor  Huxley,  F.R.S.    New  Edition.     8vo.    7s,  6d.

CEITIQUES  and  ADDEESSES.      By  Professor  Huxley,

F.R.S.    8vo,  lOs,  6d.

MOEAL  and  METAPHYSICAL  PHILOSOPHY,  from  the

FIRST  to  the  THIRTEENTH  CENTURIES.  By  Professor  F.  D.  Maurice.
New  Edition.     2  vols.  8vo.     25*.

THE  UNSEEN  UNIVEESE;  or,  Physical  Speculations  on

a  Future  State.  By  Professors  Balfour  Stewart  and  P.  Gr,  Tait.  New
Edition.     Crown  8vo.    6s,

PAEADOXIOAL  PHILOSOPHY.    A  Sequel  to  '  The  Un-

seen  Universe.'    Crown  8vo,     7s,  6d,

THE  METHODS  of  ETHICS.     By  Henry  Sidgwick,  M.A.,

Praelector  in  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.     8vo.    14^,

old-fashioned   ethics  and   common-sense

METAPHYSICS,  with  some  of  their  Applications.  By  W.  T.  Thobn*on,  C.B.
8vo.    10s.  6d.

MACMILLAN  &  CO.,  London.


Bedford  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,
March  1879.


Macmillan  ^  Co:s  Catalogue  of  Works
in  Mathematics  and  Physical  Science;
including  Pure  and  Applied  Mathe-
matics; Physics,  Astronomy,  Geology,
Chemistry,  Zoology,  Botany  ;  and  of
Works  in  Mental  and  Moral  Philosophy
and  Allied  Subjects,


MATHEMATICS.

Airy.— Works  by  Sir  G.  B.  Airy,  K.C.B.,  Astronomer  Royal  :~

ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  PARTIAL  DIFFERENTIAL
EQUATIONS.  Designed  for  the  Use  of  Students  in  the  Univer-
sities.   With  Diagrams.    New  Edition.    Crown  Svo.     55^.  6^.

ON  THE  ALGEBRAICAL  AND  NUMERICAL  THEORY  OF
ERRORS  OF  OBSERVATIONS  AND  THE  COMBINA-
TION  OF  OBSERVATIONS.  Second  Editidn.  Crown  Svo.
6j".  dd.

UNDULATORY  THEORY  OF  OPTICS.  Designed  for  the  Use  of
Students  in  the  University.     New  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     6^.  dd.

ON  SOUND  AND  ATMOSPHERIC  VIBRATIONS.  With
the  Mathematical  Elements  of  Music.  Designed  for  the  Use  of
Students  of  the  University.  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.
Crown  Svo.     9^.

A  TREATISE  ON  MAGNETISM.  Designed  for  the  Use  of
Students  in  the  University.     Crown  Svo.     qj".  6^.

Ball  (R.  S.,  A.^M.) — experimental  mechanics,    a

Course  of  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  College  of  Science  for
Ireland.  By  Robert  Stawell  Ball,  A.  M. ,  Professor  of  Applied
Mathematics  and  Mechanics  in  the  Royal  College  of  Science  for
Ireland  (Science  and  Art  Department).     Royal  Svo.  \(>s.

"  We  have  not  met  with  any  book  of  the  sort  in  English,  It  eluci-
dates instructively  the  methods  of  a  teacher  of  the  very  highest
rank.  We  most  cordially  recommend  it  to  all  our  readers^ —
Mechanics'  Magazine.

3,000.  3.   ^t^  A


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,


Bayma.— THE  ELEMENTS  OF  MOLECULAR  MECHA-
NICS. By  Joseph  Bayma,  S.J.,  Professor  of  Philosophy,
Stonyhurst  College.     Demy  8vo*  cloth,     icxf.    (yd.

Boole. — Works  by  G.  Boole,  D.C.L,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of
Mathematics  in  the  Queen's  University,  Ireland  : —

A  TREATISE   ON   DIFFERENTIAL   EQUATIONS.      Third
Edition.     Edited  byl.  Todhunter.     Crown  8vo.  cloth.   I4y.
**^  treatise  incomparably  superior  to  any  other  elementary  hook  on  the
subject  with  which  we  are  acquainted^ — Philosophical  Magazine.

A  TREATISE  ON  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS.  Supple-
mentary Volume.     Edited  by  I.  Todhunter.     Crown  8vo.  cloth.

THE  CALCULUS  OF  FINITE  DIFFERENCES.  Crown  Svo.
cloth.     lOJ.  dd.     New  Edition  revised.

Cheyne.  —  AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  THE
PLANETARY  THEORY.  With  a  Collection  of  Problems.
By  C.  H.  H.  Cheyne,  M.A.,  F.R.A.S.  Second  Edition.  Crown
Svo.  cloth.    6^.  6^.

Clifford. — THE  ELEMENTS  OF  DYNAMIC.  An  Introduction
to  the  study  of  Motion  and  Rest  in  Solid  and  Fluid  Bodies.  By
W\  K.  Clifford,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Applied  Mathematics  and
Mechanics  at  University  College,  London,  Part  I. — Kinematic.
Crown  Svo.     7^,  6^.       *

Cumming.— AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  THEORY  OF
ELECTRICITY.  With  numerous  Examples.  By  Linn^us
Cumming,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby  School.    Crown  Svo.

Cuthbertson.-— EUCLIDIAN  GEOMETRY.  By  F.  Cuth-
bertson,  M.A.,  Head  Mathematical  Master  of  the  City  of  London
School.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.     a^*  dd.

Ferrers Works  by  the  Rev.  N.M.  Ferrers,  M.  A.,  F.R.S.,  Fellow

and  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge  :—

AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  TRILINEAR  CO-ORDL
NATES,  the  Method  of  Reciprocal  Polars,  and  the  Hieory  ol
Projectors.     Third  Edition,  revised.     Crown  Svo.     6^.  bd.

SPHERICAL  HARMONICS  AND  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED
WITH  THEM.     Crown  Svo.     Ts.  6d.


MATHEMATICS,


Frost. — Works  by  Percival  Frost,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  St.
John's  College,  Mathematical  Lecturer  of  King's  Coll.  Cambridge;—

THE  FIRST  THREE  SECTIONS  OF  NEWTON'S  PRIN-
CIPIA.  With  Notes  and  Illustrations.  Also  a  Collection  of
Problems,  principally  intended  as  Examples  of  Newton's  Methods.
Third  Edition.     8vo.  cloth.     I2j-.

AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  CURVE  TRACING.
8vo.      12^.

SOLID  GEOMETRY.  Being  a  New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged,
of  the  Treatise  by  Frost  and  WoLSTENHOLME.  Vol.  L   8vo.   i6^.

Godfray.— Works  by  Hugh  Godfray,  M.A.,  Mathematical
Lecturer  at  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge  : —  '

A  TREATISE  ON  ASTRONOMY,  for  the  Use  of  Colleges  and
Schools.     8vo.  cloth.     \2s,  6d.

''It  is  a  working  book,''  says  the  Guardian,  ^'taking  Astronomy
in  its  proper  place  in  the  Mathematical  Sciences,  .  .  .  It  is  a  book
which  is  not  likely  to  begot  up  unintelligently"

AN      ELEMENTARY      TREATISE     ON      THE     LUNAR
THEORY,  with  a  Brief  Sketch  of  the  Problem  up  to  the  time  of
Newton.     Second  Edition,  revised.     Crown  8vo.  cloth,    ^s.  6d,
''As  an  elementary  treatise  and  introduction  to  the  subject,  we  think
it  may  justly  claim  to  supersede  all  former  ones'' — London,  Edin-
burgh, and  Dublin  Phil.  Magazine.

Green  (George).— MATHEMATICAL    PAPERS   OF  THE
LATE    GEORGE    GREEN,    Fellow    of   Gonville   and  Caius
College,  Cambridge.     Edited  by  N.  M.  Ferrers,  M.A.,  Fellow
and  Tutor  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College.     8vo.     15^,
"It  has  been  for  some  time  recognized  that  Green's  writings  are

amongst  the  most  valuable  mathematical  productions  we  possess, '^^

Athenaeum.

Hemming.— AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  THE
DIFFERENTIAL  AND  INTEGRAL  CALCULUS.  For  the
Use  of  Colleges  and  Schools.  By  G.  W.  Hemming,  M.A.,
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  Second  Edition,  with
Corrections  and  Additions.     8vo.  cloth,     pj-.

Jackson.— GEOMETRICAL  CONIC  SECTIONS.  An  *  Ele-
mentary Treatise  in  which  the  Conic  Sections  are  defined  as  the
Plane  Sections  of  a  Cone,  and  treated  by  the  Method  of  Projections.
By  J.  Stuart  Jackson,  M^A.,  late  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Caius
College.     Crown  8vo.     4^.  dd.

A  2


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,


Kelland  and  Tait.~AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  QUATER-
NIONS. With  numerous  Examples.  By  P.  Kelland,  M.A.,
F.R.S.,  and  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.,  Professors  in  the  department  of
Mathematics  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.    Crown  8vo.    7^.  6d.

Kempe. — how  to  draw  a  straight  line,  a  Lecture
on  Linkages.  By  A.  B.  Kempe,  E.  A.  Illustrated.  Crown  8vo.  i  j.  6^.

Merriman.—ELEMENTS  OF  THE  METHOD  OF  LEAST
SQUARE^  Ry  Mansfield  Merriman,  Professor  of  Civil  and
Mechanical  En<^ine'*-lng',  Lehigh  University,  Bethlehem,  Penn.,
U.S.A.     Crown  8vo.     ^s,  6d.

Morgan.— A  COLLECTION  OF  PROBLEMS  AND  EXAM-
PLES IN  MATHEMATICS.  With  Answers.  By  H.  A.
Morgan,  M.A.,  Sadlerian  and  Mathematical  Lecturer  of  Jesus
College,  Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.  cloth.     6j.  6d.

Newton's  Principia. — 40.  cloth.    31^.  6d.

It  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  the  reliability  of  this  com;plete  edition  of
Newtof^s  Principia  that  it  has  been  printed  for  and  under  the  care
of  Professor  Sir  Willia^n  Thomson  and  Professor  Blackburn,  of
Glasgow  University,

Parkinson.— A   TREATISE    ON  OPTICS.     By  S.  Parkin.
SON,   D.D.,   F.R.S.,    Fellow  and  Tutor  of  St.  John's   College,
•  Cambridge.     Third   Edition,  revised  and   enlarged.     Crown  8vo.
cloth.     10s.  6d.

Phear.— ELEMENTARY  HYDROSTATICS.  With  Numerous
Examples.  By  J.  B.  Phear,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  late  Assistant  Tutor
of  Clare  Coll.  Cambridge.  Fourth  Edition.  Cr.  8vo.  cloth,  ^s.  6d,

Pirrie.^ — LESSONS  ON  RIGID  DYNAMICS.  By  the  Rev.  G.
Pirrie,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Queen's  College,  Cambridge.
Crown  8vo.    6s,

Puckle.— AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  CONIC  SEC-
TIONS AND  ALGEBRAIC  GEOMETRY.  With  numerous
Examples  and  Hints  for  their  Soluti6n.  By  G.  Hale  Puckle,
M.A.     Fouth  Edition,  enlarged.     Crown  8vo.     "js.  6d,

Rayleigh. — THE  THEORY  OF  SOUND.  By  Lord  Rayleigh,
F.R.S.,  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  8vo.
Vol.  I.  12s.  6d. ;  Vol.  IL  I2s.  6d,  [Vol.  III.  in  preparation,

Reuleaux.— THE  KINEMATICS  OF  MACHINERY.  Out-
lines of  a  Theory  of  Machines.  By  Professor  F.  REULEAUx.
Translated  and  edited  by  A.  B.  W.  Kennedy,  C.E.,  Professor  of
Civil  and  Mechanical  Engineering,  University  College,  London.
With  450  lUubtiations.     Royal  8vo.     20s.


iifATHEMATlCS.


Routh. — Works  by  EDWARD  JoHN  RouTH,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  late
Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  St.  Peter's  College,  Cambridge ;
Examiner  in  the  University  of  London  : —

AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  THE  DYNAMICS  OF
THE  SYSTEM  OF  RIGID  BODIES.  With  numerous
Examples.     Third  Edition,  enlarged.     8vo.     2is.

STABILITY  OF  A  GIVEN  STATE  OF  MOTION,  PARTI-
CULARLY STEADY  MOTION.  The  Adams'  Prize  Essay  for
1877.     8vo.     8j.  6d.

Tait  and  Steele. — DYNAMICS  OF  A  particle.    With

numerous  Examples.  By  Professor  Tait  and  Mr.  Steele.  Fourth
Edition,  revised.     Crown  8vo.     12s.

Thomson.— PAPERS  ON  ELECTROSTATICS  AND  MAG-
NETISM. By  Professor  Sir  William  Thomson,  F.R.S.
8vo.     18^.

Todhunter. — Works    by    L    Todhunter,    M.A.,    F.R.S.,    of

St.  John's  College,  Cambridge  : —

**yl/r.  Todhunter  is  chiefly  known  to  students  of  mathematics  as  the

author  of  a  se^des  of  admirable  mathematical  text-books^   which

possess  the  rare  qualities  of  being  clear  in  style  and  absolutely  free

from  mistakes,  typographical  or  other.''^ — Saturday  Review.

A  TREATISE    ON  SPHERICAL  TRIGONOMETRY.      New

Edition,  enlarged.     Crown  8vo.  cloth.     4^.  dd.
PLANE  CO-ORDINATE  GEOMETRY,  as  applied  to  the  Straight

Line  and  the  Conic  Sections.     With  numerous  Examples.     New

Edition.     Crown  8vo.     7^.  6^.
A    TREATISE    ON    THE    DIFFERENTIAL    CALCULUS.

With  numerous  Examples.    New  Edition,  Crown  8vo.  \os,  6d.
A  TREATISE  ON  THE  INTEGRAL  CALCULUS  AND  ITS

APPLICATIONS.     With  numerous   Examples.     New  Edition,

revised  and  enlarged.     Crown  8vo.  cloth.     lo^.  6d.
EXAMPLES    OF  ANALYTICAL  GEOMETRY   OF  THREE

DIMENSIONS.     New  p:dition,  revised.     Crown  8vo.  cloth.     4^^.
A  TREATISE  ON  ANALYTICAL  STATICS.     With  numerous

Examples.      New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.       Crown   8vo.

cloth,     los,  6d.
A   HISTORY    OF    THE    MATHEMATICAL    THEORY   OF

PROBABILITY,   from  the  Time  of  Pascal  to  that  of  Laplace.

8vo.     1 8  J.
RESEARCHES    IN   THE    CALCULUS   OF   VARIATIONS,

Principally  on  the  Theory  of  Discontinuous  Solutions  J  An  Essay

to  which  the  Adams'   Prize   was  awarded  in   the    University  of

Cambridge  in  1871.     8vo.     6s.


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,


Todhunter — continued,

A  HISTORY   O?  THE  MATHEMATICAL  THEORIES  OF

ATTRACTION,  and  the  Figure  of  the  Earth,  from  the  time  of

Newton  to  that  of  Laplace.     Two  vols.  8vo.     24f.

**  Probably  no  man  in  England  is  so  qualified  to  do  justice  to  the

theme  as  Mr,  Todhunter.       To  all  mathematicians  these  volumes

will  be  deeply ^  interesting^  and  to  all  succeeding  investigators^  of  the

highest  practical  utility. "— Athenasum.

AN.  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  LAPLACE'S,  LAME'S,
AND  BESSEL'S  INUNCTIONS.     Crown  8vo.     lor.  6^.

Wilsoil  (W.  P.)— A  TREATISE  ON  DYNAMICS.  By
W.  V.  Wilson,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,
and  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  Queen's  College,  Belfast.     8vo.

Wolstenholme.-— MATHEMATICAL  PROBLEMS,  on  Sub-
jects included  in  the  First  and  Second  Divisions  of  the  Schedule
oi  Subjects  for  the  Cambridge  Mathematical  Tripos  Examination.
Devised  and  arranged  by  Joseph  Wolstenholme,  late  Fellow
of  Christ's  College,  sometime  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  and
Professor  of  Mathematics  in  the  Royal  Indian  Engineering  College.
New  Edition,  greatly  enlarged.     8vo.     i8j.

Young.— SIMPLE  PRACTICAL  METHODS  OF  CALCU-
LATING STRAINS  ON  GIRDERS,  ARCHES,  AND
TRUSSES.  With  a  Supplementary  Essay  on  Economy  in  su^^pen-
sion  Bridges.  By  E.  W.  Young,  Associate  of  King's  College,
London,  and  Member  of  the  Institution  of  Civil  Engineers.  8vo.
7^.  dd.


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,


PHYSICAL    SCIENCE.

A.iry  (G.  B.)— POPULAR  ASTRONOMY.  With  Illustrations.
By  Sir  G.  B.  Airy,  K.C.B.,  Astronomer  Royal,  New  Edition
i8mo.  cloth,     4f.  (id.

Bastian. — Works  by  H.  Charlton  Bastian,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,
Professor  of  Pathological  Anatomy  in  University  College,  London,
&c. : —

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE :  Being  some  Account  of  the  Nature,

Modes  of  Origin,  and  Transformations  of  Lower  Organisms.     In

Two  Volumes.  With  upwards  of  lOO  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  28.r.

*'//  is  a  hook  that  cannot  be  ignored^  and  mtist  inevitably  lead  to

renewed  discussions  and  repeated  observations^  and  through,  these  to

the  establishment  of  truth.  ^' — A.  R.  Wallace  in  Nature.

EVOLUTION   AND  THE   ORIGIN   OF  LIFE.      Crown  8vo.
ds.  6d.

''^  Abounds  in  information  of  interest  to  the  student  of  biological
science."-  -Daily  News.

Blake.— ASTRONOMICAL  MYTHS.  Based  on"^ Flammarion's
"The  Heavens."  By  John  F.  Blake.  With  numerous  Illustra-
tions.    Crown  ^YO.     gs.

Blanford  (H.  F.)^rudiments  of  physical  geo-
graphy FOR  the  use  of  INDIAN  SCHOOLS.  By
H.  F.  Blanford,  F.G.S.  With  numerous  Illustrations  and
Glossary  of  Technical  Terms  employed.  New  Edition.  Globe
8vo.     2J.  6d.

Blanford  (W.  T.)— GEOLOGY  AND  ZOOLOGY  OF
ABYSSINIA,     By  W.  T.  Blanford.    8vo.    21s.

Bosanquet — AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  MUSICAL
INTERVALS  AND  TEMPERAMENT.  With  an  Account  of
an  Enharmonic  Harmonium  exhibited  in  the  Loan  Collection  of
Scientific  Instruments,  South  Kensington,  1876  ;  also  of  an  Enhar-
monic Organ  exhibited  to  the  Musical  Association  of  London,
May,  1875.  By  R.  H.  Bosanquet,  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,
^  Oxford.     8vo.     6s.

Coal  :   ITS  HISTORY  AND  ITS  USES.    By  Professors  Green,

Ml  ALL,  Thorpe,  Rucker,  and  Marshall,  of  the   Yorkshire

College,  Leeds.     With  Illustrations.     8vo.     12s,  6d.

* '  It  furnishes  a  very  comprehensive  treatise  on  the  whole  subject  of  Coal

from  the  geological,  chemical^  mechanical,  and  industrial  points  of

view,  concluding  with  a  chapter  on  the  important  topic  known  as

the  *  Coal  Question.' "—  Daily  News.


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE.


Cooke  (Josiah  P.,  Jun.)— first  PRINCIPLES  OF
CHEMICAL  PHILOSOPHY.  By  Josiah  P.  Cooke,  Jun.,
Ervine  Professor  of  Chemistry  and  Mineralogy  in  Harvard  College.
Third  Edition,  revised  and  corrected.     Crown  8vo.     \2s.

Cooke     (M.     C.)-— HANDBOOK    OF     BRITISH    FUNGI,

with  full  descriptions  of  all  the  Species,  and  Illustrations  of  the
Genera.     By  M.  C.  Cooke,  M.A.     Two  vols,  crown  8vo.     24^-.
"  Will  maintain  its  place  as  the  standard  English  book,   on  the
subject  of  which  it  treats^  for  many  years  to  come.'''' — Standard.

Dawkins,— CAVE-HUNTING  :  Researches  on  the  Evidence  of
Caves  respecting  the  Early  Inhabitants  of  Europe.  By  W.  BoYD
Dawkins,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  Profebsorof  Geology  at  Owens  College^
Manchester.  With  Coloured  Plate  and  Woodcuts.  8vo.  21s.
"  The  mass  of  information  he  has  brought  together,  with  the  judicious
use  he  has  made  of  his  materials,  will  be  found  to  invest  his  book
with  much  of  new  and  singular  value.'''' — Saturday  Review.

Dawson   (J.   W.)— ACADIAN    geology.     The    Geologic

Structure,    Organic   Remains,   and  Mineral    Resources  of   Nova

Scotia,   New  Brunswick,  and  Prince  Edward  Island.     By  Joi^N

William  Dawson,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  Principal  and

Vice-Chancellor  of  M*Gill  College  and  University^  Montreal,  &c.

With  a  Geological  Map  and  numerous  lUusti'ationS.  Third  Edition,

with  Supplement     Svo.     21s.     Supplement,  separately,  2J".  6^.

"Z%<?  book  will  doubtless  find  a  place  in  the  library,   not  only  of

the  scientific  geologist,  but  also  of  all  who  are  desirous  of  the  m^

dustrial  progress  and  commercial  prosperity  of  the  Acadian  ibro*

vinces." — Mining  Journal.

Fleischer.— A  SYSTEM  OF  VOLUMETRIC  ANALYSIS.
By  Dr.  E.  Fleischer.  Translated  from  the  Second  German
Edition  by  M.,  M.  Pattison  Muir,  with  Notes  and  Additions.
Illustrated.     Crown  Svo.     p.  6d.

Forbes,— THE  transit  of  VENUS.  By  George  Forbes,
B.A.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Andersonian  Univer-
sity of  Glasgow.   With  numerous  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  3^.  6d,

Foster  and  Balfour.— ELEMENTS  OF  EMBRYOLOGY
By  Michael  Foster,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  andF.  M.  Balfour,  M.A.,
Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  With  numerous  Illustra-
tions.    Part  I.     Crown  Svo.     "Js,  6d.

Galton. — Works  by  Francis  Galton,  F.R.S.  :—
METEOROGRAPHICA,   or  Methods  of  Mapping  the  Weather.
Illustrated  by  up  wards  of  600  Printed  Lithographic  Diagrams.  410.95".


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,


G  alton — continued.

HEREDITARY   GENIUS  :  An  Inquiry  into  its  Laws  and  Con-
sequences.    Demy  8vo.     I2j.
The  Times  calls  it  *' «  most  able  and  most  interesting  bookT

ENGLISH    MEN   OF    SCIENCE;   THEIR   NATURE    AND
NURTURE.     8vo.     8j-.  6^.
"  J'he  book  is  certainly  one  of  very  great  inter est.^^ — Nature.

Geikie. — Works  by  ARCHIBALD  Geikie,  LL.D.,  F.R  S.,
Murchison  Professor  of  Geology  and  Mineralogy  at  Edinburgh  : —
ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.
With  numerous  Illustrations,  Fcap.  8vo.  A^s.  6d,  Questions,  is,  6d,
FIELD  GEOLOGY.  With  Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.  {Shortly,
PRIMER  OF  GEOLOGY.  Illustrated.  i8mo.  is,
PRIMER  OF  PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.   Illustrated.  i8mo.  is,

Gordon.— AN  ELEMENTARY  BOOK  ON  HEAT.  By  J.  E.
H.  Gordon,  B.A,,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Crown  8vo.     2s,

Guillemin. — THE  FORCES  OF  nature  :  A  Popular  Intro-
duction   to    the   Study  of    Physical   Phenomena.      By  Am^dee
Guillemin.      Translated  from  the  French  by  Mrs.   NoRMA^
LoCKYER  ;  and  Edited,  with  Additions  and  Notes,  by  J,  Norman
LoCKYER,  F.R.S.   Illustrated  by  Coloured  Plates,  and  455  Wood-
cuts.   Third  and  cheaper  Edition.     Royal  8 vo.     21s,
*'  Translator  and  Editor  have  done  justice  to  their  trust.     The
text  has  all  the  force  and  flow  of  original  writings   combining
faithfulness  to  the  author  s  meaning  with  purity  and  independence
in  regard  to  idiom;  while  the  historical  precision  and  accuracy
pervading  the  work  throughout^  speak  of  the  watchful  editorial
supervision  which  has  been  given  to  every  scientific  detail.     Nothing
can  well  exceed  the  clearness  and  delicacy  of  the  illustrative  wood-
cuts.    Altogether,  the  work  may  be  said  to  have  no  parallel^  either
in  point  of  fulness  or  attraction^  as  a  popular  manual  of  physical
science.^'* — Saturday  Review.

THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  PPIYSJCAL  FORCES.  By  A.
Guillemin.  Translated  from  the  French  by  Mrs.  Lockyer,  and
Edited  with  Notes  and  Additions  by  J.  N.  Lockyer,  F.R.S.
With  Coloured  Plates  and  numerous  Illustrations.  Cheaper
Edition.  Imperial  8vo*  cloth,  extra  gilt.  36^.
Also  in  Eighteen  Monthly  Parts,  price  is.  each.  Part  I.  in  November,
1878.

**J4  book  which  we  can  heartily  recommend,  both  on  account  of  the
width  and  soundness  of  its  contents,  and  also  because  of  the  excel-
lence of  its  print,  its  illustrations^  and  external  appearancej^ —
Westminster  Review.


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,


Hanbury.— SCIENCE  papers  :  chiefly  Pharmacological  and
Botanical.  Bi^  Daniel  Hanbury,  F.R.S.  Edited,  with
Memoir,  by  J.  Ince,  F.L.S*,  and  Portrait  engraved  by  C.  H.
Jeens.     8vo.     I4f.

Henslow.— THE  theory  of  evolution  of 'living

THINGS,  and  Application  of  the  Principles  of  Evolution  to
Religion  considered  as  Illustrative  of  the  Wisdom  and  Benefi-
cence of  the  Almighty.  By  the  Rev.  George  Henslow,
M.A.,  F.t.S.     Crown  8vo.     6j-.

Hooker.— Works  by  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker,  K.C.S.L,  C.B.,
F.R.S.,  M.D.,    D.C.L.  :—

THE  STUDENT'S  FLORA  OF  THE  BRITISH  ISLANDS.
Second  Edition,  revised  and  improved.  Globe  8vo.  lOs.  bd.
The  object  of  this  work  is  to  supply  students  and Jield-hotanists  with  a
fuller  account  of  the  Plants  of  the  British  Islands  than  the  manuals
hitherto  in  use  aim  at  giving,  **  Certainly  the  fullest  and  most
accurate  manual  of  the  kind  that  has  yet  appeared.  Dr.  Hooker
has  shown  his  charatteristic  industry  and  ability  in  the  care  and
skill  which  he  has  thrown  into  the  characters  of  the  plants.  These
are  to  a  great  extent  original^  and  are  really  admirable  for  their
combination  of  clearness,  brevity^  and  completeness."— ViM  Mall
Gazette.

PRIMER  OF  BOTANY.     With  Illustrations.     i8mo.     I^.     New
Edition,  ^-evised  and  corrected.

Hooker  and  Ball. — JOURNAL  OF  A  TOUR  INMAROCCO
AND  THE  GREAT  ATLAS.  By  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker,  K.C.S.L,
C.B.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  and  John  Ball,  F.R.S.  With  Appendices,
including  a  Sketch  of  the  •  Geology  of  Marocc6.  By  G.  Maw,
F.L.S.,  F.G.S.     With  M^p  and  Illustrations.     8vo.    2ls.

Huxley  and  Martin.— a  COURSE  OF  PRACTICAL  in-
struction IN  ELEMENTARY  BIOLOGY.  By  T.  H.
Huxley,  LL.D.,  Sec.  R.S.,  assisted  by  H.  N.  Martin,  B.A.,
M.B.,  D.Sc,  Fellow' of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  Crown  8vo.
6s.
**  This  is  the  most  thoroughly  valuable  book  to  teachers  and  students

of  biology  which  has  ever  appeared  in  the  English  tongue." —

London  Quarterly  Review.

Huxley  (Professor).— LAY   SERMONS,    ADDRESSES,

AND  REVIEWS.     By  T.  H.  Hurley,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.     New

and  Cheaper  Edition.    Crown  8vo.     7^.  6d.

Foufteen  Discourses  on  the  following  subjects: — (i)  On  the  Advisable-
ness  of  Improving  Natural  Knowledge: — (2)  Efhancipation —
Blc^k  af^d  White  : — (3)  A  Liberal  Education^  and  where  to  find
it: — (4)  Scientific  Education  :-^{s)  On  the  Educational  Vcdue  of


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,


Huxley  {Vvoi^^SOV)— continued,

the  Natural  History  Sciences :~(6)  On  the  Study  of  Zoology:—-
(7)  On  the  Physical  Basis  of  Life:~{%)   The  Scientific  Aspects  of
Positivism :-^{cf)  On  a  Piece  of  Chalk:— {lo)  Geological  Contem-
poraneity  and  Persistent  Types  of  Life ;— ( 1 1 )  Geological  Reform  :—
{12)   The  Origin  of  Species  :—{li)  Criticisms  on  the  ''Origin  of
Species:'^— {\d^  On  Descartes'  '' Discourse  touching  the  Method  of
using  Onis  Reason  rightly  and  of  seeking  Scientific  Truth  J'
ESSAYS     SELECTED     FROM      "LAY     SERMONS,     AD-
DRESSES, AND  REVIEWS."  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  is,
CRITIQUES  AND  ADDRESSES.     8vo.     lo^.  6^.

Contents :~i.  Administrative  Nihilism.  2.  The  School  Boards:
what  they  can  do^  and  what  they  may  do.  3.  On  Medical  Edu-
cation. 4.  Yeast.  5.  On  the  Formation  of  Coal.  6.  On  Coral
and  Coral  Reefs.  7.  On  the  Methods  and  Results  of  Ethnology.
8.  On  some  Fixed  Points  in  British  Ethnology.  9.  Palceoniology
and  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution.  10.  Biogenesis  and  Abiogenesis.
II.  Mr.  Darwin's  Critics.  12.  The  Genealogy  of  Animals.
13.  Bishop  Berkeley  on  the  Metaphysics  of  Sensation.
LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  PHYSIOLOGY.  Withnumerous

Illustrations.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     4?.  6^.
''Pure  gold  throughout." -^GuB-rdisin.     "  Unquestionably  the  clearest
and  most  complete  elementary  treatise  on  this  subject  that  we  possess  in
any  language." —^ ^%\mvasX^x  Review.

AMERICAN  ADDRESSES:  with  a  Lecture  on  the  Study  of
Biology.     8vo.     6i",  6^.

PHYSIOGRAPHY:  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Nature.  With
Coloured  Plates  and  numerous  Woodcuts.  New  Edition.  Crown
8vo.     "js.  6d.

Jellet  (John  H.,  B.D.)-~a  treatise  on  the
THEORY  OF  FRICTION.  By  John  H.  Jellet,  B.D.,
Senior  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin ;  President  of  the  Royal
Irish  Academy.     8vo.     8^.  6d.

Jones.— THE  OWENS  COLLEGE  JUNIOR  COURSE  OF
PRACTICAL  CHEMISTRY.  By  Francis  Jones,  Chemical
Master  m  the  Grammar  School,  Manchester.  With  Preface  by
Professor  RoscoE.  New  Edition.  i8mo.  with  Illustrations.  2s.  6d,

Kingsley.— GLAUCUS  :  OR,  THE  WONDERS  OF  THE
SHORE.  By  Charles  Kingsley,  Canon  of  Westminster.
New  Edition,  with  numerous  Coloured  Plates.    Crown  8vo.     6s.

Langdon. — the  application  of  electricity  to

RAILWAY  WORKING.  By  W.  E.  Langdon,  Member  of  the
Society  of  Telegraph  Engineers.  With  numerous  Illustrations.
Extra  fcap.  8vo.     4?.  dd.


12  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE.

Lockyer    (J.   N.)— Works  by  J.  Norman  Lockyer,  F.R.S.—
ELEMENTARY   LESSONS    IN   ASTRONOMY.     With  nu-
merous Illustrations.     New  Edition.     iSmo.     5^.  6d,
^^  The  book  is  full i  clear,  sound,  and  worthy  of  attention,  not  only  as
a  popular  Exposition,  but  as  a  scientific  ^ Index.  ^^^ — Athenaeum,
*'  The  most  fascinating  of  elementary  books  on  the  Sciences. ^"^ —
Nonconformist.
THE  SPECTROSCOPE  AND   ITS   APPLICATIONS.    By  J.
Norman  Lockyer,  F.R.S.    With  Coloured  Plate  and  numerous
Illustrations.    Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     3^.  6^.
CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  SOLAR  PHYSICS.     By  J.   Norman
Lockyer,  F.R.S.    I.  A  Popular  Account  of  Inquiries  into  the
Physical  Constitution  of  the  Sun,  with  especial  reference  to  Recent
Spectroscopic  Researches.      II.    Communications  to  the  Royal
Society  of  London   and  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences,  with
Notes.     Illustrated  by  7   Coloured  Lithographic  Plates  and  175
Woodcuts.     Royal  8vo.  cloth,  extra  gilt,  price  31^.  ^d.
*'  The  book  may  bd  taken  as  an  authentic  exposition  of  the  present
state  of  science  in  connection  with  the  important  subject  of  spectro-
scopic analysis.  .  .  .  Even  the  unscientific  public  may  derive  Much
inforffzation  from  itJ* — Daily  News.
PRIMER  OF  ASTRONOMY.     With  Illustrations.     i8mo.     is.

Lockyer  and  Seabroke. — STAR-GAZiNG:  PAST  AND

PRESENT.     An  Introduction  to  Instrumental  Astronomy.     By
J.  N.  Lockyer,  F.R.S.      Expanded  from  Shorthand  Notes  of  a
Course  of  Royal  Institution  Lectures  with  the  assistance  of  G.  M.
Seabroke,  F.R,^.S.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Royal  8vo.  21s.
**  A  book  of  greq>t  interest  and  utility  to  the  astronomical  student. ^^
—  Athensfcum.
Lubbock. — Works  by  Sir  John  Lubbock,  M.P.,F.R.S.,D.C.L,:
THE    ORIGIN    AND    METAMORPHOSES    OF    INSECTS.
With  Numerous  Illustrations.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  ^j.  6^.
"yjfj  a  summary  of  the  pJienom^na  of  iHsect  metamorphoses  his  little
book  is  of  great  value,  and  will  be  read  with  interest  and  profit
Ify  all  students  of  natural  history.     The  zvhole  chapter  on  the
origin  of  insects  is  most  interesting  and  valuable.     The  illustra-
tions are  numerous  and  good." — Westminster  Review.
ON  BRITISH  WILD  FLOWERS  CONSIDERED  IN  RELA-
TION TO  INSECTS.     With  Numerous  Illustrations.      Second
Edition.     Crown  8vo. '   4f.  6//.

Macmillan  (Rev.   Hugh)*-^For  other  Works  by  the  same
Author,  see  Theological  Catalogue.
HOLIDAYS  ON  HIGH  L^NlDS  ;  or.  Rambles  and  Incidents  in
search  of  Alpine  Plants.    Globe  8vo.  cloth.    6j.
"  One   of  the  most  charming  books  of  its  kind  ever  written.''^ —
Literary  Churchman.       ^^  Mr.  Macmillaris  glowing  pictures  of
Scandinavian  j-r^^^^^y.  "—Saturday  Review.


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  13

Macmillan  (Rev.  Hugh) — continued.
FIRST  FORMS  OF  VEGETATION.     Second  Edition,  corrected
and  enlarged,  with  Coloured  Frontispiece  and  numerous  Illustra-
tions.    Globe  8vo.     6s.

The  first  edition  of  this  book  was  published  under  the  name  of
^^ Footnotes  from  the  Page  of  Nature;  or,  First  Forms  of  Vegeta-
tion. Probably  the  best  popular  guide  to  the  study  of  mosses,
lichens,  and  ^un^i  ever  written.  Its  practical  value  a'i  a  help  to
the  student  and  collector  cannot  be  exaggerated.^"^ — Manchester
Examiner.

Mansfield  (C.   B.)-~Works  by  the  late  C.  B.  Mansfield  :—
A  THEORY    OF    SALTS.     A   Treatise  on   the  Constitution   of
Bipolar  (two-membered)  Chemical  Compounds.     Crown  8vo.    14J.

AERIAL  NAVIGATION.  The  Problem,  with  Hints  for  its
Solution.  Edited  by  R.  B.  Mansfield.  With  a  Preface  by  J.
M.  Ludlow.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     10s.  6d.

Mayer. — SOUND  :  a  Series  of  Simple,  Entertaining,  and  In-
expensive Experiments  in  the  Phenomena  of  Sound,  for  the  Use  of
Students  of  every  age.  By  A.  M.  Mayer,  Professor  of  Physics
in  the  Stevens  Institute  of  Technology,  &c.  With  mimerous  Illus-
trations.    Crown  8vo.     35".  6d.

Mayer  and  Barnard. — LIGHT.  A  Series  of  Simple,  Enter-
taining, and  Useful  Experiments  in  the  Phenomena  of  Light,  for
the  use  of  Students  of  every  age.  By  A.  M.  Mayer  and  C.
Barnard.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d.

Miall.— STUDIES   IN  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.     No.  i,

The  Skull  of  the  Crocodile.  A  Manual  for  Students.  By  L.  C.
MiALL,  Professor  of  Biology  in  Yorkshire  College.  8vo.  2s.  6d,
No.  2,  The  Anatomy  of  the  Indian  Elephant.  By  L.  C.  Miall
and  F.  Greenwood.     With  Plates.     5^.

Miller.— THE  ROMANCE  OF  ASTRONOMY.  By  R.  Kalley
Miller,  M.A.,  Fellow  and  Assistant  Tutor  of  St.  Peter's  Col-
lege, Cambridge.  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  Crown
8vo.  4J.  ()d,
Mivart  (St.  George). — Works  by  St.  George  Mivart,  F.R.S.
&c.,  Lecturer  in  Comparative  Anatomy  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital:  —
ON  THE  GENESIS  OF  SPECIES.  Crown  8vo.  Second
Edition,  to  which  notes  have  been  added  in  reference  and  reply  to
Darwin's  **  Descent  of  Man."  With  numerous  Illustrations,  pp.
XV.  296.     9^.

*'/;«  no  work  in  the  English  language  has  this  great  controversy
been  treated  at  once  with  the  same  broad  and  vigorous  grasp  of
facts  J  and  the  same  liberal  and  candid  temper'' — Saturday  Review,


14  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,

Mivart  (St.  GeOVgt)— continued.
THE  COMMON  FROG.     With  Numerous  Illustrations.     Crown
8vo.  3J.  (>d.     (Nature  Series.)

"  It  is  an  able  monogram  of  the  Frog,  and  something  more.  It
throws  valuable  crosslights  over  wide  portions  of  animated  nature.
Would  that  such  works  were  more  plentiful — Quarterly  Journi
of  Science.

Moseley.— NOTES  BY  a  naturalist  ON  THE  "CHAL-
LENGER," being  an  account  of  various  observations  made  during
the  voyage  of  H.M.S.  **  Challenger"  round  the  world  in  the  years
1872—76.  ByH.  N.  Moseley,  M.A..  F.R.S.,  Member  of  the
Scientific  Staflf  of  the  **  Challenger."  With^  Map,  Coloured
Plates,  and  Woodcuts.     8vo.     2.1s.

Muir.— PRACTICAL  CHEMISTRY  FOR  MEDICAL  STU-
DENTS. Specially  arranged  for  the  first  M.  B.  Course.  By
M.  M.  Pattison  Muir,  F.R.S.E.     Fcap.  8vo.     is.  6d.

Murphy .— HABIT  AND  INTELLIGENCE:  a  Series  of
Essays  on  the  Laws  of  Life  and  Mind.  By  Joseph  John
Murphy.  Second  Edition,  thoroughly  revised  and  mostly  re-
written.    With  Illustrations.     8vo.     i6j.

Nature.— A  WEEKLY  ILLUSTRATED  JOURNAL  OF
SCIENCE.  Published  every  Thursday.  Price  6d.  Monthly
Parts,  2s.  and  2s.6d. ;  Half-yearly  Volumes,  I5j-.  Cases  for  binding
Vols.  IS.  6d.

*'^  This  able  and  well-ediied  Journal,  which  posts  up  the  science  of
the  day  promptly^  and  promises  to  be  of  signal  service  to  students

and  savants Scarcely  any  expressions  that  we  can  eptploy

would  exaggerate  our  sense  of  the  moral  and  theological  value  of
the  work." — British  Quarterly  Review.

Newcomb.— POPULAR  ASTRONOMY.      By  Simon  New-
COMB,  LL.D.,   Professor  U.S.  Naval   Observatory.      With   112
,     Engravings  and  Five  Maps  of  the  Stars.     8vo.     i8j.

*^  As  affording  a  thoroughly  reliable  foundation  for  more  advanced
readings  Professor  Newcomb^s  *  Popular  Astronomy '  is  deserving
of  strong  recommendation" — Nature.

Oliver — Works  by  Daniel  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  F.L.S.,  Professor  of
Botany  in  University  College,  London,  and  Keeper  of  the  Herba-
rium and  Library  of  the  Royal  Gardens,  Kew  : —
LESSONS   IN   ELEMENTARY   BOTANY.     With  nearly  Two
Hundred  Illustrations.    New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     4-y.  6«/.
This  book  is  designed  to  teach  the  elements  of  Botany  on  Professor
Henslow\  plan  of  selected  Types  and  by  the  use  of  Schedules.     The
earlier  chapters,  embracing  the  elements  of  Structural  and  Physio-
logical Botany,  introduce  us  to  the  methodical  study  of  the  Ordinal
Types.      The  concluding  chapters  are  entitled^    ^^  How  to  Dry


PHYSICAL    SCIENCE,  15

O  liver — continued.

Plants  "  and  "  How  to  Describe  Plants. "  A  valuable  Glossary  is
appended  to  thf  volume.  In  the  preparation  of  this  work  free  use
has  been  made  of  the  manuscript  materials  of  the  late  Professor
Henslow.

FIRST    BOOK    OF    INDIAN    BOTANY.      With    numerous
Illustrations.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    6;-.  dd.

* '  It  contains  a  well-digested  summary  of  all  essential  knowledge
pertaining  to  Indian  Botany,  wrought  out  in  accordance  with  the
best  principles  of  scientific  arrangement.^^ — Allen's  Indian  Mail.

Pennington.— NOTES  ON  THE  BARROWS  AND  BONE
CAVES  OF  DERBYSHIRE.  With  an  account  of  a  Descent
into  Elden  Hole.  By  RooKE  Pennington,  B.A.,  LL.B.,
F.G.S.     8vo.     6^.

Penrose  (F.  C.)— ON  A  method  of  predicting  by

GRAPHICAL  CONSTRUCTION,  OCCULTATIONS  OF
STARS  BY  THE  MOON,  AND  SOLAR  ECLIPSES  FOR
ANY  GIVEN  PLACE.  Together  with  more  rigorous  methods
for  the  Accurate  Calculation  of  Longitude.  By  F.  C.  PENROSE,
F.R.A.S.     With  Charts,  Tables,  &c.     4to.     12J.

Perry.— AN  elementary  treatise  on  steam.    By

John  Perry,  B.E.  ,  Professor  of  Engineering,  Imperial  College  of
Engineering,  Yedo.  With  numerous  Woodcuts,  Numerical  Ex-
amples, and  Exercises.     i8mo.     4^.  dd.

"Mr.  Perry  has  in  this  compact  little  volume  brought  together  an
immense  amount  of  information,  new  told,  regarding  steam  and
its  application,  not  the  least  of  its  merits  being  that  it  is  suited  to
the  capacities  alike  of  the  tyro  in  engineering  science  or  the  better
grade  of  artisan.''^ — Iron.

Pickering.— ELEMENTS  OF  PHYSICAL  MANIPULATION.
By  E.  C.  Pickering,  Thayer  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Massa-
chusetts Institute  of  Technology.  Part  L,  medium  8vo.  \os.  6d.
Part  11. ,   lOi".  6d,

"  When  finished  ^Physical  Manipulation^  will  no  doubt  be  con-
sidered the  best  and  most  complete  text-book  on  the  subject  of
which  it  treats. " — Nature.

Prestwich.— THE  PAST  AND  FUTURE  OF  GEOLOGY.
An  Inaugural  Lecture,  by  J.  Prestwich,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,
Professor  of  Geology,  Oxford.     8vo.     2s.

Radcliffe.— PROTEUS  :  OR  UNITY  IN  NATURE.  By.  C.
B.  Radcliffe,  M.D.,  Author  of  "Vital  Motion  as  a  mode  of
Physical  Motion.     Second  Edition.     8vo.     "js,  6d,


i6  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,

Rendu. — the  theory  of  the  glaciers  of  savoy.

By  M.  LE  Chanoine  Rendu.  Translated  by  A.  Wells,  Q.C,
late  President  of  the  Alpine  Club.  To  which  are  added,  the  Original
Memoir  and  Supplementary  Articlea  by  Professors  Tait  and  Rus-
KiN.  Edited  with  Introductory  remarks  by  George  Forbes,  B.A.,
Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Andersonian  University^
Glasgow.     8vo.    7j.  6d,

RoSCOe. — Works  by  Henry   E.   Roscoe,  F.R.S.,    Professor   of
Chemistry  in  Owens  College,  Manchester  : —

Li:SSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  CHEMISTRY,  INORGANIC
AND  ORGANIC.  Wit^i  numerous  Illustrations  and  Chromo-
litho  of  the  Solar  Spectrum,  and  of  the  Alkalis  and  Alkaline
Earths.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.    4J.  6^.

CHEMICAL  PROBI^EMS,  adapted  to  the  above  by  Professor
Thorpe.     Fifth  Edition,  with  Key.     2j.

**  We  unhesitatingly  pronounce  it  the  best  of  all  our   elementary
treatises  on  Chemistry." — Medical  Times.

PRIMER  OF  CHEMISTRY.     Illustrated.     iSmo.     is,

Roscoe  and  Schorlemmer.— a  treatise  on  che-
mistry. By  Professors  Roscoe  and  StnoRLEMMER.
Vol.  I.,  The  Non-metallic  Elements.    With  numerous  Illustrations

and  Portrait  of  Dalton.     Medium  8vo.     2.\s,
Vol.  II.,  Metals.     Part  I.     With  Illustrations.     Svo.     iSj.

**  Regarded  as  a  treatise  on  the  Non-metallic  Elements,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  this  volume  is  incomparably  the  must  satisfactory  one
of  which  we  are  in  possession" — Spectator.
**  /^  would  be  diffi,cult  to  praise  the  work  too  highly.  All  the  merits
which  we  noticed  in  the  first  volume  are  conspicuous  in  the  second.
The  arrangement  is  clear  and  scientific ;  the  facts  gained  by  modern
research  are  fairly  represented  and  judiciously  selected;  and  the
style  throughout  is  singularly  lucid." — Lancet.

[Metals,  Part  II.  in  the  Press.

Rumford  (Count).— the  life  and  complete  works
of  benjamin  THOMPSON,  COUNT  RUMFORD.  With
Notices  of  his  Daughter.  By  George  Ellis.  With  Portrait.
•  Five  Vols.  Svo.     4/.   14?.  6^."

Schorlemmer.— A  MANUAL  OF  THE  CHEMISTRY  OF
THECARBON  COMPOUNDS  OR  ORGANIC CHEMIStRY.
By  C.  SCHORLEMMER,  F.R.S.,  Lecturer  in  Organic  Chemistry  in
Owens  College,  Manchester.     Svo.     14^.
**//  appears  to  us  to  be  as  complete  a  manual  of  the  metamorphoses  of

carbon  as  could  be  at  present  produced,  and  it  must  prove  eminently

useful  to  the  chemical  j/wrt'^/.''— Athenjeum.


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  17


Shann. — AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  HEAT,  IN
RELATION  TO  STEAM  AND  THE  STEAM  ENGINE.
By  G.  Shann,  M.A.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     4r.  6ci.

Smith.— HISTORIA  FILICUM  :  An  Exposition  of  the  Nature,
Number,  and  Organography  of  Ferns,  and  Review  of  the  Prin-
ciples upon  which  Genera  are  founded,  and  the  Systems  of  Classifi-
cation of  the  principal  Authors,  with  a  new  General  Arrangement,
&c.  By  J.  Smith.  A.L.S.,  ex-Curator  of  the  Royal  Botanic
Garden,  Kew.  With  Thirty  Lithographic  Plates  by  W.  H.  Fitch,
F.L.S.     Crown  8 vo.     12^.6^.

**  No  one  anxious  to  work  up  a  thorough  knowledge  of  ferns  can
afford  to  do  without  it^ — Gardener's  Chronicle.

South  Kensington  Science  Lectures. — Vol.  L— Con-
taining Lectures  by  Captain  Abney,  F.RS.,  Professor  Stokes,
Professor  Kennedy,  F.  J.  Bramwell,  F.R.S.,  Professor  G.
Forbes,  H.  C.  Sorby,  F.R.S.,  J.  T.  Bottomley,  F.R.S.E.,
S.  H.  Vines,  B.Sc,  and  Professor  Carey  Foster.  Crown  8vo.
6 J.  *  [Vol.  II.  nearly  ready,

SpottiswOOde.— POLARIZATION  OF  LIGHT.  By  W.
Spottiswoode,  President  of  the  Royal  Society.  With  numerous
Illustrations.  Second  Edition.  Cr.  8vo.  y,  6d.  (Nature  Series.)
*  *  The  illustrations  are  exceedingly  well  adapted  io  assist  in  making

the  text  comprehensible.^^ — Athenseum.     "^    clear,    trustworthy

manual. ' ' — S  tand  ard.  h

Stewart  (B.) — Works  by  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  Professor
of  Natural  Philosophy  in  Owens  College,  Manchester  : —
LESSONS   IN   ELEMENTARY   PHYSICS.      With  numerous
Illustrations  and  Chromolithos  of  the  Spectra  of  the  Sun,  Stars,
and  Nebulae.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.    4?.  6^.
The  Educational  Times  calls  this  the  beau-idial  of  a  scientific  text-
hook,  clear,  accurate,  and  thorough.'*^
PRIMER  OF  PHYSICS.     With  Illustrations.     New  Edition,  with
Questions.     i8mo.     i^.

Stewart   and  Tait.— the    unseen    UNIVERSE:    or,

Physical  Speculations  on  a  Future  State.    By  Balfour  Stewart,

F.R.S.,  and  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.     Sixtli  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     6j.

**  The  book  is  one  which  well  deserves  the  attention  of  thoughtjul  ana

religious  readers.  .  .  .  It  is  a  perfectly  sober  inquiry,  on  scientific

grounds,  into  the  possibilities  of  a  future  existence.^^ — Guardian.

Tait.— LECTURES    ON    SOME   RECENT    ADVANCES   IN
PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,    By  P.  G.  Tait,  M.A.,  Professor  of «
Philosophy  in  the   University  of  Edinburgh.       Second  edition,
revised  and  enlarged,  with  the  Lecture  on  Force  deUvered  before
the  British  Association.     Crown  Svo.     9J.

B


1 8  SCIENTIFIC  CA  TALOGUE,

Tanner.— FIRST  principles  OF  AGRICULTURE.  By
Henry  Tanner,  F.C.S.,  Professor  of  Agricultural  Science,
University  College,  Aberystwith;  Examiner  in  the  Principles  of
Agriculture  under  the  Government  Department  of  Science.    iSino.

IS,

Taylor.— SOUND  and  music  :  A  Non-Mathematical  Trea-
tise on  the  Physical  Constitution  of  Musical  Sounds  and  Hatfeiony
including  the  Chief  Acoustical  Discoveries  of  Professor  Helm
holtz.  By  SedleY  Taylor,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  Col
ledge,  Cambridge.  Large  crown  8vo.  Sj*.  6d.
"  In  no  previous  scientific  treatise  do  we  remember  So  exhaustive  and

so  richly  illustrated  a  descriptidn  of  forms  of  vibration  and  of

wave-motion  in  ^uids.'^— Musical  Standard.

Thomson. — Works  by  SiR  Wyville  Thomson,  K.C.B.,  F.R.S.
THE  DEPTHS  OF  THE  SEA  :  An  Account  of  the  General
Results  of  the  Dredging  Cruises  of  H.M.SS.  "Porcupine"  and
"Lightning"  during  the  Summers  of  1^68-69  and  70,  under  the
scientific  direction  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  F.R.S.,  J.  Gwyn  Jeffreys,
F.R.S.,  and  Sir  Wyville  Thomson,  F.R.S.  With  nearly  100
Illustrations  and  8  coloured  Maps  and  Plans.  Second  Edition.
Royal  8vo.  cloth,  gilt.     ^u.  6d,

The  Athenseum  says:  **  The  book  is  full  of  interesting  matter,  and
is  written  by  a  master  of  the  art  0/  popular  exposition.  It  is
excellently  illustrated,  both  coloured  maps  and  woodcuts  possessing
high  merit.  Those  who  have  already  become  interested  in  dredging
operations  will  of  course  make  a  point  of  reading  this  work;  those
who  luish  to  be  plmsantly  introduced^  to  the  subject,  and  rightly
to  appreciate  the  news  which  artives  from  time  to  time  from  the
*  Challenger i*  should  not  fail  to  seek  instruction  froM  it."

THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  "CHALLENGER."— THE  ATLAN-
TIC.   A  Preliminary  account  of  the  Exploring  Voyages  of  H.M.S.
"Challenger,"  during  the  year  1873  ^^'^  ^^^  ^^^^1  V^^  of  1^76.
With  numerous  Illustrations,  Coloured  Maps  &  Charts,  &  Portrait
ofthe  Author,  engraved  by  C.  H.JeenS.  2  Vols.  Medium  8vo.  42J.
The  Times  says : — "  It  is  right  that  the  public  should  have  some
authoritative  accot^nt  of  the  general  results  of  the  expedition,  and
that  as  many  of  the  ascertained  data  as  may  be  accepted  with  con-
fidence should  speedily  find  their  place  in  the  general  body  of
scientific  knowledge.    No  one  can  be  more  competent  than  the
accomplished  scientific  chief  of  the  expedition  to  satisfy  the  public  in
this  respect,  .  .  ,   The  paper,  printing,  a7td  especially  the  numerous
illustrations,  are  of  the  highest  qualtty.   .  .  .    We  have  rarely,  if
ever.  Seen  more  beautiful  specimens  of  wood  engraving  than  abound
in  this  work.  ,  .  ,  Sir  Wyville  Thomsofis  style  is  particularly
attractive;  he  is  easy  and  graceful y  but  in^orous  and  exceedingly


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE.  19

Thomson — continued,

happy  in  ike  choice  of  language^  and  throughout  the  work  there  are
touches  which  show  that  science  has  not  banished  sentiment  ff-om
his  bowmy

Thudichum  and  Dupre — A  TREATISE  ON  THE
ORIGIN,  NATURE,  AND  VARIETIES  OF  WINE.
Being  a  Complete  Manual  of  Viticulture  and  CEnology.  By  J.  L.
W.  Thudichum,  M.D.,  and  August  Dupr^,  Ph.D.,  Lecturer  on
Chemistry  at  Westminster  Hospital.     Medium  8vo.  cloth  gilt.  25J.

**^  treatise  almost  unique  for  its  usefulness  either  to  the  wine-grower ^
the  vendor^  or  the  consumer  of  wine.  The  analyses  of  wine  are
the  most  complete  we  have  yet  seen,  exhibiting  at  a  glance  the
constituent  principles  of  nearly  all  the  wines  known  in  this  country ,"
— Wine  Trade  Review.

Wallace  (A.   R.) — Works  by  Alfred  Russel  Wallace.
CONTRIBUTIONS    TO    THE    THEORY    OF     NATURAL
SELECTION.        A   Series    of   Essays.       New    Edition,   with
Corrections  and  Additions.     Crown  8vo.     8j.  6d.

Dr.  Hooker f  in  his  address  to  the  British  Association^  spoke  thus
of  the  author:  ^^  Of  Mr.  Wallace  and  his  many  contributions
to  philosophical  biology  it  is  not  easy  to  speak  without  enthu-
siasm; for,  putting  aside  their  great  merits,  he,  throughout  his
writings,  with  a  modesty  as  rare  as  I  believe  it  to  be  uncon-
scious, forgets  his  own  unquestioned  claim  to  the  honour  of
having  originated  independently  of  Mr.  Darwin,  the  theories
which  he  so  ably  defends.'''^  The  Saturday  Review  says:  ^^ He
has  combined  an  abundance  of  fresh  and  original  facts  with  a
liveliness  and  sagacity  of  reasoning  which  are  not  often  displayed
so  effectively  on  so  smalt  a  scale.^'

THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS,
with  a  study  of  the  Relations  of  Living  and  Extinct  Faunas  as
Elucidating  the  Past  Changes  of  the  Earth's  Surface.  2  vols.  8vo.
with  Maps,  and  numerous  Illustrations  by  Zwecker,  42J.

The  Times  says:  ^^  Altogether  it  is  a  wonderful  and  fascinating
story,  whatever  objections  may  be  taken  to  theories  founded  upon
it.  Mr.  Wallace  has  not  attempted  to  add  to  its  interest  by  any
adornments  of  style ;  he  has  given  a  simple  and  clear  statement  of
intrinsically  interesting  facts,  and  what  he  considers  to  be  legiti-
mate inductions  from  them.  Naturalists  ought  to  be  grateful  to
him  for  having  undertaken  so  toilsome  a  task.  The  work,  indeed,
is  a  credit  to  cell  concerned — the  author,  the  publishers,  the  artist —
unfortunately  now  no  more — of  the  attractive  illustrations — last
but  by  no  means  least,,  Mr.  Stanford'' s.  map' designer. ^^


1o  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,


Wallace  (A.  1^,)— continued.
TROPICAL  NATURE  :  with  other  Essays.    8vo.    \^s,

*'  Nowhere  amid  the  many  descriptions  of  the  tropics  that  have  been
given  is  to  be  found  a  summary  of  the  past  history  and  actual
phenomena  of  the  tropics  which  gives  that  which  is  distinctive  of
the  phases  of  nature  in  them  more  clearly,  shortly,  and  impres-
sively. " — S  aturday  Review.

Warington.— THE  WEEK  OF  CREATION;  OR,  THE
COSMOGONY  OF  GENESIS  CONSIDERED  IN  ITS
RELATION  TO  MODERN  SCIENCE.  By  George  War-
ington, Author  of  "The  Historic  Chal-acter  of  the  Pentateuch
Vindicated."    Crown  8vo.     4^".  6d.

Wilson. — RELIGIO  CHEMICI.  By  the  late  George  Wilson,
xVLD.,  F.R.S.E.,  Regius  Professor  of  Technology  in  the  University
of  Edinburgh.  With  a  Vignette  beautifully  engraved  after  a
design  by  Sir  Noel  Paton.  Crotvn  8vo.  Ss.  6d.
*'A  more  fascinating  volume,"  the  SpectSitor  says,  '' has  seldom
fallen  into  our  hands."

Wilson  (Daniel.)— CALIBAN :  a  Critique  on  Shakespeare's

*' Tempest"  and   ** Midsummer  Night's   Dream."     By  Daniel

Wilson,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  History  and  English  Literature  in

University  College,  Toronto.     8vo.     \os.  dd.

*  *  The  whole  volume  is  most  rich  in  the  eloquence  of  thought  and

imagination  as  well  as  of  words.     It  is  a  choice  contribution  at

once    to     science,    theology,    Religion,    and   literature." — British

Quarterly  Review.  ^

Wright.— METALS  AND  THEIR  CHIEF  INDUSTRIAL
APPLICATIONS.  By  C.  Alder  Wright,  D.Sc,  &c.,  Lec-
turer on  Chemistry  in  St.  Mary's  Hospital  School.  Extra  fcap.
*^vo.    3^.  6d,

WurtZ.— A  HISTORY  OF  CHEMICAL  THEORY,  from  the

Age  of  Lavoisier  down  to  the  present  time.     By  Ad.  Wurtz,

Translated  by  Henry  Watts,  F.R.S.     Crown  8vo.     6s.

* '  The  discourse^  as  a  resume  of  chemical  theory  and  research,  unites

singular  luminousness  and  grasp,    A  few  judicious  notes  are  added

by  the  translator  "-^VsXl  Mall  Gazette.     **  The  treatment  of  the

subject  is  admirable^  and  the  translator-  has  evidently  done  his  duty

most  iffidently." — Westminster  Review.


MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.     21


WORKS  ON  MENTAL  AND  MORAL
PHILOSOPHY,  AND  ALLIED  SUBJECTS.

Aristotle.— AN    introduction     to     ARISTOTLE'S

RHETORIC.     With  Analysis,   Notes,  and  Appendices.    By  E.
M.  Cope,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     8vo.     14^.
ARISTOTLE    ON    FALLACIES;    OR,    THE    SOPHISTICI
ELENCHI.     With  a  Translation  and  Notes  by  Edward  Poste,
M.A.,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford.     8vo.     Zs.  6d.

Birks. — Works  by  the  Rev.  T.  R.  BiRKS,  Professor  of  Moral  Philo-
sophy,  Cambridge  : —

FIRST  PRINCIPLES  OF  MORAL  SCIENCE ;  or,  a  Firs
Course  of  Lectures  delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.
Crown  8vo.     8j.  6d.

This  work  treats  of  three  topics  all  preliminary  to  the  direct  exposi-
tion of  Moral  Philosophy.      These  are  the  Certainty  and  Dignity
of  Moral  Science^  its  Spiritual  Geography^  or  relation  to  other
main  subjects  of  human  thought^  and  its  Formative  Principles,  or
some  elementary  truths  on  whuh    its  whole  development  must
depend.
MODERN     UTILITARIANISM;    or.    The   Systems    of    Paley,
Bentham,  and  Mill,  Examined  and  Compared.  Crown  8vo.  6^.  dd.
MODERN  PHYSICAL  FATALISM,  AND  THE  DOCTRINE
OF  EVOLUTION  ;  including  an  Examination  of  Herbert  Spen-
cer's First  Principles.     Crown  8vo.     ds,

Boole. —  AN  INVESTIGATION  OF  THE  LAWS  OF
THOUGHT,  ON  WHICH  ARE  FOUNDED  THE
MATHEMATICAL  THEORIES  OF  LOGIC  AND  PRO-
BABILITIES. By  George  Boole,  LL.D.,  Professor  of
Mathematics  in  the  Queen's  University,  Ireland,  &c.     8vo.     14X.

Butler,— LECTURES  ON  THE  HISTORY  OF  ANCIENT
PHILOSOPHY.  By  W.  Archer  Butler,  late  Professor  of
Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Dublin.  Edited  from  the
Author's  MSS.,  with  Notes,  by  William  Hepworth  Thomp-
son, M.A.,  Master  of  Trinity  College,  and  Regius  Professor  of
Greek  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  New  and  Cheaper  Edition,
revised  by  the  Editor.     8vo.     \2s,

Caird— A  critical  account  of  the  philosophy

OF  KANT.  With  an  Historical  Introduction.  By  E.  Cairo,
M.A.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Glasgow.
8vo.     i8j.


SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE.


CalderwOOd. — Works  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Calderwood,  M.A.,
LL.D.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh : —
PHILOSOPHY   OF   THE   INF^INITE :     A  Treatise  on   Man's
Knowledge  of  the  Infinite  Being,  in  answer  to  Sir  W.  Hamilton
and  Dr.  Mansel.     Cheaper  Edition.     8vo.     ^s.  6d,
**A  book  of  great  ability  ....  written  in  a  clear  style,  and  may
be  easily  understood  by  even  those  who  are  not  versed  in  such
discussions^ — British  Quarterly  Review.
A  HANDBOOK  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY.     New  Edition.
Crown  8vo.   ds.

*^Itts,  we  feel  convinced,  the  best  handbook  on  the  subject,  intellectually
and  morally,  and  does  infinite  credit  to  its  author. " — Standard.
"^  compact  and  useful  work,  going  over  a  great^deal  of  gr^nd
in  a  manner  adapted  to  suggest  and  fctcilitate  further  study.  ,  .  .
His  book  will  be  an  assistance  to  many  students  outside  his  own
University  of  Edinburgh.  —Guardian.
THE  RELATIONS  OF  MIND  AND  BRAIN.      {Nearly  ready.

Fiske.— OUTLINES  OF  COSMIC  PHILOSOPHY,  BASED
ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  EVOLUTION,  WITH  CRITI-
CISMS ON  THE  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.  By  John
FiSKE,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  formerly  Lecturer  on  Philosophy  at
Harvard  University.     2  vols.  8vo.     25J.

**  The  work  constitutes  a  very  effective  encyclopmdia  of  the  evolution-
ary philosophy,  and  is  well  worth  the  study  of  all  who  wish  to  se^
at  once  the  entire  scope  and  purpoi't  of  the  scientific  dogmatism  of
the  ^«v.  "^Saturday  Review.

Herbert.— THE  REALISTIC  ASSUMPTIONS  OF  MODERN
SCIENCE  EXAMINED.  By  T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.i  late
Professor  of  Philosophy,  &c«,  iii  the  Lancashire  Independent
College,  Manchester.     8vo.     14J.

Jardine.— THE  elements  of  the  psychology  of

COGNITION.  By  ROBERT  Jardine,  B.D.,  D.Sc,  Principal  of
the  General  Assembly's  College,  Calcutta,  and  Fellow  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Calcutta.     Crown  8vo.     6j.  dd.

Jevons. — Works  by  W.  STANLEY  Jevons,  LL.D.,  M.  A.,  F.R.S.,
Professor  of  Political  Economy,  University  CoUege,  London.
THE  PRINCIPLES  OF   SCIENCE.     A  Treatise  on  Logic  and
Scientific  Method.     New  and  Cheaper  Edition,  revised.     Crown
8vo.     I2J.  6<a?.

"  No  one  in  future  can  be  said  to  have  any  true  knowledge  of  what
has  beim  done  tn  the  way  of  logical  and  scientific  method  in
England  without  having  cctrefiilly  studied  Professor  Jevoni
^^i?i.*'-— Spectator.


MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.       23

J  e  VO  n  S — continued,

THE  SUBSTITUTION  OF  SIMILARS,  the  True  Principle  of

^  Reasoning.  Derived  frora>  a  Modification  of  Aristotle's  Dictum.
Fcap.  8vo.     7.S.  6d.

ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  LOGIC,  DEDUCTIVE  AND
INDUCTIVE.  With  Questions,  Examples,  and  Vocabulary  of
Logical  Terms.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     3J.  6d,

PRIMER  OF  LOGIC.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     is,

MaCCOll. — THE  GREEK  SCEPTICS,  from  Pyrrho  to  Sextus.
An  Essay  which  obtained  the  Hare  Prize  in  the  year  1868.  By
Norman  Maccoll,  B.A.,  Scholar  of  Downing  College,  Cam-
bridge.    Crown  8vo.     3^.  ^d.

M*Cosh. — Works  by  James  M 'Cosh,  LL.D.,  President  of  Princeton
College,  New  Jersey,  U.S.

^^  He  certainly  shows  himself  skilful  in  that  application  of  logic  to
psychology y  in  that  inductive  science  of  the  human  mind  which  is
the  fine  side  of  English  philosophy.  *His  philosophy  as  a  whole  is
worthy  of  attention. ^^ — Revue  de  Deux  Mondes.

THE  METHOD  OF  THE  DIVINE  GOVERNMENT,  Physical
and  Moral.  Tenth  Edition.  8vo.  los,  6d.
^^  This  work  is  distinguished  from  other  similar  ones  by  its  being
based  upon  a  thorough  study  of  physical  science,  and  an  accurate
knowledge  of  its  present  condition,  and  by  its  entering  in  a
deeper  and  more  unfettered  manner  than  its  predecessors  upon  the  dis-
cussion of  the  appropriate  psychological,  ethical,  and  theological  ques'
tions.  The  author  keeps  aloof  at  once  from  the  k  priori  idealism-  and
dreaminess  of  German  speculation  since  Schelling,  and  from  the
onesidedness  and  narrowness  of  the  empiricism  and  positivism
which  have  so  prevailed  in  England." — Dr.  Ulrici,  in  "Zeitschrift
fiir  Philosophie."

THE  INTUITIONS  OF  THE  MIND.      A  New  Edition.      8vo.

cloth,     los.  6d.

"  The  undertaking  to  adjust  the  claims  of  the  sensational  and  in-
tuitional philosophies,  and  of  the  k  posteriori  a-w^  a  priori  methods,
is  accomplished  in  this  work  with  a  great  amount  of  success.''^ —
Westminster  Review.  *'/  value  it  for  its  large  acquaintance
with  English  Philosophy,  which  has  not.  led  him  to  neglect  the
qreat  German  works.  I  admire  the  moderation  and  clearness,  as
well  as  comprehensiveness,  of  the  author's  views. ''^ — Dr.  Dorner,  of^
Berlin.

AN  EXAMINATION  OF  MR.  J.  S.  MILL'S  PHILOSOPHY:
Being  a  Defence  of  Fundamental  Truth.  Second  edition,  with
additions.     10$.  (>d.

*^Such  a  work  greatly  needed  to  be  done,  and  the  author  was  the  man
to  doit.     This voLume  is  important,  not  merely  in  reference  to  the


24  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE.

M  *  C  O  sh — continued,

view^  of  Mr.  Mill,  but  of  the  wk^le  schoql  of  writers,  past  and
present^  British  and  Continental,  he  so  ably  represents," — Pripceton
Review.

THE  LAWS  OF  DISCURSIVE  THOUGHT :  Being  a  Text-
book of  Formal  Logic,     Crown  8vo.     ^s.

**  The  amount  of  summarized  information  which  it  contains  is  very
great;  and  it  is  the  oftly  work  on  the  very  important  subject  with
which  it  deals.  Never  was  such  a  work  so  much  needed  as  in
the  present  day." — London  Quarterly  Review.

CHRISTIANITY  AND  POSITIVISM  :  A  Series  of  Lectures  to
the  Times  on  Natural  Theology  and  Apologetics.  Crown  8vo.
'^s.  (>d.

THE  SCOTTISH  PHILOSOPHY  FROM  HUTCHESON  TO
HAMILTON,  Biographical,  Critical,  Expository.    Royal  8vo.  ids.

MaSSOn.— RECENT   feRITISH    PHILOSOPHY  :   A   Review
with  Criticisms ;  including  some  Comments  on  Mr.  Mill's  Answer
to  Sir  William  Hamilton.     By  David  Masson,  M.A.,  Professor
of  Rhetoric  and  English  Literature  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.
Third  Edition,  with  an  Additional  Chapter.     Crown  Svo.     6^.
*'  We  can  nowhere  point  to  a  work  which  gives  so  clear  an  exposi-
tion of  the  course  of  philosophical  speculation  in  Britain  during
the  past  century,  or  which  indicates  so  instructively  the  mutual  in-
fluences  of  philosophic  and  scientific  thought." — Fortnightly  Review.

Maudsley. — Works  by  H.  Maudsley,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Medical
Jurisprudence  in  University  College,  London.

THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  MIND  ;  being  the  First  Part  of  a  Third
Edition,  Revised,  Enlarged,  and  in  great  part  Rewritten,  of  **The
Physiology  and  Pathology  of  Mind."     Crown  8vo.     lbs.  6d,

THE  PATHOLOGY  OF  MIND.  {In  the  Press.

BODY  AND  MIND  :  an  Inquiry  into  their  Connexion  and  Mutual
Influence,  specially  with  reference  to  Mental  Disorders.  An
Enlarged  and  Revised  edition.  To  which  are  added.  Psychological
Essays.     Crown  8vo.     6s.  6d.

Maufice. — Works  by  the  Rev.  FREDERICK  Denison  Maurice,
M.A.,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  tlie  University  Of  Cam-
bridge. (For  other  Works  by  the  same  Author,  see  Theological
Catalogue.)

SOCIAL  MORALITY.  Twenty-one  Lectures  delivered  in  the
University  of  Ciimbridge.  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown  Svo.
loj-.  6d,


MENTAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.     25


Maurice — continued.

**  Whilst  reading  it  we  are  charmed  by  the  freedom  from  exclusiveness
and  prejudice,  the  large  charity,  the  loftiness  of  thought,  the  eager-
ness to  recognize  and  appreciate  whatever  there  is  of  real  zvorth
extant  in  the  world,  which  animates  it  from  one  end  to  the  other.
We  gain  new  thoughts  and  new  ways  of  viewing  things,  even  more,
perhaps,  from  being  brought  for  a  time  under  the  influence  of  so
noble  arid  spiritual  a  mind. " — Athenaeum.

THE  CONSCIENCE  :  Lectures  on  Casuistry,  delivered  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Cambridge.    New  and  Cheaper  Edition.   Crown  8vo.    5^.

The  Saturday  Review  says:  ^^We  rise  from  them  with  detestation
of  all  that  is  selfish  and  mean,  and  with  a  living  impression  that
there  is  such  a  thing  as  goodness  after  all."

MORAL  AND  METAPHYSICAL  PHILOSOPHY.  Vol.  I.
Ancient  Philosophy  from  the  First  to  the  Thirteenth  Centuries  ;
Vol.  II.  the  Fourteenth  Century  and  the  French  Revolution,  with
a  glimpse  into  the  Nineteenth  Century.  New  Edition  and
Preface.     2  Vols.     8vo.    25^.

Morgan.— ANCIENT  society  :  or  Researches  in  the  Lines  of
Human  Progress,  from  Savagery,  through  Barbarism  to  Civilisation.
By  Lewis  H.  Morgan,  Member  of  the  National  Academy  of
Sciences.     8vo.     i6s.

Murphy,— THE  SCIENTIFIC  BASES  OF  FAITH.  By
Joseph  John  Murphy,  Author  of  "  Habit  and  Intelligence."
8vo.     14^.

"  The  book  is  not  without  substantial  value;  the  writer  continues  the
work  of  the  best  apologists  of  the  last  century,  it  may  be  with  less
force  and  clearness,  but  still  with  commendable  persuasiveness  and
tact ;  and  with  an  intelligent  feeling  for  the  changed  conditions  of
the  problem. " — Academy.

Paradoxical  Philosophy. — a  Sequel  to  "The  Unseen  Uni-
verse."    Crown  8vo.     7^.  dd.

Picton.— THE  MYSTERY  OF  MATTER  AND  OTHER
ESSAYS.  By  J.  Allanson  Picton,  Author  of  "  New  Theories
and  the  Old  Faith."  Cheaper  issue  with  New  Preface.  Crown
8vo.     6^.

Contents  :— 7%^  Mystery  of  Matter— The  Philosophy ^  of  Igno-
rance—The  Antithesis  of  Faith  and  Sight— The  Essential  Nature
of  Religion — Christian  Pantheism.


26  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,

Sidgwick.— THE  METHODS  OF  ETHICS.  By  He»iry
SiDGWiCK,  M.A.,  Prselector  in  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy  in
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Second  Edition,  revised  throughout
with  important  additions.     8vo.     14?.

A  SUPPLE:MENT  to  the  First  Edition,  containing  all  the  important
additions  and  alterations  in  the  Second.     8vo.     2s,

**  This  excellent  and  very  welcome  volume.  ....  Leaving  to  meta*
physicians  any  further  discussion  thai  may  be  needed  respecting  the
already  over-discussed  problem  of  the  origin  of  the  moral  faculty^  he
takes  it  for  granted  as  readily  as  the  geometrician  takes  spcu:e  for
granted^  or  the  physicist  the  existence  of  matter.  But  he  takes  little
else  for  granted,  and  defining  ethics  as  ^  the  science  of  conduct,  be
carefully  examines,  not  the  various  ethical  systems  that  have  been
propounded  by  Aristotle  and  Aristotle's  followers  downwards,  but
the  principles  upon  which,  so  far  as  they  confine  themselves  to  the
strict  province  of  ethics,  they  are  based >''^ — AtJienaeum.

Thornton.— OLD-FASHIONED  ETHICS,  AND  COMMON-
SENSE  METAPHYSICS*  with  some  of  their  Applications.  By
William  Thomas  Thornton,  Author  of  "A  Treatise  on  Labour."
8vo.     \Qs.  6d.

The  present  volume  aeals  with  problems  which  are  agitating  the
mifids  of  all  thoughtjul  men.  The  following  are  the  Contents : —
/.  Ante- Utilitarianism,  II.  History's  Scientific  Pretensions.  III.
David  Hume  as  a  Metaphysician.  IV.  Huxleyism,  V.  Recent
Phase  of  Scientific  Atheism.    VL  Limits  of  Demonstrable  Theism.

Thring  (E.,  M.A.)— THOUGHTS  ON  LIFE-SCIENCE.
By  Edward  ThriNg,  M.A.  (Benjamin  Place),  Head  Master  of
Uppingham  Schoot  New  Edition,  enlarged  and  revised.  Ctown
8vo.    *js.  6d.

Venn.— THE  LOGIC  OF  CHANCE  :  An  Essay  on  the  Founda-
tions and  Province  of  the  Theory  of  Probability,  with  especial
reference  to  its  logical  bearings,  and  its  application  to  Motal  and
Social  Science.     By  John  Venn,  M.A.,  FelloW  and  Lecturer  of
Gonville  and   Caius    College,   Cambridge.     Second  Edition,  re-
written and  greatly  enlarged.     Crown  8Vo.     lOf.  6^.
"  One  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  philosophical  treatises  on  any  sub-
ject connected  wtth  logic  and  evidence  which  has  been  produced  in
this  or  any  other  country  for  Many  years,  "** — Mill's  Logic,  vol.  ii.
pj  77.     Seventh  Edition.


SCIENCE  PRIMERS.  27


SCIENCE  PRIMERS  FOR  ELEMENTARY
SCHOOLS.

Under  the  joint  Editorship  of    Professors   Huxley,    Ros6oe,   and
Balfour  Stewart.

Chemistry — By  H.  E.  Roscoe,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Chemistry
in  Owens  College,  Manchester.  With  numerous  Illustrations.
i8mo.     \s.     New  Edition.     With  Questions.

Physics —  By  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of
Natural  Philosophy  in  Owens  College,  Manchester.  With  numer-
ous Illustrations.     i8mo.     \s.     New  Edition.     With  Questions.

Physical  Geography. —By  Archibald  Geikie,  F.R.S.,
Murchison  Professor  of  Geology  and  Mineralogy  at  Edinburgh.
With  numerous  Illustrations.  New  Edition  with  Questions.
i8mo.     IS,

Geology — By  Professor  Geikie,  F.R.S.  With  numerous  lUus-
trations.     New  Edition.     i8mo.  cloth.     \s.

Physiology._By  Michael  Foster,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  With
numerous  Illustrations.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     \s.

Astronomy — By  J.  Norman  Lockyer,  F.R.S.  With  numerous
Illustrations.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     is,

Botany.—BySir  J.  D.  Hooker,  K.C.S.L,  C.B.,  F.R.S.    With

numerous  Illustrations.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     is.

Logic — By  Professor  Stanley  Jevons,  F.R.S.  New  Edition.
i8mo.     is.

Political  Economy — By  Professor  Stanley  Jevons,  F.R.S.
i8mo.     IS,

In  preparation : —
INTRODUCTORY.     By  Professor  Huxley.     &c.  &c.


ELEMENTARY  SCIENCE  CLASS-BOOKS.

Astronomy.— By  the  Astronomer  Royal.  POPULAR  AS-
TRONOMY. With  Illustrations.  By  Sir  G.  B.  Airy,  K.C.B.,
Astronomer  Royal.     New  Edition.     i8mo.     4^.  (id.

Astronomy— ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  ASTRONOMY.
With  Coloured  Diagram  of  the  Spectra  of  the  Sun,  Stars,  and
Nebulse,  and  numerous  Illustrations.     By  J.  NoRMAN  Lockyer,

.        F.R.S.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     5x.  6^.


28  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE.

Elementary  Science  Class-books — continued.

QUESTIONS  ON  LOCKYER^S  ELEMENTARY  LESSONS
IN  ASTRONOMY.  For  the  Use  of  Schools.  By  John
Forbes  Robertson.     iSmo,  cloth  limp,     is,  6d,

Physiology — LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  PHYSIOLOGY.
With  numerous  Illustrations.  By  T.  H.  Huxley,  F.R.S.,  Pro-
fessor of  Natural  History  in  the  Royal  School  of  Mines.  New
Edition,     Fcap.  8vo.     4^.  6d.

QUESTIONS  ON  HUXLEY'S  PHYSIOLOGY  FOR
SCHOOLS.    By  T.  Alcock,  M.D.     i8mo.     u.  6d.

Botany — lessons  in  elementary  botany.     By  D.

Oliver,  F.R.S.,  F.L.S.,  Professor  of  Botany  in  University
College,  London.  With  nearly  Two  Hundred  Illustrations.  New
Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.    4^.  6d.

Chemistry — LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  CHEMISTRY,
INORGANIC  AND  ORGANIC.  By  Henry  E.  Roscoe,
F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  Owens  College,  Manchester.
With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Chromo-Litho  of  the  Solar
Spectrum,  and  of  the  Alkalies  and  Alkaline  Earths.  New  Edition.
Fcap.  8vo.    4^.  6d,

A  SERIES  OF  CHEMICAL  ..PROBLEMS,  prepared  with
Special  Reference  to  the  above,  by  T.  E,  Thorpe,  Ph.D.,
Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Yorkshire  College  of  Science,  Leeds.
Adapted  for  the  preparation  of  Students  for  the  Government,
>  Science,  and  Society  of  Arts  Examinations.  With  a  Preface  by
Professor  RoscoE.     Fifth  Edition,  with  Key,     i8mo,     2s,

Political  Economy — POLITICAL  economy  for  be-

GINNERS.  By  Millicent  G.  Fawcett.  New  Edition.
i8mo.    2s,  6d,

Logic.—ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  LOGIC  ;  Deductive  and
Inductive,  with  copious  Questions  and  Examples,  and  a  Vocabulary
of  Logical  Terms.  By  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  M.A.,  Professor  of
Political  Economy  in  University  College,  London.  New  Edition.
Fcap.  8vo.     3J.  6d.

Physics — LESSONS  IN  ELEMENTARY  PHYSICS.  By
Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in
Owens  College,  Manchester.  With  numerous  Illustrations  and
Chromo-Litho  of  the  Spectra  of  the  Sun,  Stars,  and  Nebulse.  New
Edition.     Fcap.  8vo»    4^.  6</.

Practical  Chemistry.—THE  OWENS  COLLEGE  junior
COURSE  OF  PRACTICAL  CHEMISTRY.  By  Francis
Jones,  Chemical  Master  in  the  Grammar  School,  Manchester.
With  Preface  by  Professor  RosCOE,  and  Illustrations.  New
Editioti.     i8mo.     2s,  6d,


SCIENCE  CLASS-BOOKS.  29

Elementary  Science  Class-books — continued.
Anatomy lessons  in  elementary  anatomy.    By

St.  George  Mivart,  F.R.S.,  Lecturer  in  Comparative  Anatomy
at  St.  Mary's  Hospital.  With  upwards  of  400  Illustrations.  Fcap,
8vo.    65.  6^.

Mechanics an  elementary  treatise.     By  a.  b.

W.  Kennedy,  C.E  ,  Professor  of  Applied  Mechanics  in  University
College,  London.     With  Illustrations.  \ln  preparation.

Steam an  elementary  treatise.    By  John  Perry,

Professor  of  Engineering,  Imperial  College  of  Engineering,  Yedo.
With  numerous  Woodcuts  and  Numerical  Examples  and  Exercises.
i8mo.     4^.  6^.

Physical   Geography.  —  ELEMENTARY    LESSONS    IN

PHYSICAL  GEOGRAPHY.    By  A.  Geikie,  F.R.S.,  Murchi-
son  Professor  of  Geology,    &c.,    Edinburgh.      With    numerous
Illustrations.     Fcap.  8vo.     4^.  (id.
QUESTIONS  ON  THE  SAME.     is.  6^.

Geography — CLASS-BOOK    OF   GEOGRAPHY.      By  C.  B.
Clarke,  M.A..  F.R.G.S.    Fcap.  8vo.     2j.  dd.

Natural  Philosophy— natural    PHILOSOPHY    FOR

BEGINNERS.  By  I.  Todhunter,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  Part  I.
The  Properties  of  Solid  and  Fluid  Bodies.  i8mo.  3^'.  bd.  Part
II.  Sound,  Light,  and  Heat.     i8mo.     3^.  6<^.

Sound.— AN  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE.     By  W.  H.  Stone,
M.D.,  F.R.S.     With  Illustrations.     i8mo.  lln  the  Press.

Others  in  Preparation.


MANUALS  FOR  STUDENTS.

Crown  8vo,

Dyer  and  Vines — the  STRUCTURE  OF  PLANTS.    By

Professor  Thiselton  Dyer,  F.R.S.,  assisted  by  Sydney
Vines,  B.Sc,  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.
With  numerous  Illustrations,  \J[n  preparation,

Fawcett.-*-A  MANUAL  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY.  By
Professor  Fawcett,  M.P.  New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.
Crown  8vo.     \2s.  ()d.

Fleischer.^A  SYSTEM  OF  VOLUMETRIC  ANALYSIS.
Translated,  with  Notes  and  Additions,  from  the  second  German
Edition,  by  M.  M.  Pattison  Muir,  F.R.S.E.  With  Illustra-
tions,    Crown  Zwo.     7s,  6d,


30  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE,

Manuals  for  Students — continued.

Flower  (W.  H.)— an  introduction  to  the  oste-
ology OF  THE  MAMMALIA.  Being  the  Substance  of  the
Course  of  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of
England  in  1870.  By  Professor  W.  H.  Flower,  F.R.S.,
F.R.C.S.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  New  Edition,  enlarged.
Crown  8vo.     los.  6d,

Foster  and  Balfour — the  ELEMENTS  OF  EMBRY-
OLOGY. By  Michael  Foster,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  and  F.  M.
Balfour,  M.A.     Part'l.  crown  Svo.     7^.  6d.

Foster  and  Langley.— a  course  of  elementary

PRACTICAI^  PHYSIOLOGY.  By  Michael  Foster,  M.D.,
F.R.S.,  and  J.  N.  Langley,  B.A.  New  Edition.  Crown  Svo.  6j.

Hooker  (Dr.)_THE  STUDENT'S  FLORA  OF  THE  BRITISH
ISLANDS.  By  Sir  J.  D.  Hooker,  K.C.S.I.,  C.B.,  F.R.S.,
M.D.,  D.C.L.     New  Edition,  revised.     Globe  Svo.     ioj.  6d.

Huxley — PHYSIOGRAPHY.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of
Nature.  By  Professor  Huxley,  F.R.S.  With  numerous
Illustrations,  and  Coloured  Plates.  New  Edition.  Crown  8vo-
7j.  6d,

Huxley  and  Martin. _a  COURSE  OF  PRACTICAL  IN-
STRUCTION IN  ELEMENTARY  BIOLOGY.  By  Professor
Huxley,  F.R.S.,  assisted  by  H.  N.  Martin,  M.B.,  D.Sc.  New
Edition,  revised.     Crown  Svo.     6s,

Huxley  and  Parker.—ELEMENTARY  biology,  part

II.      By  Professor  Huxley,   F.R.S.,   assisted  by  —  Parker.

With  Illustrations.  [In  preparation,

Jevons— THE  PRINCIPLES  OF   SCIENCE.      A  Treatise  on

Logic  and  Scientific  Method.    By  Professor  W.  Stanley  Jevons,

^  LL.D.,  F.R.S. ,  New  and  Revised  Edition.     Crown  Svo.    12s.  6d.

Oliver  (Professor).-_FiRST  BOOK  OF  Indian  botany.

By  Professor  Daniel  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  F.L.S.,  Keeper  of  the
Herbarium  and  Library  of  the  Royal  Gardens,  Kew.  With
numerous  Illustrations.     Extra  fcap.  Svo.     6s,  6d.

Parker  and  Bettany.— the  MORPHOLOGY  OF  THE
SKULL.  By  Professor  Parker  and  G.  T.  :feETTANY.  Illus-
trated.    Crown  Svo.     los.  6d.

Tait— Al^  ELEMENTARY  TREATISE  ON  HEAT.  By  Pro,
fessorTAiT,  F.R.S.E.     Illustrated.  [In  tke  Press.

Thomson — ZOOLOGY.  By  Sir  C.  Wyville  Thomson,
F.R.S.     Illustrated .  [In  preparation .

Tylor  and  Lankester.—ANTHROPOLOGY.  By  E.  B.
Tylor,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  and  Professor  E.  Ray  Lankester,  M.A.,
F.R.S.     Illustrated.  [In  preparation.

Other  volumes  of  these  Manuals  will  follow.


%*


NATURE    SERIES.


THE  SPECTROSCOPE   AND  ITS  APPLICATIONS.

By  J.  N.  LOCKYER.  F.R.S.  With  Illustrations.  Second  Edition.  Crown
8vo.    3^.  6d.

THE    ORIGIN    AND    METAMORPHOSES    OF    IN-

SECTS.  By  Sir  JOHN  LUBBOCK,  M.P.,  F.R.S.  With  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.     3J.  6d.    Second  Edition.

THE  TRANSIT  OF   VENUS.      By   G.  Forbes,  B.A.,

Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Andersonian  University,  Glasgow.
Wiih  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     -^s.  6d.

THE    COMMON   FROG.      By  St.    George    Mivart,

F.R.S.     Illustrated.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.

POLARISATION  OF  LIGHT.      By  W.  Spottiswoode,

LL.D.,  President  of  the  Royal  Society.  Illustrated.  Second  Edition,  Crown
8vo.    35'.  6d.

ON    BRITISH  WILD  FLOWERS    CONSIDERED  IN

RELATION  TO  INSECTS.  By  Sir  JOHN  LUBBOCK,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Illustrated.     Second  Edition.    Crown  8vo.     45.  6rf.

THE  SCIENCE  OF  WEIGHING  AND  MEASURING.

By  H.  W.  CHISHOLM,  Warden  of  the  Standards.  Illustrated.  Crown  8vo.
4J.  dd,

HOW  TO  DRAW  A  STRAIGHT  LINE  :  A  Lecture  on

Linkages.    By  A.  B.  KEMPE,  B.A.     Illustrated.    Crown  8vo.     i^.  M,.

LIGHT :    A   Series   of  Simple,    Entertaining   and  Useful

Experiments  in  the  Phenomena  of  Light  for  the  Use  of  Students  of  every  Age.
By  ALFRED  M.  MAYER  and  CHARLES  BARNARD.  With  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.     2.S.  6d.

SOUND  :  A  Series  of  Simple,  Entertaining  and  Inex-
pensive Experiments  in  the  Phenomena  of  Sound,  for  the  Use  of-  Students  of
every  Age.  By  A.  M.  MAYER,  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  Stevens  Institute
of  Technology,  &c.    With  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     3^.  dd.

( Others  to  follow, )

MACMILLAN   AND   CO,,    LONDON.


V


Published  every  Thursday,  price  6d.  j  Monthly  Parts  2s.  and
2s.    6d.,    Half-Yearly     Volumes,    i^s,

nature:

AN  ILLUSTRATED    JOURNAL    OF  SCIENCE.

Nature  expounds  in  a  popular  and  yet  authentic  manner,
the  Grand  Results  of  Scientific  Research,  discussing
the  most  recent  scientific  discoveries,  and  pointing  out
the  bearing  of  Science  upon  civilisation  and  progress,  and
its  claims  to  a  more  general  recognition,  as  well  as  to  ,a
higher  place  in  theieducational  system  of  the  country^

It  contains  original  articles  on  all  subjects  within  the
domain  of.  Science ;  Reviews  setting  forth  the  nature  and
value  of  recent  Scientific  Works ;  Correspondence  Columns,
forming  a  medium  of  Scientific  discussion  and  of  intercom-
munication among  the  most  distinguished  men  of  Science  ;
Serial  Columns,  giving. the  gist  of  the  most  important
papers  appearing  in  Scientific  Journals,  both  Home  and
Foreign ;  Transactions  of  the  principal  Scientific  Societies
and  Academies  of  the  World,  Nptes,  &c.

In  Schools  where  Science  is  included  in  the  regular
course  of  studies,  this  paper  will  be  most  acceptable,  as
it  tells  what  is  doing  in  Science  all  over  the  world,  is
popular  without  lowering  the  standard  of  Science,  ^nd  by
it  a  vast  amount  of  information  is  brought  within  a  small
compass,  and  students  are  directed  to  the  best  sources  for
what  they  need.  The  various  questions  connected  with
Science  teaching  in  schools  are  also  fully  discussed,  and  the*
best  methods  of  teaching  are  indicated.


O


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN


DATE  DUE


r,-1


A^


^f^^m


im


APR  3  0  1997


19!I7


UNIVERSITY  OF  MICHIGAN


OF  MICHIGAN


3  9015  00536  3927


Oxx  e  x>..,.^.,  ^      t-  ,/'>,/  9^


DO  NOT  REMOVE

OR
MUTILATE  CARDS


