Au


THE
REPORTS
OT
Sir EDWARD COKE, Ent.


IN ENGLISH,


IN THIRTEEN PARTS COMPLETE;


WITH


REFERENCES to all the Avcizwr and Moptrn
BOOKS of the LAW.


ExaQtly TRANSLATED, and COMPARED with the Firſt and Laſt Edition
in FRENCH, and printed Page for Page with the ſame.


TO WHICH ARE NOW ADDED, a


THE RESPECTIVE PLEADINGS.
IN ENGLISH.


.


The Whole newly REVISED, and carefully cox R ECT ED and TRANSLATED,
with many additional NOTES and REFERENCES,


By GEORGE WILSON, Sezjzanr ar Law.


LOND ON,


Printed for J. RivineTox and Sons, St. Paul's Church-yard; W. Own,
Fleer-ftreet; T. Loncman and G. Rozminson, Pater-noſter Row; G.
K8ARSLY, Fleet-ſtfeet; W. FLexxzY and W. Carter, Holborn; E. Ba poxz,
Bell- yard, Temple - bar; and T. WA Is TDox and Co. Fleet-ftreet. 1777.

| 7 45


n rr nnn ts Re bo
oY \ > . — wy *


>” WOT”


T H E .


\ -


SEVENTH PART


Q'F.. 3 8 )


r G R


sir EDWARD COKE, Kat.
Lord Chief Juſtice of | the Com on PLEASV.


O F


Divers Reſolutions and Judgments given upon ſolemn Arguments, and with

reat Deliberation and Conference of the reverend Judges and Sages of the

— of Caſes in Law which were never reſolved or adjudged before: and
the Reaſons and Cauſes of the ſaid Reſolutions and Judgments.


Publiſhed in the Sixth Year of the moſt High and moſt Illuſtrious I AME $ King
of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the XLII. the Fountain of
all Piety and Juſtice, and the Life of the Law.


With REFERENCES to all the BOOKS of the COMMON LAW, as well
Ancient as Modern: And the PLEADINGSin ENGLISH, carefully Reviſed
and Corrected, |


1


By GEORGE WILSON, Serjeant at Law.


Frequentibus argumentis & collationibus latens veritas aperitur, cum ſub eiſden verbis
 Jepe lateat multiplex intelle4us. :
Veritas firpius agitata magis ſplendeſcit in lucem.


uh


P BEL 4, 2 I RI.


PDE O, PATRIAZA, TIBI.


%
£


EXTA Commentari-

orum ſive Relationum
mearum parti vix extre-
mam manum addideram
(leftor candide) cum, que
Jingulos exercuit Angliæ
Judices, oborta eſt con-
troverſia, cujus certe fi-
milis nunquam fuit ante
hunc diem in aula Weſt.
agitata: unde etiam,


dum eorum qua audio


ram recens admodum
memoria fuit, ea præci-
pue (prout mos ſem-
perque apud me fuit) que
ſummarie ex omnibus
diſputationibus atque ar-
gumentis, plurimum pon-


deris ac momenti, five


authoritates five rationes
ad ſolvendam quæſtio-
nem annolaſſem, in pro-


HAD no fooner (good

reader) made an end
of the Sixth Part of my
Commentaries or Re—
ports, but the greateſt caſe
that ever was argued in
the hall of Weſtminſter
began to come in queſ-
tion, and afterwards
was argued by all the
Judges of England.
This great caſe (for
that memory is ixſida
labilis) while the
matter was recent and
freſh in mind, and al-
moſt yer founding in
the ear, I ſet down
in writing, out of my


ſhort obſervations which


I had taken of the ef-
fect of every argument,


(as my manner is,
A 3 and


. by Fs
Wm 4 2 .


To the RE ADE R.


and ever bath been) a


ſummary memorial of
the principal authori-
ties and reaſons of the
reſolutions of that caſe,
for my own private ſo-
lace and inſtruction. I


never thought to have


publiſhed the ſame, for
— it was not like to
give any direction in
like caſes that might
happen, (the chieteſt
end of publiſhing Re-
ports) it 1s of its own
nature ſo like the
phcenix,, and ſo fingu-
lar and rare in acci—
dent, as the union of
two famous and an-
cient kingdoms in li—
geance and obedience
under one great and
mighty monarch, Now
when I had ended it
for my private uſe, I
was by commandment
to begin again (a mat-


ter of no ſmall la—


bour and difficulty) for
the public. For cer-
rainly, that ſuccinct
method and collection
that will ſerve for the
private memorial or
repertory, eſpecially of
him that knew and


prium ſolamen meum &


Juvamen (infida enim eft


labiliſque memoria) pri-
vatim literis mandavi.
Nunquam autem iſta
quoviſmodo in publicum
proditura putavi, quia
_ (qued primum artitror &
pracipuum, quod ex Re-
lationibus edendis perci-
pi poteſt emolumentum ;)
non veriſimile” eſt hunc
caſum de aliis in judican-
do cognitionem informa-
turum : nam duo nobi-
liſſima ſimul & antiquiſ-
ima regna in unam con-
flari monarchiam, uno
in utriſque florentiſſimo
rege invictiſimoque mo-
narcha dominante, hoc
uſu infrequens, imo ficut
ipſe pbænix unicum &
individuum eſt in ſpecie,
cum quo comparari po-
teſt ſocium habens nemi-
nem. Jum demum cum
tontum, quantum mei ſo-
lins cauſa apud memet
annctare volui, perfeciſ-
ſem, mandatum mihi fuit,
ut de novo (quod non
minimi ſudoris erat &
difficultatis) in uſum e-
tiam publicum recollt-
gerem: nam c.rle ſuc-
cintia iſla & compendio-


/a


| * .


al
"SS 6”


To the READER:


ſa annotandi methodus,
que ſatis eft in memoriam
colligentis, qui omnia at-
gue ſingula prout geſta
fuerunt audierit & cog-
noverit, nequaquam ſane
ſatis erit in ea ſcribendt


genere, qued & in præ-
ſens & futurum ſeculum


eft duraturum, & quod
lellores etiam, qui per
ſemetipſas nibil habent
preter illud quod ex eo
quod conſcriptum eſt ad-
diſcant, eſs eilodturum.
Et ficut unda gignit un-
dam, fic labor unus ali-
um tanquam gemellum
aliguem videtur eſſe con-
ſecutum: nam cum bic
guem dixi caſus, novus
et & inauditus, ani-
mum idiirco induxi non
inutilem fore, fi cum &
temet (candide lefior) in
quantum poſſum erudi-
rem, alus item in ambi-
guarum quarundam, de
terris & tenementis ſuis
(in quibus adbuc graves
admodum & inter fe pug-
nantes juris-peritorum o-
piniones extiterunt) que/ſ-
tion um ſolutione ſatigſa-
cerem, alios nonnullos
caſus uſu frequenticres,
dignitate inter cele-


heard all, will nothing
become a public re-
port for the preſent and
all poſterity, or be ſuf-


ficient to inſtru&t thoſe


readers, who of them-
ſelves know nothing, but
muſt be inſtructed by
the report only in the
right rule and reaſon
of the caſe in queſtion,
And as unda gigntt un-


dam, ſo commonly one
labour cometh not alone.
This brought on an-


other with it; for ſeeing


this caſe was of ſo
rare a quality, I
thought good as well for
thine inſtruction and
ule (good reader) as
for the repole and


quiet of many, in re-
ſolving of queſtions and
doubts (wherein there
hath been great diverſity
of opinions) concerning
their eſtates and pol-
ſeſſions, to publiſh ſome
other that are common
in accident, welghty
in conſequent, and yet
never reſolved


is now verified in this,
that which hath been
ſaid of old, Laber

A 4 labori


| or ad-.
judged before: ſo as it


laberi laborem addit.


With this ſeventh work


or part of my Reports


(where unto Almighty God


of his goodneſs hath
in this ſhort time, a-
mongſt many other pub-
lic employments, enabled
me) I have out of my
love unto all my dear
countrymen,
perſuaſion in religion ſo-


ever they be, thought


good to give them all a
caveat or forewarning
in a caſe of great im-
portance, that deeply and
dangerouſly concerns them
all in ſo high a point,
that in the firſt degree
it is a Premunire, and
in the fecond high trea-
fon. And yet many
men, without all fear
(by reaſon I think they
know not the law) run


into the danger there-
of almoſt every day. 1
mult confeſs, that


this


To the READER,


of what


ros nequaquam minores,
nunquam antebac diluci-
de ſatis judiciis explica-
tos, in medium profer-
rem: ita ut jam ratum


fit quod jamdudum apud


autiquos in proderbium
abiit, Labor labori labos em
adnit. |

Putavi ego, ex med in
concives meos charitate,
cujuſcunque demum cond: -
tionis religioniſve ſint, na-
vandam eſſe operam, ut
non ſolum hanc ſepti-
mam FRelationum mea-
rum partem (cui colligen-
dæ ac in lucem edende
Deus in hiſce temporum
anguſtiis, dum in gra-
vioribus  reipublice ne-
getiis verſatus ſum, vires
dedit) omnibus ob oculos
ponerem, ſed, ut eoſdem
etiam adbortarer & præ-
monerem in quodam non
mediocris momenti caſu,
qui fingulos ita neceſſa-
rio eoque medo ſpectat,
ut, ſi quid in eo pecca-
tum fuerit, in primo gra-
du fit pena de Præmu-
wire, in ſec undo leaſe
majeſtatis culpa, in quo
tamen multi (dum le-


gem, ut mibi videtur, ig-
norant) temere & incon-
ſullo pere quotidie delin-
Mibi certe confi-

tenaum


quunt,


To the


tendum eſt, eo uſque nunc
temporis redactum eſſe hoc
ſeculum, ut quiſque pro ſe
ſedulo in diſcribendis li-
bellulis faciat, viz. Quo-
tidie plures, quotidie pejus
ſcribunt. Et certo cer-
tius eft fi quiſquam homi-
num libros iſtos) quos ego
vidi) nuperrime conſcriptos
2 Roma vel a Romaniſtis
ad nos uſque atiulerit,
aut eos legends ſuffragus
palrocinatus fuerit, aut
eos item aliis approbando
(quod maxime apud au-
thores in votis eſt) legen-
dos dederit, in ſummas,
& turbulentiſſimas peri-
culorum tempeſtates in-
cidat neceſſum eſt : nam
primo cum in hunc mo-
dum peccarit pænas da-
bit per Præmunire (que
fic ſe habent, adjudicari
non eſſe in Regis protec-
tione; eorum terras &
bona omnia in Regis po-
teſtatem red gi; et cor-
pora carceri perpetuo
damnari) : et qui ſecun-
do deliquerit læſæ ma-
Jeſtatis grave ſupplicium
incurret. Hi ſuut illi li-
bri qui ſplendidos et im-
Primis religioſos pre ſe


READER.


is a writing or ſcrib-
bling world, Quotidie
plures, quotidie pejus ſcri-
bunt, And ſure I am,
that no man can either
bring over thoſe books
of late written (which
I have ſeen) from Rome
or Romaniſts, or read
them, and juſtify them,
or deliver them over
to any other with a lik-
ing and allowance of the
ſame, (as the author's
end and deſire is they
ſhould,) but they run
into deſperate dangers
and downfalls; for the
firſt offence is a Pre-
munire, which is to be
adjudged to be out of
the King's protection, to
loſe all their lands
and goods, and to fſuf-


fer perpetual impriſon-


ment; and they, that
offend the ſecond time
therein, incur the heavy
danger of high trea-
ſon. Theſe books have
glorious and goodly ti-
tles, which promiſe dt-
rections for the con-
ſcience, and remedies
for the ſoul, but there
is mors in olla: they

are


To the READER.


are like to apothecaries
boxes, quorum lituli polli-
centur remedia, ſed pixides
ipſæ venena continent, whoſe
titles promiſe remedies,
but the boxes themſelves
contain poiſon, This fore-
warning I give out of con-
ſcience and care of their


ſafety, that blindfold might


fall into fo great danger
by their means whom they
ſo much reverence. I am
not afraid of gnats that
can prick and cannot hurt,
nor of drones that keep a
buzzing, and would, but
cannot ſting,


ferunt titulos ; bi illi ſu


qui conſcientiis hominum
infirmitate laborantibus c-
pem ferre ſe profitentur ;
hi ſunt illi denique qui
miſeras & miſerandas pec-
catrices animas in optatum
tranquillitatis & ſalutis
portum adducere in ſe ſuſ-
cipiunt; at mors in olla;
guemadmodum plerumgue
in pharmacepolarum vaſ-
culis videre eft, quorum li-
tult pollicentur remedia,
ſed pixides ipſæ venena
continent. Hiſce ego præ-
monitionibus uſus ſum e
ſolicita eorum cura, qui
preſitgias © impeſturas
iſtas (quibus bi, ques


tanto proſequuntur amo-


re & reverentid, in ſum-
mum capitis Ppericu um
eos de improviſo aucant)
nondum copnorunt. Jam
vero, neque culices, qui
944% titillando pungurt
Paulo. non penetrant, ne-


que fucos iſtos qui ſu-


ſurris tantis bombuliſque


ques edunt maxim!s, a-
culeis auiem, quibus ca-
rent agrius, nuſquam luci
belligerare ſolen!, tantil-
lum pertimeſco ; imo in-
quam, ut ct apud pee:am,

Nen


To the READER.


Non metuo pulicis fiimulos fucique ſuſurros.


Nec pili quidem æſti-


mo invidum iſtum & ma-
 ledicum, qui, quo fuſins


venena ſua evomeret, li-


bellum quendam, neſcio


an rudem an inconcin-


num magis, ſnb titulo &


nomine Pricket in lucem
protulet, dicatum opti-
mo meo domino & Soce-
ro Comiti Exceſtr. &
inſcriptum, Memoriale
ve mandatum jurato-
rum in affijis apud ci-
vitatem Nordovicam, 4
die Auguſti, 1606. quem
ſane conteſtor non ſolum
me omnino inſciente fu-
e divulgatum, ſed (o-
miſſis etiam ipſis potiſſi-
mis) ne unum quidem
ſententiblam eo ſenſu &
ſigniſicatione, prout dicta
erat, fuifſe enarratam.
Jam vero fi cataſlrophen
expectes, ecce (dum per-
petuum in me dedecus &
infamiam inurere cona-
tus eft) quam falſum ejus


eum habuit expectatis?


Primo enim leflores illi,
Juris-peritos dico, qui in-
ter legendum, non ſolum
graves & lurpes errores


And little do I eſteem
an uncharitable and
malicious practice in
publiſhing of an errone-
ous and 11I-ſpelled
pamphlet, under the
name Pricket, and de-
dicating it to my ſingu-


lar good Lord and fa-


ther-in-law, the FEarl
of Exeter, as a charge
given at the aſſizes
holden at the city of
Norwich, 4 Auguſt,
1606. which I proteſt
was not only publiſhed
without my privity,
but (beſides the omil-
ſion of divers principal
matters) that there 1s
no one period therein
expreſſed in that fort
and ſenſe that I deli-
vered it: herein it
is is worthy of obſerva-
tion, how their ex-
pectation (of fſcandali-
zing! me) was wholly
deceived ; for behold the
cataltrophe, Such of
the readers as were
learned in the Jaws,
finding not only grols
errors and abſurdt-

ties


—


—


To the READER.


ties on law, but pal-
pable miſtakings in
the very words of art,
and the whole context
of that rude and rag-
ged ſtyle, wholly diſſo-


nant (the ſubject be-


ing legal) from a law-
yer's dialect, conc]ud-


ed, that inimicus &


iniquus bo mo Juperſe-


 minavit Zzizania in me
dio tritici:


the other
diſcreet and indiffe-
rent readers, out of
ſenſe and reaſon, found
out the ſame concluſion,


both in reſpect of the


vanity of the phraſe,
and for that I, publiſh-
ing about the ſame time
one of my Commenta-
ries, would, if I had
intended the publica-
tion of any ſuch mat-
ter, have done it my
ſelf, and not to have
ſuffered any of my
works to paſs_ under
the name of Pricket;
and ſo und voce con-
clamaverunt omnes, that
it was a ſhameful and
ſhameleſs practice, and
the author thereof, to


S devias opinionum ab-
ſurditates, ſed ipſas eti-


am voces artis turpiter in


alienum ſenſum uſurpa-


tas, & totum denique
contextum longiſſume a ju-
rts-conſultorum (de legi-
bus enim agebatur) uſu
& conſuetudine remotiſſi-
mum eſſe, animadverie-
runt, continuo hoc in oe
habuerunt, TInimicus &
iniquus homo ſuperſcmi-
navit zizania in medio
tritici. Deinde alii quo-
que cordati & aqui lec-
tores, dum generis dicen-


di & phraſis levitatem


ſerio perpenderunt, ſu-
apte ſponte in eandem in-
ciderunt opinionem: nam,
cum eodem fere tempore
Commentarium quendam
ipſe divulgarem, pro certo
flatuerunt, ſi ea animus
fuiſſet divulgandi, memet-
ipſum voluiſſe, meo pi o-
prio nomino nequaquam no-
mine Pricket, mea propria
opera omnibus inſpicien-
da prebuiſſe: idcirco
quaji una voce conclama-
verunt cines, illud ip-
fum opus tum natura ſua
maxine nequam elſe &

Puden-


To the READER.


pudendum, cum ab opi-
ice ſcelirato & mendaci


preſiciſcatur:


be a wicked and malicious
fallary. ©


Circumvertit enim vis & injuria quemque,
Alque unde exorta eſt in eum r revertit.


In hiſce, ficut in aliis


meis Kelationibus, hoc
mibi pracipue cure fuit,
ut (quanlum me Penes e-
rat) obſcuritatem, am-
 biguttatem, periclitatio-
nem, novitatem & pro-
lixitatem arterſarer. 1.
Obſcuritatem, que ſa-
ne haud abſimilis tene-
brarum eſt, in quibus mi-
ſere ſelis radus viducs
neceſſe eſt huc illuc, ul-
tro cilirogue, uſquequa-
que drviare. 2. Ami:
guitatem, in qua non ut
ſupra lucis inopia labora-
mus, ſed variis meatuum
anfractibus, & irremeabi-
libus dubitationum mæ-


andris ita d:ſtrafti ſumus,
ut quid ſequenaum, quid


fugiendum fit, prorſus ig-
noremus. . Periclitalio—
nem, ne qu cquam om-


nino in: medium profer-


rem, quod quæſtiones
magis novas & contro-
verſias ad turbandum,
quam tranquillitatem &


In theſe and the
reſt of my Reports, I
have (as much as I
could) avoided obſcu-
rity, ambiguity, jeo-
pardy, novelty, aad


prolixity : 1. Obſcuri-


ty, for that is like
unto darkneſs, where-


in a man for want


of light can hardly
with all his indu-
{try diſcern any , way.
2. Ambiguity, where
there is light enough,
but there be ſo many
winding and intricate
ways, as a man for
want of direction, ſhall


be much perplexed and


entangled to find out


the right way. 3. Jeo-


pardy, either in publiſh-
ing of any thing, thar
might rather ſtir up
ſuits and controverſies in
this troubleſome world,


than eſtabliſh quiet-


nels and repole be-
tween


|
|
|


—


—


To the READER.


* 4ween man and man, (for
a commentary ſhould not
be like unto the winterly
ſun, that raiſeth up
greater and thicker miſts
and fogs, than it is able
to diſperſe,) or in bring-
ing the reader, by any
means, into the leaſt


queſtion of peril or dan-


ger at all, 4. Novelty,
for I have ever holden all
new or private interpre-
tations, or opinions, which
have no ground or war-
rant out of the reaſon or
rule of our books, or for-
mer precedents, to be
dangerous, and not wor-
thy of any obſervation :
for periculoſum exiſtimo
quod bonorum virorum non
comprobatur exemplo. 5.
Prolixity, for a Report
ought to be no longer
than the matter requireth,
and as languor prolixus
- gravat medicum, ita Rela-
tio prolixa gravat lectorem.


* deo


concordiam ad flabilien-
dum hunc fludtuantem
hominum ſtatum pro-
creet, (non enim conve-
nit, ut hujuſmodi com-
mentarii illud agant quod
plerumgue ſolent hyber-
ni ſoles, qui denfiores
nebulas & fuliginoſiores
concilant, quam quas eiſ-
dem radicrum viribus
diſpergere valent,) aut
quod lecterem meum
vel in primaria erroris
&  dubitationis limina
quoquo modo ducat. 4.
Novitatem, eo quod 1d
maxime laborandum ar-
bitror, ut novas quaſcun-
que interpretatiunculas
et privatas opiniones,
(que, fi ad amuſſim no-
ftrorum librorum et an-
tiquorum exempla appli-
centur, nequaquam qua-
drant) periculofiſimas,
et ſtudiis noſtris indig-
niſſimas evitem: nam pe-
riculoſum exiſtimo quod
bonorum virorum non
comprobatur exemplo. 5,
Prolixitatem, cum in Re-
lationibus hoc imprimis
fit optaudum, ut int a-
compendiaris bre-


ves prout neceſſitas reſ-
que


To the READER.


que ipſa ferre poteſt; ſi-

cut enim languor prolix-
us gravat medicum, ita
Relatio prolixa gravat
leforem,


Quod caſus ille de


Poſtnatis reliquis eſt pro-
lixior, confitendum eſt, at
vero tres, que fuſiorem
me fecerunt in eo renun-


tiando, cauſæ gravicres


acceſſerunt. 1. Quod in
Camera Scaccarii caſus
erat diſcuſſus, ad quem
quidem diſcutiendum omnes
Angliæ Judices (quemad-
modum leges & conſuetu-
dines poſtulant) figillatim,
aperte, & copioſe ſunt
argumentati. 2. Quin
non alius fuit uſpiam caſus
in Camera Scaccarii quoad
quiſpiam wuunc temporis
virorum cogitatione po-
teſt aſſequi, quem tot in-
 femul Judices, tamque e-
laborate pertrattarunt :;
non enim Dominus Can-
cellarius ſolum, ſed alii
etiam quatuordecim Ju-
dices in eodem caſu vi-
res ſuas et ingenia limate
exercuerunt. 3. Quta
tanta fuit varietas atque
copia tam materiæ ratio-
Tun et argumentiorum


The caſe of Poſtnati, I
confeſs, is longer than
any of the reſt, ahd that
for three cauſes: frſt,
for that it was an Ex-
chequer-chamber caſe, for
deciding whereof all the
Judges of England (as
the law doth require) did
argue openly, and at
large. Secondly, for that
never any cafe within
man's memory, was ar-


gued by ſo many Judges


in the Exchequer-cham-
ber, as this was, there
having argued the Lord
Chancellor and fourteen
Judges. Thirdly, for the
variety as well of the im-
portant matter, as of the
ſeveral kinds of excellent
learning and knowledge,
delivered in the arguments
of this cale.


| Finally


TEE
vil


1


To the READER.


Finally, with theſe


wiſhes and deſires I con-


clude, firſt, that the ſtu-
dious reader might indeed
receive as great profit and
delight in reading this
work, as I did (unleſs
mine own. judgment de-
e) in compoſing
framing thereof.
Secondly, that guoad gus
fieri poſit, quam-plurima
legibus ipſis definiantur,
quam pauciſſima vero Ju-
dicis arbitrio relinguantur.


ponderibus libratæ, quam
forme muliis excel/entium
ingeniorum, mirahilium-
que artium ornamentis de-
coratæ, ut breviter &
ſuccinfte magis referri non
Poſſe videbatur.

Nunc demum, boc ul.
terius tantum votis am-
plector meis;, primum ut
Studioſus lefior quantam
ego quidem (/i non meum
me deluſerit judicium) in
componendis & formandis,
tantam ille itidem revei a
in legendis hiſce Relaticn:-
bus utilitatem mul &
voluptatem excerpat; de-
inde ut quoad ejus fiert
poſſit, quaniplurima legi-
bus ipfis definiantur, quam
pauciſſima vero Judicis ar-
bitrio relinquaniur.


The


Part VII.


The Order of the CAs Es reported
this Seventh Book.


Calvin's Caſe, Trin. 6 Jacobi Fol.


Bulwer's Caſe, Mich. 26 & 27 Eliz,
Sir Miles Corbet's Caſe, Hil. 27 Eliz.


Caſes upon the Statute of 13 Edw, 1. of
Wincheſter.


Trin. 27 Eliz.
Trin. 28 Eliz.
| Trin. 29 Eliz.
The Earl of Bedford's Caſe, Mich. 28 & 29 Eliz.


Ughtred's Caſe, Trin, 33 Eliz.

Englefield's Caſe, Mich. 33 & 34 Eliz.
| The Caſe of Swans, Trin. 34 Eliz.

Sir Thomas Cecil's Caſe, Mich. 39 & 40 Eliz.

The Lord Anderſon's Caſe, Trin. 41 Eliz.

But' s Caſe, Trin. 42 Eliz.


—


Caſes of Quare impedit.


Hall's Caſe, Paſch. 31 Eliz.
Sir Hugh Portman's Caſe, Paſch. 40 Eliz.
Baſkervil's Caſe, Trin. 27 Eliz.
22 Caſe, 3 Fil. 43 Eliz.
iſcontinuanceof Proceſs, &c. .
by the Death of the Queen. Trin. x Jac.


Vor. IV. | B


2


ö
[ N


—ꝛñꝛů— xx ů——— —— — ̃ —᷑-—ęt!!4⁊̃ ĩ *ñ ęLi
— — — — —


——


— —
— ———— -e—_


_ — wwe” ooo eng te AR —
—


——


— —
——


wa ms


———


— —— —
2
— —_


— RE to on —„— BS wo —


OO — —


- _ — 3
—— — —


—


The Order of the Caſes in this Book. Part VII.


The Cafe of a Fine levied by |
the King, Tenant in Tail, þ Mich. 2 Jac.


&c. |
Nevil's Caſe, Mich. 2 Jac,
Penal Statutes, Hil. 2 Jac.
Lillingſton's Cafe, Mich. 5 Jac.
Bedel's Caſe, Mich. 5 Jac.
Beresford's Caſe, . Mich. 5 Jac,
Kenn's Caſe, Mich. 5 Jac»


32


33
3
3
40
41
42


Poftnati


| op


See the caſe of


the union of
Scotland wih
England debated


At large in Moore


92 Poſtnati.
CAL V I N's Caſe.
Trin. 6 Fac. I.


TAMES by the grace of God of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, King, defender of the faith, &c- To the
Sheriff of Middleſex, greeting : Robert Calvin, Gent, hath
complained to us, that Richard Smith, and Nicholas Smith
unjuſtly, and without judgment, have diſſeiſcd him of his
frechold in Haggard, otherwiſe Haggerſton, otherwiſe Ag-
gerſton, in the pariſh of St. Leonard, in Shoreditch, within
30 years now laſt paſt, and therefore we command you, that
if the ſaid Robert thall ſecure you to proſecute his claim, then
that you cauſe the ſaid tenement to be reſeiſed with the chat-
tels, which within it were taken, and the faid tenement with
the chattels, to be in peace until Thurſday next after 15 days
of St. Martin next coming ; and in the mean time, cauſe 12
free and lawful men of that neighbourhood, to view the ſaid
tenement, and the names of them to be inbreviated ; and
ſummon them by good ſummoners, that they be then before
us wherever we ſhall then be in England, ready thereof to
make recognition; and put by ſureties, and ſafe pledges, the
aforeſaid Richard and Nicholas or their Bailiffs (if they cannot
de found, ) that they be then there, to hear the recognition;
and have there the ſummoners, the names of the pledges, and
this writ, Witneſs our ſelf at Weſtminſter, the 3d day of
November, in the fifth year of our reign of England, France,
and Ireland, and of Scotland the one and ſortieth. |


For 408. paid in the hamper,
Kindeſley.


Middleſes, fl. THE aſſiſe cometh to recognizance, if Rich.

| Smith, and Nich. Smith unjuſtly, and with - /

out judgment, did diſſeiſe W rs Gent. of his freehold in
| 2


Haggard,


fr


gy, de Dyer


fo. 304. 2 Jon.


10 Vaugh. 286
279, 301. 1 Lev.
50. Plowd.


a Caſe of the


Dutchy. Elleſ-
mer, Poſtnati,
1, 2, &c. Bacon
of Government
2 pt. 76.
Atwood's Supe-
riority 304.
Salk. 411, 412.
Skinner 134,
172,198, 3357
442.

The writ of
Aſſiſe.


The Count.


Alien nee pleaded
in | |


*


Carvin's Caſe, Part VII.


Haygard, otherwiſe Haggerſton, otherwiſe Aggerſton, in the pa-
riſh of St, Leonard in Shoreditch, within thirty years now laſt
palt ; and whereupon, the ſaid Robert, who is within the age of
twenty-one years, by John Parkinſon, and William Parkinſon,
his guardians, by the Court of the ſaid King here to this being
jointly and ſeverally ſpecially admitted, complaineth ; that they
diſſeiſed him of one meſſuage with the appurtenances, &c. And
the ſaid Richard and Nicholas, by William Edwards, their attor-
ney, come and ſay, that the ſaid Robert ought not to be anſwered
to his writ aforeſaid, becauſe they ſay, that the ſaid Robert is an
alien born, on the 5th day of November, in the 3d year of the
reign of the K. that now is, of England, France, and Ireland, and
of Scotland the thirty-ninth, at Edinburgh within his kingdom
of Scotland, aforeſaid, and within the allegiance of the ſaid lord
the King, of the ſaid kingdom of 8 and out of the alle-
giance of the ſaid lord the King of his kingdom of England; and
and at the time of the birth of the ſaid Robert Calvin, and long
before, and continually afterwards, the aforeſaid kingdom of Scot-
land, by the proper rights, laws, and ſtatutes of the ſame king-
dom, and not by the rights, laws, or ſtatutes of this kingdom of
England, was and yet is ruled and governed. And this he is rea-
dy to verify, and thereupon prayeth judgment, if the {aid Robert,
to his ſaid writ aforeſaid, ought to be anſwered, &c. And the
aforeſaid Robert Calvin ſaith, that the aforeſaid plea, by the
aforeſaid Richard and Nicholas above pleaded, is inſufficient in
law, to bar him the ſaid Robert from having an anſwer to his writ
aforeſaid ; and that the ſaid Robert, to the ſaid plea in manner


and form aforeſaid pleaded,” needeth not, nor by the law of the


Joinder.


Continuances,


land is bound to anſwer ; and this he is ready to verify, and here-
of prayeth judgment ; and that the ſaid Richard and Nicholas to
the aforeſaid writ of the ſaid Robert may anſwer. And the ſaid
Richard and Nicholas, foraſmuch as they have above alledged
ſufficient matter in law to bar him the ſaid Robert from having an
anſwer to his ſaid writ, which they are ready to verify; which
matter the aforeſaid Robert doth not gainſay, nor to the ſame
doth in any ways anſwer, but the ſaid averment altogether refu-
ſeth to admit as before pray judgment, if the aforeſaid Robert
ought to be anſwered to his ſaid writ, &c. And becauſe the
Court of the lord the King here, are not yet adviſed of giving
their judgment of and upon the premiſes, day thereof is given to
the parties afareſaid ; before the Lord the King at Weſtminſter un-
til Monday next after 8 days of St. Hilary, to hear their judgment
thereof, becauſe the court of the lord the King here thereof are
not yet, &c. And the aſſiſe aforeſaid remains to be taken before the
ſaid Lord the King, until the ſame Monday there, &c. And the She-
Tiff to diſtrain the recognitors of the aſſiſe aforeſaid: and in the
interim to cauſe a view, &c. at which day, before the lord the King
at Weſtminſter, come as well the aforeſaid R. Calvin by his guar- |

ians a foreſaid, as the aforeſaid Rich. Smith and Nic. Smith by their
attorney aforeſaid, and becauſe the court of the lord the rs.


Part VII. Carvin's Caſe; 2
here of giving their judgment of and upon the premiſes iz Curta adviſers
not yet adviſed, g is given to the parties aforeſaid .
before the lord the King at Weſtminſter, until Monday next
after the morrow of the Aſcenſion of our Lord, to hear their
judgment; becauſe the court of the lord the King here are
not yet, &c. And the aſſiſe aforeſaid remains further to be | ;
taken, until the ſame Monday there, &c. and the Sheriff as be-
fore to diſtrain the recognitors of the aſſiſe aforeſaid, and in
the interim to cauſe a view, &c. At which day, before the
lord the King at Weitminſter, come as well the aforeſaid Ro-
bert Calvin by his guardians aforeſaid, as the aforeſaid Richard
Smith and Nicholas Smith, by their Attorney aforeſaid, &c,
and becauſe the court of the lord the King here, &c. .


HE queſtion of this caſe as to matter in law was, whe- The Quetion.
ther Robert Calvin the plaintiff (being born in Scot-
land ſince the crown of England deſcended to his Majeſty) be
an alien born, and conſequently diſabled to bring any real or
perſonal (a) action for any lands within the realm of England. (e) 1 Bultt,r44,
. Aﬀer this caſe had been argued in the Court of King's Bench, Yelv. 198.
at the bar, by the counſel learned of either party, the Judges Go. Las,
; « Lit. 129. b.
of that Court upon conference and conſideration of the weight 1 And 25.
and importance thereof, adjourned the fame (according to the Meor 431.
ancient and ordinary courſe and order of the law) into the (5) Tn —_—
Exchequer chamber, to be argued openly there; firſt by the cro, — 9. 2
counſel learned of either party, and then by all the Judges of 4 Inſt. 153.
England; where afterwards the caſe was argued by Bacon pen — wo
Solicitor General, on the part of the plaintiff, and by Laur. (3) 2 Bud. 146,
Hide for the defendant; and afterward by Hobart Attorney ”
General for the plaintiff, and by Seijeant Hutton for the de-
ſendant; and in Eaſter term laſt, the caſe was argued by He-
ron Puiſne Baron of the. Exchequer, and Foſter Puiſne Toles
of the Court of Common Pleas ; and on the ſecond day ap-
pointed for this caſe, by Crook Puiſne Judge of the King's
Bench, and Altham, Baron of the Exchequer ; the third day
by Snigge Baron of the Exchequer, and Williams one of the
Judges of the King's Bench ; the fourth day by Daniel, one of
the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, and by Yelverton
one of the Judges of the King's Bench: and in 1inity term
following, by Warburton one of the Judges of the Common
Pleas, and Fenner one of the Judges of the King's Bench ;
and after by Walmeſley one of the Judges of the Common
Pleas, and Tanheld, Chief Baron; and at two ſeveral days
in the ſame term, Coke, Chief Juſtice of the Common
* Pleas, Fleming, Chief Juſtice of the King's Bench, and
Sir 'Thomas Eggerton, Lord Elleſmere, Lord Chancellor of
England, argued the caſe ( the like plea in —


B 3


4


CALvix's Caſe, Part VII.


of Robert Calvin's perſon being pleaded mutatis mutandis in
the Chancery in a ſuit there for evidence concerning lands of

+ inheritance, and by the Lord Chancellor adjourned alfo into
the Exchequer-chamber, to the end that one rule might over-
rule both the ſaid caſes.) And firſt (for that I intend to make

as ſummary a report as I can) I will at the firſt fet down ſuch
The arguments arguments and objeCtions as were made and drawn out of this


1 ſhort record * the plaintiff, by thoſe that argued for the
defend. defendants. It was obſerved, that in this plea there were


four nouns, quatuor nomina, which were called, nomina opera-
tiva, becauſe from them all the ſaid arguments and objections
on the part of the defendants were drawn; that is to ſay,
1. Ligeantia (which is twice repeated in the plea, for it is
ſaid, infra ligeantiam domini Regis regni ſui Scot, & extra lige-
antiam domini Regis regni ſui Angl.”) 2. Regnum (which alſo
appeareth to be twice mentioned, viz. regnum Angl”, and
tegnum Scot.”) 3. Leges (which are twice alledged, viz. leges
Angl', and leges Scot', two ſeveral and diſtinct laws.) 4. Alieni-
| ena {which is the concluſion of all, viz. that Robert Calvin
is ahenigena.

1. Ligeantia. By the firſt it appeareth, that the deſendants
do make two ligeances, one of England, and another of Scot-
land, and from theſe ſeveral ligeances two arguments were
framed, which briefly may be concluded thus: Whoſoever is
born infra ligeantiam, within the ligeance of King James of his
kingdom of Scotland, is alienigena, an alien born, as to the
kingdom of England : but Robert Calvin was born at Edin-
burgh, within the ligeance of the King of his kingdom of
Scotland; therefore Robert Calvin is alicnigena, an alien born,
as to the kingdom of England. 2. Whofoever is born extra
ligeantiam, out of the ligeance of King James of his kingdom

of England, is an alien as to the kingdom of England; but
the plaintiff was born out of the ligeance of the King of his
kingdom of England; therefore the plaintiff is an alien, &c.
Both theſe arguments are drawn from the very words of ths

, Plea, viz. grad pred? Robertus eft alienigena, natus 5 Nov. anno
regni domini Regis nunc Ang!” Se. tertio apud Edenburgh infra '
regnum Scot', ac infra ligeantiam diet domint Regis dittt regni
fur Scot', as extra ligeantiam dicti domini Regis regni ſui Angl'.

2. Regna, From the ſeveral kingdoms, viz. repnum Ang!”
and regnum Scot', three arguments were drawn. 1. Quando

(a) Elteimere's () duo jura (imo dua regna) concurrunt in una perſona,
Poſtnati 88. . - . ISS

Poſtearg.b, 400. ©44umM ff ac fi efſent in diverſis : but in the King's per-
118.2. ſon there concur two diſtinct and ſeveral kingdoms ; there-


Cawly 20g. fore it is all one as if they were in divers perſons,
Mogr 793, 804. and


Part VII. Citvrn's Caſe; 3
and conſequently the plaintiff is an alien, as all the antenati

are, for that they were born under the ligeance of another K.

2. Whatſoever is due to the King's ſeveral politic capacities

of the ſeveral kingdoms 1s levers and divided; but ligeance

of each nation is due to the King's ſeveral politic capacities of

the ſeveral kingdoms z ergo, the ligeance of each nation is ſe-

veral and divided, and conſequently the plaintiff is an alien,

for that they that are born under ſeveral ligeances are aliens

one to another. 3. Where the King hath ſeveral kingdoms

by ſeveral titles and  deſcents, there alſo are the ligeances ſe-

veral; but the King hath theſe two kingdoms by ſeveral titles

and deſcents ; therefore the ligeances are ſeveral. Theſe three

arguments are collected alſo from the words of the plea hefore 5
remembered. |

3. Leges. From the ſeveral and diſtin laws of either king- F
dom, they did reaſon thus: 1. Every ſubject that is born out.
of the extent and reach of the laws of England, cannot by
judgment of thoſe laws be a natural ſubject to the King, in re-
ſpect of his kingdom of England; but the plaintiff was born
at Edinburgh, out of the extent and reach of the laws of
England ;. therefore the plaintiff by the judgment of the laws
of England cannot be a natural ſubject to the King, as of his
kingdom of England. 2. That ſubject, that is not at the time
and in the place of his birth inheritable to the laws of Eng-
land, cannot be inheritable or partaker of the benefits and
privileges given by the laws of England ; but the plaintiff
at the time, and in the place of his birth + as not inheritable
to the laws of England, (but only to the laws of Scotland ;)
therefore he is not inheritable or to be partaker of the be-
nefits or privileges of the laws of England. 3. Whatſoever
appeareth to be out of the juriſdiction of the laws of England,
cannot be tried by the ſame laws; but the plaintiff's birth at
Edinburgh is out of the juriſdiction of the laws of England;
therefore the ſame cannot be tried by the laws of England,
Which three arguments were drawn from theſe words of the
plea, viz. Dnuodgue tem pore nativilatis pred” Raberti Calvin, ac
diu antea, & continue poſtea, præd regnum Scot” per jura, leges
& /latuta ejuſdem regni propria, & non per jura, leges, ſeu ſlatuta
bujus regni Angl regulat & gubernat' fuit, & adbuc ęſi.

4. Alienigena. From this word alienigexa they argued thus:
every ſubject that is alien gentis (i. e. ) alien ligeant”, oft alieni-
gena; but ſuch a one is the plaintiff; therefore, & e. And to
theſe nine arguments all that was ſpoken learnedly and at large


by thoſe that argued againſt the plaintiff may be reduced.
| | B 4 But


9


How this caſe
was argued by
the L1. Chan-


_ cellor and the


Judges.


Job. 8. 8.


Co, Lit, 97. d.


CaLlvin's Caſe. Part VII.


But it was reſolved by the Lord Chancellor and twelve
Judges, viz. the two Chief Juſtices, the Chief Baron, Juſtice
Fenner, Warberton, Yelverton, Daniel, Williams, Baron
Snigge, Baron Altham, Juſtice Crooke, and Baron Heron, that
the plaintiff was no alien, and conſequently that he ought to
be anſwered in this aſſiſe by the defendants. |

This caſe was as elaborately, ſubſtantially, and judicially
argued by the Lord Chancellor, and by my brethren the Judges,
as I ever read or heard of any; and ſo in mine opinion the
weight and conſequence of the canſe, both in is 4-4 & per-
peturs futuris temporibus juſtly deferved ; for though it was one
of the ſhorteſt and leaſt that ever we argued in this court, yet
wits it the longeft and weightieſt that ever was argued in any
court, the ſhorteſt in ſyllables, and the longeſt in ſubſtance ;
the leaſt for the value (and yet not tending to the right of that
leaſt) but the weightieſt for the conſequent, both for the pre-
ſent, and for all poſterity. And therefore it was ſaid, that
thoſe that had written de fofſilibus did obſerve, that gold hidden
in the bowels of the earth, was in reſpect of the maſs of the
whole earth, parvum in magno ; but of this ſhort plea it might
be truly ſaid (which is more ſtrange) that here was magnum in
parvo. And in the arguments of thoſe that argued for the pl.

1 ſpecially noted, that albeit they ſpake according to their own
heart, yet they ſpake not out of their own head and invention:
wherein they followed the counſel given in God's book, inter-
roga priſiinam generationem (for out of the old fields muſt come
the new corn) & Ailigenter inveſtiga patrum memoriam, and di-
ligently ſearch out the judgments of our forefathers, and that
for divers reaſons : firit on our own part, Hefterni enim ſumus
& ignoramus, & vita noſtra ſicut umbra ſuper terram; for we
are but of yeſterday, (and therefore had need of the wiſdom
of thoſe that were before us) and had been ignorant (if we had
not received light and knowledge from our forefathers) and
our days upon the earth are but as a ſhadow, in reſpect of
the old ancient days and times paſt, wherein the laws have
been by the wiſdom of the moſt excellent men, in many
ſucceſſions of ages, by long and continual experience (the
trial of right and truth) fined and refined, which-no one man;
(being of ſo ſhort a time) albeit he had in his head the wiſ-
dom of all the men in the world, in any one age could


ever have effected or attained unto. And therefore it is ap-


tima regula, qua nulla eff verior aut firmior in jure, , nemi-
nem oportet eſſe ſapientiorem legibus ; no man ought to
a | takt


Part VII. C A uy 1 's Caſe.


take upon him to be wiſer than the laws. Secondly, in reſpect
of our forefathers : ip (ſaith the text) docebunt te, & loquentur
tibi, & ex corde ſuo proferent eloquia, they ſhall teach thee; and
tell thee, and ſhall utter the words of their heart, without all
equivocation or mental reſervation ; they (I fay) that cannot
be daunted with fear of any power above them, nor be daz-
zled with the applauſe of the popular about them, nor fretted
with any diſcontentment (the matter of oppoſition and con-
tradiction) within them, but ſhall ſpeak the words of their
heart, without all affection or infection whatſoever.

Alſo in their arguments of this cauſe concerning an alien,
they told no ſtrange hiſtories, cited no foreign laws, produced
no alien precedents, and that for two cauſes; the one, for
that the laws of. England are ſo copious in this point, as, God
willing, by the report of this caſe ſnall appear; the other, leſt
their arguments concerning an alien born, ſhould become
foreign, ſtrange, and an alien to the ſtate ot the queſtion,
which being gue/tio juris concerning freehold and inheritance
in England, is only to be decided by the laws of this realm.
And albeit I concurred with thoſe that adjudged the plaintiff.
to be no alien, yet do I find a mere ſtranger in this cafe, ſuch
a one as the eye of the law (our books and book-caſes) never
faw, as the ears of the law (our reporters) never heard of, nor
the mouth of the law (for judex eft lex loquens) the Judges our
forefathers of the law never taſted : I fay, ſuch a one, as the
ſtomach of the law, our exquiſite and perfect records of plead-
ings, entries, aud judgments (that make equal and true dif-
tribution of all caſes in queſtion) never digeſted. In a word,
this little plea is a great ſtranger to the laws of England, as
ſhall manifeſtly appear by the reſolution of this caſe. And


now that I have taken upon me to make a report of their ar- The method


guments, [ ought to do the ſame as truly, fully, and ſincerely
as poſſibly I can; howbeit, ſeeing that almoſt every Judge had
in the coutſe-of his argument a peculiar method, and I muft
only hold myſelf to one, I ſhall give no juſt offence to any, if
I challenge that which of ripht is due to every reporter, that
is, to reduce the ſum and effect, of all to ſuch a method, as,
upon conſideration had of all the arguments, the reporter
himſelf thinketh to be fitteſt and cleareſt for the right under-
ſtanding of the true reaſons and cauſes of the judgment and
reſolution of the caſe in queſtion.


*


that the re poi tet


In this caſe ſive things did fall into conſideration. 1. Lige- What things did


antia. 2. Leges. 3. Regna. 4. Alienigena. 5. What legal
inconveniences would enſue on either fide,


1. Con-


fall into conſi-
deration iu this


The rſt general


Cartvin's Caſe, Part VII.


1. Concerning ligeance: 1. It was reſolved what ligeance
was : 2. How many kinds of ligeances there were: 3. Where
ligeance was due: 4. To whom it was due: and laſt, how it
was due.

2. For the laws: 1. That ligeance or obedience of the ſub-
ject to the Sovereign is due by the law of nature: 2. That
this law of nature is part of the laws of England: 3. That the
law of nature was before any judicial or, municipal law in the
world: 4. That the law of nature is immutable, and cannot
be changed.

3. As touching the kingdoms : how far forth by the act of
law the Union is already made, and wherein the kingdoms do
yet remain ſeparate and divided, |

4. Of alienigena, an alien born: 1. What an alien born is
in law: 2. The diviſion and diverſity of aliens: 3. Incidents
to every alien: 4. Authorities in law: 5. Demonſtrative con-
cluſions upon the premiſes, that the plaintiff can be no alien.

5. Upon due conſideration had of the conſequent of this
caſe : what inconveniences legal ſhould follow on either party.

And theſe ſeveral parts I will in this report purſue in ſuch
order as they have been propounded ; and ſirſt de ligeantia.
> 1. (a) Ligeance is a true and faithful obedience of the ſub-


part, what lige- ject due to his Sovereign. This ligeance and obedience is an


ance is. |
(a) Bacon's Diſ-
courſe of Laws
and Governm,
2d. Part, fo. 46,
47, &c, Co. Lit,
129. @.
Gtotius. lib. 2.
fol. 160.


incident inſeparable to every ſubject: for as ſoon as he is
born he oweth by birth- right ligeance and obedience to
his Sovereign. Ligeantia eft vinculum fidei and ligeantia
eſi quaſi legis eſſentia. Ligeantia eft ligamentum, quaſi liga-
tio mentium; quia ſicut ligamentum eſi connexis articulorum
& juntlurarum, c. As the ligatures or ſtrings do knit to-
gether the joints of all the parts of the body, ſo. doth
ligeance join together the Sovereign and all his ſubjects,
quaſi uno ligamine, Glanville, who wrote in the reign of
H. 2. lib. 9. cap. 4. ſpeaking of the connexion which ought
to be between the lord and tenant that holdeth 'by ho-
mage faith, that mutua debet efſe domint & fidelitatis con-
nexio, ita quod quantum debet damins ex homagio, tantum
illi debet dominus ex dominio, prater ſolam reverentiam,
and the lord (faith he) ought to defend his tenant, But be-
tween the Sovereign and the ſubject there is without com-
pariſon a higher and greater connexion ; ſor as the ſubject
oweth to the King his true and faithful ligeance and obedi-
ence, ſo the Sovereign is to govern and protect his ſubjects,
regel e


Park VII. Carvin's Caſe. 5


regere & 2 ſubdites ſuos; ſo as between the Soverei

and ſubject there is duplex & reciprocum ligamen ; quia ficut Note.
ſubditus regi tenetur ad obedientiam, ita rex ſubdito tenetur ad pro-

teftionem : merito igitur ligeantia dicitur a ligando, quia continet

in ſe duplex ligamen. And therefore it is holden in 20 H. 7.

8. a. that there is a liege or ligeance between the King and

the ſubject. And Forteſcue, cap. 13. Rex (a) ad tutelam legis (a) Cro, Arg,64.
corporum & bonorum ſubditorum erectus eſt. And in the acts of

Parliament of 10 R. 2. cap. 5. & 11 R. 2. cap. 1. 14 H. 8.

cap. 2, &c. Subjects are called liege people; and in the acts

of Parliament in 34 H. 8. cap. 1. & 35 H. 8. cap. 3, &c. the

King is called the liege lord of his ſubjects. And with this

agreeth M. Skeene in his book de e, ae verborum, (which

book was cited by one of the Judges which argued againſt the

plaintiff) ligcance is the mutual bond and obligation between

the King and his ſubjects, whereby ſubjects are called his

liege ſubjects, becauſe they are bound to obey and ferve him;

and he is called their liege lord, becauſe he ſhould maintain

and defend them. Whereby it appeareth, that in this point

the law of England and of Scotland is all one. Thereſoie it

is truly ſaid that protedtto trahit ſuljectionem, & ſubjeftio pro-

teftioncem. And hereby it plainly appeareth, that ligeance doth

not begin by the oath in the leet; for many men owe true

ligeance that never were ſworn in a leet, and the ſwearing *

in a leet maketh no (/) denization, as the book is adjudged (5) B. Denis. 12.
in 14 H. 4 fol 19. b. This word ligeance is well expreſſed Poſtea 15. b.
by divers ſeveral names or Hnonyma which we find in our

books. Sometimes it is called the obedience or obeyſance of

the ſubject to the K. ebedientia Regi, g E. 4. 7. b. 9 E. 4. 6.

() 2 R. 3. 2. a in the Book of Entries, Ejectione firm 7. 14 H. (e) Br. Deniz. 3.
8. cap 2. 22 H. 8. cap. 8, &c. Sometimes he is called a na-

tural liege man that is born under the power of the K. / pa-

teſtate Regis, 4 H. 3. (d) tit. Dower. Vide the ftat. of 11 E. (4) 4 Hen. ;.
3. c. 2. Sometimes ligeance is called faith, fides, ad fidem Ra- Fitz. Dow. 179.
is, Sc. Bratton, who wrote in the reign of H. 3. lib. 5. 1 5
tractat" de exception, cap. 24 fol. 427. Eft etiam alia exceptio Jeni, Cent. 3.
gue cmpetit ex perſon guœrentis, propter defettum nationis, ut

i quis alienigena qui ſust ad fidem Regis Franc, Sc. And Fleta

(which book was made in the reign of E. 1.) agreeth there-

with; for J. 6. c. 47. de except” ex omiſſione participis, it is ſaid,

vel dicere potuit, quod nibil juris clamarę poterit tanguam parti-

ceps eo quod eft ad fidem Regis Franciæ, quia alienigenæ repelli

debent in Ang! ab agando, donec fuerunt ad fidem Reg' Angl.

Vide 25 E. 3. de natis ultra mare, faith and ligeance of the Kin Ws

of England; and Litt. lib. 2. cap. Homage, (e) ſaving the faith %) Lit. fed. 85.
that I owe to our ſov. lord the K. and Glanv. I. 9. c. 1. Salva Os. Lit. (4. ö.
fide debita dom” Ri & heredibus ſuis, Sometimes ligeance is

$7 called


f


CAL 's Caſe. Part VII.


called ligealty, 22 Aſſ. pl. 25. By all which it evidently ap-
peareth, that they that are born under the obedience, power,
faith, ligealty, or ligeance of the King, are natural ſubjects,
and no aliens. So, as ſeeing now it doth appear what ligeance
is, it followeth in order, that we ſpeak of the ſeveral kinds of
ligeance. But herein we need to be very wary, for this ca-
veat the law giveth, ub: lex non diſtinguit nec nos diſtinguere de-

bemus ; and certainly lex non diflinguit, but where omnia membra

dividentia are to be found out and proved by the law itſelf.

How many 2, There is found in-the law 4 kinds of ligeances ; the
— > hw, firſt is, /igeantia naturalis, abſoluta, pura & indefinita, and this
originally is due by nature and birth-right, and is called alta

ligeantia, and he that oweth this is called ſubditus natus,

| . he ſecond is called ligeantia acguiſita, not by nature but by
| * I acquiſition or denization, being called a denizen, or rather
l Co. Lit. 129. 2. donaizon, becauſe he is ſubditus datus. The third is, Iige-
| antia localis, wrought by the law, and that is when an alien
J that is in amity cometh into England, becauſe as long as he is
within England he is within the K.'s protection; therefore

| ſo long as he is here, he oweth unto the King a local obedience
: or ligeance, for that the one (as it hath been ſaid) draweth the
[| other. The fourth is a legal obedience, or ligeance which is
| called legal, becauſe the municipal laws of this realm have
| preſcribed the order and form of it; and this to be done upon
| Ligeantiz na- oath at the torn or leet. The firſt, that is, ligeance natural,

| . 129. a XC- appeareth by the faid acts of parliament, wherein the
| King 1s called natural liege lord, and his peop'e natural
bl. liege ſubjects; this alſo doth appear in the indictments of
"+ treaſon (which of all other things are the moſt curiouſly and
1 certainly indicted and penned) for in the indictment of the
| : Lord Dacre, in 26 H. 8. it is faid, pred” Dominus Dacre de-
| bitum fidei & ligeant' ſue, quod prefato domino Regi naturaliter
if & de jure impendere debuit, minime curans, c. And Regi-
dl nald Pool was indicted in 30 H. 8. for committing treaſon
contra dim” Regem ſupremum & naturalem dominum ſuum. And
FE to this end were cited the indictment of Edward Duke of
1. Somerſet in 5 E. 6 and many others both of ancient and later
[! times. But in the indictment of treaſon of John Dethick in
i 2 & 3 Phil. & Mar it is ſaid, 9d pred? Johannes machinans,
4 | Sc. predie? dominum Philipputn & dominam Mariam ſupremes
[| dominos ſuos, and omitted (naturales) becauſe K. Phillip was
not his natural liege lord. And of this point more ſhall be

Ligeantia ac- ſaid when we ſpeak of local obedience. The ſecond is i-
. 129. a. geant acquiſita, or denization; and this in the books and
records of the law appeareth to be three-fold : 1. Abſo-

lute, as the common denizations be, to them and their


heirs,


—
2 — — —
—


B Zh.


— —
* 9 * 0
—


”—_—_— a... U — —
— — .


—


—— -
— « —


Aa 2 „


*


2 2


n — a2. Mea. 4A. £2. _ IS. , © OS. A LW. 4 -


Part VII. Carvin's Caſo. | 6


Heirs, without any limitation or reſtraint: 2. Limited, as


when the King doth grant letters of denization to an alien,


and to the heirs (a) males of his body, as it appeareth in 9 () 9 E. 4. 8.


E. 4. fol. 7, 8. in Baggot's caſe; or to an alien for term of
his life, as was granted to J. Reynel, 11 H. 6. 3. It may be \
granted upon (5) condition, for (c) cujus ef? dare, ej us ęſi diſ- () Co. Lit.
ponere, whereof I have ſeen divers precedents. And this de- 10. r
nization of an alien may be effected three manner of ways; 22 **
by parliament, as it was in 3 H. 6. 55. in Dower : by letters 2 Siderf. 73.
atent, as the uſual manner is; and by conqueſt, as if the 1 n
King and his ſubjects ſhould conquer another kingdom or |, . N
dominion, as well antenati as peſtnati, as well they which Salk. 411, 412.
fought in the field, as they which remained at home, for de- N a
fence of their country, or employed elſewhere, are all deni- 4. Dar. 36.
zens of the kingdom or dominion conquered, Of which
point more ſhall be ſaid hereafter.

3 Concerning the local obedience it is obſervable, that as Zigeantia /ocalis.
there is a local protection on the King's part, ſo there is a (4) (% Co. Lit.
local ligeance of the ſubjects part. And this appeareth in 4 ““

Mar. Br. 32. (e) & 3 & 4 Phil. & Mar. Dyer 144. Sherley (%) B. N. c. 487.
a Frenchman, being in amity with the King, came into

England, and joined with divers ſubjects of this realm in

treaſon againſt the King and Queen, aud the indictment

concluded () contra ligeant” ſuæ debitum ; for he owed to the (% Hob. 271.
King a local obedience, that is, ſo long as he was within the _ Lit. 129. =
King's proteCtion ; which local obedience being but momen- 1
tary and uncertain, is yet ſtrong enough to make a natural z Inf. 11.
ſubject, for if he hath iſſue here, that ifſue is (g) a natural Ace. wy 8. ts
born ſubje&t ; 4 fortiori he that is born under the natural and 324. a.
abſolute ligeance of the King (which as it hath been ſaid, is


alta Ligeantia) as the plaintiff in the caſe in queſtion was,


ought to be a natural born ſubject ; for lacalis ligeantia eff lige-
antia infima & minima, & maxime incerta, And it is to be
obſerved, that it is nec cœlum, nec ſolum, neither the climate
nor the ſoil, but liglantis and obedientia that make the ſubject
born; for if enemies ſhould come into the realm, and poſſeſs
a town or fort, and have iſſue there, that ifſue is no ſubject
to the King of England, though he be born upon his ſoil,
and under his meridian, for that he was not born under the
ligeance of a ſubject, nor under the protection of the King.
And concerning this local obedience, a precedent was cited
in Hilar. 36 Eliz. when Stephano Ferrara de Gama, and
Emanuel Lewis Tinoco, two Portugeſe born, coming into
England under Q Elizabeth's ſafe conduct, and living here
under her protection joined with Doctor Lopezin treaſon ah

| : ens


—ͤ—ä— — —


p AK 4% a — —
C -
— — —— IS — *
. — — —


«a 2
2 CCEY WY


— — ——————  _— — —


P ˙ CD . u — ü Co I


1 8 — —


1


(s) 3 Inſt, *
Dy. 145. pl. 62.
Cawly 185.
Hob. 271.
Co. Lit. 129. a.
(5) ; Inſt. 5, 11.


8 acon's Hiſt,
. 7


fo. 11.


Ca Ly 1 n's Caſe, Part VII.


this realm againſt her Majeſty; and in this -caſe two points


were reſolved by the Judges. Firſt, that their indictment
ought to begin, that they intended treaſon contra dominam Re-
ginam, Ic. omitting theſe words (naturalem domin' ſuam) and
ought to conclude contra (a) ligeant” ſue debitum, But if an
(b) alien enemy come to invade this realm, and be taken in
war, he cannot be indicted of treaſon ; for the indictment
cannot conclude contra ligeant ſuæ debitum, for he never was
in the protection of the King, nor ever owed any manner of

ligeance unto. him, but malice. and enmity, and therefore he
ſhall be put to death by martial law. And ſo it was in anno
15 H. 7. in Perkin Warbeck's caſe, who being an alien born
in Flanders, feigned himſelf to be one of the ſons of Edward
the fourth, and invaded this realm with great power, with an
intent to take upon him the dignity royal: but being taken


in the war, it was reſolved by the Juſtices, that he could not


be puniſhed by the common law, but before the Conſtable


Ligeantia lggalis,


Co. Lit. 68. b.


Co. Lit. 68. b.


and Marſhal (who had ſpecial commiſſion under the great
ſeal to hear and determine the ſame according to martial law)
he had ſentence to be drawn, hanged, and quartered, which
was executed accordingly. And this appeareth in the book
of Griffith Attorney-General, by an extract out of the book
of Hobart, Attorney-General to King H 7.

4. Now are we to ſpeak of legal Ligeance, which in our
books viz. 7 E. 2. tit. Avowry 211. 4 E. 3. fol. 42. 13 E. 3.
tit. Avowry 120, &Cc. is called ſuit royal, becauſe that the
ligeance of the ſubjeCt is only due unto the King. This oath
of ligeance appeareth in Britton, who wrote in anne 5 E. 1.
cap. 29. (and is yet commonly in ule to this day in every leet)
and in our books; the effect whereof is: Lou ſhall (wear,
4% that from this day forward, you ſhall be true and faithful
« to our ſovereign lord King James, and his heirs, and
© truth and faith ſhall bear of life and member, and terrene
« honout, and you {hall neither know nor hear of any ill or
„ damage intended unto him, that you ſhall not defend. 80
„ help you Almighty God.” The ſubſtance and effect
hereof is as hath deen ſaid due by the law of nature, ex inſit-


tutione nature, as hereafter ſhall appear: the form and addition


of the oath is, ex proviſione hominis. In this oath of ligeance
five things were obſer ved. 1. That for the time it is inde-
finite, and without limit, “from this day forward,” Secondly,
two excellent qualities are required, that is to be * true and
« faithful.” 3. To whom, * to our ſovereign lord the King


and his heirs:” (and a beit Britton doth ſay, to the K. of Eng.


| that is ſpoken propter excellent iau, to delign the perſon, and not


to


——ͤ—: — — rm


Part VII. Calvin's Caſe. |
to confine the ligeance; for a ſubjeCt doth not ſwear his lige-


ance to the King, only as King of England, and not to him
as King of Scotland, or of Ireland, &c. but generally to the
King.) 4. In what manner; “and faith and troth ſhall bear,
% Kc. of life and member,” that is, until the letting out of
the laſt drop of our deareſt heart's blood. 5. Where and in
what places ought theſe things to be done, in all places what-
ſoever, for, you ſhall neither know nor hear of any ill or
damage, &c.” that you ſhall not defend, &c. ſo as natural
ligeance is not circumſcribed within any place. It is holden
12 H. 7. 18. b. That he that is ſworn in the leet, is ſworn
to the King for his ligeance, that is, to be true and faithful
to the King; and it he be once ſworn for his ligeance, he
ſhall not be ſworn again during his life. And all letters
patent of denization'by, that the patentee ſhall behave himſelf
tanguam verus & fidelis ligeus domint Regis. And this oath of
ligeance at the torn and leet was firſt inſtituted by King Ar-
thur ; for ſo I read, Inter leges Sancti Edwardi Regis ante con-
queſlum 3 cap. 3 7 Et quod omnes principe & comites, proceres,
milites & liberi homines debent jurare, &c. in Folkemote, & ſimi-
liter omnes proceres regni. & mites & liberi hamines univer/i totius
regni Britann' facere debent in pleno Folkemate fidelitatem domino
Regi, Sc. Hanc legem invenit Arthurds qui quandam fuit inciy-


Co, Lit. 68. b.


tiſimus Rex Britonum, Sc. bujus legis authoritate expulit Ar- Co. Lit. 68. b.


thurus Rex Saracenss et inimicos a regno, Ic. et hujus legis autho-
ritate Etheldredus Rex uno et eodem die per untverſum regnum


172. b.


Danos occidit. Vide Lambert inter leges Regis Edwardi, * Sc. See L. L.


this legal ligeance had his ficſt inſtitution within this realy,


Ligeantia in the caſe in queſtion is meant and intended of the


firſt kind of ligeance, that is, of ligeance natural, ab-
ſolute, &c. due by nature and birth- right. But if the plain-


fol. 135 & 136. By this it appeareth, when and from whom S2xn- per Wil-


p. 204.


tiff's father be made a denizen, and purchaſe lands in Eng- Co. Lit. 8. .


land to him and his heirs, and die ſeiſed, this land ſhall never

deſcend to the plaintiff, for that the King by his letters patent

may make a denizen, but cannot naturalize him to all pur-

poles, as an act of Parliament may do; neither can letters
patent make any inheritable in this caſe, chat by the common

law cannot inherit. And herewith agreeth 36 H. 6. tit. De-

nizen Br. 9.


Homage in our book is two-fold, that is to lay, Homagium Homage is two-
ligeum, and that is as much as ligeance, of which Bratton 6


ſpeaketh, I. 2. c. 35. f. 79. Soli Regi Teber* fine deminit ſeu ſervitio,
By "Re and


129. a.


fold. Co. Lit.
5
V;ugh. 279


—— — —


CaLrvin's Caſe. Part VII.


Vaugh, 279- and there is Homagium feodale, which hath his original by
tenure. In Fit. Nat. Brev. 269. there is a writ for reſpiting
of this later homage (which is due ratione feodi ſive tenure ©
ſciatis quod reſpectuamus homagium nobis de terr' et tenementis que
tenenter de nobis in capite debit'. But Homagium ligeum, i. li-
geantia, is inherent and inſeparable, and cannot be reſpited.

Where natural 3. Now are we come to (and al moſt paſt) the conſideration

lite ance is due. of this circumſtance, where natural ligeance ſhould be due:

| for by that which hath been ſaid, it appeareth, that ligeance,
and faith and truth, which are her members and parts, are
qualities of the mind and ſoul of man, and cannot be circum-
ſcribed within the predicament of ubi, for that were to con-
found predicaments, and to go about to drive (an abfurd
and impoſſible thing) the predicament of quality into the pre-

dicament of abi. Non reſpondetur ad hanc quæſtionem, ubi e?

to ſay, Verus et fidelus ſubditus gt; ſed ad hanc queſtionem, qua-

lis ; Recte & apte reſpondetur, verus & fidelis ligeus, Sc. eft.

But yet for the greater illuſtration of the matter, the point

t was handled by itſelf, and that ligeance of the ſubjeQ was of

| | as great an extent and latitude, as the royal power and pro-

tection of the King, et e converſo. It appeareth by the ſtat.

[| | of 11 H. 7. cap. 1. and 2 E. 6. cap. 2. that the ſubjects of

14 England are bound by their ligeance to go with the King,

| * &c. in his wars, as well within the realm, &c. as without.

fi And therefore we daily ſee, that when either Ireland, or any
will bother of his Majeſty's dominions, be infeſted with invaſion
or inſurrection, the King of England ſendeth his ſubjects out

of England, and his ſubjects out of Scotland alſo into Ireland,

for the withſtanding or ſuppreſſing of the ſame, to the end

his rebels may feel the ſwords of either nation. And ſo may

his ſubjects of Guernſey, Jerſey, Iſle of Man, &c. be com-

manded to make their ſwords good againſt either rebel or

enemy, as occaſion ſhall be offered; whereas if natural lige-

ance of the ſubjects of England ſhould be local, that is, con-

fined within the realm of England or Scotland, &c. then were

not they bound to go out of the continent of the realm of

9. 47, 48, England or Scotland, &c. And the opinion of Thirninge

12 in 7 H. 4. tit. Protect' 100. is thus to be underſtood, that an
Engliſh ſubject is not compellable to go out of the realm
without wages, according to the ſtatutes of 1 E. 3. c. 7. 18 E.

Ef: c. 8. 18 H. 6. c. 19, &c. 7 H. 7. c. 1. 3 Hl. 8. c. 5, &c.

2 Inſt, 528, n ann. 25 E. 1. Bigot Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, and

. e Earl Marſhal of England, and Bohun Earl of Hereford and

14 High Conſtable of England, did exhibit a petition to the

| | Maynard's F. 3. King in French (which I have ſeen anciently recorded) on


iel ”


1


1 an”


and it appeareth by the record, and by the chronicles alſo,


vv we Wt TA NA 0, EE ww”


Part VII. Carvrn's Caſe, g 1


the behalf of the Commons of England, concerning how and

in what ſort they were to be employed in his Majeſty's wars

out of the realm of England; and the record faith, that, po/?

multas & vartas altercationes, it was reſolved, they ought to , Int. 528.
go but in ſuch manner and form as after was declared by the

{aid ſlatutes, which ſeem to be but declarative ofthe common

law. And this doth plentiiully and manifeſtly appear in our

books, being truly and rightly underſtood, In 3 H. 6. tit. Co, Lit. 130. b.
Protection 2. one had the benefit of a protection, for that he
was ſent into the King's wars in c-mitiva of the Protector; 4
that this employment was into France; the greateſt part Co. Lit. 130. b.
thereof then being under the King's actual obedience, ſo as

the ſubjects of England were employed into France for the

defence and ſafety thereof: in which cafe it was obſerved,

that ſeeing the Protector, who was Prorex, went, the ſame <

was adjudged a voyage royal, 8 H. 6. fol. 16. b. the Lord Tal- Fitz. Protect. g.
bot went with a company of Engliſhmen into France, then K Protect. 48.
alſo being for the greateſt part under the actual obedience of

the King, who had the benefit of their protections allowed

unto them. And here were obſerved the words of the writ

in the Regiſter, fol. 88. where it appeareth that men were

employed in the King's wars out, of the realm per præceptum

no/irum, and the uſual words of the writ of protection be in
obſequiono/tro, * 32 H. 6. fol. 4. a. it appeareth, that Engliſhmen * Fitz. Protect.
were preſſed into Guyienne, + 44 E. 3. 12 a. into Gaſcoyne i Fitz, protect.
with the Duke of Lancaſter, 17 H. 6. tit. Protection, into 35. Br. Protect.
Gaſcoyne with the Earl of Huntington, ſteward of Guienne, 11
& 12 Hl 4. 7. a. into (a) Ireland, and out of this realm with ©,
the Duke of Glouceſter and the Lord Knolles : vide (o) 19 (a) Fitz. Pro-
H. 6. 35. b. And it appeareth in 19 Ed. 2. tit. Avowry 224. 2 24. =
26 Aff. 66. 7 H. 4. 19, &c. that there was forinſecum ſervi- H. pro,


| a . 6 Br. Protect. 34.
tium, foreign ſervice, which Bracton, fol. 36. calleth regale (s) Fitz. Po-


ſervitium; and in Fitz. N. B. 28. that the King may ſend beck. 5.


men to ſer ve him in his wars beyond the ſea. But thus much Br, Prote d. 49.


(if it be not in ſo plain a cate too much) ſhall ſuffice for this
point for the King's power, to command the ſervice of his
ſubjects in his wars out of the realm, whereupen it was con-
cluded, that the ligeance of a natural - born ſubject was not
local, and confined only to England. Now Jet us ſee what
the law faith in time of peace, concerning the King's protec-
tion and power of command, as well without the realm, as
within, that his ſubjects in all places may be protected from
violence, and that juſtice may equally be adminiſtered to all


bis ſubjects.


Vol. IV. C In


24.
[| Fitz. Protect.
6


-


Carvin's Cafe. Patt VII.
In the Regiſter, fol. 25 b. Rex univerſis & ſingulis admirall',


eaſtellan', cuſlodibus caſtrerum, villar”, & altorum fortalitiorum
præpoſitis, vicecom* majoribus, cuſtumariis, cuſtodib' portuum, &
alior” locor* maritimor ballivis, miniſir', & alus fideP ſuis, tam
in tranſmarinis quam in ciſmarinis partib” ad quos, &c. ſalutem.
Sciatis, quod ſuſcepimus in protectionem et defenſion 3 nec-
non ad ſalvam et ſecuram gardiam noſtram I. veniendo in regnum
ugſtram Angl, et poteſlatem noſtr am, tam per terram quam per
mare cum uno valetto ſuo, ac res ac bond ſud quacungue ad tratland”
cum dilecto nofira & fideli L. pro redemptione priſonarii ipſius L.
infra regnum & poteſlatem noſtram pred” per ſex menſes morando
& — . ad propria redeund. Et ideo, Cc. quad ipſum .
cum valetto, rebus et bonis ſuis pred” veniendo in regn' & poteſſat
noſtram pred” tam per terr' quam per mare ibid at prædic! oft ex
eauſa antedicta morando, & exinde ad propria redeundo, manu-
ieneatis, protegatis, & defendatis ; non inferentes eis, c. ſex
gravamen. Et fi quid eis forisfactum, &c. reformari faciatis,
In cujus, &c. per fex menſes duratur*. 7. &c. In which writ
three things are to be obſerved. 1. That the King hath fidem
& fideles in partib' tranſmarinis. 2. That he hath protection
in partib' tranſmarinis. 3. That he hath poteftatem in partibus
tranſmarinis. In the Regiſter fo. 26. Rex univerfss & jingulis
admirallis, caftellanis, cuſtodibus caſtrorum, villarum, et aliorum
Fortalitiorum præpoſitis, victcom' majoribus, cuſtumariis, cuſtadib
portuum, & alior locor maritimorum ballivis, miniſiris, et aliis
fidelibus ſuis, tam in tranſmarinis quam in ciſmarinis partibus ad
quos, Cc. ſalutem. Sciatis quod ſuſcepimus in protectionem et de-


Jenſionem noſtram, necnon in ſaluum & ſecurum conduttum noſir*


J. valettum P. et L. Burgenſium de Lyons obſidum noſtrorum, qui
de licentid noſira ad partes tranſmarinas profecturus eſt, pro finans
tia magiſtrorum ſuorum predia” obtinenda vel deferenda, eundo
ad partes prædictas ibidem morando, et exinde in Ang redeunds.
Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eidem J. eunda ad partes pred
ibidem morando, et exinde in Ang!” redeundo, ut pred” eſt, in
perſond, bonis, aut rebus ſuis, non inferatis, ſeu quantum in vobis
eſt ab aliis inferrt permittatis injuriam, moleſtiam, &c. aut
gravamen. Sed eum potius ſalvum et ſecurum conductum, cum
per loca palſus, ſeu diſtrictus veſtros tranſierit, et ſuper hoc regui-
iti fueritis, ſuis ſumptibus habere faciatis. Et fi quid eis fo-


riſadtum fuerit, Se. reformari faciatis. In cujus, c. per
tres ani? durat' T. Cc. And certainly this was, when Lyons


in France (bordering upon Burgundy, an ancient friend to
England) was under the actual obedience of K. Hen. 6. For


the King commanded fidelibus ſuis, his faithful magiſtrates *


part VII. Catvin's Caſe;


that if any injury were there done, it ſhould be by them re-
formed and redreſſed, and that they ſhould protect the party
in his perſon and goods in peace. In the Regiſter, fol 26.
two other writs: Rex omnibus ſeneſchallis, majoribus, juratis,
paribus præpoſitis, ballivis et fidelibus furs in ducatu Aquitan &
ad quos, &c. ſalutem. Quia dilecti nobis T. et A. cives civitat
Burdegal coram. nobis in Cancellar* neſt? Ang! et Aguitan jura
ſua proſequentes, et metuentes ex veriſimilibus conjecturis per quoſ-
dam ſibi comminantes tam in corpore quam in rebus ſuis, fibi poſſi
grave damnum inferri, ſupplicaverunt nobis ſibi de protectione regia
providere : nos volentes dictes T. et A. ab oppreſſionibus indebitis
præſervare, ſuſcepimus ipſos T. et A. res at juſtas poſſeſſiones et
bona ſua quacungue in protectionem et ſalvam gardiam noſiram
ialem. Et vobis et cuilibet veſir um inſungimus et mandamus,
quod ipſos T. et A. familius, res ac bona ſua quecunqut a violentiis
of gravaminibus indebitis defendatis, et ipſos tn juſtis poſſeſſuunibus
uts manuteneatiss Et fa quid in præjudicium hujus protectionis et
ſalve gardie noſtr attentatum inveneritis, ad ſtatum debitum redu-
catis. Et ne quis ſe poſſit per ignorantiam excuſare preſentem pro-
teftionem et ſaluam gardiam noſtram faciatis in locts de quibus
requiſiti fueritis infra diſtrict veſirum publice intimari, inhibentes
omnibus et ſingulis ſub paenis gravibus, ne didlis A. et T. ſeu fa-
mulis ſuis in perſonis ſeu rebus ſuis, injuriam, moleſtiam, damnum
aliguod inferant ſeu gravamen : et penocellas 22 in locis et boni⸗
ipſorum T. & A. in ſignum protectionis et ſal gard' memorat'g
cum ſuper hoc requiſiti fueritis, apponatis. In cujus, Cc. dat in
palatio noſtro Weſim' ſub magni ſigilli teſtimonio, ſexto die Auguſti
anno 44 E. 3.— Rex univerſis et ſingulis ſeneſcballis, conflabular',
caſtellanis, præpoſit', miniſl', et omnib* ballivis et fidelibus ee in
domi nis nefiro Aquitan” conflitutis ad quos, Sc, falut'. Volentes
G. et R. uxor ejus ſavore proſequi 1 ipſos G. et R. humines
et familias ſuas ac juſtas poſſeſſiones, et bona ſua quacunque, ſuſce-
pimus in protectionem et deſenſianem n:ſiram, necnon in ſaluam
gardiam noſtram ſpecialem. At ideo vobis et cuilibet vſtrum injun-
gimus et mandamus, quod ipſos G. et R. eorum homines, familias
ſuas, ac juſtas poſſeſſiones et bona ſua quæcunque manuteneatis, pro-
tegatis, et defendatis: non inferentes eis ſeu quantum in vabis «ff
ab aliis inf erri permittentes, injuriam, moleſtiam, damnum, vto-
lentiam, impedimentum aliguod ſeu gravamen. Et fi quid eis
forisfat, injuriatum vel contra eos indebite attentatum fuerit, id eis
fine dilatione corrigi, et ad flatum debitum reduci faciatis, prout
ad vos et quemiibet veſtrum noveritis pertinere : pmnocellas ſuper do-
mibus ſuis in ſi num præſentis ſalve gardiæ noſire (fprout moris


crit) jacientes, In cujus, Fc. per unum annum duratur's T. c.


C2 By


Caw!y 139.


Cobledike's caſe
temp. E. 1 re-
ported by Hing-
- ham,


Elleſmere's Poſt-
nati 91, 02.


; Notes


any place; it followeth, that the plea that doth confine the


de Cobledike, and others, named in the writ, and counted


Carvin's Caſe; Part VII.


By all which it is manifeſt, that the protection and government
of the King is general over all his dominions and kingdoms,
as well in time of peace by juſtice, as in time of war by the
ſword, and that all be at his command, and under bis obe-
dience. Now ſeeing power and protection draweth ligeance,
it followeth, that ſeeing the King's power, command, and
protection extendeth out of England, that ligeance cannot be
toeal, or confined within the bounds thereof. He that is ab-
juted the realm, Qui abjurat regnum amittit regnum, ſed non
regem, amittit patriam, ſed non patrem patrie: for notwith-
ſtanding the abjuration, he oweth the King his ligeance, and
he remaineth within the King's protection ; for the King may
pardon and reſtore him to his country again. So ſeeing that
ligeance is a quality of the mind, and not confined within


ligeance of the plaintiff to the kingdom of Scotland, fra
ligeantiam regis regni ſui Scotia, & extra ligeantiam regis regni
ſui Angliz, whereby the defendants do make one local lige-
ance for the natural ſubjects of England, and another local
Jigeance for the natural ſubjects of Scotland, is utterly inſuf-
cient, and againſt the nature and quality of natural ligeance,
as often it hath been ſaid. And Coke, Chief Juſtice of
the court of Common Pleas, cited a ruled caſe out of Hing-
ham's reports, tempore E. 1. which in his argument he ſhewed
in court written in parchment, in an ancient hand of that
time. Conſtance de N. brought a writ of Ayel againſt Roger


that from the ſeiſin of Roger her grandfather it deſcended to
Gilbert his ſon, and from Gilbert to Conſtance, as daughter
and heir. Sutton dit, Sir, el ne doit efle reſponde, pur ces que
el e Francors & ment de la ligeance ne a la foy Denglitterre, &
demand judgement ſi el doit action aver that is, the is not to be
anſwered, for that the is a French woman, and not of the
ligeance, nor of the faith of England, and demanded judg-
ment, if ſhe this action ought to have. Bereford (then Chief
Juſtice of the court of Common Pleas) by the rule of the court
difalloweth the plea, for that it was too ſhort, in that it re-
ferred ligeance and faith to England, a d not to the King:
And thereupon Sutton faith as followeth ; Sir, nous voilomus
averre que el ne eſt my de la ligeance Denglitterre, ne a la
foy le Roy et demand jugement, et fi vous agardes que el
doit efte reſponde, nous dirromus aſſets that is, Sir, we will
aver, that ſhe is not of the ligeance of England, nor
of the faith of the King, and demand judgment, &c.

| | Which


Part VII. Car vin's Caſe, | 10


Which latter words of the plea (nor of the faith of the King)
referred faith to the King indefinitely and generally, and te-
ſtrained not the ſame to England, and thereupon the plea
was allowed for good, according to the rule of the court :
for the book ſaith, that afterward the plaintiff defired leave to
depart from her writ. The rule of that caſe of Cobledike,
did as Coke Chief Juſtice ſaid) over rule this caſe of Calvin,
in the very point now in queſtion ; for that the plea in this
caſe doth not refer faith or ligeance to the King indefinitely
and generally, but limiteth and reſtraineth faith and ligeance -
to the Kingdom: Extra ligeantiam Regis regni ſui Angliæ, out
of the- ligeance of the King of his kingdom of England :
which afterwards the Lord Chancellor and the Chief Juſtice
of the King's Bench, having copies of the ſaid ancient report,
affirmed in their arguments. So as this point was thus N
cluded, Quod ligeantia naturalis nullis clauſiris coercetur, nullis
metis refrængtur, nullis finibus premitur.

4 & 5. By that which hath been ſaid it appeareth, that To whom and
this ligeance is due only to the King; fo as therein the queſ- how ligeance us
tion is not now, cui, ſed guomoda debetur. It is true, that the —

King hath two capacities in him: one a natural body, being
deſcended of the blood royal of the realm; and this body is
of the creation of Almighty God, and is ſubject to death,
infirmity, and ſuch like; the other is a | politic body or ca- |! Politick Body,
pacity, ſo called, becauſe it is framed by the policy of man 7 lac. 15. b. 46.
(and in 21 E. 4. 39. b. is called a myſtical body ;) and in this |
capacity the King is eſteemed to be immortal, inviſible, not
ſubject to death, infirmity, infancy, (a) nonage, &c. Pl Com. in (a) Poftea 12,
the caſe of the Lord Barkley 238. and in the caſe of the Duchy a Co. Lit. 44,
213. 6 E. 3. 291. & 26 Afl. pl. 54. Now ſeeing the King hath 83 *
but one perſon, and ſeveral capacities, and one politic capacity 221. ..
for the realm of England, and another for the realm of Scot 354. b. 26 af
land, it is neceſſary to be conſidered, to which capacity lige "» pox; oa
ance is due. And it was refolved, that it was due to the na- Age = *
tural perſon of the King (which is ever accompanied with the
politic capacity, and the politic capacity as it were appro-
priated to the natural capacity) and it is not due to the politic
capacity on'y, that is, to his crown or kingdom diſtinct from
his natural capacity, and that for divers reaſons. Firſt, every
ſubject (as it hath been affirmed by thoſe that argued againtt
the plaintiff) is preſumed by law to be ſworn to the King,
which is to his natural perſon, and likewife the King is [worn
to his ſubjects, (as it appeareth in Bracton, lib. 3. de aftiont-
bus, Cap. 9. fol. 107.) which oath he taketh in his- natural

1 perſon ;


(a) Antes 6.


* 3 Inſt. 11.


| ob. 271. Dy.


| 743. pl. 62.


Cawly 185.


Co, Lit, 129 · a,


() This caſe is
not in the book
at large, but is
in the Abridg-
ment of Dy. fo,
32. Stow's
Abridgm.

. 1062. 1064.

peed's Chron,


p. 1127. col. 2.


num. 100.


(c) 10 Co. 32. b.


Co. Lit. 66. b.
4 Co. 11. as


(9) 3 808 7.


—


CALVIV“s Caſe. Part VII.


perſon : for the politic capacity is invifible and immortal ;


nay, the politic body bath no foul, for it fs framed by the po-
licy of man. 2. In all indictments of treaſon, when any do
intend or compaſs mortem & diſtructionem domini Regis (which
muſt needs be underſtood of his natural body, for his politic
body is immortal, and not ſubject to death) the indictment
concludeth, contra (a) ligeantie ſuæ debitum; ergo, the ligeance
is due to the natural body. Vide Fit. Juſtice of Peace 53. &
Pl. Com. 384. in the Earl of Leiceſter's caſe. 3. It is true,
that the King in genere dieth not, but, no queſtion, in indivi-
duo he dieth : as for example, H. 8. E. 6. &c. and Q Eliz.
died, otherwiſe you ſhould have many Kings at once. In 2
& 3 Ph. & Mar. Dyer 128. (/) one Conſtable diſperſed divers
bills in the ſtreets in the night, in which it was written, that
K. E. 6. was alive and in France, &c. and in Coleman-ſtreet
in London, he pointed to a young man, and ſaid that he was
King Edward the Sixth. And this being ſpoken de individus
E accompanied with other circumſtances) was reſolved to

high treaſon; for thg. which Conſtable was attainted and
executed. 4. A (c) body politic (being inviſible) can as a
body politic neither make or take homage 3 Vide 33 H. 8. tit,
Fealty, Brook 15. 5. In fide, in faith or ligeance nothing
ought to be feigned, but ought to be ex fide non ficta. 6. The
King holdeth the kingdom of England by birth-right inherent,
by deſcent from the hood royal, whereupon ſucceſſion doth
attend; and therefore it is uſually ſaid, to the K, his heirs,
and ſucceſſors, wherein heirs is firſt named, and ſucceſſors is
attendant upon heirs. And yet in our ancient books ſucceſſion
and ſucceſſor are taken for hereditance and heirs, Bract. lib,
2. de acquirendo rerum dominte, c. 29, Et ſciend' eft, quod he-


reditas eft fucceſſio in univerſum jus quod defunctus anteceſſor


habuit, ex cauſa quacunque acquijitionts vel ſucceſſionis, & alibi
affinitatis jure nulla ſucceſſio permittitur. But the title is
by deſcent; by Queen Llizabeth's death the crown and
kingdom of England deſcended to his Majeſty, and he was
fully and abſolutely thereby King, without any eſſential


ceremony or act to be done ex p fatto: for coronation


is but a royal ornament and folemnization of the royal de-
ſcent, but no part of the title. In the firſt year of his
Majeſty's reign, before his Majefly's coronation, Watſon
(d) and Clerke, Seminary Prieſts, and others, were of
opinion, that his Majeſty was no complete and abſolute K.
before his coronation, but that coronation did add a con-


| ys and perfection to the deſcent ; and therefore (ob-


ſerve their damnable and damned conſequent) that they by
C000 TT I, 2 ſtrengch


Ss. 34A EG IAG


Part VII. C ALVI 's Caſe. 11
ſtrength and power might before his coronation take him and


his royal iſſue into their poſſeſhon, keep him priſoner in the
Tower, remove ſuch counſellors and great officers as pleaſed
them, and conſtitute others in their places, &c. And that
theſe and other (acts) of like nature could not be treaſon a-
gainſt his Majeſty, before he were a crowned King. But it
was clearly reſolved by all the Judges of England, that pre-
ſently 2 the deſcent his Majeſty was completely and abſo-
lutely K. without any eſſential ceremony or act to be done ex
po/t facto, and that (a) coronation was but a royal ornament, and (4) 3 laſt. 3.


outward ſolemnization of the deſcent. And this appeareth


evidently by infinite precedents and book-caſes, as (taking one

example in a caſe ſo clear for all) King Henry VI. was not

crowned until the eighth year of his reign, and yet divers men

before his coronation were attainted of treaſon, of felony, &c.

and he was as abſolute and complete a King, both for mat-

ters of judicature, as for grants, &c. before his coronation, as

he was after, as it appeareth in the Reports of the 1, 2, 3, 4.

5, b, and 7 years of the ſame King. And the like might be

produced for many other Kings of this realm, which for bre-

vity in a caſe ſo clear I omit. By which it manifeſtly ap-

peareth, that by the laws of England there can be no“ inter- e Q. If net ſo

regnum within the ſame. If the King be ſeiſed of land by a {between K. J. 2.

defeaſible title, and dieth ſeiſed, this deſcent ſhall toll the en- LY —
. : » g W. z. ſucceſ-

try of him that right hath, as it appeareth by 9g (5) E. 4. 51. fion? pott. 12. a.

But if the next K. had it by ſucceſſion, that ſhould take away (5) 4 Co. 58. b.

no entry, as it appeareth by Littleton, fol. 97. If a diſſeiſor

of an infant convey the land to the K. who dieth ſeiſed, this

deſcent taketh away the entry of the infant, as it is faid in 34


H. 6. fol. 34. (c) 45. lib. Aſſ. pl. 6. Plow. Com. 234. where 2 10 Co. 96. b.


the caſe was; K. H. 3. gave a manor to his brother the Earl Os, Hit. 19. b.


. . 8 b. Plowd,
of Corn wal in tail (at what time the ſame was a fee - ſimple vg a. EE


conditional) King H. 3. died, the Earl before the ſtatute of Fitz. Garranty


Donis conditional” (having no iſſue) by deed exchanged the 68. Br. Alles


. a Diſcent 31.
manor with warranty for other lands in fee, and died without Br. Tail 36.


iſſue, and the warranty and aſſets deſcended upon his nephew Br. Prarog. 52.
King Edward I. and it was adjudged, that this warranty — 2 =
and aſſets, which deſcended upon the natural perſon of the wes #, "4
King, . barred him of the poſſibility of reverter. In the 132. ö. :
reign of Ed. 2. the Spencers, the father and the ſon, to

cover the treaſon hatched in their hearts, invented this

damnable and damned opinion, that homage and oath of Q

ligeance was more by reaſon of the King's crown (that is,
of his politic capacity) than by reaſon of the perſon of the

C |


4 King,


—— — — =


\ — g Fo =
* 7 > ———— — ˙ ⁰Üũu Oe —
— - — —
=


FS.


—_ 9 — - _— - - =


— —


—
— - *
- = ——— —


————̃ —„—„-—
1 . n
— 7


— —
— ” __— —
2. 2 2
— — — —
—_— — ——


Prynꝰ Sovereign
Power of Parlia-
ment. 2 Part pa.


43+ Cro, Arg. 4.


a


Ul
(a) 3 Keb. 20.
Cart. 120. 2Rull,
Rep. 229.
Het. 101.


4 Co. 46. b.


Carlrvin's Caſe. Part VII.


King, upon which opinion they inferred execrable and deteſt-
able conſequences: 1. If the King do not demean himſelf by
reaſon in the right of his crown, his lieges be bound by oath
to remove the King. 2. Seeing that the King could not be
reformed by ſuit of law, that ought to be done by the ſword.
3. That his lieges be bound to govern in aid of him, and in
default of him. All which were condemned by two Parlia-
ments, one in the reign of Ed. 2. called Exilium Hugonis le
Spencer, and the other in Ann. 1. Ed. 3. c. 1. Bracton, lib. 2.
de acguirendo rerum dominio, c. 24. f. 55, ſaith thus, E/! enim
corona Regis facere juſtitiam & judic, & tenere pacem, & fine qui-
bus corona conſiſtere non poteſi nec tenere; hujuſmodi autem jura


five juriſdictiones ad perſonas wel tenementa transferrt non pater unt,


nec a privata perſona poſſideri, nec uſus nec executis juris, niſi hoc
datum fuit ei deſuper, ſicut juriſdictio delegata delegari non poterit
quin ordinaria remaneat cum ipſo Rege. Et lib. 3. de actionibus,
cap. ꝙ fel. 107. Separare autem debet Rex, cum fit Dei vicarius
in terra, jus ab injurid, æguum ab iniguo, ut omnes ſibi ſuljefti
bonefle vivant, & quod nullus alium lædat, & quod unicuigue
guad ſuum fuerit rectd contributione reddatur. In reſpect where-
of one faith, that corona e&ft quaſi cor ornans, cujus ornamenta
funt miſericordia & juſtitia. And therefore a King's crown is
an hieroglypbic of the laws, where juſtice, &c. is adminiſter-
ed; for ſo faith P. Val. I. 41. p. 400. Coronam dicimus legrs
judicium eſſe, propterea quod certis eft vinculis complicata, quibus
vita noſirg velun religata coercetur. Therefore if you take that
which is ſignified by the crown, that is, to do juſtice and judg-
ment, to maintain the peace of the Jand, &c. to ſeparate right
from wrong, and the good from the ill; that is to be under-
ſtood of, that capacity of the King, that in ret veritate hath ca-
Pacity, and 1s adorned and endued with endowments as well
of the ſoul, as of the body, and thereby able to do juſtice and
judgment according to right and equity, and to maintain the
peace, &c. and to find out and diſcern the truth, and not of
the inviſible and immoctal capacity that hath no ſuch endow-
ments; for of itſelf it hath neither ſou] nor body. And
where divers books and acts of Parliament ſpeak of the ligeance
of England, as 31 E. 3. tit. Coſinage 5. 42 Ed. 3. 2. 13 E.
3. tit. Brief 677. 25 Ed. 3. Stat. de natis ultra mare. All theſe
and other ſpeaking briefly in a vulgar manner (for (a) lo-
quendum ut wulgus) and not pleading (for ſentiendum ut
dofli) are to be underſtood of the ligeance due-by the peo-
ple of England to the King; for no man will affirm, that
England itſelf, taking it for the continent thereof, doth owe


any


4
t
:
4


Carvin's Caſe,
any ligeance or faith, or that any faith or ligeance ſhould be


due to it: but it maniſeſtly appeareth, that the ligeance or
faith of the ſubjeCt is proprium quarto mods to the King, omni,


Part VII.


foi, & ſemper. And oftentimes in the reports of our book-
caſes, and in acts of Parliament alſo, the crown or kingdom
is taken for the King himſelf, as in * Fitzh. Natur. Brev. fol.
5. Tenure in capite is a tenure of the crown, and is a ſeig-
niory in groſs, that is of the perſon of the King: and fo is
30 H. 8. Dyer fol. 44, 45. a tenure in chief, as of the crown,
is merely a tenure of the perſon of the King, and therewith
agreeth 28 H. 8. tit. Tenure Br. 65. The ſtatute of 4 H. 5.
cap. ultimo gave Priors aliens, which were coventual to the
King and his heirs, by which gift ſaith 34 H. 6. 34. the fame
were annexed to the crown. And in the ſaid act of 25 Ed. 3.
whereas it is ſaid in the beginning, within the ligeance of
England, it is twice afterward ſaid in the ſame act within the
ligeance of the King, and yet all one ligeance due to the
King. So in 42 Ed. 3. fol. 2. where it is firſt ſaid, the
ligeance of England, it is afterwards in the ſame caſe called,
the ligeance of the King ; wherein though they uſed ſeveral
manner and phraſes of ſpeech, yet they intended one and the
ſame ligeance. So in our uſual commiſſion of aſſiſe, of gaol-
delivery, of Oyer and Terminer, of the peace, &c. power is
given to execute juſtice, ſecundum legem & conſuetudinem regni
n/tri Angliæ; and yet Littleton, lib. 2. in his chapter of Vil-
lenage, fol. 43. in diſabling of a man that is attainted in a pre-
munire ſaith, that the ſame is the King's law; and ſo doth
the Regiſter in the writ of A jura regia ſtyle the ſame.

The reaſons and cauſes wherefore by the policy of the law
the King is a body politic, are three, viz. 1. cauſa majeſtaits,
2. cauſa neceſſitatis, and 3. cauſa utilitatis. Firſt, cauſa majeſtatis,
the King cannot give or take but by matter of record for
the dignity of his perſon. Secondlv, cauſa neceſſitatis, as to
avoid the (a) attainder of him that hath right to the crown,
as it appeareth in 1 H. 7. 4. Jeſt in the interim there ſhould
be an (6) interregnum, which the law will not ſuffer. Alſo
by force of this politic capacity, though the (c) King be
within age, yet may he make leaſes and other grants, and the
ſame ſhall bind him; otherwiſe his revenue ſhould decay,
aud the K ſhould not be able to reward ſervice, &. Laſtly,
cauſa utilitatts, as when lands and pofleſſions defcend from
bis collateral anceſtors, being ſubjects, as ſrom the Earl

| of


12


® 7, e. Of the
politic capacity.


The reaſons
wheretor= the
K. by judgment
of law hatu a
politic capacity.
1 H. 7. 4

(a) Co. Lit. 16. a.
Bacon's H. 7.
fo, 8. 9. Fitz.
Parl. 2. Br.
Parl. 37, 105-
Plowd. 238. b.
(5)1 W. & M.
p. 4 (et. 10.
Co. Lit. 43. a.
ſe) 5 Co. 27. a.
1 Roll. 728.
Plowd. 213. a.
233. 221 a. 364.
b. 26 AT. 54-
Fitz Enfant 15.
Br. Age 14.


CaLvin's Caſe. Part VIT,


of March, &c. to the King, now is the King ſeiſed of the

Cs. Lit. 15, b. fame in jure corona, in his politic capacity; for which cauſe
See Tredy's Ar- the ſame ſhall go with the crown; and therefore, albeit Q:
Quo Wanna, Elizabeth was of the half-blood to Q. Mary, yet ſhe in her
| body politic enjoyed all thoſe fee-fimple lands, as by the law
| ſhe ought, and no collateral couſin of the whole blood to Q.
| Mary ought to have the ſame. And theſe are the cauſes
5 wherefore by the policy of the law the King is made a body
if 3 ſo as for theſe ſpecial purpoſes the law makes him a
y politic, immortal and inviſible, whereunto our ligeance
cannot appertain. But to conclude this point, our ligeance
is to our natural liege Sovereign, deſcended of the blood
royal of the Kings of this realm. And thus much of the firſt


1 eneral part de ligeantid.
li De Legibs. © p :
fl

;


The eoont Now followeth the ſecond part, de legibus, wherein theſe
ge- 3 . .
neral part. parts were conſidered : firſt, that the ligeance or faith of the
ſubject is due unto the King by the law of nature: ſecondly,
that the law of nature is part of the law of England : thirdly,
1 that the law of nature was before any judicial or municipal
1 law: fourthly, that the law of nature is immutable.
in | The law of na- The law of nature is that which God at the time of cre-
1 Wines Max, 1. àtion of the nature of man infuſed into his heart, for his pre-
| ; | Co. Fog 11, b. ſervation and direction; and this is lex ælerna, the moral
| - poſt. 14. b. law, called alſo the law of nature. And by this law, writ-
8:8 ten with the finger of God in the heart of man, were
iN | the people of God a long time governed, before the law
x was written by Moſes, who was the firſt reporter or writer
5 Q of law in the world. The Apoſtle in the ſecond chapter
1 1 ä to the Romans faith, cum enim gentes gue legem non habent
| naturaliter ea que legis ſunt faciunt, And this is within
11 that command of the moral law, hoanora patrem, which
doubtleſs doth extend to him that is pater patriæ. And
| | the Apoſtle ſaith, omnis anima poteſtatibus ſublimioribus ſub-
Th . dita it. And theſe be the words of the great Divine,
'N Hoc Deus in ſacris ſcripturis jubet, hoc lex nature diftat,
1s. ut quilibet ſubditus obedtat ſuperiori, And Ariſtotle, na-
11 ture's ſecretary, lib. 5. Athic. faith, that jus naturale eff,
15 guod apud omnes hamines eandem habet potentiam, And
herewith doth agree Bracton, lib. 1. cap” 5. and Forteſ-
cue, cap. 8, 12, 13, & 16, Doctor and Student, cap. 2. & 4.
And the reaſon hereof is, for that God and nature is one
| | tO


—_—


— — *


—
—


——
8 1 — — —
—— — — A 8 = . __
Fn * n —— 2 . - * _ — » . — a * o 11
+ — U — . ³˙¹ 4 —— ——— — 2 — . — wy — — —


7 Juſtin an. Inſt.
ub. 1. Cap. 2.


— — — —U—ͤ 4 — —
— — —
4 « _ - >


— — :
*


* — —
— — — 4
= —_ — == \


—
— —ũ—D— — — —
—— — —


— —_—
— 3


— — —— md1’n — —
2
yp
2 — x —
——


—
—


22
.


AGD of. S at a G6


Part VII. Carvin's Caſe.


to all, and therefore the law of God and nature is one to all. Nae,


By this law of nature is the faith, Jigeance, and obedience of
the ſubject due to his Sovereign or ſuperior. And Ariſtotle
1 Politicorum proveth, that to command and to obey is of na-
ture, and that magiſtracy is of nature : for whatſoever is ne-
ceſſary and profitable for the preſervation of the ſociety of man
is due by the law of nature: but magiſtracy and government
are neceſſary and profitable for the preſervation of the ſociety
of man ; therefore magiſtracy and government are of nature,
And herewith accordeth Tully, 4b. 3. de legibus, fine imperio


nec domus ulla, nec civitas, nec gens, nec hominum untverſum genus


flare, nec ipſe denique mundus pott. This law of nature, which
indeed is the eternal law of the Creator, infuſed into the Poſtes 25. a.


heart of the creature at the time of his creation, was two thou -
ſand years before any Jaws written, and before any judicial or
municipal laws. And certain it is, that before judicial or
municipal laws were made, Kings did decide cauſes according
to natural equity, and were not tied to any rule or formality
of law, but did dare jura. And this appeareth by Forteſcue,
cap. 12 & 13. and by Virgil that philoſophical poet, 7 Aneid,


Hoc Priami ge/lamen erat, cum jura vocatis


More daret populis.
And 5th ZEneid.


| Gaudet regno Trejanus Aceſ/les,
Indicitque forum & patribus dat Jura vacatis.


And Pomponius, lib. 2. cap. de origine juris, affirmeth, that


in Tarquinius Superbus's time there was no civil law written,


and that Papirius reduced certain obſervations into writing,
which was called Jus Civile Papirianum. Now the reaſon
wherefore laws were made and publithed, appeareth in For-
teſcue, cap. 13. and in Tully lib. 2. OMiiorum: at cum jus ægua-
bile ab uno vira homines non conſequerentur, inventi ſunt leces.
Now it appeareth by demonſtrative reaſon, that ligeance, faith,
and obedience of the ſubject to the Sovereign, was before any
munic'pal or judicial laws 1. For that government and ſubjec-
tion were long beſore any municipal or judicial laws. 2. For that
it had been in vain to have preſcribed laws to any, but to ſuch as
owed obedience, faith, and ligeance before, in reſpect whereof
they were bound to obey and obſerve them: Fare enim
feruntur


Carvin's Caſe. Part vn.


feruntur leges niſi ſubditis & obedientibus. Seeing then that
faith, obedience, and ligeance, are due by the Jaw. of nature,
it followeth that the ſame cannot be changed or taken away ;
for albeit judicialor municipal laws have inflicted and impoſed in
ſeveral places, or at ſeveral times, divers and ſeveral puniſh-
ments and penalties, for breach or not obſervance of the law
of nature, (for that law only conſiſted in commanding or pro-
hibiting, without any certain puniſhment or penalty) yet the


(a) Dr. as _ very law of nature itſelf, never was nor could be (a) altered or
4. a. ante 12. b.


. (8) Cant. 130. changed. And therefore it is certainly true, that (5) jura


naturalia ſunt immutabilia. And herewith agreeth Bracton,

lib. 1. cap. 5. and Doctor and Student, cap. 5 & 6. And this

appeareth plainly and plentifully in our books. |

If a man hath a ward by reaſon of a ſeigniory, and is out-

lawed, he forfeiteth the wardſhip to the King: but if a man

hath the wardſhip of his own ſon or daughter, which is his

n heir apparent, and is outlawed, he doth not (c) forfeit this
7 Co. 12. ö. wardſhip ; for nature hath annexed it to the perſon of the fa-
Co. Lit. 84. b. ther, as it appeareth in 33 H. 6. 55. b. It bonus Rex nihil a
— — bono patre differt, & patria dicitur a patre, quia habet commu-
Plow. mak a, nem patrem, qui eft pater patrig. In the ſame manner, maris
Englefield's caſe. & farming conjundtio eff de jure nature, as Bratton in the ſame
2 loft. 23 hook and chapter, and St. Germin in his book of the Doctor
and Student, cap. 5. do hold. Now it he that is attainted of

treaſon or felony, be ſlain by one that hath no authority,

or executed by him that hath authority, but purſueth not

his warrant, in this caſe his eldeſt ſon can have no ap-

peal, for he muſt bring his appeal as heir, which being ex

4 baminis, he loſeth it by the attainder of his father;

ut his (4) wife (if any he have) ſhall have an appeal, be-

(J) Stamf. Cor, Cauſe ſhe is to have her appeal as wife, which ſhe remaineth
59. c. 35 H. 6. notwithſtanding the attainder, becauſe maris & ſeeming con-
58. a. Br. Ap- fjundtio is de jure nature, and therefore (it being to be intended
oh St of true and right matrimony) is indifio'\uble; and this is
2 Inft. 215, proved by the book in 33 H.6. 57. So if there be mother
and daughter, and the daughter is attainted of felony, now can -

not ſhe be heir to her mother for the caule aforeſaid; yet aſter

her attainder, if ſhe kill het mother, this is paticide and petit

treaſon ; for yet ſhe remaineth her daughter, for that is of na-

ture, and herewith agreeth 21 F. 3. 17. b. If a man be attaint-

ed of felony or treaſon, he hath loſt the King's legal protec-

tion, for he is thereby utterly diſabled to ſuc any action real or

perſonal (which is a greater diſability than an alien in league

hath) and yet ſuch a perſon ſo attainted hath not loſt that

protection


Part VII. CAL VI N's Caſe,


protection which by the law of nature is given to the King,

for that is indelebilis & immutabilis, and therefore the King

may protect and pardon him, and if any man kill him without

warrant, he ſhall be puniſhed by the law as a manſlayer, and

thereunto accordeth 4 Ed. 4. and 35 H. 6 57. 2 Aff. pl. 3. Cay 47.

By the ſtatute of 25 Ed. 3. cap. 22. a man attainted in a Præ- 3 Iaſt. 126.

munire, is by expreſs words out of the King's protection ge-

nerally ; and yet this extendeth only to legal protection, as it

appeareth by Littleton, fol. 43. for the Parliament could not

take away that protection which the law of nature giveth unto q.

him ; and therefore notwithſtanding that ſtatute, the King

may protect and pardon him. And though by that ſtatute it

was farther enacted, that it ſhould be done with him as with Co. Lit. 130. a.

an enemy, by which words any man might have flain ſuch a

perſon (as it is holden in 24 H. 8. Tit. Coron. Br. 197.) B. N. c. 53.

until the ſtatute made anne 5 Eliz. cap. 1. yet the King might 0. Lit. 130. 2.

protect and pardon him. A man outlawed is out of the be- An

nefit of the municipal law; for ſo faith Fitz N. B. 161. a. ut- :

lagatus eft quaſi extra legem poſitus : and Bract. I. 3. tract. 2. c.

11. faith that caput geret lupinum; yet is he not out either of Co. Lit. 128. b.

his natural ligeance, or of the King's natural protection; for

neither of them is tied to municipal laws, but is due by the

law of nature, which (as hath been faid) was long before any

judicial or municipal laws. And therefore if a man were out-

jawed for felony, yet was he within the King's natural pro-

tection, for no man but the Sheriff could execute him, as it is |

adjudged in 2 Nb. Aſſ. pl. 3. Every ſubject is by his natural ;, Crone io.

ligeance bound to obey and ſerve his Sovereign, &c. It is,

enacted by the Parliament of 23 H. 6. that no man ſhould 23 H. 6. c. 8.

ſerve the King as Sheriff of any county, above one year, and

that, notwichſtanding any clauic of nn ob/Jtante to the contra-

ry, that is to ſay, notwithſtanding that the King ſhould ex-

preſsly diſpenſe with the ſaid ſtatute: howbeit it is agreed in,

2 H. 7. that againſt the expreſs purview of that act. the King plond. coz. b.

. may by a ſpecial Non 9b/{ante diſpenſe with that act, for that 2 H. 7. 6. ö.

the act could not bar the King of the ſervice of his ſubject, . 3

which the law of nature did give unto him. By theſe and

many other caſes that might be cited out of our books, it ap-

pearcth, how plentiful the authorities of our Jaws be in this

matter, Wherefore to conclude this point (and to exclude all

that hath been or could be objected againſt it) if the obedi-

ence and ligeance of the ſubject to his Sovereign, be due by

the law of nature, if that law be parcel of the laws as well

of England, as of all other nations, and is immutable, and

that Po/inat; * and we of England are united by birth-right, . i. e. of Scot-
| In land.


9 - - _ —
— — — — — —
. > > ——
— —
2 —


| (s) Elleſmere's
ll oftnat, C. 88.
4 4 Co. 118. a,
i" Cawly 209.
i Antea 2. b.
Moor 793, 834.


The 3d general


2


CA er's Caſe. Part VII.


in obedience and ligeance (which is the true cauſe of natural
ſubjection) by the law of nature; it followeth, that Calvin the
mp being born under one ligeance to one King, cannot
an alien born; and there is great reaſon, that the law of
nature ſhould direct this caſe, wherein five natural operations
are remarkable: firſt, the King hath the crown of England
by birth-right, being naturally procreated of the blood royal
of this realm : ſecondly, Calvin the plaintiff naturalized by
N and birth - right, ſince the deſcent of the crown of
ngland : thirdly, ligeance and obedience of the ſubject to
the Sovereign, due by the law of nature : fourthly, protection
and government due by the law of nature: fifthly, this caſe, in
the opinion of divers, was more doubtful in the beginning,
but the further it proceeded, the clearer and ſtronger it grew;
and therefore the doubt grew from ſome violent paſhon, and
not from any reaſon grounded upon the law of nature, qua
guanto magis violentus motus (qui fit contra naturam) appropin-
guat ad ſuum finem, tanto debilteres & tardiores ſunt ejus motus;


fed naturalis motus, quanto magis appropinquat ad ſuum finem,


tanto fortiores & velociores ſunt ejus motus. Hereby it appear-
eth how weak the objection grounded upon the rule of (a)
quando duo jura concurrunt in und perſona, &c. is: for that rule
holdeth not in perſonal things, that is, when two perſcns are
neceſſarily and inevitably required by law, as in the caſe of an
alien born there is; and therefore no man will ſay, that now
the King of England can make war or league with the King
of Scotland, & fic de cæteris and ſo in cafe of an alien born,
you muſt of neceſſity have two ſeveral ligeances to two ſeveral

ſons. And to conclude this point concerning laws, non ad-
ver ſatur di ver ſitas regnor ſed regnant”, non patriarum, ſed jatrum
patriar, non coronarum, ſed coronatorum, non legum municipali-
um, ſed regum majeſtiatum. And therefore thus were directh.
and clearly anſwered as well the objections drawn from the
ſeveralty of the kingdoms, ſeeing there is but one head of
both, and the Peſlnati and us joined in ligeance to that one
head, which is copula & tanguam oculus of this caſe; as alſo
the diſtinction of the laws, ſeeing that ligeance of the ſub-
jects of both kingdoms, is due to their Sovereign by one law,
and that is the law of nature.

For the third, it is firſt to be underſtood, that as the
law hath wrought four unions, ſo the law doth ſtill make
four ſeparations. The firſt union is of both kingdoms under one
natural liege Sovereign K. and ſo acknowledged ym act ol


arliament


manife


45
0


Part VII. C ALVI x's Caſe:


Parliament of recognition. The 2d is an union of ligeance
and obedience of the ſubjects of both kingdoms, due by the
Jaw of nature to their Sovereign : and this union doth ſuffice
to rule and over-rule the caſe in queſtion ; and this in ſubſtance
is but a uniting of the hearts of the ſubjeCts of both kingdoms
one to another, under one head and Sovereign. 'The 3d
union is an union of protection of both kingdoms, equally be-


| longing to the ſubjects of either of them: and therefore the


two firſt arguments or objections drawn from two ſuppoſed ſe-
yeral ligeances were fallacious, for they did digjungere conjun-
genda, The 4th union and conjunction 1s of the three lions
of England, and that one of Scotland, united and quartered
in one eſcutcheon.

Concerning the ſeparations yet remaining : 1ſt, England
and Scotland remain ſeveral and diſtin kingdoms. 2. They
are governed by ſeveral judicial or municipal laws: 3. They
have ſeveral diſtinct and ſeparate Parliaments. 4. Each king-
dom hath ſeveral nobilities; for albeit a Peſtnatus in Scotland,
or any of his poſterity, be the heir of a Nobleman of Scotland,
and by his birth is legitimated in England, yet he is none of
the (a) Peers or nobility of England; for his natural ligeance
and obedience, due by the law of nature, maketh him a ſub-
ject and no alien within England: but that ſubjection maketh
kim not noble within England, for that nobility had his origi-
ginal by the King's creation, and not of nature. And this is

ed by expreſs authorities, grounded upon excellent
reaſons in our books. If a Baron, Viſcount, Ear], Marquis,
or Duke of England, bring any action real or perſonal, and
the defendant pleadeth in abatement of the writ, that he is
no Baron, Viſcount, Earl, &c. and thereupon the demand-
ant or plaintiff taketh iffue ; this ifſue ſhall not be tried by
jury, but by the (5) record of Parliament, whether he or his
anceſtor, whoſe heir he is, were called to ſerve there as a
Peer, and one of the Nobility of the realm. And ſo are our
books adjudged in 22 Aſſ. 24. 48 Edw. 3. 30. 35 H. 6. 40.
20 Eliz. Dyer 360. Five in the Sixth Part of my Reports,
in the Counteſs of Rutland's caſe. So as the man, that is
not de jure a Peer, or one of the Nobility, to ſerve in the
Upper Houſe of the Parliament of England, is not in the le-
gal proceedings of law accounted noble within England.
And therefore if a Countee of France or Spain, or any other
foreign kingdom, ſhould come into England, he ſhould not
here ſue, or be ſued by the name of Countee, &c. for
that he is none of the Nobles that are members of the


Upper


13


(a) Dyer 360.
pl. 6. 9 Co. 1 17.
a. b. 2 Inſt. 48.


(9 Co. Lit. 16.5,
6 Co. 53. a.

9 Co. 31. 3:49 2.
12 Co. 70, 94,95 ·
2 Inft. 50.

2 Roll. 575.
Moor 767.


|
|


— —— —
— — — % — —
— — — — - — - =
—C—————O — ——— —
— — goo — — — =


4 * 22 - — =_—_
—
2 8 — 2 2
— — — —
— —U —  - —— —
— — —— —


— — —
— — -- — — 5
— - — ä
————
ꝗ&XU 72 - * m
— nn


— —
—
5 — — —
-
— — — = PY — — —
» = -
2 ů — -
—— — — .
3 o ARES —


> oe
—


tn —
” -


abr au.
IG


—


—


—


_


„


_
— *


— —


—


—— =
IS. eo en to —— —— ow 6s


(a) 9 Co. 177. b.
Br. noſme de


dignity 49.


Y 9. Co. 115. b.
itz. Proc. 224.


f (c) Dy. 360 pl. 6.


Co. Lit. 261. b.


(d) Moor 803.
9 Co. 117. b.
Poſtea 16. a.


( Moor 803.


Y Moor 798,
799 ·


(g) Y Co. 117. b.


Br. notme de
dignity, 49


Carvin's Caſe, Part VIE


Upper Houſe of the Parliament of England ; and herewith
agree the book-caſes of (a) 20 Ed. 4. b. a b. and 11 Ed. 3.
11 it. Bre. 47 3 like law it is, and for the ſame reaſon, of an Earl
or Baron of Ireland, he is not any Peer, or of the Nobility of
this realm: and herewith agreeth the book in 8 R. 2. Tit. (b)
Proceſ. pl. ultim. where in an action of debt proceſs of outlaw-
ry was awarded againſt the Earl of Ormond in ireland; which
ought not to have been, if he had been noble here. Vide Dyer

(e) 20 Eliz. 360. |
But yet there is a diverſity in our books worthy of obſerva-
tion, for the higheſt and lowelt dignities are univerſal, for if a
King of a foreign nation come into England, by the leave of
the King of this realm (as it ought to be) in this caſe he ſhall
ſue and be ſued by the name of a King; and herewith agreeth
11 E. 3. Tit. Br. (d) 473. where the caſe was, that Alice,
which was the wife oft R. de O. brought a writ of dower
againſt John Earl of Richmond, and the writ was Precip.
ohann'. Comiti Richmondiæ cuſtodi terr' & heredis of William
the ſon of R. de O. the tenant pleaded that he is Duke of
Britain, not named Duke, judgment of the writ? But it is
ruled, that the writ was good, for that the dukedom of Bri-
tain was not within the realm of England. But there it is
ſaid, that if a man bring a writ againſt Edward (e) Baliol, and
name him not King of Scotland, the wiit ſhall abate for the
cauſe aforeſaid. And hereof there is a notable precedent in
Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 3. $9. where treating of the juriſdiction of
the King's Court of Marſhallſea it is ſaid, et hec omnia ex officio
ſus licite facere poterit (/. Seneſchal* aul heſpitii Regis) non ab-
ante alicujus libertate, etiam in alieno regno dum tamen reus in
hoſpitio Regis poterit inveniri ſecundum quod contigit Pariſ. anno
14 Ed. 1. de Engelramo de Nogent capto in hoſpitio regis Angi“
(ipſo rege tunc apud Pariſiam exiſtente) cum diſcis argenti furatis
recenter ſuper facto, rege Franc tunc preſente, & unde licet curia
regis Franc de pred” latrone per caſtellanum Pariſ petita fuerit,
habitis hinc & inde tractatibus in eonſilis regis Franc, tandem con-
fideratum fuit; quod Rex Angl' illa regia prerogativa, & Heſpitii
ſui privilegia uteretur, & gauderet, qui, coram Roberto Fitz- Join
milite tunc hoſpitii regis Angl' Seneſchalls de latrocinio- convid-
us, per conſiderationem ejus cur* fuit (f) ſuſpenſus in patibulo
fanfti Germani de pratis. Which proveth, that though the
King be in a foreign kingdom, yet he is judged in law a
King there. The other part of the faid diverſity, is proved by
the book-caſe in 20 (g) E. 4. fol. G. a. b. where in a writ of debt
brought by Sir J. Douglas, Knight, againſt Elizabeth Mol ford,
the deſendant, demanded judgment of the writ, for that
| the


Part VII. CaLilvin's Cafe.”


the plaintiff was an Earl of Scotland, but not of England ;


and that our Sovereign Lord the King had granted unto him
ſafe conduct, not named by his name of dignity, judgment
of the writ, &c. And there Juſtice Littleton giveth the rule;
the plaintiff (faith he) is an Earl in Scotland, but not in Eng-
land ; and if our Sovereign Lord the King grant to a Duke of
France a ſafe conduct to merchandize, and enter into his
realm, if the Duke cometh and bringeth merchandize into
this land, and is to ſue an action here, he ought not to name
himſelf Duke, for he is not a Duke in this land, but only in
France. And theſe be the very words of that book-caſe ; our
of which I collect three things. Firſt, that the plaintiff was
named by the name of a Knight, whereſoever he received that
degree of dignity. Vide (a) 7 H. 6. 14 b. accord. 2, That
an Earl of another kingdom or nation is no Earl (to be ſo
named in legal proceedings) within this realm : and herewith
agreeth the book of (5) r1 Ed. 3. the Earl of Richmond's
caſe before recited. 3. That albeit the King by his letters
patent of ſafe conduct do name him Duke, yet that appella-
tion maketh him no Duke, to ſue or to be ſued by that name
within England: ſo as the law in theſe points (apparent in


our books) being obſerved, and rightly underſtood it appear-


eth how cauſeleſs their fear was, that the adjudging of the
plaintiff to be no alien, ſhould make a confuſion of the No-
bilities of either kingdom. |
No are we in order come to the fourth noun (which is
the fourth general part) alienigena; wherein ſix things did
fall into conſideration. 1. Who was alienig2na, an alien born
by the laws of England. 2. How many kinds of aliens born
there were. 3. What incidents belonged to an alien born.
4. The reaſon why an alien is not capable of inheritance or
freehold within England. 5. Examples, reſolutions, and
judgments reported in our books in all ſucceſſions of ages,
proving the plaintifF to be no alien. 6. Demonſtrative conclu-
tons upon the premiles, approving the ſame. |

1. An alien is a ſubject that is born out of theligeance of the
King, and under th&higeance of another, and can have no real
or perſonal action for or concerning land; but in every ſuch ac-
tion the tenant or defendant may plead, that he was born in ſuch
a country which is not within the ligeance of the K. and demand
judgment if he ſhall be anſwered. And this is in effect the de-
{cription which Lit. himſelf maketh, ib. 2. cap. 14. Villen. fel.
43. 7 eft alienæ gentis ſeu alienæ ligeantiæ, qui etiam dici-

Vor. IV. D tur


(a) Br. Brief 1 59.
Fitz. Brief 3 5 4


(b) ir E. 3.
Fitz. Brief. 473.
Antea 15. b.
Moor 803.

9 Co. 117. b.


The 4th general
Part, De alieni -
gena.


Who is an aliens


-


Co. Lit. 1228. bg
129. a, 4 Inſt,


152.
Lit. ſect. 198,


* .


.


*
Ta,
9


(a) Antes 5. 8.


77. f.


Note.


Fult. Ch. Hiſt.
J. 1. IA,


Carvain's Cafe. Part VII.


fur peregrinus, akenus, exoticus, extraneus, Ce. Extraneus
ſubditus, qui extra terram, i. poteſlatem Regis natus eſt. And
the uſual and right pleading of an alien born, doth lively and
truly deſcribe and expreſs what he is. And therein two
things are to be obſerved. 1. That the moſt uſual and beſt
pleading in this caſe, is, both excluſive and incluſive, viz.
extra ligeantiam domini Regis, Sc. & infra ligeantiam alterius
Regis, as it appeareth in (a) g Ed. 4. 7. b. Book of Entries,
fol. 244, &c. which cannot poſhbly be pleaded in this caſe,
for two cauſes. 1. For that one Kin is Sovereign of both
kingdoms. 2. One ligeance is due by both to one Sovereign,
and in cafe of an alien there muſt of neceſſity be ſeveral
Kings and ſeveral ligeances. Secondly, no pleading was
ever extra regnum, or extra legem, which are circumſcribed to
place, but extra ligeantiam, which (as it hath been ſaid) is not
local or tied to any place. | |
It appeareth by Bracton, Ib. 3. tract. 2. e. 15. fol. 134.
that (5) Canutus the Daniſh King, having ſettled himſelf in
this kingdom in peace, kept notwithſtanding (for the better
continuance thereof) great armies within this realm. The
Peers and Nobles of England diſtaſting this government, by
arms and armies, odimus accipitrem quia ſemper vivit in armis,
wiſely and politicly perſuaded the King, that they would pro-
vide for the ſafety of him and his people, and yet his armies
carrying with them many inconveniences, ſhould be with-
drawn ; and therefore offered, that they would conſent to a
law, that whoſoever ſhould kill an alien, and be apprehended, -
and could not acquit himſelf, he ſhould be ſubject to juſtice :
but if the manſflayer fled, and could not be taken, then the
town where the man was flain ſhould forfeit ſixty- ſix marks
unto the King; and if the town were not able to pay it, then
the hundred ſhould forfeit and pay the ſame unto the King's
treaſure; whereunto the King aſſented. This law was-pen-
ned quicungue occiderit Francigenam, &c, not excluding other
aliens, but putting Francigena a Frenchman for example, that
others muſt be like unto him, in owing ſeveral ligeance to a
ſeveral Sovereign, that is, to be extra ligeantiam Regis Ang,
and infra ligeantiam alterius Regis. And it appears before out of
Bracton and Fleta, that both of them uſe the ſame example
(in deſcribing of an alien) ad fidem Regis Francia. And it was
holden, that except it could be proved, that the party ſlain
was an Engliſhman, that he ſhould be taken for an alien
and this was called Engleſherie, Englieſheria, that is, a
proof that the party ſlain was an Engliſhman. 3
| anutus


Part VII. Catvrk's Caſe. 17


Canutus preſently withdrew his armies, and within a while
after loſt his crown, and the ſame was reſtored to his right
owner.) The ſaid law of Engliſherie continued until 14 Ed.
3. cap. 4. and then the ſame was by act of Parliament ouſted
and aboliſhed. So amongſt the laws of William the Firſt,
(publiſhed by Maſter Lambert, fol 125.) omnis Fr ancigena
(there put for example as before is ſaid, to expreſs what man-
ner of perſon alienigena ſhould be) gui tempore Edvard! pro-
pingui mftri fuit particeps legum & conſuetudiniim Anglorum (that
is made denizen) quod dicunt ad fot & lot per ſolvat ſecundum
legem Anglorum. b

Every man is either alienigena, an alien born, or ſubditus, How many kind
a ſubject born. Every alien is either a friend that is in league, 3 there
&c. or an enemy that is in open war, &c. Every alien ene-
my is either pro tempore, temporary for a time, or perpetuus,
perpetual, or ſpectaliter per miſſus, permitted eſpecially, Every
ſubject is either natus, born, or datus, given or made: and
of theſe biefly in their order. An alien friend, as at this
time, a German, a Frenchman, a Spaniard, &c. (all the
kings and princes in Chriſtendom being now in league with
our Sovereign; but a Scot being a ſubjeCt, cannot be ſaid to
be a friend, nor Scotland to be /olum amici) may by the com-
mon law have, acquire, and get within this realm, by gilt,
trade, or other lawful means, any treaſure, or (a) goods per- (a) co. Lit. 2. b.
ſonal whatſoever, as well as an Engliſhman, and may main-
tain any (64) action for the ſame: but (c) lands within this realm, (5) 1 Bulſt. 234.
or houtes (but for their neceſſary habitation only) alien friends TO IN
cannot acquire, or get, nor maintain any action real or per- = 2 And.
fonal, for any land or houſe, unleſs the houſe be for their ne- 25. Moor 431.
ceſſary habitation. For if they ſhould be diſabled to acquire N 4
and maintain theſe things, it were in effect to deny unto them 683. 8
trade and traffick, which is the life of every iſland. But if 9. 4 Inft. 152.
this alien become an enemy (as all alien friends may) then 1s 3 * 8.
he utterly diſabled to maintain any action, or get any thing B. N. C. pf
within this realm. And this is to be underſtood of a tem- Br. Non-ability
porary alien, that being an enemy, may de a friend, or be- ©) Po Ls
ing a friend may be an enemy. But a perpetual enemy Cos. br 4 Ry
(though there be no wars by fire and ſword between them) Dy. 2. pl. 8.
cannot maintain any aCtion, or get any thing within this
realm. All infidels are in law perpetui (d inimici, perpe- (d) Wing. Max.
tual enemies (for the law preſumes not that they will be +
converted, that being remeta potentia, a remote poſſi- :
bility) for between them, as with the devils, whoſe
ſubjects they be, and the Chriſtian, there is perpetual

-D 2 hoſtility,


(a) 4 Inſt. 155.


By what laws
kingdoms gotten
by conqueſt, &c,
ſhall ve govern-
ed, Dav. 30. b.
3 Keb. 402.
Salk. 411, 412.
666.

Comb, 55.


Irc land.


Carvin's Caſe: Part VII.


hoſtility, and can be no (a) peace; for as the Apoſtle ſaith,
2 Cor. 6. 15. Yue autem conventio Chrifii ad Belial, aut que
pars fidelt cum infideli, and the law faith, Judæo Chriſtianum
nullum ſerviat manciptum, nefas enim eſi quem Chriſtus redemit
blaſphemum Chriſti in ſervitutis vinculis detinere. Regiſter 282.
Infideles ſunt Chriſti & Cbriſtianorum inimici. And herewith
agreeth the book in 12 H. 8. fol. 4. where it is holden that a
Pagan cannot have or maintain any action at all. [ Quære. ]
And upon this ground there is a diverſity between a con-
queſt of a kingdom of a Chriſtian King, and the conqueſt of
a kingdom of an infidel ; for if a King come to a Chriſtian
kingdom by conqueſt, ſeeing that he hath vite & necis poteſta-
tem, he may at his pleafure alter and change the laws of that
kingdom, but until he doth make an alteration of thoſe laws,
the ancient laws of that kingdom remain. But if a Chriſtian
King ſhould conquer a kingdom of an infidel, and bring them
under his ſubjection, there zp/o facto the laws of the infidel
are abrogated, for that they be not only againſt Chriſtianity,
but againſt the law 'of God and of nature, contained in the
decalogue, and in that caſe, until certain laws be eſtabliſhed
amongſt them, the King by himſelf, and ſuch judges as he
ſhall appoint, ſhall judge them and their cauſes according to
natural equity, in ſuch ſort as Kings in ancient time did with
their kingdoms, before any certain municipal laws were gi-
ven, as before hath been ſaid. But if a King hath a king-
dom by title of deſcent, there ſeeing by the laws of that king-
dom he doth inherit the kingdom, he cannot change thoſe
laws of himſelf, without conſent of Parliament. Alſo if a
King hath a Chriſtian Kingdom by conqueſt, as King Henry
the Second had Ireland, after King John had given unto
them, being under his obedience and ſubjection, the laws of
England for the government of that country, no ſucceeding :
King could alter the ſame without Parliament. And in that
caſe while the realm of England, and that of Ireland were
governed by ſeveral laws, any that was born in Ireland was no
alien to the realm of England. In which precedent of Ire-
land three things are to be obſerved. 1. That then there had
been two deſcents, one from Henry the Second to King Rich-
ard the Firſt, and from Richard to King John, before the al-


teration of the laws. 2. That albeit Ireland was a diſtin


dominion, yet the title thereof being by conqueſt, the fame
by judgment of law might by expreſs words be bound
by act of the Parliament of England, 3. That albeit no reſer-

| vation


Part VII. CA L vin's Caſe, ; 18


vation were in King John's charter, yet by judgment of law a Kelw. 202. pl,
writ of error did he in the King's Bench in England of an er- r 71.
roneous judgment in the King's Bench of Ireland. Further. © 224.
more, in the caſe of a conqueſt of a Chriſtian kingdom, as y,yyg, 290,
well thoſe that ſerved in wars at the conqueſt as thoſe 291.
that remained at home for the ſafety and peace of their
country, and other the King's ſubjects, as well antenati
as poſinati, are capable of lands in the kingdom or country
conquered, and may maintain any real action, and have the
like privileges and benefits there, as they may have in Eng-
land.

The third kind of enemy is, 1mimicus permiſſus, an enemy
that cometh into the realm by the King's ſafe conduct, of
which you may read in the Regiſter, fol. 25. Book of Entries,
Ejectione firmæ, 7, 32 H. 6.23. b. &c. Now what a ſubject
born is, appeareth at large by that which hath been ſaid de li- Co. Lit. 229. ©.
geantia: and ſo hkewiſe de ſubdito dato, of a donarſon : for that
is the right name, ſo called, becauſe his legitimation is given
unto him; for if you derive denizen from deins nee, one born
within the obedience or ligeance of the King, then ſuch a
one ſhould be all one with a natural-born ſubjeft. And it
appeareth before out of the laws of King W. 1. of what anti-
quity the making of denizens by the King of England hath
been. | | Of the incidents
3. There be regularly (unleſs it be in ſpecial caſes) three to an alien. Lit.
incidents to a ſubje& born. 1. That the parents be under Reę. 27.
the aCtual obedience of the King. 2. That the place of his
birth be within the King's dominion. And 3. 'The time of
his birth is chiefly to be conſidered ; for he cannot be a ſub-
ject born of one kingdom that was born under the ligeance
of a King of another kingdom, albeit afterwards one kingdom
deſcend to the King of the other. For the firſt, it is termed
actual obedience, becauſe though the King of England hath
abſolute right to other kingdoms or dominions, as France,
Aquitain, Normandy, &c. yet ſeeing the King is not in ac-
tual poſſeſſion thereof, none born tgere ſince the crown of
England was out of actual poſſeſſion thereof, are ſubjects to the
King of England. 2. The place is obſervable, but ſo as
many times ligeance or obedience, without any place within
the King's dominions may make a ſubject born, but any place
within the King's dominions may make a ſubject born, but any
place within the King's dominions without obedience can ne-
ver produce a natural ſubject. And therefore if any of the
King's Ambaſſadors in foreign nations, have children there of 6, Cat. bor
their wives, being Engliſh women, bythe common laws of Eng- 602, N
land they are natural: born ſubjects, and yet they are born out March gr.
of the King's dominions. But if enemies ſhould come into any Fx. Cont, ts"
of the King's dominions, and ſurpriſe any caſtle or fort, and

D 3 polleſs


(a) 2 Vent, 6,
Vautzh. 286.


Wherefore an
alien born is not


capable of lands.


EeY


(2) 10 Co. 104. a.
o Lit. 156. b.
Poph. 36. |


Examples and
zuthorities in
law.


(4) Co. Lit. 10. a.
491. a; 232 as


CATI 1˙8 Caſe, Part VII.


oſſeſs the ſame by hoſtility, and have iſſue there, that iſſue
0 no ſubject to the King, though he be born within his do-
minions, for that he was not born under the King's ligeance
or obedience. But the time of his (a) birth is of the eſſence
of a ſubject born ; for he cannot be a ſubject to the King of
England, unleſs at the time of his (a) birth he was under the
ligeance and obedience of the King. And that is the reaſon
that antenati in Scotland (for that at the time of their birth
they were under the lipeance and obedience of another King)
are aliens born, in reſpect of the time of their birth
4. It followeth next in courſe to ſet down the reaſons,
wherefore an alien born is not capable of inheritance within
England, and that he is not for three reaſons, 1. The ſe-
crets of the realm might thereby be diſcovered. 2. TI he re-
venues of the realm (the finews of war, and ornament of
peace) ſhould be taken and enjoyed by ſtrangers born. 3. It
ſhould tend to the deſtruction of the realm. Which three
reaſons do appear in the ſtatute of 2 H. 5. cap. and 4 H. 5.
cap ultimo. But it may be demanded, wherein doth that deſtrue-
tion conſiſt; whereunto it is anſwered; firſt, it tends to de-
ſtruction tempore belli; for then ſtrangers might fortiſy them-
ſelves in the heart of the realm, and be ready to ſet fire on the
commonwealth, as was excellently ſhadowed by the Trojan
horſe in Virgil's Second Book of his Aneid, where a very
few men in the heart of the city did more miſchief in a few
hours, than ten thouſand men' without the walls in ten years.
Secondly, tempore pacis, for ſo might many aliens born get a
great part of the inheritance and freehold of the realm,
whereof there ſhould follow a failure of juſtice (the ſupporter
of the commonwealth) for that aliens born cannot be returned
of juries (6) for the trial of ifſues between the King and the
ſubject, or between ſubject and ſubject. And for this pur-
poſe, and many other, {le a charter (worthy of obſervation)
of King Ed. 3. written to Pope Clement, datum apud
Meſim. 26, die Sept. ann. regni noflri Francia 4. regni vera
Angliæ 17. eb |
5. Now are we come to the examples, reſolutions, and
judgments of former times; wherein two things are to
be obſerved : firſt, how many: caſes in our books do o-
ver- rule this caſe in queſtion (for t (c) eadem ratio ibi
idem jus, & de ſimilibus idem eft judicium. 2. That for
want of an expreſs text of law in terminis terminantibus
and of examples and precedents in like caſes (as was object-
ed by ſome) we are driven to determine the queſtion by
natural reaſon ; for it was 22 ſh ceſſet lex ſeripta id cuſtadiri
.F. IIS | a „„ + BOG


%


Part VII. CaLvin's Caſe, 19


oportet quod moribus & conſuetudine inductum eft, & fi qua in re

hoc defecerit, recurrendum eſt ad rationem. But that receiveth a

threefold anſwer : Firſt, That there is no ſuch rule in the

common or civil law, but the true rule of the civil law is, y

lex ſeripta ſi ceſſet, id cuſtodiri oportet guod moribus et conſuetudine

induftum eſt, & fi qua in re hoc defecerit, tunc id quod proximum

& conſequens ei e, & ji id non appareat, tunc jus quo urbs Romana

utitur, ſervari oportet. Secondly, If the faid imaginative rule

be rightly and legally underſtood, it may ſtand for truth : for

if you intend ratio for the legal and profound reaſon of ſuch

as by diligent ſtudy and long experience and obſervation are

ſo learned in the laws of this realm, as out of the reaſon of

the ſame they can rule the caſe in queſtion, in that ſenſe the

ſaid rule is true: but if it be intended of the reaſon of the

wiſeſt man that profeſſeth not the laws of England, then (I

ſay) the rule is abſurd and dangerous; for (a) cuilibet in ſug (a) 4 Co. 29. 2.

arte perito eſt credendum, & quod quijque (b) norit in bac ſe exer- bes A 8

ceat, Et omnes prudentes illa admittere ſolent que probantur its Col 31. Co.
ui in ſug arte bene verſati ſunt. Ariſt. 1. Topicorum, cap. 6. Lit. 125. a.
hirdly, There be multitudes of examples, precedents, judg- (2) 8 — 10. b.

ments, and reſolutions in the laws of England, the true and 23 bong

unſtrained reaſon whereof doth decide this queſtion ; for ex Co. Lit. r25. a.

ample : the Dukedom of Acquitain, whereof Gaſcoin was en

parcel, and the Earldom of Poitiers, came to King Henry nie, Gaſconia. ©

the Second by the marriage of Eleanor, daughter and heir of

Wm. Duke of Acquitain, and Earl of Poitiers, which de-

ſcended fo Rich. 1. Hen. 3. Ed. 1. Ed. 2. Ed. 2. &c. In

27 lib. (c) AT pl. 48. in one caſe there appear two judgments (e) Mor 796,

and one reſolution to be given by the Judges of bath benches 801. Poſt, 20, b:

in this caſe following. The poſſeſſions of the Prior of Chel-

ſey in the time of war were ſeiſed into the King's bands, for

that the Prior was an alien born : the Prior by petition af

right ſued to the King, and the effect of his petition was,

that before he became P:ior of Chelſey, he was Prior of An-

dover, and whilſt he was Prior there, his poſſeſſions of that

priory were likewiſe ſeiſed for the tame cauſe, ſuppoſing that

he was an alien born; whereupon he ſued a former petition,

and alledged that he was born in Gaſcoin within the ligeance

of the King : which point being put in iſſue, and found by |

jury to be true, it was adjudged that he ſhould have

reſtitution of his poſſeſſions generally without men-

tioning of advowſons. After which reſtitution, one of the


D 4 laid


2 — — —— — —


Vaſconia appel-
pellata fuĩt,
tempore Czroli
magni regnum
de V aſconia,
Mo. 800.
Vaugh. 300.


Co, Lit. 7. b.


CALvix's Caſe, Part VII.


ſaid advowſons became void, the Prior preſented, againſt
whom the King brought a Quare impedit, wherein the King
was barred ; and all this was contained in the latter petition,
And the book faith, that the Earl of Arundel, and Sir Guy
of B came into the court of Common Pleas, and demanded
the opinion of the Judges of that court concerning the ſaid
caſe, who reſolved, that upon the matter aforeſaid the King
had no right to ſeize, In which caſe amongſt many notable
points, this one appeareth to be adjudged and reſolved, that a
man horn in Gaſcoin under the King's ligeance, was no
alien born, as to lands and poſſeſſions within the realm of
England, and yet England and Galcoin were ſeveral and dif-
tinct countries. 2. Inherited by ſeveral and diſtinct titles.
3. Governed by ſeveral and diſtinct municipal laws, as it
appeareth amongſt the records in the Tower, Rot. Vaſc. 10
Ed. 1. Num. 7. 4. Out of the extent of the great ſeal of
England, and the juriſdiction of the Chancery of England.
5. The like objection might be made for default of trial, as
hath been made againſt the plaintiff. And where it was ſaid
that Gaſcoin was no kingdom, and therefore it was not to be
matched to the caſe in hand, it was anſwered, that this dif-
terence was without a diverſity as to the caſe in queſtion ; for
if the plea in the caſe at the bar be good, then without queſ-
tion the Prior had been an alien; for it might have been ſaid
(as it is in the caſe at the bar) that he was born extra ligeantiam
Regis regni ſui Angliz, & infra ligeantiam dominu ſui Haſco-
ni, and that they were ſeveral dominions, and governed by
ſeveral laws : but then fuch a conceit was net hatched, that
a King having ſeveral dominions ſhould have ſeveral ligeances
of his ſubjects. Secondly, it was anſwered, that Gaſcoin
was ſometime a kingdom, and likewiſe Millan, Burgundy,
Bavaria, Bretagne, and others were, and now are become
Dukedoms. Caſtile, Arragon, Portugal, Barcelona, &c.


where ſometime earldoms, afterwards dukedoms, and now


kingdoms Bohemia and Poland were ſometimes dukedoms,
and now kingdoms ; and (omitting many other, and coming
nearer home) Ireland was before 32 fl. 8. a lordſhip, and now


is a kingdom, and yet the King of England was as abſolute a


Prince and Sovereign when he was Lord of Ireland, as
now, when he is ſtyled King of the ſame, 10 Ed. 3 41. an
exchange was. made between an Engliſhman and a Gaſcoin,
of lands in England and in Gaſcoin ; ergo the Gaſcoin was
no alien, for then had he not been capable of lands in Eng-
land, 1 H. 4. 1. the King brought a writ of right of ward
againſt one Sybil, whoſe huſband was exiled into Gaſcoin ;


ergo


** *


Part VII. ALVI N's Caſe.


ergo Gaſcoin is no parcel or member of England, for exilium
eſt parria privatio, natalis ſoli mutatio, legum nativarum amifſio ;
4 E. 3. 10. b. the King directed his writ out of Chancery
under the great ſeal of England, to the Mayor of (a) Bur-
deaux (a city in Gaſcoin) then being under the King's obedi-
ence, to certify, whether one that was outlawed here in Eng-
land, was at that time in the King's ſervice under him in
obſequio regts : whereby it appeareth, that the King's writ did
run into Gaſcoin, for it is the trial that the common law hath
appointed in that caſe. But as to other caſes, it is to be un-
derſtood, that there be two kinds of writs, Brevia mandatoria
& remedialia, & brevia mandatoria & non remedialia : brevia
mandatoria & remedialia, as writs of right, of Formedon, &c.
of debt, treſpaſs, &c. and ſhortly, all writs real and perfonal,
whereby the party wronged is to recover ſomewhat, and to


be remedied for that wrong was offered unto him, are return-


able or determinable in ſome court of juſtice within England,
and to be ſerved and executed by the Sheriffs, or other mini-
ſters of juſtice within England, and theſe cannot by any
means extend into any other kingdom, country, or nation,
though that it be under the King's aCtual ligeance and obedi-
ence. But the other kind of writs that are mandatory, and
not remedial, are not tied to any place, but do follow ſubjec-
tion and ligeance, in what country or nation ſoever the ſub-
ject is, as the King's writ to command any of his ſubjects
rehding in any foreign country to return into any of the
King's own dominions, ſub fide et ligeantia quibus nobis tenemini.
And ſo are the aforeſaid mandatory writs, cited out of the
Negiſter of protection for ſafety of body and goods, and re-
quiring, that if any injury be offered, that the ſame be re-


20


(2) Vaugh. 290.
9 Co. 31. b.

2 Roll. 583.
Co. Lit. 74. a.
Br, Trial. 126.


Vavgh. 401.
2 Init. 486.
Moor dog.


3 Inſt. 179.


Antea fol. 8. b.


dreſſed according to the laws and cuſtoms of that place. Vide


le Reg. fol. 26. Stamford Prærog. cap. 12. fol. 39. faith, that
men born in Gaſcoin are inheritable to lands in England.
This doth alſo appear by divers acts of parliament: for by
the whole parliament, 39 E. 3 cap. 16 it is agreed, that the
Gaſcoins are of the ligeance and ſubjection of the King. Vide
42 Ed. 3. cap. 2. & 28 H. 6. cap. 5. &c.

Guicnne was another part of Aquitain, and came by the
ſame tit'e: and thoſe of Guienne were by act of parliament
in 13 H. 4. not imprinted, - ex Rot. Parliament. eodem
anno, adjudged and declared to be no aliens, but able
to poſſeſs and purchaſe, &c. lands within this realm.
And fo doth Stamford take the law, Przrog. c. 12. f. 39,

| | PF CR An


Cuyan.
Zuienna.

13 H. 4. nu. 22.
Cotton's Abr.
480.


CaLvin's Caſe. Part VII. |


And thus much of the dukedom of Acqu'tain, which (to-


(a) Dav. 19. 2.
Moor 796, 801.
Normandy.
Normannia,


Noi mandia.


Stamf. Prærog.
3h» 39s Ker.


gether with the earldom of Poitiers) came to King Henry the
Second (as hath oeen ſaid) by marriage, and continued in the
aCtual poſſeſhon of the Kings of England by ten deſcents,
viz. from the firſt year of King Henry the Second, unto the
two and thirtieth year of King Henry the Sixth, which was
upon the very point of three hundred years, within which
duchy there were (as ſome write) 4 archbiſhopricks, 24
biſhopricks, 15 earldoms, 202 baronies, and above a thou-
ſand captainſhips and bailliwicks : and in all this long time
neither book-caſe nor record can be found wherein any plea
was offercd to diſable any of them that were born there, by
foreign birth, but the contrary hereof directly appeareth by
the ſaid book-caſe of (a) 27 lib. Aſſ. 48.
The King's of England had ſometimes Normandy under
aCtual ligeance and obedience. The queſtion is then, whether
en born in Normandy, after one King had them both, were
inheritable to lands in England; and it is evident by our
books that they were: for ſo it appeareth by the declaratory
act of 17 E. 2. de Prærog. Reg. c. 12. that they were inherit-
able to, and capable of lands in England; for the purview of
that ſtatute is, quod Rex habebit eſcaetas de terris Normannorum,
Sc. Ergo Normans might have lands in England: et hoc
ſimiliter intelligendum efl, ſi aligua hereditas deſcendat alicui nato
in partibus tranſmarinis, &c. Whereby it appeareth, that
they were capable of lands within England by deſcent. And
that this act of 17 E. 2. was but a declaration of the common
law, it appeareth both by Bracton who (as it hath been ſaid)
wrote in the reign of Henry the Third, lib. 3. tract. 2. c. 1.
f. 116. and by — who wrote in 5 E. 1. c. 18. that all
ſuch lands as any Norman had either by deſcent or purchaſe,


eſcheated to the King for their 2 in revolting from


their natural liege lord and ſovereign. And therefore Stam-
ford Prærog. cap. 12. fol. 39. expuunding the ſaid ſtatute of
17 E. 2. cap. 12. concludeth, that by that chapter it ſhould
appear (as if he had ſaid, it is apparent without queſtion ) that all


men born in Normandy,Gaſcoin, Guienne, Anjou, and Britain,


Kel. 202. pl. 19.
4 Init. 286.

Co. Lit. 11. b.
Seld. M are clay.
lib. 2. Cap. 19.
Guernſey and


Jeriey.


(whilſt they were under actual obedience) were inheritable
within this realm as well as Engliſhmen. And the reaſon
thereof was, for that they were under one ligeance due to one
Sovereign. And ſo much {omitting many other authorities)
for Normandy : faving J cannot let pals the iſles of Guernſey
and Jerſey, parts and parcels of the dukedom of Normandy,
yet remaining under the actual ligeance and obedience of
the King, I think no man will doubt, but thoſe that Ra

In


Part VII. CALVIN 's Caſe. 21


born in Guernſey and Jerſey (though thoſe ifles are no parcel
of the realm of England, but ſeveral dominions enjoyed by Oo. Lit. 1. b.
ſeveral titles, governed by ſeveral laws) are inheritable and |
capable of any lands within the realm of England, 1 E. 3.
fol. 7. Commiſſion to determine the title of lands within
the ſaid iſles, according to the laws of the iſles ; and Mich. 4 Iaſt. 256.
41 E. 3 in the treaſury, Quia negotium pred” nec aliqua alia
negotia de inſuld præd emergentia non debent terminari mft ſecun-
dum legem inſulæ pred”, &c. And the Regiſter fol. 22. Rex
fidelibus ſuis de Jernſey & Gerſey. K. William the Firſt
brought this dukedom of Normandy with him, which by
five deſcents continued under the actual obedience of the
Kings of England, and in or about the 6th year of mg
John, the crown of England loſt the actual poffellion thereof,
until K. Henry the Fifth recovered it again, and left it to King
Henry the Sixth, who loſt it in the 28th of his reign ;
wherein were (as ſome write) one archbiſhoprick and fix
biſhopricks, and an hundred ſtrong towns and fortreſſes, be-
ſides thoſe that were waſted in war. Maud the Empreſs, the
only daughter and heir of Henry the Firſt, took to her ſecond
huſband Jeffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, Tourain, and
Mayne, who had iſſue King H. 2. to whom the ſaid earldom
by juſt title deſcended, who, and the King's that ſucceeded
him, ſtyled themſelves by the name of Comes Andegad, Sc.
until K. E 3. became King of all France; and ſuch as were
born within that earldom, ſo long as it was under the actual
obedience of the King of England, were no aliens, but na- Co. Lit. 7. 3.
tural born ſubjects, and never any offer made, that we can
find, to diſable them for foreign birth. But leave we Nor- :
mandy and Anjou, and ſpeak we of the little, but yet ancient 5 go ag”
and abſolute Kingdom of the Iſle of Man, as it appeareth by Co. Lit. * _
divers ancient and authentic records; as taking one for many. Kelw. 202. pl.
Artold King of Man ſued to King H. 3. to come into Eng- /% 144 186.
land to confer with him, and to perform certain things which 9
were due to K. H. 3 thereupon King H. 3. 21 Decemb. ann.
rign ſui 34, at Wincheſter, by his letters patent gave licence
to Artold King of Man as followeth; Rex omnibus ſalutem.
Sciatis, quod licentiam dedimus, Ic. Artoldo Regi de Man ve-
niendo ad nos in Angl ad loquend” nobiſc & ad 17 nobis quod
facere debet; & ides vabis mandamus quod ei Regi in ve-
niendo ad nis in Angl, vel ibi morando, vel inde redeundo nul-
lum fuciat aut fieri permittatis damnum, injur', moleſtiam,
aut gravamen, vel etiam haminib” ſuis quos ſecum ducet &
/ aliquid ets foriifa fuerit, id es fire dilat” faciat' emen-
Ari. Incrjus, c. duratur uſque ad feſt” S. Mich. Wherein
. two


Carvin's Caſe. Part VII. |


two things are to be obſerved ; 1. That ſeeing that Artold K.
of Man ſued for a licence in this caſe to the King, it proveth
him an abſolute King, for that a Monarch or an abſolute
Prince cannot come into England without licence of the K.
but any ſubjeCt being in league, may come into this realm
without licence. 2. That the King in his licence doth ſtyle
him by the name of a King. It was reſolved in 11 H. g. that
where an office was found after the deceaſe of Thomas Earl of
Derby, and that he died ſeiſed, &c. of the Iſle of Man, that
the ſaid office was utterly void, for that the Iſle of Man, Nor-
mandy, Gaſcoin, &c. were out of the power of the Chancery,
and governed by ſeveral laws; and yet none wil! doubt, but
thoſe that are born within that iſle, are capable and inherit-
Wales, Cam- able of lands within the realm of England. Wales was ſome
** time a kingdom, as it appeareth by 19 H. 6. ſol. 6. and by the
4 Inſt. 239, 240, act of Parliament of 2 H. 5. c 6. but whilſt it was a kingdom,
&c. Plow. 126. the ſame was holden, ang within the fee, of the King of Eng-
Var: 281. land; and this appeareth by our books, Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 16.
CE 1 E. 3.14. 8 E. 3. 59. 13 E. 3. tit. Juriſdict'. 10 H. 4. 6.
1 Plow. Com. 368. And in this reſpect, in divers ancient
1 charters, Kings of old time ſtyled themſelves in ſeveral man-
| ners, as King Edgar, Britannia Baowes; ; Etheldredus, totius
Albian® Dei providentia Imperatcr ; Edredus Magn' Britann*
Monarcha, which among many other of like nature I have
ſeen. But by the ſtatute of 12 E. 1. Wales was united and
incorporated into England, and made parcel of England in
poſſeſſion ; and therefore it is ruled in 7 H. 4 f. 13. a. that
Co, Lit. 130. b. no protection doth lie 9% moratur in Mallia, becauſe Wales
hn Protect. is within the realm of England. And where it is recited in
Br. Protect. 33, the act of 27 Hl. 8. chat Wales was ever parcel of the realm
N 405. of England, it is true in this ſenſe, viz. that before 12 E. 1.
auch. 314. jt was parcel in tenure; and ſince it is parcel of the body of the
realm. And whoſoever is born within the fee of the King
of England, though it be in another kingdom, is a natural-
born ſubject, and capable and inheritable of lands in Eng-
land, as it appearcth in Plow. Com. 126. And therefore
thoſe that were born in Wales before 12 E. 1. whilſt it was
only holden of England, were capable and inheritable of lands

; —” A _ : 47
_ Now come we to France and the members thereof, as
X Callice, Guynes, Tournay, &c. which defcended to King
Edw. the Third as fon and heir to Iſabel, daughter and
beir to Philip le Beau, King of France. Certain it is, 78
a N ing


Part VII. Carvin's Caſe; 22


King Henry the Sixth had both Roe and the heart and
greateſt part of France under his actual ligeance and Gbedi-
ence (for he was crowned King of France in Paris) that they
that were then born in thoſe parts of France, that were undet
actual ligeance and obedience, were no aliens, but capable of,
and inheritable to lands in England. And that is proved by
the writs in the Regiſter, fol. 26. cited before. But in the
inrollment of letters patent of denization in the Exchequer
int' originalia, ann. 11 H. 6. with the Lord Treaſurer's Remem-
brancer was ſtrongly urged and objected ; for (it was faid)
thereby it appeareth, that King H. 6. in anno 11 of his reign,
did make denizen one Reynel born in France; whereunto it
was anſwered, that it is proved by the ſaid letters patent, that
he was born in France, before King Henry the Sixth had the
actual poſſeſſion of the crown of France, ſo as he was antenatus;
and this appeareth by the ſaid letters patent, whereby the K.
granteih, that Aagi/ter Johannes Reynel ſerviens naſler, Sc.
mfra regnum noſirum Franc oriundus pro termins vite ſue ſit
ligeus noſter, & eodem mods teneatur ſicut verus & fidelts noſter
infra regnum Ang! oriundus, ac quad ipſe terras infra regnum noſ-
trum AnglP ſeu alia dominia noftra perquirere poſſit & wvaleat,
Now if that Reyne! had been born ſince Henry the Sixth
had the quiet poſſeſſion of France (the King being crowned
King of France about one year before) of neceſſity he muſt be
an infant of very tender age, and then the King would never
have called him his ſervant, nor made the patent (as thereby
may be collected) for his ſervice, nor have called him by the
name of Magiſter Johannes Reynel: but without queſtion he
was anteratus, born before the King had the actual and real
poſſeſſion of that crown.

Calais is a part of the kingdom of France, and never was Calice, Cale-
parcel of the kingdom of England, and the Kings of England 8
enjoyed Calais in and from the reign of King Edw. the 5
Third, until the loſs thereof in Queen Mary's time, by the Br. Trial 58,

ſame title that they had to France. And it is evident by 7335. 101.
our books, that thoſe that were born in Calais, were capable Br. Cinque
and inheritable to lands in England, 42 E. 3. c. 10. Vide 21 Poris 10. |
/ H. 7. 33. b. 19 H.6.2E. 4. I. a. b. 39 H. 6. 39. a. 21 E. 4.18. * ö
a. 28 H. 6. 3. b. By all which it is manifeſt, that Calais being ;
parcel of France was under the actual obedience and com- |
mandment of the K. . d by conſequent thoſe that were born
there, were natural-born ſubjects, and no aliens. Calais
from the reign of K. Ed. 3. until the fifth year of Queen Mary,
remained under the actual obedience of the King 12 Engl.
uines


Py — j—ͤ—.ñ——— 2 — — — 2 any WY
a


' CaLvik's Caſe, Part VII.

Fitz Protect. 13. Guines alſo, another part of France, was under the like obe-

qu mma dience to K. Henry the Sixth, as appeareth by 31H. 6. fol. 4.

Dy. 224- pl. 29. And Tournay was under the obedience of Henry the Eighth,

Vaugh. 282. as it appeareth by 5 El. Dyer, fol. 224. for there it is reſolv-

Co. Lit. 8. 2. ed, that a baſtard born at Toutnay, whilſt it was under the

obedience of Henry the Eighth, was a natural ſubject, as an

iſſue born within this realm by aliens. If then thoſe that were

born at Tournay, Calais, &c. whilſt they were under the

obedience of the King, were natural ſubjects, and no aliens,

it followeth, that when the kingdom of France (whereof thoſe

were parcels) was under the King's obedience, that thoſe that

were then born there, were natural ſubjects, and no aliens.

Treland, Hiber- Next followeth Ireland, which originally came to the Kings

22 3 2 of England by conqueſt, but who was the firſt conqueror

= 206, os thereof, hath been a queſtion. I have ſeen a charter made

Dav.60. Pref. 4, by King Edgar in theſe words: Ego Edgarus Anglorum Bacuuòe,

Rep. 3a, 33% ommiumgue inſularum oceant, guæ Britanniam circumjacent, Im-

perator & Dominus, gratias ago ipſi Deo omnipotenti Regi mes,

gui meum imperium fic ampliavit & exaltauit ſuper regnum patrim

meorum, Sc. mihi conceſſit propitia divinitas, cum Anglorum

Imperio omnia regna inſularum oceani, Ic. cum ſuis fg ane

Regibus uſque Norvegiam, maximamque partem Hibern', cum

ſud nobiliſſimã civitate de Dublina, Anglorum Regno ſubjugare,

guapropter & ego Chriſti gloriam & laudem in regno meo exaltare,

eus ſervitium amplificare devotus diſpoſui, c. Yet for that

it was wholly conquered in the reign of Henry the Second,

Co. Lit. . a. the honour of the conqueſt of Ireland is attributed to him,

| and his ſtyle was, Rex Ang!', Dominus Hibern', Dux Nor-

mann, Dux Aguitan, & Comes Andegav', King of England,

Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Duke of Aquitain, and

Earl of Anjou. That Ireland is a dominion ſeparate and di-

| vided from England, it is evident from our books, 20 H. 6. 8.

| Sir John Pilkington's caſe. 32 H. 6. 25. 20 Eliz. Dyer 360.

12 Co. 111. Plow. Com. 360. And2R. 3. 12. a. Hibernia habet Parlia-

* + 64 mentum, & faciunt leges, & naſira ſtatuta non ligant eos, quia non
2 And. 116. mittunt milites ad Parliamentum (which is to be underſtood, un-


Dav. 37. 3. | - La
Jen. Gs — 8 leſs they be eſpecially named) ſed per ſonæ eorum Jos Sie N


r. Farliam. 98. Reg is, ſicut inhabitantes in Caleſid, Gaſconid, & Guyan. erein
it is to be obſerved, that the Iriſhman (as to his ſubjection)
is compared to men born in Calais, Gaſcoin, and Guienne.
Concerning their laws, ex rotulis patentium de anno 11
Regis H. 3. there is a charter which that King made,
beginning in theſe words, Rex, &c. Baronibus, militibu:,
& oemmbus libere tenentibus L. ſalutem, ſatis ut credimus

vel a


Go. Lit. 147. 8.


Part VIE Car vin's Caſe, oY


veftra audivit diſcretio, quod quando bone memoriæ (a) Johannes (=) Co. Lu. 141.
quondam Rex Angl pater no/ter venit in Hiberniam ipſe duxit ſe- b. 2 Vent. 4.
cum viros diſcretos & legis peritos, quorum communi confilio & ad y
inflantiam Hibernenſium flatuit & præcepit leges Anglicanas in
Hibern ita quod leges eaſdem in ſcripturas redactas reliquit ſub
A fegilly ſue ad Scaccarium Dublin'. do as now the laws of Eng-

land became the proper laws of Ireland; and therefore, be-
cauſe they have Parliaments holden there, whereat they have
made divers particular laws concerning that dominion, as it


appeareth in 20 H. b. 8. & 20 El. (6) Dyer 360. and for that
they retain unto this day divers of their ancient cuſtoms, the
book in 20 H. 6. 8. hoſdeth, that Ireland is governed by laws
and cuſtoms, ſeparate and diverſe from the laws of England.
A voyage royal may be made into Ireland. Vide (c) 11 H.
4. 7. a. & 7 (4) E. 4. 27. a. which proveth it a diſtinct do-
minion. And in anno 33 Reg. El. it was reſolved by all the
Judges of England in the caſe of (e) Orurke an Iriſhman,
who had committed high treaſon in Ireland, that he by
the ſtatute of 23 H. 8. C 33. might be indicted, arraigned,
and tried for the ſame in England, according to the pur-
view of that ſtatute; the words of which ſtatute be, That
« all treaſons, &c. committed by any (/) perſon out of the
« realm of England ſhall be from henceforth enquired of, &c.”
and they all reiolved (as afterward they did alſo in Sir John
Perrot's caſe) that Ireland was out of the realm of Engl. and
that treaſons committed there, were to be tried within Engl.
by that ſtatute. In the ſtatute of 4 H. 7. cap. 24. of (g) Fines,
roman is made for them that be out of this land, and it is
olden in Plow. Com. in Stowel's cafe 375, that he that is in
Ireland is out of this land, and conſequently within that
proviſo. Might not then the like plea be deviſed as well a-
gainſt any perſon born in Ireland, as (this 1s againſt Calvin
that is a po/tnatus) in Scotland? For the Iriſhman is born extra
ligeantiam Regis regni ſui Angl', Sc. which be verba operativa
in the plea : but all men know, that they are natural-born
ſubjects; and capable of and inheritable to lands in Eng-
land. Laſtly, to conclude this part with (5) Scotland itfelt ;
in ancient time part of (i) Scotland (beſides Berwick) was
within the power and ligeance of the gr, Jeu England, as
appeareth by our books (4) 42 E. 3. 2. b. the Lord Beaumont's
cale, 11 E. 3. c. 2, &c. and by precedents hereafter mention-
ed; and that part (though it were under the King of
England's ligeance and obedience) yet was it governed
by the laws of Scotland. Ex rotulis Scotiæ, anno 11 Ed.
85 amongſt the records in the Tower of London. Kex,
» Conftituimus Rich. Talebot Juſticiarium naſirum ville


Berwict


(B) 9 Co. 117. B,
rt. 136,


(e) Fita. Protect.
24. Br. Protect.


347.

(4, Fitz. Protect.
16. Br. Protect.
72. 3 Inſt. 11,
18, 24. Co. Lit,
261. b. 1 And,
262, 263.

2 Vent. 4+ Cart,
190, Cawly 93.
(f) 35 H. J. e. 2.


) Cawly 93+
Co, Lit. 264. b.
3 Inſt, 11.


(50 3 Inſt. 18.
Plowd. 368. b.
Scotland, Sco-
tis. |

(i) Heylin's
Coſmog. lib. 4.
p. 305, 306.
(A) 2 Brief
551


(a) Fitz. Brief
551. Ant. 23. a.


Berwick?
(5) I Sid, 381,
382.

V. oY fie 2 Burro. 858.
S e 110.41
— uli

44 (e) Fitz. Pro-
tect. 8. Br. Pro-
tect. 49.


J * 4 * * _
— + — 0 — — —
— . 4 C a by 8 2 7 — 2 — 2 — — — 2 — ——O_ * — — — — —
- — AW N n p 22 8 — = = —
— — — — = 2-9 . — ra + 1 x - . — 2 2 — — = —
0 23 * — 5 5" hy — - P
— — % \ 4.4 AS. rr — \ 2 8 . 6 2 — 3 —— —— —
: — - K R — D 2


*


3


EE


—


— — . .
* 5 „* 0 Y +
- „ r
29 MT _—_— «+ < :


Carvin's Ciſe: Part VII.


Bertwici ſuper Twedam, ac omnium aliarum terrarum noſtrarum
in partibus Scot", ad faciend omnia & fingula que ad officium Ju-
ticiarii pertinent, ſecundum legem & conſuetudinem regni Scot”.
And after anno 26 E. g. ex codem rot. Rex Henrico de Percey
Ricarda de Nevil, &c. Volumus & wobis & alteri veſlrum tenore
præſentium committimus & mandamus, quod homines niſiri de
Scotꝰ ad pacem & obedientiam noſlram exiſtentes, legibus, liberta-
tibus, & liberis conſuetudinibus, quibus ipſi & anteceſſires ſui
tempore celebris memoriæ Alexandri quondam Regis Scot” rationabi-
liter uſt fuerunt, uti ut gaudere deberent, prout in quibuſdam in-
denturis, &c. plenius dicitur contineri. And there is a writ in
the Regiſter 295. a. Dedimus poteſtatem recipendi ad fidem &
pacem noſlram homines de Galloway, Now the caſe in (a) 42
Ed. 3. 2. b. (which was within fixteen years of the ſaid grant,
concerning the laws in 26 EK. 3.) ruleth it, that ſo many as
were born in that part of Scotland, that was under the lige-
ance of the King, were no aliens, but inheritable to lands in
England ; yet was that part of Scotland in another kingdom
governed by ſeveral laws, &c. And if they were natural. ſub-
Jes in that caſe, when the King of England had but part of
Scotland, what reaſon ſhould there be, why thoſe that are born
there, when the King hath all Scotland, ſhould not be natural
ſubjects, and no aliens? So likewiſe (%) Berwick is no part of
England? nor governed by the laws of England and yet they
that have been born there, ſince they were under the obedi-
ence of one King, are natural-born ſubjects, and no aliens,
as it appeareth in 15 R. 2. cap. 7, &c. Vide (c) 19 H. 6. 35.
b. & 39 H. 6. 39.a. And yet in all theſe cales and examples,
if this new deviſed plea had been ſufficient, they ſhould have
been all aliens againſt ſo many judgments, reſolutions, au-
thorities, and judicial precedents in all ſucceſſions of apes.
There were ſometimes in England, whilſt the heptarchy ſaſt-
ed, ſeven ſeveral crowned Kings of ſeven ſeveral and diſtinct
kingdoms, but in the end the Weſt Saxons got.the monarchy,
and all the other Kings melted (as it were) the crowns to
make one imperial diadem, for the King of the Weſt Saxons
over all. Now when the whole was under the actual and
real ligeance and obedicnce of one King, were any that were
born in any of thoſe ſeveral and diſtinct kingdom, aliens one
to another? Certainly they being born under the obedience
of one King and Sovereign, were all natural-born ſubjects,
and capable of and inheritable unto any lands in any of the
faid kingdonis, f
5


part. VII. Catvin's Caſe.


In the holy hiſtory reported by St. Luke, ex dictomine Spi-
ritus Santi, cap. 21 & 22 Add. Abojlolorum, it is certain, that
St. Paul was a Jew, born in Tarſus, a famous city of Cilicia;
for it appeareth in the ſaid 21ſt chapter, ver. 39. by his own
worde, Ego homo ſum quidem Fudæus a Tarfs Cilicie non ignotæ


civitatis municeps. And in the 22d chapter, verſe 3. Ego ſum


vir fudæus natus Tarja Ciiiciz, c. and then made that excel-
lent ſermon there recorded, which when the Jews heard, the
text ſaith, veiſe 22. Levaverunt vocem ſuam dicentes, tolle de
terra hujuſimodi, non enim fas eſl eum dium; vitiferantibus au—
tem eis et projictentibus veſiimenta ſua, & pulverem jactantibus in
aerem, Claudius Lyſias the popular Tribune, to pleaſe this
turbulent and prophane multitude (though it were utyerly
againſt juſtice and common reaton) the text ſaith, Zur Tei
bunus induc eum in caſira, 2. flagellts cedi, and 3. torgueri e
(quid ita?) ut ſciret propter quam cauſam fic acclamarent ; and
when they had bound Paul with cords, ready to execute the
Tribune's unjuſt commandment, the bleſſed Apoſtle (to avoid
unlawful and ſharp puniſhment) took hold of the law of a
heathen emperor, and ſaid to the Centurion ſtanding by him,
Si hominem Rimanum et indemnatum licet vobis flagel:are 9)
Which when the Centurion heard, he went to the Tribune
and ſaid, Quid acturus es ? Fic enim bomo cives Romanus eſt,
Then came the Tribune to Paul, and ſaid unto him; Die
mihi fi tu Romanus es? At ille dixit, Eliam. And the I ribune
anſwered, Ego multa ſunima ci uitatem hanc conſequutus um But
Paul not meaning to conceal the dignity of his birth-right
ſaid, Ege autem et natus ſum: as if he ſhould have ſaid to the
Tribune, you have your freedom by purchaſe of money, and
I (by a more noble means) by birth-right and inheritance.
Pratinus eręs (faith the text) deceſſerunt ab iilo gui illum torturi
erant, Tribunus queque ti muit poſiguam reſcivit, quia vis Romas
nus eſſet, et quia alligaſſet eum. So as hereby it is maniteſt
that aul was a Jew, born at Tarſus in Cilicia, in Aſia Minor,
and yet being born under the obedience of the Roman m-
peror, he was by bi th a citizen of Rome in Italy in Europe,
that is, capable of and inheritable to all privileges and immu—
nities of that city. But ſuch a plea as is now imagined
againſt Calvin might have made St Paul an alien to Rome.
For if the Lmperor of Rome had ſeveral ligeances for every
ſeveral kingdom and country under his obedience, then
might it have been ſaid againſt St. Paul, that he was extra
Vor. IV. E | lige-


24


«. 4


C ALVI 's Caſe. Part VII.


Igeantiam Imperatoris regni ſui Italiæ, et infra ligeantiam Impe-
ratoris regni ſui Cilicig, &c. But as St. Paul was Judæus pa-
trig et Romanus privilegio, Judæus natione et Romanus jure na-
tionum; ſo may Calvin ſay, that he is Scotus patrid, & Anglus
privilegio, Scotus natione & Anglus jure nationum.

Samaria in Syria was the chief city of the ten tribes; but it
being uſurped by the King of Syria, and the Jews taken pri-
ſoners, and carried away in captivity, was after inhabited by
the Panyms. Now albeit Samaria of right belonged to Jewry,
yet becauſe the people of Samaria were not under actual obe-
dience, by the judgment of the Chief Juſtice of the whole
world they were adjudged alienigenæ, aliens: for in the
Evangelift St. Luke, e. 17. when Chrift had cleanſed the ten
lepers, wnus autem ex illis (faith the text) ut vidit quia mandatus
eſſet, regreſſus eſt cum magna voce magnificans Deum ot cecidit in
faciem ante pedes ejus gratias agens, & hic erat Samaritanus. Et
Jeſus reſpondens dixit, Nonne decem mundati funt, et novem ubi
ſunt? Non eft inventus qui rediret et daret gloriam Deo niſi hic aii-
enigena. So as by his judgment this Samaritan was alienigena,
a ſtranger born, becauſe he bad the place, but wanted obedi-
ence. Et ſi deſit obedientia non adhuvat locus. And this agreeth
with the divine, who faith, Si locus ſalvare potuiſſet, Satan de cls
pro ſua inabedientia non cecidiſſet. Adam in paradiſe non cecidiſſet,
Lot in monte non cecidiſſet, ſed potius in Sodom.

6. Now reſteth the ſixth part of this diviſion, that is to ſay,
fix demonſtrative illations or concluſtons, drawn plainly and
expreſsly from the premiſes. :

1. Every one that is an alien by birth, may be, or might
have been an enemy by accident ; but Calvin could never at
any time be an enemy by any accident ; ergo, he cannot be
an alien by birth. Vide 33 H. 6. f. 1. a. b. the difference be-
tween an alien enemy, and a ſubject traitor. Heſtes ſunt qui
nobis, vel quibus nos bellum decernimus, cæteri proditores, præ-
dones, c. The major is apparent, and is proved by that
which hath been ſaid. Et vide Magna Charta, cap. 30. 19
Z. 4. 6. 9 E. 3. e. 1. 27 E. 3. e. 2. 4 H. f. c. 7. 14 E. 3.
ſtat. 2. c. 2, &c. |

2. Whoſoever are born under one natural ligeance and
obedience due by the law of nature to one Sovegeign, are
natural- born ſubjects: but Calvin was born under one na-
tural ligeance and obedience, due by the law of nature to
one Sovereign ; ergo he is a natural born ſubject,

3. Who-


>*


—_ _Y Y


part VII. CALvin's Caſe. 25


2. Whoſoever is born within the King's power or protec-
tion, is no alien: but Calvin was born under the King's
power and protection; ergo he is no alien. 5

4. Every ſtranger born mult at his birth be either amcus,
or inimicus : but Calvin at his birth could neither be amicus
nor inimicus; ergo he is no ſtranger born. Inimicus he cans
not be, becauſe he is ſubditus, for that cauſe alſo he cannot
be amicus ; neither now can Scotia be ſaid to be ſalum amici, as
hath been ſaid.

5. Whatſoever is due by the law or conſtitution of man, Swyer's Argu«
may be altered: but natural ligeance or obedience of the ſub- ment in Quo
je& to the Sovereign cannot be altered; ergo natural ligeance 25.
or obedience to the Sovereign is not due by the law or conſti-
tution of man. Again, whatſoever is due by the law of na-
ture, cannot be altered: but ligeance and obedience of the


ſubject to the Sovereign is due by the law of nature; ergo it


cannot be altered. It hath been proved before, that ligeance
or obedience of the inferior to the ſuperior, of the ſubject to
the ſovereign, was due by the law of nature many thouſand Antea 13. a,
years before any law of man was made: which ligeance or
obedience (being the only mark to diſtinguiſh a ſubject from
an alien) could not be altered; therefore it remaineth ſtill
due by the law of nature. For leges nature perfectiſſimæ ſunt
et immutabiles, humani vero juris conditio ſemper in inſinitum de-
currit, et nibil eft in es quod perpetuo ſtare paſſit. Leges humans
naſcuntur, vivunt, & moriuntur.

Laſtly, whoſoever at his birth cannot be an alien to the
King of England, cannot be an alien to any of his ſubjects
of England : but the plaintiff at his birth could be no alien to
the King of England; ergo the plaintiff caunot be an alien
to any of the ſubjects of England. The major and minor both
be propoſitiones perſpicue vere. For as to the majzr it is to be
obſerved, that whoſoever is an alien born, is fo accounted in
law in reſpect of the King: and that appeareth firit by the
pleading fo often before remembered, that he muſt be extra
lgeantiam Regis, without any mention making of the ſubject. Ce, Lit, a, bi
2. When an alien born purchaſeth any lands, the King only
ſhall have them, though they be holden of a ſubject, in which
caſe the ſubject loſeth his ſeigniory. And as it is ſaid in our
books, an alien may purchate ad proficuum Regis; but the act
of law giveth the alien nothing: and therefore if a woman
alien marrieth 2 ſubject, (the ſhall not be endowed, neither Br. Den'zen Tz
ſhall an alien be tenant by the curteſy Vide 3 H. 6. 55. a, 4 Fitz. Dover
II. 3. 279, 3. The ſubject ſhall plead, that the defendantis an

E 2 alien


—


Br. Patents 111.


Carvin's Cafe. Part VIf.


alten born, for the benefit of the King, that he upon office
found may ſeize, and 2. that the tenant may yield to the
King the land, and not to the alien, becauſe the King hath
belt right thereunto. 4. Leagues between our Sovereign
and others are the only means to make aliens friends, et /&-
dera percutere, to make leagues, only and wholly pertaineth to
the King. 5. Wars do make aliens enemies, and bellum in-
dieere belongeth only and wholly to the King, and not to
the ſubject, as appeareth in 19 Ed. 4. fol. 6. b. 6. The
King only without the ſubject may make not only letters of
ſafe conduct, but letters patent of denization, to whom, and
how many he will, and enable them at his pleaſure to ſue
any of his ſubjects in any action whatſoever, real or perſonal,
which the King could not do without the ſubject, it the ſub-
ject had any intereſt given unto him by the law in any thing
concerning an alien born. Nay, the Jaw is more preciſe
herein than in a number of other cafes, of higher nature :
for the King cannot grant to any other to make of ſtrangers
born, denizens ; it is by the law itſelf fo infeparably and indi—
vidually annexed to his royal perſon (as the book is in 20H.
7. fol. 8.) For the Jaw citeemeth it a point of high preroga-
tive, jus maje/tatts, et inter infigma ſumma poleſlatis, to make
aliens born ſubjects of the realm, and capable of the lands
and inheritances of England in ſuch ſort as any natural born
ſubject is. And therefore by the ſtatute of 27 H. 8. c. 24.
many of the molt ancient prerogatives and royal flowers of
the crown, as authority to pardon treaſon, murther, man-
ſlaughter, and felony, power to make Juſtices in Eyre, Juſ-
tices of Aſſiſe, Juſtices of Peace, and Gaol-delivery, and
ſuch like, having been ſevered and divided ſrom the crown,
were again reunited to the ſame : but authority to make let-
ters of denization, was never mentioned therein to be re-
ſumed, for that never any claimed the fame by any pretext
whatſoever, being a matter of ſo high a point of prerogative.
So as the pleading againſt an alien, the purchaſe by any
alien, leagues, and wars between aliens, denizations, and
ſafe conducts of aliens, have aſpect only and wholly unto the
King. It followeth therefore, that no man can be alien to
the ſubject that is not alien to the King. Non poteſt eſſe alieni-
gena corpori, qui non eft capiti, non gregi qui non eft Regi.

The autnorities of law cited in this caſe for mainte-
nance of the judgment, 4 H. 3. tit. Dower. Bracton,
lib. 5. fol. 427. Fleta lib. 6. cap. 47. In temp. E.
1. Hingham's Report, 17 Edw. 2. cap. 12. 11 Edw. 3.

cap.


a+
—


Part VII. CALVIN 's Caſe.


cap. 2. 14 Ed. 3. Statut. de Francid. 42 Fd. 3. fol 2. 42


Ed. 3. cap. 10. 22 Lib. Aff. 25. 13 Rich. 2. cap. 2. 15
Rich. 2. cap. 7. 11 Hen. 4. fol. 26. 14 Hen. 4. fol. 19. 13
H. 4. Statutum de Guyan. 29 Hen. 6. tit. Eſtoppel 48. 28 H.
6. cap. 5. 32 Hen. 6. fol. 23. 32 Hen. 6. f. 26. Littl. temps
Ed. 4. lib. 2. cap. Villenage. 15 Ed. 4. fol. 15. 19 Ed. 4. 6.
22 Ed. 4. cap. 8. 2 Rich. 3. 2. & 12. 6 Hen. 8. fol. 2. Dyer
14 H. 8. cap. 2. No manner of ſtranger born out of the
King's obeyſance, 22 H. 8. c. 8. Every perſon born out of
the realm of England, out of the King's obeyſance, 32 H. 8,
c. 16. 25 H. 8. c. 15, &c. 4 Ed. 6. Plowd. Comment. fol.
2. Fogaſſa's caſe. 2 & 3 Ph. & Mar. Dyer 145. Shirley's
caſe. 5 El. Dyer 224. 13 EI. c. 7. de Bankrupts, All com-


miſſions ancient and late, for the finding of oſſices, to entitle-


the King to the lands of aliens born: alſo all letters patent of
denization of ancient and later times do prove, that he is no
alien that is born under the King's obedience.


26


Now we are come to conſider of legal inconveniences : and The ;. general


ficſt of ſuch as have been objected againſt the plaintiff, and
ſecondly of ſuch as ſhould follow, it it had been adjudged
againſt the plaintiff.

Of ſuch inconveniences as were objected againſt the plain-
tiff, there remain only four to be anſwered; for all the reſt
are clearly and fully ſatisfied before: 1. That if Po/tnatz
ſhould be inherit-ble to our laws and inheritances, it were
reaſon they ſhould be bound by our laws; but Peſinati are
not bound by our ſtatute-or common laws; for they baving
(as it was objected) never ſo much freehold or inheritance,
cannot be returned of juries, nor ſubject to ſcot or lot, nor
chargeable to ſubſidies or quinzimes, nor bound by any act
of parliament made in England. 2. Whether one be born
within the kingdom of Scotland or no, is not triable in Eng-
land, for that it is a thing done out of this realm, and no jury
can be returned for the trial of any ſuch ifſue: and what in-
convenience ſhould thereof follow, if ſuch pleas that wanted
trial thould be allowed (for then all aliens might imagine the
like piea) they that objected it, left it to the conſideration of
others. 3. It was objected, that this innovation was ſo danger-
ous, that the certain event thereof no man could foreſee, and
therefore, ſome thought it fit, that things ſhould ſtand and
continue as they had been in former time, for fear of the
worlt. 4. If Paſlnati were by law legitimated in England,
x: was objected what inconvenience and contuſion ſhould
| E 3 | follow,


part concerning
incomenicnces.


Co. Lit, 261. a, b.
6 Co, 47. a.


CaLvin's Caſe. Part VII,


follow, if for the puniſhment of us all) the King's royal iſſue
ſhould fail, &c. whereby thoſe kingdoms might again be
divided. All the other arguments and objections that have
been made, have been all anſwered before, and need not to
be repeated again. |

1. To the firſt it was reſolved, that the cauſe of this doubt
was the miſtaking of the law: for if a Poſinatus do purchaſe
any lands in England, he ſhall be ſubject in reſpect thereof,
not only to the laws of thisgealm, but alſo to all ſervices and
contributions, and to the payment of ſubſidies, taxes, and
public charges, as any denizen or Engliſhman ſhall be; nay,
if he «well in England, the King may command him, b
a writ of Ne exeat regnum, that he depart not out of England.
But if a Peſfnatus dwell in Scotland,” and have lands in Eng-
Jand, he ſhall be chargeable for the ſame to all intents and

rpoſes, as if an Engliſhman were owner thereof, and dwelt
in Scotland, Ireland, in the iſles of Man, Guernſey, or Jerſey,
or elſewhere. The ſame law is of an Iriſhman that dwells in
Ireland, and hath lend in England. But if Peſinati, or Ir iſh-
men, men of the Iſles of Man, Guernſey, Jerfey, &c. have
lands within England, and dwell here, they ſhall be ſubject
to all ſervices and public charges within this realm, as any
Engliſhman ſhall be. So as to ſervices and charges, the Poft-
nati and Engliſhmen born are all in one predicament.

2. Concerning the trial, a threefold anſwer was thereunto
made and reſolved: 1. That the like objection might be
made againſt Iriſhmen, Gaſeoins, Normans, men of the Iſles
of Man, Guernſey, and Jerley, of Berwick, &c. all which
appear by the rule of our books to be natural born ſubjeQs
and yet no jury can come out of any of thoſe countries an
places, for trial of their births there. 2. If the demandant or
plaintiff in any action concerning lands be born in Ireland,
Guernſey, Jerſey, &c. out of the realm of England, if the
tenant or defendant plead, that he was born out of the lige-
ance of the King, & the demandant or plaintiff may reply,
that he was born under the ligeance of the King at tuch place
within England ; and upon the evidence the place ſhall not be
material, but only the iſſue ſhall be, whether the demandant or

laintiff were born under the ligeance of the King in any of
his kingdoms or dominions whatſoever ; and in that cafe the
jury (if they will) may, find the ſpecial matter, vzz. the
place where he was born, and leave it to the judgment of
the court: and that jurors may take knowledge of things done
Out


Part VII. C ALVI 's Cafe.


out of the realm in this and like caſes, vide 7 H. 7. B. b.
20 Ed. 3. Averment 34. 5 Ric. 2. tit. Trial 54. 15 Ed. 4.
15. 32 H. 6. 25. Fitz. Nat. Br. 196. Vid Dowdale's caſe,
in the Sixth Part of my Reports, fol. 47. and there divers
other judgments be vouched. 3 Brown, in anno 32 H. 6. te-
porteth a judgment then lately given, that where the defend-
ant pleaded, that the plaintiff was a Scot, born at St. John's
town in Scotland, out of the ligeance of the King ; where-
upon they were at iſſue, and that ifſue was tried where the
writ was brought, and that appeareth alſo by 27 Af. pl. 70
that the jury did find the Prior to be born in Gaſcoin. (for fo
much is neceſſarily proved by the words trove fuit.) And 20
Ed. 3. tit. Averment 34. in a juris utrum, the death of one
of the vouchees was alledged at ſuch a caſtle in Britain, and
this was inquired of by the jury : and it is holden in 5 Rich. 2.
tit. Trial 54. that if a man be adhering to the enemies of
the King in France, his land is forfeitable, and his adherency
ſhall be tried where the land is, as oftentimes hath been done,
as there it is ſaid by Belknap: and Fitz. Nat. Br. 196. in a
Aortdanc, if the anceſtor died in itinere peregrinatioms ſue
verſ. Terram Sanctam, the jury ſhall enquire of it. But in the

e at bar, ſeeing the defendant hath pleaded the truth of the
caſe, and the plaintiff hath not denied it, but demurred upon
the ſame, and thereby confeſſed all matters of fact, the court
now ought to judge upon the ſpecial matter, even as if a jury
upon an iſſue joined in England, as it is aforefaid, had found
the ſpecial matter, and left it to the court.

3- To the third it was anſwered and reſolved, that this
judgment was rather a renovation of the judgments and cen-
ſures of the reverend judges and ſages of the law in ſo many
ages paſt, than any innovation, as appeareth by the book and
book-caſcs before recited : neither have Judges power to judge
according to that which they think to be fit, but that which
out of the laws they know to be right and conſonant to law.
Fudex bonus nihil ex arbitrio fuo faciat, nec prapoſita domeſticæ vs»
luntatis, ſed juxta leges & jura pronuntiet. And as for timores,
fears grounded upon no juſt cauſe, qui non cadunt in conſtantem
virum, vant timores æſlimandi ſunt.

4. And as to the fourth, it is leſs than a dream of a
ſhadow, or a ſhadow of a dream: for it hath been often
faid, natural legitimation reſpecteth actual obedience to the
Sovereign at the time of the birth: for as the Antenati re-
main aliens as to the crown of England, becauſe they were born
when there were ſeveral Kings of the ſeveral kingdoms, and the

E 4 * uniting


2 Ventris 6.


”


Note, on the
abdication of
K. ] 2. they
were divided;
but are now con-
ſolidated by the


| vnion act.


(a) Co. Lit. 68. b.


C5) 9 Co. 110. b.


Carvin's Caſe. Part VII.


nniting of the kingdoms by deſcent ſubſequent, cannot make
him a ſubject to that crown to which he was alien at the time
of his birth: ſo albeit the kingdoms (which Almighty God of
his infinite goodneſs and mercy divert) ſhould by deſcent be
divided, and governed by ſeveral Kings; yet it was reſolved,
that all thoſe that were born under one natural obedience,
while the realms were united under one Sovereign, ſhould re-
main natural born ſubjects, and no aliens; for that natura-
lization due and veſted by birth-right, cannot by any ſepara-
tion of the crowns afterward be taken away: nor he that was
by judgment of law a natural ſubject at the time of his birth,
become an alien by fuch a matter ex po/? facto. And in that
caſe, upon ſuch an accident, our Poſtnatus may be ad fidem
utriuſque Regis, as Bracton ſaith in the afore remembered
place, fol. 427. Sicut Anglicus non -auditur in Dlacitando alt-
quem de terris & tenement in Francia, ita nec debet Francigena &
*altenigena, qui fuerit ad fidem Regis Francia, audiri placitands in
Arglia : ſed tamen ſunt aligui Francigene in Francid qui ſunt ad
fidem utriufque ; et ſemper fuerunt ante Nermaniam deperditam
& poſt, et qui placitant hic et ibi, ed ratione qua ſunt ad fidem
utriuſque, ficut fuit Millielmus comes mareſchallus et manens in
Anglia, et M. de Gynes manens in Francia, et alii pluren. Con-
cerning the reaſon drawn from the (a) etymologies, it made
againſt them, for that by their own derivation, alienæ gentis,
and alienæ ligcantiæ is all one: but arguments drawn from
etymologies, are too weak and too ligbt for Judges to build
their judgments upon: for /@penumero ubi proprietas (b) ver-
borum attenditur, ſenſus deritatis amittitur : and yet when they
agree with the judgment of law, Judges may uſe them for or-
naments. But on the other (de, ſome inconveniences ſhould
follow, if the plea againſt the plaintiff ſhould be allowed: for
firſt it maketh ligeance local; widelicet, ligeantia Regis regni


fur Scotiæ, and ligeantia Regis regni ſui Anglie : whereupon


ſhould follow, firſt, that faith or ligeance, which is univerſal,
ſhould be confined within local limits and bounds: ſecondly,
that the ſubjects ſhould not be bound to ſerve the King in peace
or in war out of thoſe limits; thirdly, it ſhould illegitimate many,
and ſome of noble blood, which were born in Gafcoin, Gui-
enne, Normandy, Calais, Tournay, France, and divers other
of his Majeſty's dominions, whilſt the ſame were in actual
by, 1 0 RS obedience


Fl


Part VII. CxLivin's Caſe.


obedience, and in Berwick, Ireland, Guernſey, and Jerſey,
if this plea ſhould have been admitted for good. And third-
ly, this ſtrange and new deviſed plea inclineth too much to
countenance hat dangerous and deſperate error of the Spen-
cers, touched before, to receive any allowance within Weſt-
miniter-hall. | 2

In the proceeding of this caſe, theſe things were obſerved,
and ſo lid the Chief Juſtice of the Common Pleas publicly
deliver in the end of his argument in the Exchequer Cham-


her. Firſt, that no commandment or meſſage by word or


writing was ſent or delivered from any whatfoever to any of


tne Judzes, to caule them to incline to any opinion in this


caſe; which I remember {or that it is honourable for the
gate, and conſonant to the laws and ſtatutes of this realm.
Sccondly, there was obſerved, what a concurrence of judg-
ments, reſolutions, and rules, there be in our books in all
aw concerning this caſe, as if they had been prepared for
the deciding of the queſtion of this point : and that (which
never fell out in any doubtful caſe) no one opinion in all our
books is againſt this judgment. 1hirdly, that the five Judges
of the King's Bench, who adjourned this caſe into the Exche-
quer-chamber, raiher adjourned it for weight than difficulty,
for ali they in their arguments ung voce concurred with the
judgment. Fourthly, that never any caſe was adjudged in.the
Exchequer chamber with greater concordance and leſs variety
of opinions, the Lord Chancellor and twelve of the Judges
concurring in one opinion. Fiithly, that there was not in
any remembrance ſo honourable, great, and intelligent an au-
ditory at the hearing of the arguments of any Exchequer-
chamber caſe, as was at this caſe now adjudged. Sixthly,
it appeareth, that jurisprudentia legis communis Angliæ eft ſci-


entia ſocialis & copioſa: ſociable, in that it agreeth with the


principles and rules of other excellent ſciences, divine and
human: copious, for that guamdp ad + ca gue frequentius ac-
cidunt jura adaptantur, yet in a cafe jo rare, and of ſuch a qua-
lity, that loſs is the aſſured end of the practice of it (for no
alien can purchaſe lands, but he loſeth them, and p/o facto
the King is entitled thereunto, in reſpect whereof a man
would think few: men would attempt it) there ſhould be ſuch
a multitude and farrago of authorities in all ſucceſſions of ages,
in our books and book- caſcs, for the deciding of a point of ſo


rare an accident. Et fic determinata & terminata eſti iſia
que/19,


The


T 5 Co. 127. b.
Co. Lit. 218. a.
2 Inſt. 137.
Cart. 13.

6 Co. 87. As


Carlvin's Caſe, Part VII,


The Judgment in the ſaid Caſe, as entered on
Record, &c.


«© Whereupon all and ſingular the premiſes being ſeen, and
66 by the Court of the Lord the now King here diligently in-

« ſpected and examined, and mature deliberation being had
«« thereof ; for that it appears to the Court of the Lord the
c now King here, that the aforeſaid plea of the faid Richard
4 Smith and Nicholas Smith above pleaded, is not ſufficient
«© jn law to bar the ſaid Robert Calvin from having an anſwer
« to his aforeſaid writ: therefore it is conſidered by the
« Court of the Lord the now King here, that the aforeſaid


« Richard Smith and Nicholas Smith to the writ of the ſaid
« Robert do further anſwer.”


{See now the ſtatutes for the union of both kingdoms, ] #


Mieb,


Mich. 26 & 27 Eliz.
B U LW E R's Caſe.


ULWER of Dalling in Norfolk, brought an action on
B his caſe againſt George Smith, and declared that one
eary Heydon, Eſq. did recover 201. &c. ia the Common
Pleas againſt the plaintiff, and after judgment, and before ex-
ecution, the ſaid Henry Heydon died, and afterwards the faid
defendant knowing thereof, at W. in the county of Norfolk


4 Leon. 52, 53


Noy. 22.


to outlaw the plaintiff upon the ſaid judgment in the name of


Henry Heydon malitioze & deceptive machinatus ei, in perfor-
mance of which the defendant, Trin. 23 El. at Weſtminſter
in Middleſex, purchaſed a writ of Capias ad ſatisfaciendum, in
the name of the ſaid Henry, upon the ſaid judgment, directed
to the Sheriffs of London, who by the procurement of the de-
fendant returned non ef? inventus ; whereupon the defendant
purchaſed a writ of Exigent ia the name of the ſaid Henry,
which writ the ſaid Sheriffs by the procurement of the ſaid
| defendant returned, that at ſeveral huſtings the ſaid now
plaintiff had been demanded, et ad huſtingum de communibus
placitis tent” in Guildhalda civitatis pred” die Lun' prox” poſt feſ-
tum Apoſtol' Simonis & Jud', anno ſupradiat pred? the now
plaintiff quint” exaftus fuit, &c. & 1deo ipſæ the plaintiff utlaga-
tus fuit : and aferwards Paſch. 24 El. the defendant purchaſed
out of the ſaid Common Pleas a writ of Capias utlagatum, in
the name of the ſaid Henry, directed to the Sheriff of
Norfolk to arreſt his body, &c. which writ did mention that
the ſaid now plaintiff was ontlawed die Lun” prox. ante feſtum
Apaſtolorum Simonis & Jud', &c. And the ſaid writ the de-
fendant at W. aforeſaid in the ſaid county of Norfolk, did de-
liver to one Robert Godfrey then deputy to the Sheriff of the
faid county, to the intent that he ſzculd execute the ſaid writ,
the which Robert by force of the ſaid writ took, and arreſted
the faid now plaintiff, and did impriſon him by the ſpace of two
months, until the now plaintiff purchaſed his charter of pardon,
by reaſon of which outlawry he forfeited all his goods and
chattels: and upon this declaration the defendant did de-
mut in law; and the principal cauſe of the demurrer
was, becauſe this action by the pretence of the —_—

ought


Cr, Jac, 667,
Cr. U 629.


|
|
[


|
|
|
|
|


(a) Cr. El. 574.
$844. Dyer 38.
pl. 51, Cr. Car.
20, 21. Dy. 40.
pl. 66.


(hb) x Sid. 218.


219,401. 1Mod,


Rep. 198, 199.
Winch. 100.
Latch. 262.


1 Brown]. 12,69,


Cr. Jac. 533.
Nov 22,


Hub, 106. 209.
Dyer 38. pl. 54.


Cr. El. 574. 844.


Plow. 530.
(e) 4 Leon. 53.


2 Rol]. Rep. 2 59.
dtanf. Cor, 166.


d.


(4) Fitz. Con-
ftpiracy 10.

Br. Conſpir. 6.
(e) Br. Lieu Jo»
(CF) F. N. B.


116. m.


(S Bi. Lieu 91.


Br. Walt, 9.


B v L WE R's Caſe, Part VII.


ought to have been brought in Mid. where the wrong began,
for there (as it was ſaid) the def. took out as well the Cap' ad


fatisfac as the Exigent and the Cap” utlagatum alſo. And altho?


the Cap” utlagat? was executed in Noi folk, yet the action ought
to be brought where the wrong began; as in thexaſe of Con-
{piracy in 42 E. 3. 14. a. and divers other caſes were put;
alſo by the outlawry which was in London all his goods and
chattels were forfeit. where it is more reaſon to bring the action
than in Norfolk, But it was anſwered an reſolved, that the
(a) action was well brought in N. for it is a maxim in law,
quod ibi ſemper debet fiert triatio, ubi jurator” melierem paſſunt
babere notitiam. And in N. was the viſible wrong, for there
the pl. was imprifoned for the ſpace of two months, and there-
fore it is great reaſon that the pl. may have his action there,
and ãt doth not appear by the record what goods or chattels the
plaintiff had at the time of the outlawry, but for the aggravat-
ing of the damages, the pl. may give in evidence what goods
and chattels he hath forfeited by the outlawry. And this
action doth conſiſt upon two principal parts, the one, matter
of record, and the other matter in fact; and none of the
matters of record, but is mixed with matter of fact; and
no matter of fact, but it is mixed with matter of record:
for the writs and the outlawry are matters' of record, but
mixed with matters in fact, /c. purchaſing, and proſecution
of them by the def. in the name of H. Heydon, which are
matters in fact; alſo the impriſonment is a matter in fact,
but it is mixed with the writ of Cap? utlagat”, which is of re-
cord, /c. if the pl. was arreſted by virtue thereof. And matters
in fact are triable only by the country, and not matters of re-
cord, and when one matter in one county is depending upon
the matter in the other county, there the pl. may (6b) chuſe in
which county he will bring his action, (unleſs the def. upon
the general ifſue pleaded, ſhould be prejudiced in his trial, as
he would not be in this caſe) as 1f two (c) conſpire to indict a
man in one county, and they by their malicious proſecut. make
the execution of their conſpiracy in another county, and there
cauſe the party to be indicted, tne pl. may have his action ©
conſpiracy in which county he will, for they put their conſpiracy
in one countyin execution in the other, and the matter of record
of the indictment is mixed with the matter of fact. But iſ they
conſpire in one county, by force of which conſpir. without any
other act by them, he is in- ited in another county, there the
writ ought to be brought in the county where the conſpir. was,
for the def. have done nothing in the county where the indict.
was, nor were parties nor privies to the finding of the indictm.
but only by the conſpir. in the other county. And that appears
in 14 E. 4. 3. b. and ſo the books in (d) 42 E. 3. 14 a. 20 (e)
H. 6. 10. a. b. F. N. B. {f) 116. b. and other books are well
reconciled. If a (z) manaſſe be made in Eſſ. by which my te-
nants depart in Lond. I ſhall have my action in Eſſ. and not

| 12


Part VII. BUL Wenn's Cafe;
in Lond. for in ſuch caſeI have done nothing in Lond. 9 H. 6.


42. b. In all caſes where the action is founded upon two (a)
things done in ſeveral counties, and both are material or tra-
verſable, and the one without the other doth not maintain the
action, there the pl. may chuſe to bring his action in which
of the counties he will, as it is if a ſervant be (Y) retained in
one county and departs in another, and therewith agree 41 E.
3. 1. b. 34H. 6. 18. a. 38 H. 6. 15 b. 15 E. 4. C. 20 H. 6.
11. 29 H. 8. Dyer 38. 20 E. 3. 25, &c. Zo if a man be ar-
reſted in execution in one county, and he (c) eſcapes into an-
other county, the pl. may chuſe to bring his action in which
of the counties he will, and therewith agree 15 E. 4. 3. a. b.
30 H. 6 6. a. b. 11 EL Dy. 278. So ina writ of (4) annuity
founded on a preſcription againſt a mari of religion, or body
corporate, where the church or houſe 1s in one county, and
the ſciſin is alledged in another county, the pl may chuſe in
which county he will bring his action. 48 E. 3. 26. a. b. 4H. 4.
1.4H.6 5 b. 10 H. 6. 19. a. b. 39 H. 6. 15. b. 2 E. 4. 28. b.
4 E. 4 26 a. &c. F. N. B. 152, e. Otherwiſe if the annuity
be granted in one county to be paid in another, the action lies
where the grant was, and ſo is * 8H. 6. 23. b. So if a man
cites one in one county to appear before (e) the Admiral in an—
other county, for a thing done in the body of the county, by
force of which the party appears, he may have his action in
the one county or the other at his pleaſure, 5 Ma. Dyer 159.
b. 42 E. 3. 14. a. 44 E. 3. 31. b 32. a. 46 E. 3. 8. b. 3H. 4.
3. a. 38. H. 6. 14. b. 14 EK 4. 3. a. b. The fame law of the
dpiritual Court. So if the def. caſts a protection in one coun-
ty and remains in another county, he may bring his action in
which of the counties he ple: ſcs. 20 H. 6. 10. a b. So if a man
ſtrikes a perſon in one county (, and he dies in another coun-
ty, the appeal of murder may be biought in the one or che
other county, and yet the det. did nothing in the county where
the party died, but the (% death which enſued on the ſtroke
makes the felony. 18 E. 3. 22. 9 H. 6.63. 45 Aſſ. pl. 9. 43Ed.
3-3-(þ) H. 7. 12. a. 4 H 7. 18 6 H. 7. 10. 11 H. 4.93 it aman
commits (i) a robbery in one county, and carries the goods in-
to divers counties, the party robbed may have an appeal of te-


lony in which ot the counties he will, but not an (%) appeal of


*


robbery but only in the county where the robbery was done,
for it is felony in all the counties where the goods are car-
ried (for felony doth not diveſt property) but it is not robbery
(which ought to be done to the perſon of a man) but only in
the county where the robbery was done. 4 H.7.5.b.29H. 8. 3,
40. Dyer, 11 H. 4 93. 3 E. 3 tit. AT 446. In debt it a man de-
clares on a leaſe (1) tor years in one county of land in another
county, he ought to bring bis action where the leaſe was made,
and not where the land lies; for the action is grounded


upon the contract made by the leaſe. 38 H. 6. 15. acc. per


cur. 8 H. 6. 23. acc. vide 4 H. 6. 18. 14 E. 4. 3. 29 Hf. 8. 40
Dy. So the law well explained in a caſe in which are va-
rieties


2


(a) Dyer 39. pl.
57. 1 Vent. 364.
1 Sund. 259,


240, 241.


(3) Fitz. Labor.
22. Statham La-
borers 5. Br.
Lieu 11. Dy. 38.
pl. 53. 40. pl.
70. Plowd 37. b.
4 Leon. 53. (| 4
14E. 4. 3. b.
Br. Lieu 72.
(c) 4 Leon. 53.
Cr. El. 27 1,625.
2 Roll. 602,
Dy. 278. pl. 5.
38. pl. 53. Br.
Lieu 33, 43, 72,


82
(4 Plow. 538.
12 E. 4. 3. a.


® Br. Lieu 27.
(e) Hob. 196.


Dyer 40. pl.
71.


(g) 4 Co. 42. b.


(%) Br. Appeal 8.
Fr. Viin 78.

(i) Dyer 39. pl.
56. 40. pl. CG.
Kelw. 160. b.
(+) Dzer 39. pl.
50. Stanf. 63. g-
W:nch. 69.
Latch, 197,271.
Sce Rep, Q 4.
8, 9, K.
Forrel. 157.
Salk. 614.


Cx. Car. 184.
Dyer 40. pl. 70.
Cr. Jac. 142
Cr. El. 116,259,
555. 12 E. 4-34
Br. Licu 43.
5 E. 4+ 21, d.


(a) Dy. 40. pl.
2 Mod. 194.
1 Sand. 238.
1 Jon. 41. 44.


ob. 37.


(e) Dy. 38. pl. 54.
3% pl. 57.


(4) Dyer 38. pl.
54. 39- Pl. 57. 1


(e) 4 Co. 47. b.
Jenk. Cent. 29.


(f) Dyer 38. pl.


52.
Hob. 37.
Winch. 69.
Latch, 197.
Cr, Car. 143
184.


F. N. B. 140. f.
Regiſt. 163. A.


Note.


BU LW ER's Caſe. Part VII.


rieties of opinions in our books. But if a leaſe be made in one
county and the land lies in another, the action of (a) waſte
ſhall be brought where the land lies, and not where the leaſe
was made, altho' the term be paſſed, for the land and damages,
or damages only for the waſte which is local, ſhall be reco-
vered. 14 E. 4. acc. If a man promiſes to (5) cure one in
one county, and miſdoeth in another county, the pl. bath his


1 Cro. 143, x83, election to bring his action in which of the counties he will,


and therewith agrees 11 R. 2. Action ſur le Caſe 37. If a man
doth not repair a wall in Eſſex, which he ought to repair,
whereby my land in Midd. is drowned, 1 may bring my ac-
tion in Eſſex, for there is the default, as it is adjudged in 7
H. 4.8. or I may bring it in Middleſex, for there 1 have the da-
mage, as it is proved by 11 R. 2. A#ton ſur le Caſe 36. So if
one forge a(c) deed in one county, and proclaims it in another,
the pl. may chuſe in which county he will bring his action.
29 H. 8. 38. 22 H. 6.5. a b. But when the def. upon plead-
ing not guilty ſhall be prejudiced in his trial, there the pl.
hath not election to. bring his action in which county he will,
(4) 29 H. 8. Dyer 38. where Gawyn ſued an appeal of —

in the county of Wilts where the robbery was done, again
Huſſey and Gibbs as acceflaries, and declared that the princi-
named in the writ, and who were attainted, did the rob-
ry in the county of Wilts, and that the def. feloniouſly at
London, before the robbery done, did abet them to do it, and
it was adjudged, that altho' the pl. can have but (e) one ap-
peal againſt the principals and acceſſaries, and againit the
principal of neceſſity it ought to be brought in the county of
Wilts, yet becauſe thoſe of the county of Wilts upon not guil-
ty pleaded, and Lond. cannot join, and thoſe in Wilts cannot
inquire of a thing in Lond. altho' it be tranſitory (for in caſe
of felony which concerns the life of a man every act ſha!) be
tried in the proper county where the act was in truth done)
the appeal agaiuſt the ſaid acceſſaries did abate, 43 E. 3. 17, 18,
19. And it is to be obſerved that in all real actions, if any iſſue
riſes on the land, or in any action in which the poſſeſſion of the
land or (/) local thing, or which riſes on the land by reaſon
thereof, is to be recovered, all theſe ſhall be brought in the
county where the land lies; as in a wiit of right of ward of
land, or writ of intruſion of ward, theſe ſhall be brought in
the county where the land lies; although the refuſal were, or
the ſeigniory be in another county 29 E 3. 3 38 H. 6 14. b.
22 R. 2. Bre. 937. acc. So in a writ of right of ward for the
body only, it ſhall be brought in the county where the land is,
for that is in the right and favours of the land. 21 E. 3-42. 30
E. 3. 25, 9 E. 3. 12, 13. 10 E. 3. 7. acc. and the reaſon of 40
E. 3. 6. agrees with it, although the judgment there is men-
tioned to be given contrary. But a writ of raviſhment of
ward ſhall be brought where the raviſhment was, and not
where the land is, or where the body is carried: for it
| 15


Part VII. Bu LlwEA's Caſe:


is founded on the raviſhment. 38 H. 6. 14. b. 22 R. 2. Brev.
37. & 12 E. Dy. 289. And a writ of forfeiture of marriage
{hall be brought where the land is, for the writ doth ſuppoſe
an intruſion into the land; and there with agrees the ſaid book
in 22 R. 2. & 38 H. 6. 15. a. And a writ de valore(a) mari- (a)Br. Lieu 43.
tagii ſhall be brought where the land is; for the lord need not
make any (+) tender, but if he makes a tender and the other (5) 5Co. 125. a. b.
refuſes, and he alledges it in the county, then the writ de va-
hore maritagii lies in the county where the refuſal was, 22 R. 2.
Brev. 937. 38 H. 6. 15. a. Writs of Qu. imp. and Qu. incum-
bravit (c) {hail be always brought where the church is; for by (e) F. N. B.48.c,
the one the pl. ſhall recover his preſentment, and by the other
the Biſhop's clerk ſhall be removed, and the pl.'s clerk admit-
ted, 38 H. 6. 14 & 15 accord. Vide 4 Ed. 3. 9. Otherwiſe it
is in the K. 's caſe. But a Qu. (d) non admiſit ſhall be brought (4) Dy. F. N. B.
in the county where the retuſal was, and not in the county 47. f. 40. pl. 69,
where the church is, becauſe damages are only to be recover-
ed, and the refuſal is the beginning of the wrong, and the
ground of the action; and fo is the book adjudged in 38 H. 6.
14, & 15. F. N. B. 47. f. And a Qu. imp of a Prebend ſhall
be brought in the county where the cathedral church is, and
not in the county where the body of the Prebend is; for the
pl.'s clerk is to be inducted and inſtalled in the cathedral
church, and therewith agrees 21 E. 3. 5. & 2 El. Dy. 194. (e) Dyer 194.
(e) but 43 E. 3. 34. & 15 Ed. 3. Br. 325. ſeem contrary. 24 Pl. 33+
E. 3. 37. And fo the law is well explained in a caſe in
which there were different opinions in our books. And if a
man at the com. law had a rent iſſuing out of two counties, he 44:
could not have had an (f) aſſiſe in one county, becauſe every 71 My oF :
part of the land in the two counties is charged with the rent, 3. Putt. 3 b. 24.
and all ſhould be put in view, as it is agreed in 18 E. 2, Aſſ. * b.
uy 18 E. 3. 32. 10 E. 3. 21. 10 Aſſ. p. 4. & 18 Aſſ. p. 1.
But if a man makes a leaſe pur auter vie of land in two coun-
ties, rendering rent, and the rent is behind, and ' gue die
dies, the leſſor ſhall have an action of debt in which ot the coun-
ties he will, for now it is changed into debt; and in that caſe
no land ſhall be put in view, but the perſon of the debtor
ſhall be only charged by the com. law. So if arent be iſſuing
out of the land of B in two counties, and the rent is behind, and
he who hath the rent dies, his executors may have an aCtiun ol
debt againſt B. in which of the counties they will, on the ſtat.
of 32 H. 8 cap. 37. for altho' he ought to * his action in one
of the counties, yet at the com. law the perſon of the def. is
chargeable in the action of debt, and not the land. And before N
the ſtat. of (g) 6 R. 2. c- 2. a writ of debt and accompt againſt () 2 Ink. 231.
a receiver, and ſuch actions might be brought in ſuch county
where the party might be beſt brought in to anſwer, and the
pl. might have declared on a contract or receipt, &c. in any
other county, quad debitum & contrattus, &c, ſunt (h) nullius, (%) 2 loft, 231.
loci. See for that 2 Ed 3. 446 Ed. 3. 206. & 275. 8 E. 3-380.
10 KE.


BULWER“Ss Caſe. Part VII.


10 1 3. 7. 19 E. 3. Juciſd. 29. 29 E. 3 26. 33 E. 2. tit. Juriſd.
E. 3. 7 3H. 6. 30 15 E. 4. 19. 21 k. 4 88. As in 22
Fitz. Affiſe 10. Fox 9- & 10. a. b. where the K. granted the ofic- of Surveyor
Br. Aſie 76. of packing of all manner of cloths within Lond. and the liberties
thereof, which are in two counties, and the aſſiſe was brought
in Midd. and there Newton and Paſton ſaid, that there i 0 a

great difference between an aſſiſe of rent and that. aſſiſe;
where a rent- charge is iſſuing out of lands in divers ede
every parcel is chargeable with the whole, and all the ter-
tenants ought to be named: but here the perſon is charged
and not the land, and yet the oſſice for which the aſſiſe was
brought did extend in two counties. And if a fine or feoffm.
be made of lands in two counties, with warranty, the Marrant
| chartz may be brought in any of the counties, 29 E 3. 3 a. b.
Co. Lit. 154. a. It is purvie ed by the ſtat. of 7 R. 2. c. 10. that an aſſiſe of
4 Co. 4. b. Nov. difeiſ. ſhall for the future be granted and made of a rent
behind, due for tenem. in divers counties to be held in co fin?
cemitat', and thereupon the aſſiſe ſhall be taken and tried by the
people of the fame county in the ſame manner and form as it
1s done of a common of paſture in one county append. to te-
nements in another county: for at the com. law if a man had
had com. in land in one county append. or appurtenant to land
[| in another county, he ſhou!d have two ſeveral writs to the She-
riffs of the ſeveral counties. Or if the land to which, &c. lay
; in one county, and the land in which, lay in ſeveral counties,
1 there he thouid have a writ of aſſiſe to the Sheriff ot the county
of where the land to which, &c. lay, and ſeveral writs to the She-
= ri of the county where the land in which, &c. Jay; and all
. that appears in the!“ H. and F. N. B. 180 a. and the
1 ſame law is whena1 ge is done in one county, and the
land to which, &c. . another county, as it appears alſo in
the Regiſt. and F. N. 5. 183. k. So that if a man bath a rent
in three or four counties, it ſcemeth that he who is diſſeiſed
may have ſeveral afl:!:s to be brought ix confin” cemitatuum; tor
5 'S the letter of the itat. ui 5 R. 2 is general of rent due for tene-
18 ments in ſeveral counties. And àltho' it hath a reference to
5 the caſe of com. of patture, &c. yet foraſmuch as in the caſe of
| com. of paſture, if the land in which, &c. lay in ſeveral coun-
ties, and the land to v hich, &c. lay in another county, there
| 38 ſhould be as many writs 2s there are ſeveral counties; thence
| it follows, that ſuch remedy he mall have who hath a rent il-
ſuing out of lands in many counties. Alſo the cafe of com. is
put exempt gratia & ſymilituatrar'e, & null ſimile quatucr pe-
dib' currit ; and it is not neceſlary that a Emile thould agree in
all points. And the tat. of 7 R. 2. was made to ſatisfy a doubt
which was conceived before: for thereby it is enacted, that
writs in ſuch caſe hall be made in the Chancery without any
manner of contradiction, as well of diſſeiſins before made,
as aſter to be made. And the doubt was on the. ſtatute
of Magna Charta, cap. 2. Recognitiones as nova 41

| &


Co. Lit. 154. a.


* 1


— MM 9 oo "2 0 VF 2m. w-


Part VII. BULWER“s Caſe.


et de morte anteceſſr* non capiantur mſi in ſuis comitat', And
ſome held that the ſame was not obſerved when the Juſtices of
aſſiſe did fit in confinio comitatuum, and namely when there are
twenty counties meſne between the two counties, as it is in
the book in 5 E. 4. 2. b. But that doubt alſo might be con-
ceived on the ſaid aſſiſe of Nov. diſſeiſin of common when the
land in which, &c. is in one county, and the Jand to which,
&c. in another county (which cafe without queſtion 1s not re-
ſtrained by the faid ſtatute. For aſſiſe of Nev. diſſeiſin of
common of paſture: lay at the common law, as by the ſtat. of
Weſtm. 2. c. 29. appears) 10 E 3. 21. & 10 Aſſ. p. 4. And
if need were, the ſtat. of Weſt. 2 c. 28. doth extend to the
ſaid caſe of rent, by which it is provided, gued guotieſcungue
de retero evenerit in cancellaria, quod in *no caſu reperit' brevez
et in conſimili caſu, cadente ſub eod jure, et ſimili indigente remedio,
non reperit', concordent clerici in cancellar” in brevi factendo, &c.
vel ad proxim Parliament de conſenſu juriſperitor' fiat breve,
And the ſtatute concludes with the effect of a maxim of the
com. law, quod cu dom” Regis non debet deficere conquerentibus
in juſlitia perquirenda. 38 E. 3. 33. a. where the caſe was, that
the K. brought a writ of right of the fourth part of the tithes
and offerings of the church of S. Dunſt. in the Weſt, in Fleet-
ſtreet in the ſuburbs of London againſt the Prior of St. John's
of Jeruſalem in England there Candiſh took exception to the
writ, becauſe altho' this writ was given by the ſtar. of Weſt. 2.
c. 5. toward the end, and artic Cler. c. 2. which ſtat. gave,
that he ſhall have a writ Ad petendum advocation” decimar* pett=
tar”, &c. And this writ is brought of the fourth part of tithes
and offerings, which is not warranted by the ſtatute judgment
of the writ, foraſmuch as the ſtatutes do not give any writ of
the fourth part of tithes. Thorpe the Ch. Juit. who gave the
rule ſaid, altno' the ftat. do not limit by expreſs words, but of
tithes, yet thoſe in the Chancery may make a writ in cnſim'
caſu, and the writ is good enough ; \wherefore anſwer. And
in 18 E. 2. Br. 287. a writ of entry was brought in the


Co. Lit. 154. 4.
Fitz, Aﬀile 26,


9 Co. 88. b.
Poſtea 4. b.


F. N. B. 30. &


F. N. B. 105. p.


county of Suſſ the tenant pleaded a releaſe of the anceſtor of


the plaintiff with warranty, which w.s denied, and found for
the plaintiff in London by a jury of Friday-ſtreet, &c. for
which the demandant did recover; and the tenant brought an
attaint, and there exception was taken, becauſe in the writ is
not compriſed to attach the party, judgment, &c. And for
the plaintiff it was ſaid, that the writ was granted to the Sheriff
of London to ſummon the 24, and attach the 12, and another
writ to the Sher, of Suſſ. to attach the party where the land was,
and both the writs were read in court. To which it was ſaid,
that there was no ſpecial law, that did maintain that writ which
s out of the com. courſe. Berisford the Ch. Juſt. who gave the
rule, ſaid, in anew caſe, a new remedy, &c. wherefore anſwer.
And therefore if there be lord and tenant, and the tenancy
doth extend into two counties, in this caſe if the rents and
ervices be behind, the lord may have ſeveral writs of cuſ-
oms anc ſervices, {or every county one writ, and ſhall have


*


Vor. IV. F them


BU LWER's Caſe. Part VII.


them returnable at one day in the Common Pleas, and then


(%% Co. 88. b. to count upon them as his caſe is, quia aliter curia (a) Regis


Antea 4. a+


(5) 4 Leon. 54-
Co, 39. A. d.


Co. 59. a.
F. N. B. 2 1. f.
Palm. 39, 40.
2 Sand. 46.
1 Roll. 7 57, 759,
760, Fitz. Exror


92»


deficeret ogy ogy in juſtitia perquirenda, and therewith a-
gree Fitz. Nat. Brev. 151. b. & 30 Ed. 1. Droit pl. ultimo.
And that is a good example, pro guolibet conſimili caſu, Ic. fi.
mili indigente remedio. Vide 12 Ed. 1. tit. Attaint 71. a very


good caſe ; and the reaſon and rule of the book in 21 Ed. 3.


18. is to be obſerved, where the caſe was, that a fine was le-
vied of a manor in one county, and the tenancy lay in another
county, now where the per que ſervitia ſhould be * was
the queſtion ; and it was adjudged that it was well brought
in the county where the manor was. And there Stone gave
the rule of the court in theſe words : he can have no other
writ, for his writ muſt be according to the fine, and brought
in the county where the note is levied. Vide 11 Rich. 2. tit.
Action ſur le Caſe 36. 7 H. 4. 8. Vide 26 Hen 6. tit. Cove-
nant 9.41 Af. pl. 12. 9 Hen. 5 6. 22 Hen 6. 5. And in
the principal caſe where it was objected that the ſaid Capra;
utlagatum was erroneous ; for it was proximum ante feſtum, Cc.
where it ſhould be, po? feſtum, &c. the court took no regard
to it; for the error in the writ which the defend. himſelf hath
wrongfully brought, ſhall not (6) advantage himſelf ; but in
regard he was impriſoned and troubled thereby, that gave the
plaintiff cauſe of action. Alſo the court did not regard the
clauſe that the defendant at W. in the county of Norf. &c.
malitiose et deceptive machinatus fuit, &c, for that is ſo ſecret and
ſo uncertain, that it cannot be tried. h


Sir


a = LS] 22 — a e i 1


Part VII.


1 a. — 2 4
— ** —


Sir MiLEs CoRBET's Cale.
Hil. 27 Eliz.
In the Exchequer.


ETWEEN Sir Edw. Clere and Miles Corbet then Eſq.
now a Knight, it was reſolved in a caſe concerning the
parſonage of Marham in the county of Norf. that where in
the county of Norf. there is a ſpecial manor of common called
Shack, which is to be taken in arable land, after harveſt
until the land be ſewed again, &c. and it began in ancient
time in this manner: the fields of arable land in this country
conſiſt of the lands of many and divers ſeveral perſons lying
intermixed in many and ſeveral ſmall parcels, ſo that it is not
poſſible that any of them without treſpaſs to the others, can
feed their cattle in their own land, and therefore every one
doth put in their cattle to feed promiſcue in the open field.
Theſe words, “To go Shack,” is as much as to ſay to go at li-
berty, or to go at large: in which the policy of old times is to
be obſerved, that the ſeverance of fields in ſuch ſmall parcels
to ſo many ſeveral perſons was to avoid incloſure, and to main-
tain tillage. But it is to be obſerved, that the ſaid common
called Shack, which in the beginning was but in the nature of
a feeding becauſe of vicinage for avoiding of ſuit, within ſome
places of that country, is by cuſtom altered into the na-
ture of a common appendant or appurtenant, and in ſome
places it retains its original nature; and the rule to know
it is the cuſtom and uſage of every ſeveral town or place,
for * conſuetudo loci eff obſervanda- And therefore if in the
town of D. (exempli gratid) one who hath purchaſed divers
parcels together, in which the inhabitants have uſed to have
Shack, and long time ſince has incloſed it; and notwith-
ſtanding always after harveſt the inhabitanis have had


Shack there by paſſing into it by bars or gates with their


cattle, there it ſhall be taken as common appendant or ap-
purtenant, and the owner cannot exclude them of com-
mon there, notwithſtanding he will not common with
them, but hold his own lands fo incloſed in ſeveralty ;


and that is proved by the uſage, for notwithſtanding the


ancient incloſure, the inhabitants have always had "common
there. But if in the town of S. the cuſtom and uſage bath
been, that every owner in the ſame town hath incloſed

F 2 their


* 4 Co. 28. v.
6 Co. 67. 2.
10 Co. 140. a.


4 Co. 38. b.
Co, Lit. 122. a.


their own lands from time to time, and ſo hath held it in ſe.


of vicinage, and in the town of A. there are fifty acres of


Sir MILES CokßET's Caſe: Part VIt,


veralty, there this uſage proves, that it was but in the nature
of Shack originally, for the cauſe of vicinage, and fo it con-
tinues, and therefore there he may incloſe and hold in ſeve-
ralty, and exclude himſelf to have Shack with the others,
And although in the ſaid caſe of the town of D. the uſage
hath been, that notwithſtanding the incloſure by divers in-
habitants of late times, the other inhabitants have had Shack
there; yet if a man hath an ancient cloſe of ancient time taken
out of the field, and he and all thoſe whoſe eſtate he hath,
have held it always in ſeveralty, he may well keep it incloſed:
for as to ſuch parcel ſo anciently incloſed, the Shack there
doth retain its ancient and original nature. And he who
claims Shack there cannot preſcribe to have common in it.
Nota, a good reſolution, which ſtands with reaſon, and no in-
convenience, innovation, or Cauſe of ſuits or trouble can
thereupon ariſe, but quiet and repoſe will be thereby in many
caſes eſtabliſhed, which I thought fit to be reported, becauſe
it is a general caſe in the faid country, and at firft the court
was altogether ignorant of the nature of this common called
Shack. It was alfo reſolved at the ſame time, that if the com-
mons of the town of A. and of the town of B. are adjoining,
and that one ought to have common with the other by reaſon


common, and in the town of B. there are an hundred acres
of common ; in that caſe the inhabitants of the town of A.
cannot put more cattle into their common of fifty acres than
it will feed, without any reſpect to the common within the
town of B. nec e converſo; for the original cauſe of this com-
mon for cauſe of vicinage, was not for profit, but for pre-
venting of ſuits in a champaign country; for the reciprocal
eſcapes of the one town into the other : and therefore if the
common of the town of A. will feed fifty beaſts, and of the
town of B. an hundred beaſts, it is no prejudice to the one
or the other, if the cattle of one town eſcape and feed in the
common of the other town reciprocally; for if all the cattle
feed promiſcue together through the whole, it will be no preju-
dice to one or the other.

[Note, The like intercommoning is in Lincolnſhire, York-
ſhire, and other counties, and in Mich. Term 18. Car. 2. B.
R. Twiſden, Juſtice, ſaid, that this common called Shack
was but Common pur cauſe de vicinage.] |


” os


JX


W on NE.


. 8 » 7


aſe


Part VII.


Cafes upon the Stat. of 13 Ed. I.
of Wincheſter.


Tx puryiew of the faid act is, That from henceforth
every county be ſo well kept, that immediately after
« robberies and felonies committed, freſh ſuit be made from
« town to town, and from county to county, &c.” And after
the felony or robbery is committed, the county ſhall have no
longer ſpace than 40 days, within which 40 (4) days it ſhall
behove them to agree for the robbery or treſpaſs, or elſe that
they anſwer for the bodies of the offenders, &c. Upon which
words divers reſolutions have been made,


Trin. 27 Eliz. in C. B.


TIN. 27 Eliz. it was held by the whole court of Com-
mon Pleas, in a cafe which happened in Harlefton in
the county of Suffolk, that if a man be robbed in his (5) houſe,
be it in the day or in the night, the hundred in which the houſe
is, ſhall not be charged with it : for although the words of the
faid act are general, without ſpeaking of any place in ſpecial,
yet ſuch robbery is not within the ſaid act, for thiee reaſons :
1. Becauſe every man's houſe is his (c) caftle, and he ought
to keep and defend it at his (4) peril ; and if any one be robbed


in his houſe, it ſhall be eſteemed his own default and negli- 5


gence. 2. It is not lawful for any other to enter into the houſe
of another for the ſafeguard of it, (without the owner's con-
ſent.) 3. Such robbery for which the hundred ſhall anſwer
by force of the ſaid o/ þ ought to be committed openly, ſo
that the country may take notice of it themſelves ; for it was
adjudged in Aſhpole's caſe next following, that it is not neceſ-
fary to have hue and cry, or notice given to the country, nei-
ther by the words of the ſaid act of 13 Ed. I. nor by the mean-
ing thereof; for it may be, that the party robbed was bound,
or maihemed, &c. fo that he cannot make hue and cry, or
give notice to the country, but when a robbery 1s ſecretly
done in a houſe they cannot take notice of it.


Trin. 28 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 72 5


BETWEEN Aſhpole and the inhabitants of 12
it was reſolved by the whole court, that althoug

the ſtatute is general, and doth not make mention of
any time, that the robbery ought to be committed in
3 the


Weftm. 1. e. 9.
2 Inſt. 172.

2 Inſt. 117,118.
2 Saund. 423.

5 Co. 67. b.


(a) 2 Inſt. 477.
1 Sid. 11.

See the form of
the count for
robbery. Raſt,
Entr, fo. 406.


Sendil's caſe.


(5 Cro. El. 7 53.
3 Leon. 262,

2 Inſt. 569.
Moor 620.


(c) Cro. El.753.
2 Co. 32. a.

Co. 91. b.

Co. 126. a.

11 Co. 82. 3.

1 Bulſtr. 146.
(d) 3 Leon. 262.
Cro. El. 753.

6 Mod, 105.

v 2 Co. 66.


5 Co. 91, 92,
&c


See 2 Wilſon
113. *


Aſbpole's caſe,

1 Leon. 57.

4 Leon. 218,

1 And.158, 159,
Goldſb. 55 56,
60, 61,


Caſes of the Statute of Part VII.


(a) 2 Inft. 569. the day-time, and out of the (a) night; and there the caſe
3 was, that a robbery was committed in January preſently after
4 Leon. 59,191, ſun-ſet, during day-light;z and it was adjudged that the hun-
218, 219. Sav. dred ſhould anſwer, becauſe it was a convenient time for men
5 78. to travel, or be about their buſineſs or work; and therewith
El. 250. Cr. Jac, agreeth the book in 3 Ed. 3 Coron. (6) 293. that if one kills
706, another at the hour of evening, and eſcapes, by the common
e law the town ſhall be amerced ; for it is in law accounted


b. part of the day, and not of the night.


Trin. 29 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 1027.


Milborn's caſe, BEFWEEN (a) Milborn and the inhabitants of the hun.
(a) Goldfb. 70. dred of Dunmow in Eſſex it was adjudged, that for a
6 Loon: 2. 99s robbery committed in the morning, ante _ the hundred
1814 25. * - ſhall not be charged, becauſe the robbery was committed
(5) 2 Inft. 569. in the (bj night; and although no time be ſpecified in the
_ =_ cr. ſtatute, yet by good expoſition: it doth not extend to a robbery
1 2 ic. committed in the night; for no laches or negligence can be
70. Cr.) 8 cgug

106. imputed to the. hundred for default of, well guarding the
33 country in the night; alſo in the night they cannot make
9 purſuit after the offenders or enquire for them, and then to
charge them when they are deprived of their convenient means

would be very hard. And as it hath elſewhere been often

ſaid, it is a good expoſition of a ſtatute to expound it accord-

The city of Lon- ing to the reaſon of the com. law, And at the com, law, if
nad — a man be killed in a town by day, that is, ſo long as there is
= Dr. Lamb . full day-light, and he who killed him eſcaped, the town
being flain. See where this felony was committed ſhould be amerced for it;
won ORGY and ſo it is held in 21 E. 3. Coron. 238. Cum quis | JO OCs
cap, 1. fol. x45. ciſus fuit per diem, niſi felo captus fuit, tota villa illa oneretur.

P. 1. 45

And therewith agreeth alſo the ſaid book in 3 E. 3. But if

ſuch murder or manſlaughter be committed in the night, the

town ſhould not be amerced by the common law, becauſe,

(as it hath been ſaid) no laches or negligence can be im-

puted to the inhabitants of the town ; and God hath appoint-

ed the day for men to labour, travel, and do their buſineſs,

and the night to take their repoſe and reſt, and therefore the

Plalm 10g. prophet ſaith, poſuiſti tenebras, et facta gt nox, in qua pertranſ-
eunt beſtiæ ſylve, &c. ſol oritur, et congregati ſunt, exit homo

ad opus et operationem, et redit veſpere : ſo ſavage beaſts pals

and repaſs in the night, and then men are at reſt, and in the

day men apply themſelves to their labours and affairs, and

then the beaſts retice to their dens. And the poet faith, ut


Jugulent homines ſurgunt de nocie latrones.


And


3


„% er 0 eee WW OD CO UP eee ca & ©


Q ea


> a SS 48: & 8”


» =


Part VII. 12 E. 1. of Winch. 5


And the common law is, men cannot (a) diſtrain for rent or () Co. Lit.142,
ſervice in the night, as it is adjudged in 12 E. 3. Diſtreſs 17. 2 —
& 11 H. 7. 5. a. acc. But for a damage - ſeaſance, a man may Stud. ry 6
diſtrain in the night for the neceſſity of the caſe; for other- 4 Leon. 218.
wiſe perhaps he ſhall not diſtrain at all, for before day they Ar
may be taken or ſtray out of his land, and therewith agreeth 7 Rall. 85
10 E. 3. 21. And further it is provided by the ſaid ſtat. of Fitz. Avowry
Wincheſter, that in cities or great towns which are incloſed, 737:

the gates ought to be ſhut from ſun-ſet to ſun- riſing; after

which ſtatute, if in ſuch city or town incloſed any murder or
manſlaughter be committed in the day or in the night, and Styles 14.

the offender eſcapes, ſuch city or town ſhall be amerced,

For now the act hath changed the reaſon of the law, and

therefore the law itſelf is changed; for ratio legis eff anima

legis, et mutata legis ratione, mutatur et lex. For at the com.

law, if a man was killed in the night, as it hath been ſaid, Cro. Car. 252.
there was not any fault in the city or town : but now if they

do not keep their gates ſhut according to the ſtatute, by which

the offender eſcapes, then there is fault and negligence in

them ; and therewith agreeth the book in 3 E. 3. Coron. 299.

where the caſe is, it was preſented, that one killed another in

the night; and it was aſked, where the felon was? And they Cro. Car. 299.
ſaid, that he is fled: and becauſe it was in the night, they
ought not to be charged. Lowther Juſtice, who gave the
rule, ſaid, that the town ſhould be ſhut, by the ſtatute, from


| ſuch an hour; and becauſe the townſmen of the town took 1 Sig. 17.


him not, all the town was amerced : alſo it was held on the
faid act of 13 E. 1. that if divers commit a robbery, thoſe of
the hundred ought to apprehend all the felons ; for although
they apprehend ſome of them, that ſhall not be ſufficient to
excuſe them. For the words of the act of 13 E. 1. are, that
they anſwer for the bodies of the offenders; which in con-
ſtruction was taken, all the offenders. But now by the ſtar.
of 27 El. cap. 13. a new law is made, amongſt others, in theſe 2 Inf. 172,173,
points following, viz. 1. That none ſhall have an action on the 1.
ſaid ſtat. unleſs the party robbed doth, ſo ſoon as he can, give

notice of the ſaid felony to ſome of the inhabitants of ſome

town, village, or hamlet next the place where the robbery

was committed. 2. If they in their purſuit do apprehend

any of the offenders, the fame ſhall excuſe them, although

they do not apprehend them all. See the act of 27 El. cap.

13. which hath added to the ſaid ſtatute of Wincheſter and al-

teced the ſame in divers points. |


Nota, If a man was robbed on the Sabbath day, the coun-
try was chargeable, 2 Roll. Rep. 59. But by the ſtat. 29 Car.
2. it is enacted that the country ſhall not be chargeable.


F 4 3 * The


Cited in caſes
in law and equi»
ty 414-


(a) Palm. 437.


(5) Lit. Rep. 306.


(e) 3 Bulſt. 273.
Co. Lit 215. b.
1 Roll. Rep. 402.
442. |
7A 4 Co.124. 2.
8 Co. 44. a.
Nn 254.
1 Roll. Rep. 401,
442. Br. Entry
Cong. 129.

3 Bulſt. 272.

2 Inſt. 483.

49 E, 3. 13. A.


Part VII.


—ü—»
A a 4 -


4
n=, 28%; | # S A 6 4. 2 I | = rr = © WA * —
— * —
_ k tl


* The Earl of BEDFORD's Caſe.
wy Mich. 28 & 29 Eliz.


TN the Court of Wards, the caſe was, that Francis Earl of
Bedford being ſeiſed of certain houſes in the Strand in the
county of Midd. in tail, ſcil. to him and the heirs of his body,
and ſeiſed of other lands in fee held in capite, by deed indent-
ed, made leaſes of the ſaid houſes, whereof he was ſeiſed in
tail, for 21 years, rendering rent (which leaſes were not war-
ranted by the ſtatute of 32 H. 8. but were voidable by the iſ-
ſues in tail) and died; the reverſion deſcended to the heirs ge-
neral of the Earl, that is to fay, to two daughters and heirs
of Henry Lord Ruſſel, eldeſt ſon of the ſaid Earl (which Henry
died in the life of his father) and it appeared that the ſaid
leaſes were to have continuance after the ſaid daughters
ſhould be out of ward: and by office after the death of the faid
Earl it was found, that he died ſeiſed of the ſaid eſtate-tail of
thEfaid houſes, and that they deſcended to the ſaid heirs ge-
neral, by force whereof the faid houſes were ſeiſed into the
Queen's hands. And in this caſe two points were reſolved :
1. That the (a) King in privity and right of the heirs in tail,
ſhould avoid the faid leaſes during the time that they ſhould
be in ward; as if a Biſhop makes a leaſe for years not war-
ranted by the ſtatute, ſo that the leaſe is voidable by the
ſucceſſor, and dies, the King ſhall avoid the leaſe (b) during
the vacation of the biſhoprick, in privity and right of the
biſhoprick, for the King in none of the ſaid caſes is as a
ſtranger. And the ſame Jaw is when a ſubject is guardian in
knight's ſervice he in the right of the heir within age,
and in his ward, ſhall avoid voidable leaſes as to his own
intereſt, but it ſhall not prejudice the heir of his election
at full age; for cu/tos flatum heredis in cufiodia ſud exiftent' me-
liorem, non deteriorem facere pott. So if the heir within
age before the entry of the guardian, or the anceſtor be-
ing within age, makes a leaſe for years rendering rent,
the (c) guardian may enter in the right of the heir, and
ſhall avoid the leaſe. But the lord by (4) eſcheat ſhall not
avoid yoidable eſtates made by his tenant who was an infant ;
for regularly, none ſhall avoid voidable eſtates for infancy, but
5 Ray | the


-


Part VII. The Earl of Bzprorp's Caſe. $


the infant himſelf or his heirs, but the guardian ſhall avoid

the ſaid voidable leaſes in the right of the infant himſelf, and

ſo a difference; and the (a) K. in the caſe of a Biſhop ſhall (2) Lit. Rep.
avoid the leaſe in the right of the biſhoprick, which conti- 3%.

nves although the POD be dead. And that was one of the

points adjudged in the Exchequer, in the great caſe between

Auſtine and Sir J. Baker, 2 Mar, which I have ſeen, and (6) Palm. 437.
which ſhall be related more at large in the reſolutions of the Av *

2d point of this caſe. Vide 16 El. Dyer 337. b. patentee of Pyer il ro
Q. El. of lands given to a parſon and his ſucceſſors to ſuper- 3 Leon. 158.
ſtitious uſes, ſhall avoid after his death a leaſe for life (which _ ey "Boot,
is voidable by the ſucceſſor) made by the parſon, by the intent e
of the act of 1 E. 6. of Chauntries. Vide 7 El. Dy. 239. Hoſ-
kins's caſe. 2. It was reſolved, that although the K. in the
right of the heir had avoided it for his time, yet it doth not
avoid the leaſes ſo abſolutely, that the heirs in tail after the
King's intereſt determined, cannot make them good by the
acceptance of the rent. For the King's act cannot determine
the power and election of the iſſues in tail, or of the ſucceſſor
of the Biſhop in the caſe before put, to make the leaſes good
by acceptance of the rent. And when voidable leaſes being
void for a time ſhall be always avoided, and when not, this
difference was taken and reſolved by the court; /c. when the
intereſt of him who makes the avoidance is but for part of the
term, ſo that it appears that a reſidue remains; and when he
who makes the avoidance avoids the whole intereſt, ſo that it
appears that no reſidue can remain; and therefore in the caſe
at bar it appears, that after the King's intereſt determined,
there remains a reſidue of the term. But if the patron of the
church of D. doth grant the next avoidance to another, and
afterwards and before the ſtat. of 13 Eliz. the Parſon, Patron, 1 Jones 454.
and Ordinary make a leaſe for years, rendering rent, and the Co. Lit. 46. a.
Parſon dies, the grantee preſents, who is admitted, inſti- G. , Ron.
tuted, and inducted, and dies, this leaſe was avoided in the 480. Moor 481.
whole abſolutely, and therefore ſuch leaſe cannot ſtand 2 E. 3. 8: per
againſt the ſecond ſucceſſor, 2 E. 3. 8. If anadvowſon of a er
church by licence be granted to a Prior and his ſucceſſors,

and afterwards the ſame church is appropriated to him and his Co. Lit. 46. b.
ſucceſſors, ſo as they be perpetual Parſons imparſonees, in that

cale if the wife of the grantor be endowed of the advowſon,

and preſents a clerk, who is admitted, inſtituted, and inducted,

the appropriation is defeated for ever, for the whole eſtate of

the Parſon imparſonee is avoided, and ſo it was adjudged as

Sir Jeff. Scroope reports in 2 E. 3. 8. and in ſuch ſenſe is the Co. Lit. 46. b.
book to be underſtood. For although the wife-was endowed

of the advowſon, yet if ſhe had died before any was admitted

and inſtituted to the ſame church at her preſentation the

church had remained appropriated, and ſo the Quære Hob 228.

in 6 E. 6. 72. Dyer, is well reſolved. So if a feme co- 10 Co. 43. 3.
vert (as a feme ſole) levies a fine by herſelf of land, where- 82 —5 46 —
of ſhe is ſeiſed in fee to another and his heirs; in that * 20


caſe


29. Palm. 437.


2. Roll. 20.
10 Co. 43. a.
Co. Lit. 46. a.


1 Jones 457


Plowd. 560. b,
Bridgm. 27.


Eo. Lit. 46. a.


Sodb. 325.


The Earl of BZDronb's Caſe. Part VII.


eaſe if the huſband doth not enter, that fine ſhall bind the
wife and her heirs for ever; and in the ſame caſe, if the huſ-
band enters and dies, the conuſee ſhall not have the land; for
by the entry of the huſband the whole eſtate of the conuſee
was defeated, and the old eſtate of the wife reveſted in her,
and the huſband ſeiſed of the whole eſtate as in the right of
his wife, and therewith agree 17 E. 3. 52. b. 17 Af. pl. 17.
7 H. 4.23. 2 R. 320. 9 H. 6. 33. But when only part of
the eſtate or term is defeated, there it is otherwiſe, as in the
ſaid caſe between Auſtine and Sir J. Baker was adjudged,
which caſe, as I my ſelf have ſeen, in effect was, Sir T.
Wyatt was tenant in tail of the manor of Eaſt Forleigh in the
county of Kent, viz. to him and to the heirs males of his
body, of the gift of H. 8. to hold of him in capite, the rever-
ſion to the King, his heirs and ſucceſſors. Sir Tho. Wyatt
by indenture demiſed the ſaid manor to Auſtine for 26 years,
rendering 131. rent to the ſaid Sir Tho. and his heirs, and
afterwards Sir 'Tho. died, and all this was found by office,
and that Sir T. Wyatt was his ſon and heir male of full age,
by which the King had primer ſeiſin of the land itſelf, and
for his intereſt did avoid the leaſe, and afterwards Sir Tho.
the ſon ſued livery, and accepted of the rent of Auſtine, and
afterward committed high treaſon, for which he was attainted.
In that caſe it was adjudged, that foraſmuch as the King had
avoided the leaſe, but as to his primer ſeiſin, that after livery
made it is in the election and power of the iſſue in tail, by
acceptance of the rent to affirm the leaſe ; becauſe the leaſe
was avoided by the King, but for part of the term. So if
tenant in tail takes a wife, and makes a leaſe for 30, or 40,
&c. years, rendering rent, which is avoidable by the iſſue in
tail, and dies, and afterwards the wife recovers her dower, in
that caſe the wife ſhall avoid the leaſe, and yet, if ſhe dies
within the term, the iſſue in tail at his election may either
affirm or diſaffirm the leaſe. And it was ſaid, if tenant in
tail makes a leaſe for 3o or 40 years, rendering rent, which
is avoidable by the iſſue in tail, and afterwards tenant in
tail dies without iſſue, his wife with child with a fon, by which
the donor enters, and as to him avoids the leaſe, and after-
wards the ſon is born, the leſſee re-enters, the ſon at his full
age may by acceptance of the rent affirm the leaſe; for the
leaſe was never avoided abſolutely, nor ſimpliciter, but ſecun-
dum quid, and upon the matter ex poſt facto was defeated but
for a time. And although fflius in utero matris, eſt pars viſcerum
matris, (vide 3 Aſſ. pl. 2. 22 AM. pl. 94. 22 Edwarai tertii,
Corone 180. Stamford 21.) yet the law in many caſes hath conſi-
deration of him in reſpect of the apparent expectation of 2
bir


* c ww 1» in, ff „ od a es * * . O


2 2


part VII. The Earl of BE Droxp's Caſe.


birth. See the opinion of Saunders and Browne in Stowel's
caſe, Plow. Com. for avoiding of a fine. Vide temp. E. 1.
Gard. 1 $3: & 31 E. i. Bre. 873. for the wardſhip of him.
Vide 38 E. 3. 7. & 41 E. 3. & 11 E. 3. Voucher, that he ſhall
be (a) vouched in his mother's womb. 11 H. 6. 13. a deviſe () 8 E. 2.
of (b) land (deviſable by cuſtom) to one in his mother's orgs |
womb, 41 E. 3. Deteinment of (c) charters for the heir in his ,, E. 1. BY oe.
mother's womb. 3 El. Dy. 186. An adulterer doth counſel Cart. 89. |
the woman to kill the child when he is born, who doth ac- 28 32. b.
cordingly; the adulterer is acceſſary, yet at the time of the , H. 4 3
counſel the child was in his mother's womb. But it was ſaid, 11 E. 3. Vouch.
if (4) tenant in tail makes a leaſe for 30 or 40 years, render- 73: 2 Roll: 746.
ing rent, and afterwards takes a wife, and dies without ifſue, (3) Dees 30%
his wife with child with a ſon, and afterwards the wife re- pl. 51. 1814. 53
covers dower of the ſame land, ſhe before the ſon's birth ſhall Moor 637.

not avoid the leaſe, for her eſtate is quodammods a continuance Ras, *


Raym. 5 84.
of part of the eſtate-tail, and the ſame is proved by 10 E. 3. (0711 nel. 2.


256. 34 Aſſ. pl. 15. & 23 E. 3. Dower 130. that ſhe ſhall be Ape Pg


(2) attendant for a third part of the ſervices that tenant in tail , Afl. 4. et
did, which ſhe ſhould not be, if to all intents the eſtate-tail Ficz.Coronez63.
were utterly extinct, and tenant in dower is in in the per by her (4) Co. Lit.
huſband, and in of his eſtate. Jide Litt. 93. b. in Deſcents, Gen d os

8 Aſſ. 26. 7 H. 5. 3. 8 E. 2. Entre 75, &c. Vide 33 H. 8. 241.a.

yer 51. b. V) tenant in tail before the ſtatute of 27 H. 8. (f ) Dyer 51.
of Uſes, made a feoffment in fee to the uſe of him and his IE
heirs ; and alſo before the ſaid act, he and his feoffees made a 3 Leon. 134.
leaſe for years, rendering rent, and died after the ſtatute, the Bridgm. 27,103,
land deſcended to his iſſue, who before entry upon the termor = Sang, oo. by
levied a fine to another, and by the better opinion of the Juſ- 2 Babe. 3a. 45»
tices of both the benches, except Saunders, the alienee ſhall 6 Co. 34. a.
not avoid it; for although the ſon was remitted, yet the leaſe 7 © 13. b.
was not merely void, without actual entry by the iſſue, Vide
Plow. Com. 437.


UGHTRED's


*


Part VII.


UGHTRE D's Caſe.
Trin. 33 Eliz.


In the Common Pleas.


1 Cent. abo. LT ENRY UGHTRED, Eſq. brought a writ of annuity
n | againſt William Marqueſs of Wincheſter, ſon and
Dod. 1 eir of John Marqueſs Wincheſter, and declared that the


1 Bulffr. 168. ſaid John Marqueſs of Winton, 20 Dec. 17 El. tam pro bona
Palw. 397 & favorabih affeftione & benevolentia quas geſſit erga eundem
Henricum, quam pro confidentia & fidelitate repojit” in eodem Hen«
rico, by his writing did conſtitute and authoriſe the faid Henry
to be Captain of the fort or bulwark, and caſtle of Netley,
alias Letley, in the county of Southampton, to have and ex-
erciſe the [aid office of Captain, &c. during the life of the
ſaid Henry, and gave him authority during his life to nomi-
nate and appoint from time to time a mafter gunner, one
porter, and fix ſoldiers, &c, And further by the ſaid writ-
ing the ſaid John Marqueſs did grant, £5 conſideratiane præ-
dicta, & pro meliore manutentione ipſius Henrici & magiſtri tor-
mentor & ſex militum in defenſione & tuitione caſtri prædicti, for
him and his heirs, to the ſaid Henry during his life, an an-
nuity of 32 J. &c. at the feaſt of St. Michael, and the Annun-
ciation of our Lady by equal portions, by force of which he
was ſeiſed of the ſaid office, and of the ſaid annuity for his
life; and afterwards, 10 Nov. 18 El. the ſaid John Marqueſs -
died; and the defendant his ſon and heir for 11 years before
the writ brought did with-hold the annuity, which in all
amounted to 368 1. &c. on which declaration the defendant
did demur in law; and according to the ſtatute did ſhew
2) El. esp. 5. divers cauſes : 1. becauſe it doth not appear by the declaration,
N eb that the faid John Lord Marqueſs had power or intereſt
Sendment of to grant the ſaid office; and alſo becauſe the plaintiff hath
the law, not averred, that he hath exerciſed the ſaid office, nor that
he did appoint a maſter gunner, porter, or the ſoldiers,
and divers other cauſes were ſhewed ; but notwithſtand-
ing theſe, judgment was given by the Juſtices of the Com-
mon Pleas for the plaintiff, whereupon the Marqueſs brought


a writ


i


Part vil! Ucurre D's Caſe.


a writ of error, and divers errors were aſſigned, but all were
over-ruled by the court but one. And that was, that the


10


plaintiff in the writ of annuity had not averred in his declara-


tion that he had exerciſed the ſaid office, &c. But after many
arguments and conſideration of all the books, in which (as it
ſeems prima facie) there is a diverſity of opinions; it was re-
ſolved, that the declaration was good without ſuch (a) aver-
ment; and their reaſon was, that in all caſes where an intereſt
dr eſtate doth commence upon a condition precedent, be the
condition or act to be perto:; med by the plaintiff or detendant,
or by any other; and be the condition in the (6b) affirmative
or negative, thee, the plaintiff ought to ſhew it in his decla-
ration and to aver the performance thereof ; for there, the
intereſt or eſtate doth begin in him by the performance of
the condition, and is not in him till the condition be per-
formed. But otherwiſe it is when the intereſt or eſtate paſſeth
preſently and veſts in the grantee, and 1s to be defeated by
matter ex p fatto, or condition ſubſequent, be the condition
or act to be performed by the plaintiff or defendant or by any
other, and be the condition in the affirmative or negative,
there, the plaintiff may declare generally, without ſhewing the
performance thereof, and it ſhall be pleaded by him who will
take advantage (c) of the condition or matter ex pot fatto, for
every one ought to alledge that which (d) makes for him, and
which is for his avail, and none thall be forced to alledge that
which is againſt himſelf. And it may well be, that the con-
dition ſubſequent or matter ex p fas, ſtands upon many
parts; (as in the cafe at bar it happens) to rehearſe all which
would be tedious, when iſſue ſhall be taken but upon one of
them, and the defendant may plead any one of them which he
plea'eth in bar of the action, and ſo the pleading will be more
ſhort and compendious, which is the moſt commendable, if
it be ſufficient. Here in the caſe at bar the condition was to
be performed by the plaintiff bimſelf, and therefore the caſe is


the ſtronger, but becauſe the plaintiff by the ſaid grant was


preſently ſeiſed of the ſaid office and annuity for the term of
his life, which ought to be defeated by the not uſing the faid
office or other ſubſequent matter; the ſubſequent matter makes
againſt him, and therefore ſhall be pleaded by the defendant,
and therewith. agreeth 15 H. 7. (e) 1. a. b. In a writ of an-
nuity againſt the ſucceſſor of a Prior on a grant made by his
predeceſſor until he was advanced to a benefice of hol
church, and the plaintiff declared generally, without ſaying

that he is not yet advanced ; and for that cauſe exception was
taken to it, and notwithſtanding the declaration was adjudged
good, becauſe the condition went in defeaſance of the an-
nuity, which ought to be ſhewed on the defendant's patt.
Alſo this is an annuity, which beginneth before the con-
dition ſhall be performed, which performance ſhall come on
the part of the grantor, and not like where the condition
was (/), that if the grantee doth ſuch a thing, that then
he ſhall have ſuch an annuity; now, if he will demand


It,


(a) Hard. 9 79.
Hob. 41. Jenk.
Cent, 250, Doct.
pl. 91. 21 E. 4.
49. 22 E. 4. 42.
% Dock. pl. 91.
Plowd. 30.

1 Lev. 274.
Hardr, 9, 79+


() Doct. pl. 97.


(4) 5 Co. 78. d.
Plowd. 16. b.


9 E. 4. 20.
Choke, 18


(e) Cro. Arg.
108. Hard. 9,10.
2 Brownl. 98.


y Dot. pl. 91.


Br. Count. 43.
Plowd. 25: b.
32. b. 272. b.
273. a. Palm,
192. Hob. 41.
Jones 328.


Doc. pl. or.
4 E. 3. 39- pl. 6.
per Wilby, *


i
|
|


2) Doct. pl. gr.


tw. 250, 251.


(6) Br. Count 7.


22 E. 4 29. a.
Palm. 397.
1 Bulftr, 168.
Poph. 161.
DoR. pl. i.
(e) Doct. pl. 91.
opham 161.
Jenk. Cent. 260.
(d) Hob. 41, 106,
(e) Doct. pl. ga ·
1 Bulſtr. 168.
Popham. 161.
Palm 397, 398.
1 Roll. 414,415.
1 Sand. 3 20.
1 Lev. 293.


po. pl.g2.


UcnTtarevy's Caſe, Part VII.


it, he ought to alledge in facto, that the condition is per-
formed, for by the performance thereof the annuity doth
begin. And ſo is the difference by all the Juſtices, and theſe
are the words of the book. So it is ſaid in Colthirſt's caſe,
Pl. Com. 25. b. If I grant to one that when he ſhall be pro-
moted to a benefice, that he ſhall have an annuity ; if he de-
mands the annuity, he ought firſt to ſhew that he is promoted
to a benefice. But if an annuity be granted to one until he
be promoted to a benefice, there he Kal have a writ of an-
nuity, and ſhall not ſhew that he is not yet promoted to a
benefice, becauſe the annuity doth precede, and the promo-
tion is ſubſequent, and goes in defeaſance of the annuity ;
and therefore it ought to be ſhewed on the contrary part, But
when (a) a man is only intitled to an action, and the action
lies not if the condition or conſideration be not performed,
there, the plaintiff in his declaration ought to ſhew the per-
formance, for it amounts to a condition precedent, becauſe
the aCtion ariſes on the condition or conſideration performed,
as the book in (b) 3 H. 6. 33. b. Suppoſe I retain (c) a man
to go with me to Rome for 40s. here by the going the cauſe
of the duty firſt ariſes, in which caſe, if he brings an action
of debt for it, in his declaration, he ought to declare, that
he was there, otherwiſe the declaration ſhall abate. So it 18
if I (4) retain one to ſerve me for 40s. by the year; for here
by the conſideration performed the duty ariſes, ſo that it is in
the nature of an act precedent, and ſo was the opinion of the
whole court in the ſaid book. But the caſe in (e) 48 E. 3. 3.
& 4. was affirmed for good law where it appears, that inden-
tures were made between Sir R. Pool, Knt. of the one part, and
Sir R. Tolcelfer of the other part, by which Sir Ralph did co-
venant with Sir Rich. to ſerve him with 3 Eſquires of arms
in the wars of France, and Sir Rich. did covenant therefore to
pay him 42 marks : in that cafe each party had equal remedy,
one for the ſervice, and the other for the money ; and there-
fore in debt for the 42 marks he may chuſe either to declare
in general, or ſpecially at his pleaſure, by the rule of the
court. Alſo when an intereſt doth paſs preſently, and is to be
defeated by matter, ex po/t fatto, yet if it appears to the court
by matter in law, that the action ſhall not be maintainable
without ſhewing the performance of the condition or conſi-


deration, there, the plaintiff ouaht to aver it for the mainten-


ance of his action, as in 39 H. b. 21, 22. the caſe was, R.
Abbot of Cheſter granted to John Brewin Eſq. by his deed
(without the conſent of the convent) a yearly rent of 40s. out
of his monaſtery, pro conſil' ſuo eid R. Abbati & (/) conventut
ejuſdem loci impenſo, & impoſterum impendendo ; the ſaid R.
Abbot died, and John Brewin brought a writ of annuity
againſt the ſucceſſor, and averred, that he had given to the ſaid
R. nuper Abbati & conventui conſil ſuum apud W. in negot domus
pred” agendis, ad proficuum ejuſd domus: and Priſot and the whole

ä | court


a i. . PI n r 1


Part VII. UcnuTREvD's Caſe.


court held that the action was not maintainable againſt the
ſucceſſor without ſuch (a) averment. For the action is not
maintainable againſt the ſucceſſor for any contract or grant
made by the Abbot only without covent, unleſs the effect or
conſideration thereof comes to the profit of the houſe. And
that ſuch general averment was good, for it would be too
long to ſhew all the cauſes ſpecially, and therefore againſt the
ſucceſſor he ought to take ſuch averment. But in an action
againſt the Abbot himſelf, who made the grant, it is not
neceſſary to take ſuch averment, as it is agreed there by the
whole court. And fo by theſe differences: 1. Between an
intereſt, or eftate veſted, and which is to be deveſted by
condition or matter ſubſequent, and a condition or matter,
which precedes the eſtate or intereſt. 2. Between a thing
in action which in judgment of law is to commence on a con-
dition or conſideration precedent, and intereſts or eſtates
which begin preſently. 3. When equal remedy is given to
both by reciprocal covenants. 4. When by matter apparent
the plaintiff's action ſhall not be maintained without averment,
although it be in the caſe of an eſtate or intereſt veſted, you
will the better underſtand your books, which ſeem prima facie
to diſagree, (c) 21 E. 4. 39. or 49 b. 22 (4) E. 4.43. a. 9
E. 4. 20. b. 37 H. 6.8. b. 36 H. 6. 2. b. Dyer 10 El. 270.
in Avowry, and 15 El. Dyer 329 in Debt. And note, the ſaid
Ughtred had judgment in the Common Pleas. Quod prediftus
Henricus recuperet verſus prefatum nunc Marchionem, annuum
redditum prædictum & arreragia tjuſdem tamdiu ante diem impe-
trationis brevis original* ipſius Henrici, quam paſtea incurſa, &
damna ſud occaſione ſubtractionis annui redditus predia ad decem
libras, eidem Henrico ex aſſenſu ſuo per curiam hic adjudicat.
Jo quidem arreragia & damna in toto ſe attingunt ad 402 libr.
t prædictus nunc Marchio in miſer icordia.


EN GL E-


#


(a) Jenk. Cent,
260. 261. DoR,


pl. 92.


(Cr. EI. 546.
Doct. pl. 92.


(c) Br.Count72,
Br. annuity 38.
DoR. pl. go.
(d. Hard. 10.


Doc. pl. 90, gt-


_—C— Q =rz 2 „„ „„ „„
* —_— " q -
* — T
"I. * — — —


. — 5
—


— TT „ «„ 2
- 2 —
—


8 *
= M._


* —
M


Part VII.


n ©. _


ä


ENGLEFIELD's Caſe.
Mich. 33 & 34 Eliz.


In the Exchequer.


2 the Queen and Margaret Englefield, Francis
Englefield, and others, in an information upon intru-
. ſion in the Exchequer, which began Trin. 32 El. the caſe in
305. 4 Leon, effect was ſuch, Sir Fr. Englefield ſeiſed of the manor of En-


1And. 293, 294.


NR, Rep. 142. Jan. 18 El. between bim and the ſaid Fran. his nephew,


23, 324, 420. Covenanted for the advancement of his blood, Sc. to ſtand


. ſeiſed to the uſe of himſelf for life, and afterwards to the uſe


135, 136, 137. ger in the county of Berks in fee, by indenture dated 2


lat. 19, 180, Of bis ſaid nephew, and the heirs males of his body, and after-


Palm. 437, 438, Wards to the uſe of the right heirs of the nephew. And it
4392 was further contained in the ſame indenture, that becauſe his
— 15 — nephew was an infant, ſo that his proof was not then ſeen,
Skin. 603, 604. and becauſe the uncle did not think convenient to ſettle the
1 Mos. 16, 38. ſaid inheritance in the nephew abſolutely, ſo long as the uncle
ſhould live, without a bridle to reſttain him, if atter he ſhould
be prodigal, or ſhould be given to intolerable vices ; for this
cauſe it was provided, that if the uncle by himſelf, or by any
other during his natural life, deliver or offer to the nephew a
gold ring, to the intent to make void the uſes, that. then all the
2 Roll.Rep.391. the uſes ſhould be void. Hil. 26 El. Sir Fr. was indicted in the


1 Vent. 1 29.


\ Latch 28. Palm. King's Bench by a jury of Middleſex for treaſon committed at


438. 1Jones136, Nemures in Hanonia in partibus tranſmarinis, 20 Octob 18
El. upon which indictment he was outlawed, and aſterwards
8 Aug. 28 El. the Queen by patent under the great ſeal did
leaſe the land to Foſter and f itton, two of the defendants for
40 years, and alſo demiſed to them for 40 years, omnes
& /ſingulos boſcos, ſubboſcos, arbores, & terras buſcales : and
afterwards at the Parliament 29 Oct. 28 El. the attain-
der was confirmed. And further it was enacted, that
he ſhould be attainted of high treaſon, and ſhould forfeit to
the Queen all his manors, lands, tenements, &c. the day of
the treaſon committed, or at any time after, and that the
{ame ſhould be in the actual poſſeſſion of the Queen without
ofhice. But further it was provided, by the ſaid act, that
nothing therein ſhould extend to make void any leaſe of land,
or gilt of goods made by the Queen under the great ſeal, or
Exchequer-ſeal, after the treaſon committed, &c. And at the

29 El, cap. 3. fame Parliament another act was made, by which it was
enacted, That every perſon and perſons which hath, or
« claimeth to have any eſtate or intereſt, of, in, or out of any
&« land of any of the perſons attainted ſince 18 Eliz. not

„ inrolled


\


Part VII: Encrerretd's Caſe, |


« jnrolled of record, not certified into the Exchequer, made
« ſince 1 El. by any of the perſons attainted fince 18 El. of
« treaſon, for conſpiring of the Queen's death (as the ſaid
« treaſon of Sir Fr. Englefield was) within two years after the


« laſt day of this ſeſſion of Parliament, ſhall openly ſhew, and


&« bring forth into the Q's Majeſty of the Court of Exche-
« quer, the ſame, his, or their grant, conveyance, and aſſur-
« ance, and there, in the term time, in open court, the ſame
© ſhall offer and exhibit, or upon his or their oath, affirming
te that they have not the ſame, nor can come by it, or that it
© was never put in writing, then the effect thereof to be en-
«* tered and inrolled of record, or elſe every ſuch conveyance
« and afſurance thould be void and of none effect to all in-
« tents an purpoſes: ſaving to every perſon and perſons (other
than parties and privies to ſuch conveyance, and ſuch as
& ſhail not exhibit the ſaid conveyance according to the true
i meaning of this act) all ſuch right, &c.” And afterwards, 17
Mar. 31 El. the Q. by her letters patent under the great ſeal,
reciting the uſes and the proviſo of tendering of a ring, and
that the benefit and advantage of the ſaid condition 1s given to
her by the ſtatute of this realm, did depute, authoriſe, and in
her place and perſon put R. Broughton and H. Bouchier,
jointly and ſeverally to deliver or offer the ring of gold to En-
glefield the nephew, to the intent to make void the uſes in the
indentures ; and that they ſhould certify into the Exchequer,
what they ſhould do in the premiſes. Broughton and Bouch.
8 Mar, 31 EI. offer the ring (and read to him the patent) to
the ſaid Fran. the nephew, which he refuſed : all which ſacts,
with the patent they certified into the Exchequer 19 Mar, 31
El. and the life of Sir Fran. was averred, &c. And the def.
were charged for intruſion 20 Mar. 31 El. and with the cut-
ting of certain trees of elm and aſh, and certain under-
woods. And in this caſe, after many arguments at bar, and
upon open argument at bench theſe points were reſolved :
1. The Queen as tenaut pur auter vie, made a leaſe for 40
years; although the Queen (having only an eſtate pur auter
vie) could not abſolutely contract for a leaſe for 40 years,
E without any recital or mention of the eſtate for life, the
eaſe is good; for the leaſe for years is in judgment of law
leſs than the leaſe pur auter vie, and the Queen doth not
any wrong or prejudice to any by the demiſe, and is not de-
ceived in her grant; for in judgment of the law it is a leaſe


Moor 3214


for 40 years, if celui que vie ſhall ſo long live, but if the


Queen had granted a greater eſtate than ſhe lawfully
might, as an eſtate in tail,- or in fee, there becauſe ſhe could
not lawfully do it, ſhe was deceived, and by conſequence
her grant void. See now the cafe of Alton Woods, in the Firſt
Part of my Reports. And it was ſaid, that it the Queen grants
titum ſlatum ſuum (having a term, or eſtate for lite, extent,
or other particular eſtate) it is good enough; for the

Vor. IV. Queen


1 Co, 50. b. E e


|

:
l
l
1.
'F
|

l

l

|

l
7
1
14
=
\


„ Sen „ 5
2 Sm — —


—
*
-


<= 2


5 „


— —


E. -
— 4
- -


R =
7 * My. _


|


— — —
— —


— . ⏑ 7
— — = =
- -


——— : r e ———————


(a) 5 Co. 58. b.
1 Co. 44. b. 52. b.
Dav. 75. a. b.
11 Co. 72. a.

2 Inſt. 681.

Co. Lit. 19. b.
13 E. 4. 8. a.
Plowd. 246. b.
487. b. Cr. Ar-
gument 60,

1 Roll. Rep. 167.
Noy 182.

Moor 416.
Godb. 317.


(5) Vaugh. 180.
33 H. 6. 55. b.
7 Co. 13. b.
Calvin's caſe.
Co. 39. a.
Plow, 294. a.
2 Iuſt. 234.
Br. Gard. 6.
Br. Forfeit. 70.
Co. Lit. $4. b.


tion, altho' the condition be given to the


ExcLETIEIp's Caſe. Part VII.


Queen doth not grant more than ſhe may do by the law, nor


doth any (a) wrong, or make any alteration of any eſtate by her
grant. And it was objected, that this condition ſhould not be
given to the Q. by the ſtat. of 32 H. 8. c. 20. for three rea-
ſons : 1. This condition is annexed to Sir Francis with ſuch in-
ſeparable privity, that it cannot be given to another, for in this
caſe the ſubſtance of the condition is the intent and mind of
Sir Fran. but becauſe his intent and mind cannot appear with-
out an overt act for this cauſe the ring ſhall be tendered as
a declaration of his intent, which was inward and ſecret to
himſelf, ſo that the tender of the ring is only the outward ce-
remony, but the ſubſtance of the condition is the mind and will
of Sir Fran. which cannot be transferred to another. Alſo in
this caſe nature is made judge, for the uncle is to judge of the
quality and diſpoſition of the nephew, and whether he gives his
uncle cauſe to revoke or diſannul his eſtate; and therefore as
natural love and affection cannot be transferred to another, ſo
this conveyance, of which natural love and affection is the
cauſe of the creation of it, and the judge of the determination
of it cannot be revoked or determined by any other; and all
this agrees with the reaſon of the com. law; for the (b) ward-
ſhip of the eldeſt fon, which the law of nature gives the father,
is inſeparable, and cannot be forfeited or transferred to an-
other, as it is agreed in 33 H. 6. And homage anceſtrel is in-
ſeparable, becauſe it is annexed to the blood of the lord and the
tenant. 2. By the general words of the act of 33 H. 8. con-
ditions ſeparable, and which may be performed by others, and
not inſeparable, are given to the K. as appears by divers caſes
founded on general acts of Parliament here put, and after a-
greed. 3. It was objected, that this _—_ a collateral condi-

fc. the benefit of
it, if it be performed, yet the performance of it is not given to
the K. by the ſaid act and therefore Sir Francis ought to
render the ring, and not the Q. And therefore ſuppoſe that


the condition had been, if the Ch. Juſt. of England for the


te) 9 Co. 78. a,
79.3, 1Roll.455,
456. 2 Brownl.


131. 1Roll Rep.
296,297. Cr. El.
46, 193, zog,
458. 3 Bulſt.
148,149. Co. Lit.
212. b. Perk.
145, b. 146. a.
Hob. 178. Palm.


550.
95 Latch. 71.


Palm. 435.
Q de hoc,


time being, ſhall tender a ring after the attainder of Sir Fran-
cis, the Q. cannot tender it; and the reaſon of the books in
12 H. 4. 2. & 9 H. 7. 17 & 20. 4 H. 8. Dyer 1, &c. was
urged, where collateral (c) conditions cannot be altered, and
other things taken in ſatisfaction of them between the ſame
parties, @ fortior; here, for here the perſon, who by ex-
preſs words ought to perform the condition ſhall be changed.
As to the firſt and ſecond objections, Manwood Chief Baron,
and the whole court held, that the whole force and effect of
the condition in the caſe at bar did conſiſt on the tender of
the ring; and the other matter of the reaſon and cauſe,
which moved and induced him to leave the faid power and
bridle in himſelf, was not any parcel of the provifo, but a
(4) flouriſh (as he termed it) and preamble, and nothing
is paicel of the condition but that which comes after the

provilo,


r % 0 C0 RU. 9


* 6 %F — we we


Part VII. ENGLEFIEED's Caſe,


proviſo, and that is the tender of the ring. And as to thaf,
the ſaid difference was taken and agreed by the whole court,
eil. between conditions which are perſonal and individual,
and cannot be performed by any other; and conditions which
are not ſo inſeparably annexed to the perſon but that they
may be performed by any other ; as it was reſolved in the
caſe of Tho. D. of (a) Norfolk, who in anne 11 El. conveyed
his lands to the uſe of himſelf for life, and afterwards to the
uſe of Philip E. of Arundel his eldeſt fon in tail, with di—
vers remainders over, with proviſo, that it he ſhould be
minded to alter and revoke the ſaid uſes, and ſhould Ggnit
his mind in writing under his proper hand and ſeal, and ſub-
ſcribed by three credible witnefles, that then, &c- And at-
terwards the ſaid Duke was attainted of high treaſon, that
this provifo or condition was not given to the Queen by the
faid act of 33 H. 8. becauſe the performance of it was (%) per-
ſonal and inſeparably annexed to his perſon, that is to lay, to
ſignify bis mind by writing under his own proper band, which
none could do but the Duke bimſelf: upon which point all
the poſſeſſions of the dukedom ſo conveyed ut ſupra were
ſaved, and not forfeited by the attainder. 53 H. 6 56. The
Templars held divers of their poſſeſſions in (c) frankalmoign
(which tenure, as Littleton ſaith, is annexed in privity to the
blood of the donor), and afterwards they were diſſolved, and
by Parliament, anno 17 Ed. 2. their poſſeſſions were given to
the Hoſpitalers, to hold them in the ſame manner as the Tem-
plars held, yet they by thoſe general words ſhould not hold
in frankalmoign, becauſe the privity of the tenure on the
part of the tenant doth not continue, aud this privity being
perſonal and inſeparable, by the general words of the act, was
not transferred to the Hoſpitalers. The fame law of an im-
propriation of a church, which alſo is an incident inſeparable
to the religious houſe to which the church is impropriate. And
therefore it is adjudged in P. 3 Ed. 3. (4) that the Hoſpitalers
by the ſaid act of 17 Ed. 2. ſhould not have the impropri-
ation, for it was inſeparably annexed to the corporation of
Templars, which thing conſiſting in inſeparable privity by
general words of an act of Parliament ſhould not be transſer—
ted to others. So was it ac judged Trin. 25. El. in the Mar-
ques of Wincheſter's caſe, ( which ſec in the { hird Vart of my
Rep. 2.) that by the general words of all hereditaments, &c.


a writ of (e) error which a perſon attainted had was not given


to the King; for a writ of error is a writ which liech in pri-


vity. And the Chief Baron ſaid, that he never ſaw in any


act of attainder (J actions which belonged to the perſon at-
tainted given to the King. In the time ot H. 8. Br. Corodie
3- it 18 held, that a (z) founderthip, which allo is a thing
annexed inſeparably to the blood of the founder, ſhould
not be forfeited by attainder, vide L. 5. Ed. 4. But in
the caſe at bar, the condition, ſci, the tender of the

G 2 ring


13


(a) Latch. 107.
1 Mod. Rep. 17
38.40. Hob. 343.
1 Vent. 12.

2 Roll.Rep.3gr,
394. Latch. 27,


Y 29, 69, 70, 71,


103 Palm. 435.
O. Benl. 39.

1 Jones 77, 2359
739. Styles 196,


(2) Palm. 119.


(e) Latch. 69,71.
Lit. ect. 141,
Co Lit. 99. a.

3 Co. 3. b.
Moor 312, 322.
35 H. 6. 56. d.
57. a. Moor 163.


(4) 3 E. 3. 11. b.
pl. 1. 3 Co. 3. b.
Moor 530, 531.
Fitz. Grants 0.
Plowd. $01.
Leon. 17.

(e) 4 Leon. 17.
173, 174. Moor
323. Latch. 30,
6g. O. Benl. 129.
2 Toll Rep. 3 19,
324, 374.

I Leon. Rep. 371,
372. Moor 125.
Lit. Rep. 100.
Cro, El. 389.
Owen 21,

3 Co. 2. a. 3. b.
1 Jones 77.

(/) Hob. 341.
2 Roll. Rep. p.
325, 420, 501.
(z) Co. Lit. 99.
a. b. Moor 322.
4 Leon. 133-4
11 Co. 77. b.


—— —


— —


— - — —


;

l

| |
0

|
;
|
|
U
| |
|
|
!


EnGLtriely's Cafe, Part VII.


ring is not annexed to the perſon of Sir Francis, but any
other may do it as well as himſelf. The ſame law of payment
of moticy, delivery of gold ſpurs, or other like. As to the
third objeQtion it was reſolved, that when the ſtatute gives
the condition to the Queen, that the performance thereof
(which is not perſonal, and inſeparable) is alſo given to the Q.
as incident to it: for the performance is the ſubſtance and the
effect of the condition; and the ſtatute puts the King in the
place of the perſon attainted, to do that for the performance
of the condition, which is feafible, and which is not inſepa-


| Fably annexed to the perſon of him who is attainted. 4. It


a) Co. Lit. 272. b.
1 Fo. 121. a.

1 Mod. Rep. 39.
1 Anderſ. 318.
Plowd. 352. b.


Poph. 71.


® 27 H. 8. cap.
20.


(5) 13 Co. 56.


<Q 2 Roll. 78 Ho


lowd. 309. d.


was objected, that altho' the condition ſhould be given to the
Q and the performance of it alſo, yet the leafe ſhould not be
void, for the eſtate for life of Sir Francis was not ſubject to
the condition. For an (a) uſe at the com. law was a truſt and confi-
dence repoſed in one perſon, that another perſon ſhould have
the profits, ſo that there ought to be a ſeparation of the poſ-
ſeſhon and of the uſe, either by covenant, or feoffment, fine,
or other conveyance, by which there is a tranſmutation of
the poſſeſhon : but in our cafe he himfelf ſtood ſeiſed to the
uſe of himſelf for life, which could not be as an uſe, for he
himſelf is terre-tenant and there is not any ſeparation of the
poſſeſſion, and it is not any truſt or confidence, and he could.
not have a ſubpœna againſt himſelf before the ſtatute ; and the
ftat. of ® 27 H. 8. doth execute the poſſeſſion to him only who
hath an uſe, and who had not a poſſeſſion before; but Sir
Francis in our caſe had the poſſeſſion before, and there -
fore the ſtatute cannot give poſſeſſion to him, but his eſtate
for life was parcel of his old eſtate. And note, the ſta-
tute of 27 H. 8. faith, to the uſe of (5) another perſon,
&c. fo that another perſon ought to have the uſe, than he
who hath the poſſeſhon. And vide 30 H. 8. Feoffments
al Uſes Br. 47. Ceſtuy que uſe in tail before the ſtat. was en-
feoffed by the feoffees ; and afterwards the ſtat. of 27 H. 8.
was made, the ſtat. ſhall not give him a poſſeſſion in tail ac-
cording to the uſe, becauſe he had the poſſeſſion before, becauſe
there was not any ſeparation of the uſe and poſſeſſion at the
time of the making of the ſtat. And then if the eſtate for
life be parcel of his old eſtate, it is not ſubject to the ſaid pro-
viſo or condition, and by conſequence by the performance of
the condition the eſtate for life is not defeated, and then the
leaſe for 40 years, which is derived out of it, remains good, But
It was reſolved by the court, that Sir Francis had the eſtate
for life by the limitation of the uſe, and the operation of the
ſtatute of 27 H. 8. And they much relied upon the reaſon
and rule of Bainton's caſe in Plow. Com. that a man for the
advancement (c) of his heirs males, may covenant to ſtand
ſeiſed to the uſe of himfelf and the heirs of his body, in that
Cale thece is no ſeparation of the poſſeſſion and uſe, and E


Part VII. ENnGLEFIELD's Caſe,


the ſtatute doth create an eſtate in tail in poſſeſſion in him, in
which caſe the whole eſtate-tail is in himſelf : but that is for
the benefit of the heir male, altho' he is in future, and not in
pre/enti, for none can know who ſhall be his heir male, for(a)
Solus Deus facit heredes, non homo. But in this caſe it is for the
benefit of the nephew in pre/enti to have the uſes raiſed accord-
ing to the ſaid indentures. $5. It was objected, that altho' the
eſtate for life be defeated by the condition, yet the Q. ſhould
not avoid her own leaſe; for when the Q hath an eſtate for
the life of another, and alſo a condition ia her by the ſtatute
of 33 H. 8. and ſhe makes a leaſe for years, altho' the Q. doth
perform the condition, ſhe ſhall not avoid the leaſe. As it in
ſuch caſe a common perſon had had the eftate for life, and the

ueen the condition, and the common perſon had made a
leaſe of the land, and the Q. had confirmed it, and afterwards
the condition is performed, yet the (%) leaſe is good. And if
the mortgagee makes a leaſe for years, and the mortgageor con-
firms it, and afterwards the condition is performed, the leaſe
ſhall not be avoided. And Arden's caſe was cited Tenant
in (c) tail makes a leaſe for life, now he hath gained a new tee
by wrong, and afterwards he grants a rent-charge or makes a
leaſe for years, and afterwards tenant for liſe dies, he ſhall not
avoid his charge or leaſe, altho* he be in of another eſtate, be-
cauſe he had a defeaſible poſſeſſion, and ancient right, the
which, iſ they be in ſeveral hands, ſhould be good; as the
leaſe of one, and the confirmation of the other, and being in
one hand ſhall be as much in judgment of law. Note, the
leaſe is the ſtronger caſe than the charge, 11 H. 7. 21.a. E-
drich tenant in tail made a feoffm. to his uſe upon condition,
and afterwards upon his recognizance the land 1s extended by
the ſtat, of 1 R. (4) 3. and afterwards he performed the condi-
tion, yet the intereſt of the conuſee ſhall not be avoided, and
yet the eſtate is changed cauſa gud ſupra. And all that was at-
firmed by the court. But as to that it was reſolved, that the de-
miſe of the Q ſhould not enure (to her ſpecial prejudice) to
(e) two intents, ſcil. to a demiſe of the land, and alſo to a
ſuſpenſion of her condition, by which ſhe might defeat the
eſtate for life, and the other eſtates as it ſhould in the caſe of a


common perſon, or to a demiſe in reſpect of her preſent.


eſtate for the life of another, and alſo to a confirmation in
reſpect of her condition; by which otherwiſe ſhe might
defeat the whole, as it ſhould be alſo in the caſe of a com-
mon perſon. For the grant of the Queen ſhall be taken
according to her expreſs intention comprehended in her
grant, and ſhall not extend to any other thing by conſtruc-
G 3 tion


14


a) Roll. 786.
% Lit. 4
21. 56. 4.


Co. Lit. 301. fi.


(5) Moor 325.
2 Roll.Rep. 320,
340. Godb. 311,


314, 323.


(e) Moor 28.
Poph. * 8
1 Co. 147. b, |
Co. Lit. 343. 2.
349. a. Br. Con-
dition 249.

2 Roll. Rep. 320.


Poph 150. b.


* Co. 56. a. P


ExGLEFIEtD's Caſe. Part VII.


tion or implication, which doth not appear by her grant that
her intent did extend to. And therefore in ſuch caſes the
Queen ought to be truly informed, and ſhe ought to make a
ſpecial and particular grant, which by expreſs words may enure
to all ſuch ſeveral intents as are deſired; as 17 E. 3 39. An
advowſon held of the King is aliened to an Abbot 3 now the
King hath title to the advowſon tor the mortmain, and atter-
wards the King by his letters patent grants to the Abbot that
he may hold the advowſon to his own uſe, yet he ſhall not oſe
the advantage of the mortmain, for when the King hath two
rights in him, he cannot exclude bimſelf of both without ſpe-
cial words, Vide 9 H. 7 14. Plow Com. 397, & And
if in this caſe the demite of the Queen ſhou]ꝗ amount to a con-
firmation by force of her condition, or it the dem ile ſhould
amount to a ſuſpenſion of the condition, then upon that it
would follow, that ſhe dur:ng the term could not pertorm the


condition, which would be very prejudicial to the Q 6. And


Doct. pl. 252,
370.


See Co. Lit. 74. a.


Latch. 71.
Moor 335.
Doct. pl. 3525
270.


33 H. 80 C. 20.1


as to the ſaid tender by force of the ſaid letters patent, and the
certificate thereof into the Exchequer, it was objected, that
the ſame would not be ſufficient, but the tender ought to be
found by ofhce, for although the letters patent are ot record,
yet the tender itſelf is matter in fact, which ought to be found
by office ; for the certificate of the Piſhop by force of the
King's writ, or of the Marſhal of the King's hoſt, as in 2 Ed.
4. 1. which and ſuch like, are not traveriable, but are trials
in law, and ſhall bind the parties. But in our caſe, if this
certificate, which is not made upon any ordinary courſe of
proceeding, ſhouid be good in law, it would be a great pre-
judice to the party; for no certificate, which is allowed and
warranted by the common Jaw, is traverſable; and then the
matter might be falſe, and the party diſfinherited, and yet he


ſhould not have any remedy, which would be very inconve-


nient. But it was reſolved by the whole court, that the tender
and certificate in this caſe was good enough, and that the
party grieved, if it be falſe, might traverſe the ſame, and
ſhould not be concluded by it, for it was not in the nature of
a trial, but of a record to inform and fatisfy the Queen of her
title. Alſo they reſolved, that preſently by the tender of the
ring according to the ſaid proviſo, or condition, the uſes were
determined and void in law, and by conſequence the land
veited in the Queen by force of the attainder, and of the
act of 33 H. 8. 7. It was objected, that the ſaid convey-
ance was void by the act of 28 Eliz. and then was Sir Fran-
cis at the time of his treaſon committed, and attainder
thereupon, ſeiſed of the ſaid lands in fee, which were

5 5 | lor-


*


Part VII. EncLEFlELD's Caſe.


forfeited to the Queen, and veſted in her by the ſaid act of
33 H. 8. and by conſequence, the ſaid leaſe made by the
Queen (being at the time of the making thereof ſeiſed in fee)
is good. And to prove that the conveyance was void by the
ſtatute before the ſaid tender of the ring, ſo that the eſtate was
not defeated by the condition, but the conveyance in which
the condition was contained made void by the act of 28 El.
before the ſaid tender of the ring, and betore the leaſe made;
the words of the ſtatute are, that every perſon, &c. © within
« two years after the laſt day of that ſeſſion, ſhall openly ſhew
« and bring forth into the Exchequer his conveyance, and
&« there in the term-time in open court ſhall exhibit, &c. the
« ſame to be entered and inrolled of record, &c.” And the
tender of the ring was the 18 Mart. anno 31. before which
day all the terms in the two years were paſt ; ſo that after Hi-
lary term paſt anno 31. it was not poſhble that the conveyance
ſnoula be enrolled within the 2 years in open court in term-time.
For the 2 years paſſed by effluction of time before Eaſter term;
and therefore preſently after Hilary term paſſed, the conveyance
was void; and by conſequence the condition alſo. And
thereupon the caſe in Temp. E. 1. Covenant 29. & F. N. B.
was put, that although the covenant be that he leave the
wood in as good plight, &c. at the end of the term, if the
lefſee cuts down the trees, the leſſor ſhall preſently have an
action of covenant, for it is not poſhble that he leave the trees,
&c. at the end of the term, fo that the impoſſibility of the act
ſhall give a preſent action upon a future covenant, But it
was reſolved by the Court, that at the time of the tender of
the ring the ſaid conveyance, and by conſequence the condi-
tion was in force. And their reaſon was, becauſe the ſtatute
doth not require that the inrollment of the conveyance, which
is the act of the court, ſhould be within the two years; but
the ſhewing and exhibiting thereof, which is the act of
the party, ought to be within the two years: ſor as to
the ſhewing and exhibiting of the conveyance, the words
are (“ within two years, &c. ſhall, &c. there in the term-
time in open court exhibit the fame”) then the next words
following are, (“ to be entered and enrolled of record”) fo
that no time is limited when it ſhall be enrolled ; but if the
words had been, (“ and then and there ſhal]! be entered and
inrolled of record”) then the conveyance ought to have been
enrolled within the two s: but as the words are, it ma
be enrolled after the two years paſt. And this was the firſt
caſe (that I know) that was argued and adjudged on the ſaid act
of 33 H.8. which gives conditions of perſons attainted of treaſon
to the K. And in the argument of this caſe, the cafe of T. Marken-
feld Eſq. an. 19 El. in the Excheq. and divers other caſes of perſons
attainted of treaſon, who had power of revocation were cited:
G4 and


15


Moor 446.


5 Co. 21. 2.

F. N. B. 145. k.
Moor 313. 323.
2 Roll. Rep.
332» 347
Godb. 333.


—


3 Roll. Rep, 30.


The Caſe of Swans. Part VII.


and on conſideration of them by the Barons, they reſolved ut
fubra, and gave judgment for the Queen But the couniel


of Francis Englefield were not ſatisſied with the judgment,


and chiefly as to this principal point : for they conceived, that
as this caſe is, the condition was ſo inſeparably annexed to the
perſon of Sir Francis, that it was not given to the Queen by
the ſaid aCt of 33 H.8. And their advice was to bring a writ
of error. But at the next Parliament, cl. 35 Eliz. a ſpecial
act of Parliament was made to eſtabliſh the forteiture to the


Queen.


The Caſe of SW ANS.
Trin. 34 Eliz.


ETWEEN the Queen, and the Lady Joan Young, late
the wife of Sir John Young, Knight, deceaſed, and Tho-
mas Saunger defendants, the caſe was ſuch: an office was
found at W. in the county of Dorſet, 18th of September ann.


32 El. before Sir Matthew Arundel and other commiſſioners


of the Queen under the great ſeal, Puod a villa de Abbotſbury,
in præd com Dorſet, uſque ad mare per inſulam de Portland in
eodem com* eft quædam aftuaria, Anglice a mere or fleet, in
quam mare fluit & refluit, in qua quidem æſtuaria ſunt 500 cigni,
quorum 410. ſunt albi, & 90 ſunt cignetti, & quod omnes præ-
dicti cigni of cignetti ſunt in poſſeſſine J. Young & Tho. Saunger,
& quod quilibet eorem eft valoris 25 6d. quodgue major pars tem-
pore captionis diftg inquiſitionis minime fuer fignat': which of-
fice being certified into the Exchequer, a writ was ditect-
ed to the Sheriff of the fame county to ſeiſe all the
ſaid white ſwans not marked, by force whereof the She-
riff returned that he had ſeiſed four hundred white ſwans,
tw which afterwards, /ci/, Hilary 34 Eliz. the _
, | a 822 oan


Part VII. The Cafe of Swans. 16


Joan Young and Tho. Saunger pleaded ; Duod præd aſtua-
ria five aqua, jacet in paroch de Abbotsbury in com. Dorſet (and
abucted it) and that before the inquiſition taken, the Abbot of
Abbotſbury was ſeiſed de præd' e/tuaria, & de ripis & ſolo
zjuſdem in fee, and that at the time of the inquiſition, and
time out of mind, fuit & adhuc eft quidam volatus cig:orum &
cignettor” feror', vocat' a game of wild ſwans, in e/tuaria ſerve
aqua illa, & ripis, & ſolo gzuſdem midificant', gignen' et freguen-
tant” Anglice haunting, de quo quidem volatu cignor I cignettor',
pred” Abbas et omnes predeceſſores ſui Abbates monaſlerii pret',
per totam tempus predift' habuere & gaviſi fuer unt, et habere et
gaudere conſueverunt, tot” profic et increment” omnium et ſingulor”
cignor et cignetior feror', in &/tuaria bred” nidificant', gignen' et
frequent” qui qui lem cigni et cignetti per totum tempus pred” fue-
runt feræ nature, et infra idem tempus iidem cigni et cagnetti ſeu
esrum aliqui aliqus fizno non uſt fuiſſent, nec conſueviſſent ſignari,
niſi quod præd nuper Abbas et prædec ſſores ſui pred” per totum
tempus pred” ad eorum libitum guoſd* ſeu aliquos de minorib' cig-
nettis annuatim pullulant” quos ad ufum et culing et hoſpitalitatis
ſue ſiatuerunt expendend', in hunc modum annuatim fignare con-
ſueverunt, et uſi fuerunt, viz amputare medium jundturam unius
alæ, Ang!" to cut off the pinion ot one wing, cajuſlibet talis cig-
netti, ed intentione, quod cignetti fic amputati minime valerent avo- |
lare. And afterwards the ſaid Abhot ſurrendered the premiſes |
to K H 8. who anno 35th of his reign granted to Giles (a) (a) Day. 57. 8. |
Strangways, Eſq. by his letters patent inter alia, totam illam li-

beram piſcariam naſir' in agua, vocat” the fleet in Abhotſbury

pred', ac omnia meſuag', aquas, piſcat' et cetera hereditam

noir quacungque in Abbotsbury, in dict com” Dorſet dif? nuper

monaſteria, fc. adeo plene et integre, &c et in tam amplis modo

et fo: ma, &c. and that the ſaid Giles died, and it deſcended

to Giles Strang ways his couſin and heir, who demiſed to the

defendants the ſaid game of ſwans for one year, &c. and pray-

ed quod manus dictæ dominæ Reginæ amoveantur. Upon which L
the Queen's Attorney did demur in the law. | |
I. It was reſolved, that all white ſwans not marked, which |
having gained their natural liberty, and are ſwimming in an

open and common river might be ſeiſed to the King's ule by his

prerogative, becauſe volatilia, (que ſunt fere nature) alia ſunt

regalia, alia communia : and ſo aquatilium, alta ſunt regalia, alia

communia: as a ſwan is a royal fowl; and all thoſe, the property

whereof is not known, do belong to the King by his preroga-

tive: and ſo („) whales and ſturgeons are royal fiſh and belong n of. ©


to the King by his prerogative. And there hath been an an- Stamf. Prætog. h
cient officer of the King's, called magi/ter deductus cignorum, 37. b. 3. a.


a 5 Co 108, b.
which 5. 315. b.


Fitz. Barr. 6.
Br. Eſtray Js.


3 Keb. 21%


The Caſe of Swans. Part VII,


which continues to this day. But it was reſolved alſo, that the
ſubject might have property in white ſwans not marked, as
ſome may have ſwans not marked in his private waters, the
property of which belongs to him, and not to the King; and if
they eſcape out of his private waters into an open and common
river, he may bring them back and take them again. And
therewith agreeth Bracton, ib. 2. c. 1. fol. 9, Si autem anima-
lia fera facta fuerint manſueta, et ex conſuetudine eunt et redeunt,
volant et revolant, (ut ſunt cervi, cigni, pavones, et columbæ, et
hujuſmodi) eouſque noſira intelligantur quanidiu habuerint animum
revertendi. But if they have gained their natural liberty, and
are ſwimming in open and common rivers, the King's officer
may ſeiſe them in the open and common river for the King:
for one white ſwan without ſuch purſuit, as aforeſaid, cannot
be known from another, and when the property of a ſwan
cannot be known, the ſame being of its nature a fowl royal,
doth belong to the King ; and in this caſe the book of 7 H.
6. 27. b. was vouched, where Sir John Tiptoft brought ah ac-
tion of treſpaſs for wrongful taking of his ſwans ; the defen-
dant pleaded that he was ſeiſed of the lordſhip of 8. within
which lordſhip, all thoſe whoſe eſtate he hach in the ſaid lord-
ſhip, had had time out of mind, all eſtraies being within the
ſaid manor ; and we ſay that the ſaid ſwans were eſtraying at
the time in the place where, &c. and we as landlords did
ſeiſe and make proclamations in fairs and markets, and ſo ſoon
as we had notice that they were your ſwans, we delivered
them to you at ſuch a place. The plaintiff replied that he was
ſeiſed of the manor of B. joining to the lordſhip of S. and we
ſay, that we and our ancelltors, and all thoſe, &c. have uſed
time out of mind, to have ſwans ſwimming through all the
lordſhip of S. and we ſay, that long time before the taking we
put them in there, and gave notice of them to the defendant
that they were our ſwans; and prayed his damages. And the
opinion of Strange there was well approved by the court, that
the replication was good: ſor when the plaintiff may lawfully
put his ſwans there, they cannot be eſtraies, no more than the
cattle of any can be eſtraies in ſuch place where they ought to
have common; becauſe they are there where the owner hath
an intereſt to put them, and in which place they may be
without negligence or laches of the owner. Out of which
caſe, theſe points were obſerved concerning ſwans. I. That
every one who hath ſwans within this manor, that is to
ſay, within his private waters, hath a property in them,
for the writ of treſpaſs was of wrongful taking his ſwans.
ſcil. Quare cignos, ſuos, c. 2. That one may preſcribe to
have a game of ſwans within his manor, as well as a
warren, or park. 3. That he who hath ſuch a game of
ſwans may preſcribe, that his ſwans may ſwim within the
manor


Part VII. The Caſe of Swans. 17


manor of (a) another. 4. That a ſwan may be an eſtray, and ſo (a) 3 Keb. 275-
cannot any other fowl, as I have read in any book, In (3) 2 R. z.
15. b. & 16. a. The Lord Strange and Sir John Charlton brought (60 Cr. El. 275,
an action of treſpaſs againſt three, becauſe the defendants had ta-
ken and carried away 40 cygnets of the plaintiff's in the county
of Bucks, to his damages of 101. One of the defendants pleaded,
that the water of the Thames ran through the whole realm, and
that the county of Buckingham 1s adjoining to the Thames, and
that the cuſtom of the ſaid county of Buckingham is, and hath
been time out of mind, that every ſwan (for cignet in the book is
taken for a ſwan) which hath its courſe in any water, which wa-
ter runs to the Thames within the ſame county, that if any ſwan
comes on the land of any man, and there builds. and hath cignets
on the ſame land, that then he who hath the property of the ſwan
ſhall have two of the cignets, and he who hath the land ſhall have
the third cignet, which ſhall be of leſs value than the other two;
and that was adjudged a good cuſtom, becauſe the poſſeſſor of the Cro, El. 725,
land ſuffers them to build there, where he may drive them off.
And by this judgment it alſo appears, that a man may alledge a
cuſtom or preſcribe in ſwans or cignets And in the ſame cale it
is ſaid, that the truth of the matter was, tnat the Lora Strange
had certain ſwans which were cocks, and Sir John Charle:on cer-
tain ſwans which were hens, and they had cignets between them;
and for theſe cignets the owners did join in one action, for in ſuch
caſe by the general cuſtom of the realm, which is the common
law in ſuch caſe, the cignets do belong to both the owners in com-
mon equally, /©, to the owner of the cock, and the owner of the
hen; and the cignets ſhall be divided betwixt them. And the
law thereof is founded on a reaſon in nature; for the cock-ſwan
is an emblem or repreſentation of an affectionate and true huſ-
band to his wife above all other fowls; for the cock iwan hold-
eth himſelf to one female only, and for this cauſe nature hath con-
ferred on him a gift beyond all others; that is, to die ſo joyfully,
that he ſings ſweetly when he dies; upon which the poet ſaith ;


Dulcia defecta modulatur carmina lingua,
Cantator, CYgnus, funerts zþſe ui, Sc.


And therefore this caſe of the ſwan doth differ from the caſe of 1
kine, or other brute beaſts. Yide 7 Hen. 4. 9. And it was |
agreed, that none can have a ſwan mark, which in Latin is called |
(cigninota) unleſs it be by the grant of the King, or of his officers
authorized thereto, or by preſcription. And if he hath a lawful |
ſwan- mak, and hath ſwans ſwimming in open and common ri-
vers lawtully marked therewith, they belong to him ratione pri-
vilegii. But none ſhall have a ſwan- mark, or game of ſwans, un-
leſs ne hath lands or tenements of an eftate of freehold of the yearly
value of five marks, above all charges, on pain of forfeiture of his
ſwans, whereof che K. ſhall have one moiety, and he who ſeiſes ſhall
have the other moiety; and that is by the ſtat. of 22 Ed. 4. cap. 6.
And he who hath ſuch ſwan-mark may grant it over. And thereof I
haveſeen a notable precedent in the time of H. 6. hich is ſuch, aotum
fit ommnib hominib træſeutib' etfuturis, quodego F. Steward, miles, dedi et


couceſſi


The Caſe of SWANS. Part vn.


conceſſi Tho? fil meo primogenito & hæredib' ſuis, cigninat' meam
armor meor, prout in marg ine laterali pingitur, que mihi jure
hereditar* add poſ mori I Steward mil” patris met + habend
ſibi et heredit” ſuis, una cum omnib” cignis et cignicul cum dicla
nota baculi nodati fignat*, ſub condit'ꝰ quod quilib' feria ſolis durante
vita, a gula Auguſli uſque ad Carniſprivium apud dom meam de
Dar ford, unum cignicul bene ſignat mihi aut meis deliberet, quod
ft defecerit, tunc vol, quod hoc pi ſens chirographum caſſetur pe-
| nitus, et pro nibilo habeatur. In cuj rei teſlimon' ad inſtant
| 3 Inſt. 98, 109, MHatildæ uxor' mee, meum ſigil' ſecret Chriſit crucifix praſentil/
| f 110. feci apponi. Hiis teſtib“' R. Clerico, J. de Conyers, Alana Fabra,
= 3 et al dat. apud dom mcam manſional de Daf. in vigillia 5.

45, 854. Dunſt” ep" an regni Regis Hen peſi conqueſt” Anglie ſexti 14.

- Lit. 37. a. And in the margent was painted a little ragged ſtaff. And in

this caſe it was reſolved, that in ſome of them which are fere

| | nature, a man hath jus proprietatis, a right- of property, and
in ſome of them a man hath jus privilegts, a right of privilege,

, | And there are three manner of rights of property, /ci/ pro-
Dock. pl. 314. perty abſolute, property qualified, and property poſſeſſory. A
| man hath not abſolute property in any thing which is fere
nature, but in thoſe which are domite nature. Property qua-

lified and poſſeſſory a man may have in thoſe which are fere

nature, and to ſuch property a man may attain by two ways,

by induſtry, or ratione impotentiæ ct loci, by induſtry as by

taking them, or by making them man/ueta, i. e. manui aſſueta,

or domeſtica, i. e. domui aſſueta: but in thoſe which are fere

nature, and by induſtry are made tame, a man hath but a

qualified property in them, /cil. ſo long as they remain tame,

for if they do attain to their natural liberty, and have not ani-

mum revertendi, the property is loſt, ratione impotentiæ et loci:

as if a man has young ſhovelers or goſhawks, or the like,

which are ſeræ nature, and they build in my land, I have

poſſeſſory property in them, for if one takes them when they

cannot fly, the owner of the ſoil ſhall have an action of trel-

paſs, Quare boſcum ſuum fregit, et tres pullos eſpervor* ſuor', or

ardear* ſuar* pretii tantum, nuper in cod” boſco nidificant, cepit &

F. N. B. 86. M. aſportav' ; and therewith agreeth the Regiſt. and F. N. B. 86.
IR Gar. L. & 89. K. 10 Ed. 4. 14. 18 Ed. 4.8. 14 H. 8. 1. b. Stam.
| wi". a, 25. b. &c. vide 12 H. 8. 4. & 18 H. 8. 12. But when a man
F. N. B. 87. . hath ſavage beaſts ratione privilegii, as by reaſon of a park, war-
Co. Lit. 8. a ren, &c. he hath not any property in the deer, or conies, ot


„E . © . .
Os 2794 pheaſants, or partridges ; and thereſore in an action, Quart


Owen 20. parcum warrennum, &c. fregit et intrav', et 3. damas, leports,
Goldi. 129. cuniculos, phaſianos, perdices, cept et aſportavit, he ſhall not lay
1 8,6 (ſues) tor he hath no property in them, but they do belong
Cro. Jac. 46,47. to him ratione privil” for his game and pleaſure, ſo long 28


oy agg 34. they remain in the privileged place; for if the owner of the
3 Lev. 22


park dies, his heir ſhall have them, and not his executors ot


2 —x.
. 4 a 7 Fe. fas


le SS tee AT Leg «


Part VII. The Caſe of Swans: 2 13


inheritance, is not complete; nor can felony be committed 3 1n#. 98, 99,
of them, but of thoſe which are made tame, in which a man 799, 110.
by his induſtry hath any property, felony may be committed.

And therewith agrees the rule of the book in 3 H. 6. 55. b.

8 E. 4. f. b. 22 H. 6. 59. which is ill reported, and 43 E.

4. 24. vide 22 Af. 12 H. 8. 3. 13 El. Dyer 306. 38 E. 3.

10. Vide 2 E. 2. tit. Diſtreſs, 2 E. 2. Avowry 182. But a

man may have property in ſome things which are of ſo baſe 3 1:9. 109.
nature, that no felony can be committed of them, and no Stam. Cor, 25. b.
man ſhall loſe life or member for them, as of a blood-hound,

or maſtiff, moloſſus, 12 H. 8. 3. Vide 18 H. 8. 2. But he

who ſteals the eggs of ſwans out of the neſt, ſhall be impri-

ſoned for a year and a day, and fined at the will of the King ;

one moiety to the King, the other to the owner of the land

where the eggs were ſo taken, and that is by the flat. of 11

H. 7. cap. 17. And it hath been ſaid of old time, that he

who ſteals a ſwan in an open and common river, lawfully

marked, the ſame ſwan (if it may be) or another ſwan ſhould

be hung in a houſe by the beak, and he who ſtole it, ſhall in
recompence thereof be obliged to give the owner ſo much

wheat that may cover all the ſwan, by putting and turning

the wheat on the head of the ſwan, until the head of the

ſwan be covered with the wheat. And it was reſolved, that

in the principal caſe the preſcription was inſufficient ; for the

effect of the preſcription is to have all wild ſwans, which are

fere nature, and not marked, nidificant', gignent', et frequen-

tant, within the ſaid creek. And ſuch preſcription for a Wing. Max. 17.
warren would be inſufficient, ſcil. to have all pheaſants and
partridges, nidificantes, gignentes, and frequenting within his

manor. But he ought to ſay, to have free warren of them

within his manor : for although they are n:dificantes, gignentes,

and frequenting within the manor, he cannot have them jure
priuilegii, but ſo long as they are within the place. But it

was reſo ved, that if the defendants had alledged, that within

the ſaid creek there had been time out mind, a game of wild

ſwans not marked, building and breeding ; and then had pre-

ſcribed, that ſuch Abbot and all his predeceſſors, &c. had uſed

at all times to have and take to their uſe ſome of the ſaid game

of wild ſwans and their cignets within the ſaid creek, it had

been good ; for although ſwans are royal fowls, yet in ſuch

a manner a man may preſcribe in them; for that may have

a lawſul beginning by the King's grant: for in Rot. Parliam.

30 Ed. 3. part. 2. num. 20 the King granted to C. W.

all wild ſwans unmarked between Oxford and London for

ſeven years. In eodem Rot an 16 R. 2. p. 1. num? 39. the
like grant of wild ſwans unmarked in the county of Cambridge

to B. Bereford Kt. In eodem Rot an 1 H. 4. p. 6. num' 14.

A grant made to J. Fenn, to ſurvey and keep all wild ſwans
unmarked, ita quod de preſicus reſpondeat ad —

4 Y


..


Sir Tuomas Cxcir's Caſe. Part VII.


By which it appears that the King may grant wild ſwans un.
marked ; and by conſequence a man may preſcribe in them
within a certain place, becauſe it may have a lawful begin.
ning. And a man may preſcribe to have royal fiſh within
his manor, as it is held in 39 Ed. 3. 35. for the reaſon afore.
ſaid. And yet without preſcription they do belong to the
King by his prerogative.


Sir Thomas CEcirL's Caſe.


232333 Mich. 39 & 40 Eliz.
ir

2 In the Exchequer.
Fnw pe le .


ae p02
are we,


IR Thomas Cecil being ſeiſed of the manor of Strickſton
in the county of North. did enter into communication
with one Foſter to exchange divers parcels thereof with him
for certain lands which the ſaid Foſter had in the ſame town;
and before any exchange perfeCted, Sir Thomas did convey
the ſaid manor, and the ſaid land of the ſaid Foſter, by the
ſpecial name of the ſaid Foſter, by deed indented and in-
rolled, to Queen Elizabeth, her heirs and ſucceſſors, and
covenanted with the Queen, that he was ſeiſed as well of the
ſaid manor as of the ſaid land late Foſter's, of a good eſtate in
fee-ſimple, &c. and the Taid Sir Thomas was bound to the
Queen in an obligation of ten thouſand marks to perform the
ſaid covenant amongſt others. And the ſaid Sir Thomas had
before that time exhibited an Engliſh bill in the Exchequer-
chamber, containing the matter aforeſaid ; and that the ſaid
lands, parcel of the faid manor intended to be given in
exchange to Foſter, were of greater value than the ſaid land
of the ſaid Foſter, ſo that the Queen was not deceived in
the value; which lands parcel of the manor paſſed to the
Queen by the conveyance of the manor, and nevertheleſs
the covenant and obligation of the ſaid Sir Thomas as


to that was broken and forfeited by the ligour of the L
- 8 | A


Part VII. Sir Tnouas Cecir's Caſe.


19


But the ſaid Sir T. in his bill did rely on the flat, of 33 (a) H. (-) Herd. 25.


8. c. 39 by which it is enacted, ** That if any perſon of whom
« any ſuch debt or duty is, or at any time hereafter ſhall he
« demanded, alledge, plead, declare, or ſhew in any of the
« ſajd courts, good, perfect, and ſufficient cauſe, and mat-
« ter in law, reaſon, or good conſcience, in bar or diſcharge
« of the ſaid debt or duty, or why ſuch perſon or perſons
e ought not to be charged or chargeable to, or with the ſame,
ic and the ſame cauſe or matter ſufficiently prove in ſuch one
&« of the ſaid courts as he or they ſhall be impleaded, ſued,
« yexed, or troubled for the ſame, that then the ſai courts,
« and every of them, ſhall have full power and authority to
accept, judge, and allow the ſame proof, and wholly and
« clearly to acquit and diſcharge all and every perſon and
« perſons that ſhall be ſo pleaded, vexed, ſued, or troubled
« for the ſame, any thing in this preſent act before men-
« tioned to the contrary notwithſtanding, &c.” And that
proceſs was ſued againſt bim on the ſaid bond out of the court


of Exchequer. Upon which act of Parliament, and the mat-


ter aforeſaid (being as he ſuppoſed good, perfect, and ſuih-
cient cauſe and matter in reaſon, and good conſcience within
the ſaid act to diſcharge him of the ſaid bond) the ſaid vir T.


304, 368. 442.
4 inft, 118, 119.
2 Co. 12 b.
Poſtea 21. a. b,
Lane 51. 0.
Benl. 65, 66,
67. Lit. Rep.
87, 88.


by his ſaid bill prayed to be relieved, and thereupon he had a


commiſſion to examine witneſſes, to prove the: matter of his
bill to be true, which was returned and publiſhed. And upon
the hearing of the cauſe in court in the Exchequer-chamber,
it appeared by the teſtimony of divers witneiles, that the
plaintiff had made direct proof of all the parts of his bill. And
now in this term, 39 & 40 El. divers queſtions were moved


to the K. which he had not before, 2. If the court could
make a diſcharge by decree on this Engliſh bill within the
intention of the act. And as to the firſt, it is to be known,
that divers branches of the act are to be conſidered : 1. The
act makes all obligations to the K. in nature of a ſtatute ſtaple.
2. Another branch gives the ſuit to the K. although the obli-
gation had been made to another to the uſe of the King. 3.
That the King upon ſuit upon every obligation made or to be
made, ſhall recover damages and coſts. 4. 'The ſtat. gives
remedy to the K. for recovery of his debt or duty, &c. by Ca-
prias, Extend fac Subpœna, Attachment, and Proclamation of
Allegiance (if need be) or otherwiſe as to any of the courts it
ſhall by their diſcretions be thought expedient for the ſpeedy
recovery of the King's debts. 5. I here is a clauſe, that the K.
ſhall be preferred in his execution before common perſons.
b. The heir who claims by the gift of his anceſtor ſhall be
bound to pay the King's debt (due beſore or aſter the gift)


4 Iuſt. 118, 119,


See.
a 5 ie
touching this matter. 1. And the principal was, if the branch
of the act extended to any debt mentioned in the ſaid act, for
which the K. had remedy by the common law, or to ſuch


debts and ſuch caſes only for which the ſaid act gave a remedy


by


— —— —
. ͤ —— ——
-


ö
4


!


en


3 Co. 12. b.


8 Co. 171. 2.


Poſtea 21. b.


Hard. 304.


Hardr. 502.


Part VII.


by judgment, recognizance, obligation, or other ſpecialty,
and ſhall bind the land alſo to the King's debt againſt the iflue


Sir Thomas Cxcir's Caſe.


in tail; then comes the ſaid proviſo whereof the queſtion doth


ariſe, Provided always, and be it enacted, that if any perſon,
Sc. ut ſupra, And it was objected, that it ſhould extend
only to ſuch caſes in which remedy is given to the King by


this ſtatute, as where a bond was made to the uſe of the
| King, or to charging the iſſue in tail, or to charging the heir
who claims by gift before the debt accrued, &c. there becauſe


the ſtat gives the King a remedy which he had not before,
this branch gives the party ſo charged by this act, a plea to
diſcharge him, either be matter of bar in law, or in good
conſcience. And that was ſtrongly enforced by the conclu—
fon of this proviſo; for the concluſion is, (as it appeareth
before) “ any thing in this act before mentioned to the con-
« trary notwithſtanding ;” ſo that the ſenſe was, that the
party might take any matter in law or good conſcience, not-
withſtanding any thing contained in this act; which is as
much as to ſay, that this act ſhall be no impediment to it.


But in our caſe the King had a remedy by the common law,


and therefore this proviſo ſhould not help him. As to that it
was anſwered and reſolved by the court, that the ſaid Sir J.
Cecil on the matter aforeſaid was to be relieved by the aid of
this proviſo. For the ſaid act of 33 H. 8. hath given a benefit


and advantage to the King: 1. In making every bond made
to the King in nature of a ſtatute ſtaple. 2. In giving remedy


to the King himſelf for obligations made to others to his ule,
3. To recover coſts and damages. 4. In ſuing of execution for
all his debts. 5. In charging the iſſue in tail, and the heir
who hath the land of the gift of his anceſtor ; and therefore it


Was the intent of the act to gratity the ſubject, that where a


new proviſion was made for the levying of the King's debt in
a more ſpeedy and beneficial manner than the King had be-
fore, the ſubject alſo ſhould have ſome new benefit which he


had not before, and that was to diſcharge himſelf by matter


alledged to be a diſcharge in good conſcience : alſo this pro-
viſo doth not only give benefit to him who hath matter in
good conſcience, but alſo to him who hath ** good, perfect,
„and ſufficient cauſe and matter in law, reaſon, (and then
& comes) good conſcience:” and without queſtion the firſt
words, (cauſe and matter in law) ſhall extend to all the
King's debts and proceſs thereupon, as well at the common
law as upon this act. And the concluſion of the faid
branch makes not againſt it, for the ſenſe of it was, that he
might plead matter in law or good conſcience, and that no-
thing contained in the ſaid act ſhould be an impediment to
it. And ſoit was held in the like caſe on the like words, in
the 2d ſaving of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. of uſes in Chenie's 2

b where


part VII. Sir Tnouas Creil's Caſe.


YZ |


20


where the proviſo faves the right, &e. of, &c. As if the act 7 Co. 39. a.


had not been made; and there the caſe was, that the leſſor
did enfeoff the lefee to the uſe of others, in which caſe, if
the ſtatute had never been made, the term had been merged
at the common law. But Trin. 27 El. it was refolved, that
the term was ſaved, and the fame expoſition made of the
words as before. Alſo theſe notable precedents were cited,
which were reſolved in the Exchequer by the Barons of the
Exchequer, upon conference had with the two Chief Juſtices,
one in the caſe of Sir Will. Herbert in Prin. 37 El. who was
relieved on the ſaid branch of the ſaid act for matter in equity,
becauſe in a Scire facias againſt him as heir to Matthew Her-
bert his father on a recognizance acknowledged to K. E. 6.
by the ſaid Matt. the Sheriff returned Scire fecr, and upon his
default judgment was given, as you may fee in Matt. Her-
bert's caſe, in the Third Part of my Reports. And becauſe in
truth he was never ſummoned, and had good matter, if he
had notice thereof, to plead in diſcharge of the ſaid recog-
nizance, becauſe he had no land by deſcent from his father,
nor any land from him after the recognizance acknowledged,
all which he ſhewed in certain in an Engliſh bill in the Ex-
chequer-chamber; upon which, upon conference had by Sir
Rog. Manwood and the other Barons, with the two Chief
Juſtices, by decree he was diſcharged of the faid recognizance,
&c. Another caſe cited was, Tho. D. of Norf. was attainted
by parliament, anno 38 H. 8. And King E. 6. fold to Sir
Edw. Rous divers timber-trees growing upon the poſſeſſions
of the ſaid Duke in Suff. and Sir Edw. was bound in an ob—
ligation to King Ed. 6. for payment of certain money, at a
certain day for the ſaid trees, and before the day of payment,
and before the ſaid Sir Edw. cut down any of the ſaid trees,
Edw. 6. died. And at a Parliament held anno 1 Reg. Mar. it
was declared by Parliament that the ſaid attainder of the ſaid
Duke was void; for which cauſe the ſaid Sir Edw. could
never enjoy the ſaid trees according to his bargain : and in a
Scire facias in the Exchequer on the ſaid obligation again(t
the heir and terre-tenant of Sir Ed. aun 28 El. they appeared,
and pleaded all the ſaid matter in equity in bar an diſcharge
of the ſaid obligation in a Latin plea in the Exchequer.
And upon good conſideration of the ſtat. of 33 H. 8. by

the Barons, and of the ſaid Plea, at laſt (after it had de-
pended long) it was reſolved by the Barons, that the defen-
dants were to be relieved within the ſaid act; and that the de-
fendants might well plead it in bar. And thereupon Poph. the
Attorney-General, ſeeing the opinion of the court, ulterius
projequi nou vult. Both which precedents I ſhewed to the Juſ-
tices,and accordingly it was reſolved by all the Juſtices of Engl.
(who met together to give their opinions in the ſaid cafe) that
Sir Thomas Cecil was to be relieved upon the ſaid matter in
Vor. IV. H equity


Co. Lit 51.
Cro. Jac. 643.


3 Co. 15. b.


3 Co. 1 ö. b.


Ante 13. 3.


| Sir Tomas Crcru's Caſe. Part VII.


equity within the purview of the faid branch of 33 H. 8.

| And 2dly, that the court of Exchequer-chamber might well

upon the ſaid Engliſh bill (although the ſuit was by proceſs

at the common law in the court of Exchequer before the

| a Barons) make a decree in the caſe; for to this purpoſe they

are but one court. Then it was moved, if the next proviſo

next following aſter the branch concerning the equal charging

of land liable to the King's debt in the hands of every owner

and poſſeſſor, that ſome of them ſhould not be charged only,

| but all entirely, if that extends to' all the King's debts ; and

| to all executions for the levying of them as well at the com-

mon law as on the ſaid act. And it was reſolved by them,

that the ſaid branch did extend to all executions for the King's

debts, as well at the common law as on the ſaid act; and

+ that all ſhould be equally extended by force of that branch

according to the purview of that act. It was alſo reſolved,

that although the obligation was made for performance of

covenants, yet after that it was broken, (as it was in the cale

Hard. 368, 442. at bar at the time of ſealing and delivery thereof) that it was a
| debt to the King by obligation within the act.


— - — — — — — — —


5 ämJQ— ——— ͥꝙ ——— —fä——.
— — — . — —


——


— — — . ub Aga dS AIDS —


— —— ——


— - ———
— _— = — 2
— , — 7


— Am —
— ——


* ——— —


— — — —


— 2 * — —— —


Part VII.


—5i—
—


—


The Lord ANDERSON's Caſe.


In the Exchequer.
Trin. 41 Eliz.


ETWEEN the Lord Anderſon Chief Juſtice of the court

of Common Pleas, and Sibthorpe of the Middle Temple,

a queſtion was moved upon the branch of the ſaid act of 33
H. 8. cap. 39. That is to ſay, © T hat all manors, lands, &c.
« which now be, or that hereafter ſhall come, or be in, or
« to the poſſeſhon or ſeiſin of any perſon to whom the ſame
% manors, lands, &c. have heretofore or hereaſter ſhall de-
“ ſcend, &c. in fee- ſimple, or fee-tail, &c. by, or after the
« deceaſe of any of his or their anceſtor or anceſtors as heir,
&« or by gift of his anceſtor, whoſe heir he is, which ſaid an-
© ceſtor or anceſtors, was, is, or ſhall be indebted to the
« King, or to any other perſon to his uſe, by judgment,
e recognizance, obligation, or other ſpecialty ; that then,
e in every ſuch caſe, the ſame manors, lands, &c. ſhall be and
e ſtand by authority of this act from henceforth charged and
& chargeable, to and for the payment of the ſame debt.” If
tenant in tail of the manor of D. be bound in a recognizance
to J. S. which recognizance afterwards comes to the Queen,
by the attainder of J. S. of high treaſon, and afterwards tenant
in tail dies, and the iſſue in tail aliens the land bona ſide, if
the Queen may extend the manor of D. in the hands of the
alienee. And in this caſe four points were refolved by the
Barons on conference had with Popham Chief Juſtice, and
divers other Juſtices. 1. It was reſolved, that beſore the faid
ſtatute of 33 H. 8. if tenant in tail of land became indebted
to the King by judgment, recognizance, obligation, or other-
wiſe, and died, the King ſhould not (a) extend the Jand in the
ſeiſin of the ifſue in tail; for the King is (6) bound by the ſtat.


de Donis Conditionalibus, as it is adjudged in Plowden's Com- 48


mentacies in the Lord Berkley's caſe 22. in the principal caſe ;
and therewith agrees, as to the point in quetiion, the reſolu-
tion of the court in the Exchequer, and of the court of Sur-
veyors in the caſe of Brown, father of Juſtice Brown, as


H 2 it


21


Lane 51,


(a) F. N. B.
217. C.

(% Co. 44.
.

5 Co. 14. b. 11
Co. 72. a. Poſtea
32.8. 41. d.
Plowd, 243. b.
244. a. 248. b.
249. b. 231. b.
252.2. 1 Roll.
Rep. 153.


je * —


—_— - =


n — My —ů ¶ —
— —— WS — — — D


©. Benl. 66,


7 Co. 28.
tempus occurrit
regi. Co, Lit.
185.


3 Crs 14. b.


Ante 19. b.


Plowd. 440. a.
3 Co. 12. b.


Hard. 217.


The Lord AupERS0On's Cafe. Patt VII.


it is reported in Plow. Com. 249. b. So one point well re-
ſolved, in which there was variety of opinions in our books


. Vide 39 AM. p. 18. 47 E. 3. 8 Regiſt. 143, 144. F. N. B.


217.a & b. 2dly. It was reſolved, that if tenant in tail
becomes indebted to the King by the receipt of the King's


money, or otherwiſe, unleſs it be by judgment, recogni-


zance, obligation, or other ſpecialty, and dies, the land in
the ſeiſin of the iſſue in tail by force of the ſaid act of 33 Ul.
8. ſhall not be extended for ſuch debt of the King's, for the
ſtat. of 33 H. 8. extends only to the ſaid four caſes; and all
other debts remain at common law. 3. It was refolved, that
if tenant in tail becomes indebted to the King by one of the
four ways mentioned in the ſaid act, and dies, and before
any proceſs or extent the iflue in tail bona fide aliens the land
in tail, that now this land ſhall not be extended by force of
the ſaid act of 33 H. 8. for as it appears by the words of the


ſaid branch. it makes the land in the poſſeſſion or ſeiſin of


the heir in tail only liable againſt the iflue in tail, and not
the alienee. For the effect of the purview as to that purpoſe
is, 'That all lands which ſhall be in the poſſeſſion or ſeĩſin of
any perſon, to whom the ſame ſhall deſcend in fee-tail 25
« heir, whole anceſtor was indebted to the King, &c. that
„then, in every ſuch cafe, the ſame land ſhall be charged
„with the King's debt: ſo that by the expreſs purview of
the act, the land ſhall be only extended ſo long as it is in
the poſſeſſion or ſeiſin of the heir in tail; for the act ſaith,
«* "That in every ſuch caſe the land ſhall be charged,“ and
for as much as the land againſt the iſſue in tail was not ex-
tendable before the faid act, the King bath the benefit to ex-
tend it in the poſſeſſion of the heir in tail, which he could
not before, but the King cannot extend in the hands of the
alienee, for the ſtat doth not extend to it: and the makers of
the act had reaſon to favour the purchaſer, farmer, &c. of the
heir in tail, more than the heir himſelf, for they are ſtran-
gers to the debts of the tenant in tail, and they come to the
land bona fide, and on good conſideration. There is likewiſe
another clauſe next following the ſaid branch, the effect of
which is, And that our ſovereign lord, his heirs, or ſuc-
„ ceſſors, ſhall not be barred, delayed, &c. to demand and
receive their juſt, &c. debts againſt any of his ſubjects, as
& heir or heirs, &c. if any ſuch perſon or perſons ſhall fay
« or aliedge, that they have no lands, &c. but only entailed
« or given to them by any of their anceſtors to whom they be
« heirs:” fo that by this clauſe alſo the intent of the makers
of the act appears, that the heir in tail ſhall be only charged
with the King's debt. But lands in fee-ſimple were extend-
ible, at the common Jaw, in whoſe hands ſoever they
came, and therefore as to them the flatute was but decia-
rativum antiqui juris; but as to eſtates in tail, it was
introductivum novi juris againſt the iſſue in tail, and that
in the caſe at bar makes che difference of the ſaid cats


although


Part VII. The Lord AxvoERsox's Caſe.


although both be joined together in one and the ſame ſentence.
And Popham Chief Juſtice ſaid, that fo it hath been reſolved
in the Exchequer before that time, in the caſe of Serjeant Ni-


22


cholls, father of the Serjeant that now is, that the lands in


the hands of the purchaſer of the ifſue in tail ſhould not be
extended by the ſaid act of 33 H. 8. for the debt that the
father of the iſſue in tail owed to the K. (by one of the four
ways mentioned in the act) but was diſcharged by the opinion
of the court of Exchequer. 4. It was reſolved, that for as
much as the ſaid debt in the caſe at bar was originally due to
a ſubject, that ſuch debt is not within the ſaid act of 33 H. 8.
to charge the land in the poſſeſſion or ſeiſin of the heir in tail:
for the ſaid act, as to charge lands entailed againſt the iſſue,
extends only to debts originally and immediately due to the
King by judgment, recognizance, obligation, or other
ſpecialty ; for the words are, (indebted to the K. * or any
other to his uſe by judgment, &c.) which is intended to be an
+ immediate debt, and not to debts which were due to ſub-
jects, and did belong or accrue to the K. by reaſon of attain-
der, outlawry, forfeiture, gift of the party, or by any other
collateral way or means, for which the ſtat. of 33 H. 8. hath
a clauſe a little before the ſaid branch, for the ſhort and
general manner, and form of pleading in ſuch caſes (for the
recovery of them in the courts mentioned in the ſaid act) on
the King's part, cil. That the party ſuch a year and day
« did give the fame debt to the K. or was attainted, outlawed,
& or other offence, forfeiture, deed, act, or thing committed or
„done, by reaſon whereof the ſaid debts did accrue and ought
© to remain, come, and be to the King.” So that the ſeveral
manners of penning of theſe two branches manifeſt the inten-
tion of the makers of the act, to prefer immediate debts due
to the K. by judgment, &c. before debts of the ſubjects,
which accrued to the King by aſſignment, attainder, out-
lawry, &c. and the reaſon was, becauſe debts due imme-
diately to the King by judgment, recognizance, obligation,
or other ſpecialty, are in their nature higher, and may be
better known, and found upon ſearch, than debts due to
ſubjects. Alſo when J. N. is indebted to J. S. by judgment,
recognizance, obligation, or other ſpecialty, and afterwards
J. S. is outlawed, &c. by which the debt comes to the K. by
the outlawry, &c. in that caſe it cannot properly be ſaid,
that J. N. is indebted to the King by judgment, recogniz-
ance, obligation, or other ſpecialty; for by them he was
indebted to J. 8. and J. S. by his outlawry (which is the K's
title) hath forfeited them to the King. So that by force of the
judgment, &c. and outlawry the debt doth belong to the K.
and the words of the act are (indebted to the King, or any
other to his uſe by judgment, &c.) ſo that the debt either ought
to be immediately to the K. himſelf; or if it be to any other
than the K. it ought co be originally to the uſe of the King,

98 H 3 and


® r And. 129,
130.

+ Lit. Rep. $9,
88.


The Lord AN DERSOxN's Caſe. Part VII.


and that it is not when the debt is originally due to a ſubject to
his own uſe, and afterwards forſeited to the King by a ſub-
ſequent act. And ſo it was reſolved, that for ſuch debt the
Queen ſhould not extend either. againſt the alienee of the heir
in tail, or againſt the heir in tail himſelf ; for ſuch dehts are
not within the ſaid act of 33 H. 8. as to charge the heir in
tail; and ſo remain at the common law as debts immediately
due to the King, which are not due by judgment, recog-


nizance, obligation, or other ſpecialty, as hath been faid
before.


BUT T's


B U N


Trin. 42 Eliz.
In the Common Pleas.


TN a replevin between Fiſh and Butt, the caſe in effect

was, one ſeiſed of Black-acre in fee, and alſo poſſeſſed of
White-acre for years, by his deed granted a rent out of both
to A. to have and perceive to him for the term-of his life,
with clauſe of diſtreſs in both: and for rent behind A. doth
diſtrain and avow in White-acre, and if the diſtreſs was well
taken or not, was the queſtion. And it was agreed by the


whole court, that the diſtreſs was well taken. And in this
caſe theſe points were reſolved. 1. That if leſſee for years of cr, El. 183.


a carve of land, grants to another a rent out of the ſaid carve
for the life of the grantee, that it is a good charge during the
term, if the grantee ſo long live; for the grant ſhall be taken


more ſtrong againſt the grantor, and ſhall not be void, when


by any conſtruction it may be made good (vide Plow. Com-
ment. in Welchden's caſe) and in ſuch caſe the grantee hath
but a chattel. So if the leſſee for years grants the carve of
land to another, for the term of his life, he hath the whole
term if he live ſo long, as well as in the caſe of a deviſe.
2. It was reſolved, that when a rent is granted out of land in
fee, and out of a term for years, to have and perceive to the
grantee for the term of his life, that this, as an eſtate of free-
hold, according to the purport of the deed, cannot iſſue
out of the term for years, but out of the land which the
grantor hath in fee ſimple only, becauſe the freehoid of the
rent can iflue out of that, and not out of the chattel. And
one entire rent cannot be a freehold out of Black-acre,
and a Chattel out of White-acre, And to make two
rents when one only is granted by one to another, would


de in this caſe injurious, and the bargain and mutual agree-


4 ment


23


v. Poſtea 25. a.


Co. Lit, 147, b.
Cr. Jac. 390.
1 Roll.R-p.330.
Cr, El. 607,022,


(a) Co. Lit. 47. a.


5 Co. 3. 3. 4. 4.
17


Palm. ros.

Co Lit. 44 b.
142. 2.

2 Roll. 446.
Cr. Jac. 111,
112.

Moor 163. 168,
— Sand. 303, 304.
Raymond 194.
Cr. El. 690.


Br. Rents 11.


Br. Tenure 26,


Br. Afiſe 30g.


Bur T's Caſe, Part VII.


ment of the parties cannot charge ſuch thing with rent, which
is not (a) chargeable by the law, as out of an hundred, or ad-
vowſon, 30 lib. Aſiſarum pl. 5. out of a fair, 14 E. 3. Sire


facias 122. the Earl of Kent's caſe ; neither can a rent be


granted or reſerved of any eſtate of freehold out of any other
hereditament which is not manurable, either in poſſeſſion,
reverſion, or by poſſibility, but is hereditamentum incorporeum;
for pacla privata non der agant juri communi: and in an aſſiſe
they cannot be put in view, nor can any diſtreſs be taken in
them. But in the caſe at bar, Whitz-acre is Hæreditamentum
cor poreum, and manurable; but {or the ſmallneſs and incapa-
city of the intereſt that the grantor hath in it, this rent of
freehold cannot iſſue thereout, but ſhall iſſue only out of the
land in fee-ſimple. And in the caſe at bar, in an aſſiſe brought
of this rent, the land in fee ſhall only be put in view, and if


the grantee accept a leaſe, or grant of White acre, it will not


(5) Co. Lit.
147. a. b-


ſuſpend his rent. 3. It was reſolved, that White-acre ſhould
during the term be ſubject to the diſtreſs of the grantee for the
rent during the years, although the rent doth not iffue there-
out, as1n 41 (46) Ed. 3. 14. when land is charged witha
rent in fee, goods (%) and chattels may be bound to the diſ-
treſs. And it was ſaid, foraſmuch as White-acre is only
charged with diſtreſs, if the grantee takes a leaſe of any part
thereof, it is no ſuſpenſion of the diſtreſs, but that he may diſ-


train in the reſidue; for it is not ifſuing out of the land, but


(c) 171 Co. 13. b.
Dy. 30. pl. 209,
Dav. 5. b.


Poph. 169.


(d) Co. Lit.


7. 3.
hy Roll. 426.


(e) Co. Lit.


147. a.
2 Roll. 425.


to be taken on the land: as if I have a warren in another's
land, and take a leaſe of*parcel of the land, although the land
be charged with warren, 2 foraſmuch as it doth iſſue out of
the land it is not any ſuſpenſion. ide (c) 35 H. 6. 56. a.
14 H. 4.6, &c. for a man may have a warren in his own
lands: ſo he may in many caſes diſtrain in his own poſſeſſion,
as in 31 E. 1. Diſtreſs 64. & 7 H. 6. 3 per curiam, one te-
nant in common may diſtrain the cattle of the other in the
land which they have in common : and 26 H. 8. 5. he may
preſcribe to diſtrain in his own land, but not to have a rent
out of his own land. (4) If a man by deed grants a rent of
forty ſhillings to another out of his manor of D. to have and
perceive to him and his heirs ; and grants further by the ſame
deed, that if the rent be behind, the grantee ſhall diſtrein
in the manor of 8. (be the manor of S. in the ſame county
or in another, and be it granted by one or divers deeds)
the rent is only iſſuing out of the manor of D. and it is
but a (e) penalty that he may diſtrain in the manor of 8.
but both the manors are charged, one with the rent,
the other with the diſtreſs for the rent, one iſſuing
out of the land, the other to be taken on the land.


And
.


Part VI  BurTr's Caſe,


And if I grant unto you, that you and your heirs ſhall (a)
diſtrain for a rent of forty ſhillings within my manor of 5.
this by conſtruction in law ſhall amount to a grant of a rent
out of my manor of S. for if it ſhould not amount to a grant
of a rent, the grant ſhould be of little force or effect, if the
grantee ſhould have only a bare diſtreſs, and no rent in him ;
for then he ſhould never have on afhſe thereof, &c. and that
is the reaſon, that it is often ruled and reſolved, that it ſhall
amount to a (&) grant of a rent by conſtruction of law, ut
res magis valeat, 53 Ed. 3. 12. 3 Aſſ. p. 7. 14 Af. p. 14. 16
E. 3. tit, Grants 64. 18 Ed. 3. 32. 26 Aſſ. pl. 38. 30 Af.
pl. 12. 46 Ed. 3. 18, 32. 8 H. 4. 19. 9H. 6 9. a. 22 Hl. 6.
11. Lit. 48. b. And in ſuch cafe the grantee ſhould not have
a writ of annuity. But when one grants a rent out of the
manor of D. and further grants, that if the rent be behind,
the grantee ſhall deſtrain for the fame rent in the manor of 5.
it is but a penalty (c) in the manor of S. for three cauſes :
1. The law (4) need not make conſtruction that it ſhall
amount to a grant of a rent; for here a rent is expreſly granted
to be iſſuing out of the manor of D. and the parties have ex-
preſly limited out of what land the rent ſhall ifſue, and in
what land the diſtreſs ſhall be taken, and the law will not
make an expoſition againſt the expreſs words and intent of the
parties, when it may ſtand with the rule of law, (e) quotes
in verbis nulla eſt -ambiguitas, ibi nulla expeſitio contra verba ex-
preſſa fienda /t. 2. /) it in that caſe it ſhould amount to a
E. of a rent out of the manor of S. then the grantor would
twice charged; for if the grantee brings a writ of annuity,
that will extend only to the manor of D. for on the grant of a
diitreſs in the manor of S. no writ of annuity lies be-
cauſe the manor of S. is only charged, and not the per-
fon of the grantor, as to that ; and therefore the bringing of
the writ of annuity cannot diſcharge the manor of S. of any
rent; and ſo the law, by conſtruction againſt the words and
and intention of the parties, would do an injury to the grant-
or to charge him twice. 3. (g) If in ſuch caſe the manor of
S. in which the diſtreſs is only appointed, ſhould be in an-
other county, then it hath been often adjudged, that the rent
ſhould not iſſue out of it, but the diſtreſs ſhould be as a means
and remedy to compel the tenant of the Jand to pay the
tent, And it was ſaid, that there was no difference in reaſon,
that the law in conſtruction ſhould make the rent to be iſſu-
ing out of it, when it lies in the ſame county, and not when
it lies in feveral counties, for the words in both caſes are all
one, and it is not any reaſon to ſay, that he ſhall fail of
recovery


24


(a) Co Lit.
147. a. 146. a.
148. Roll. 424.
Lit. ſect. 221.
9 H. 6. 9. a.
Dy. 22 pl. 141.
41. Aſſ. pl. CO
Moor 592.
Plow. 139. a.


(5) Lit. ſect. aa t.


(c) 2 Roll. 425.
Co. Lit. 147.
(d) Co. Lit.
147. a.


(e) Wing. Max.
24+

Co. Lit. 147. a.
2 Sand. 167.
(F) Co. Lit.
147.

6 Co. 58. b.


(g) Co. Lit.
147 4.


Bur r's Caſe. part VII.


Antes 3. a, b. recovery by aſſiſe. Vide ſupra in Bulwer's caſe, and the books
in 1 Af. pl. 10. 1 Ed. 3. 21. and other books do not ſay that
the rent iſſues in ſuch caſe out of both, but that the land in
which the diſtreſs ſhall be taken is charged; and that is true;
for it is charged with diſtreſs : and foraſmuch as it was charged
with diſtreſs, their opinion was, that the tenants of both

Co. Lit. 147. a. ſhould be named in the aſſiſe. See the books in 9 Ed. 3. 13,

5 31 Af. pl. 27. 17 Ed. 4. 6. 10 Aſſ. 4. 10 Ed. 3. 18. 2 Ed.
2. Aſſ 360. 1 Aſſ. 10. 3 Aff. 7. 32 H. 6. 27. 22 Aſſ. 66,

(a) Co. Lit. 1 Aff pl. 27. 29 Ed. 3. Aſſ. 366. And the opinion of (a)

ts 5 inchden in 41 Ed. 3. 15, was affirmed for good law, that if
the manor of D. out of which the rent is granted, be reco-
vered by eigne title, that all the rent is extint. But if the
manor of 5. in which the diſtreſs is limited, be evicted, yet

(3) Co. Lit. the whole rent remains, So if the grantee (4) purchaſes


147. a. parcel of the manor of S. the rent is not extinct, becauſe the
rent iſſues only out of the manor of D. vide 17 Ed. 4. 6. the

(e) co. Lit. like caſe. And it was ſaid, that if a man (c) grants a rent out

147. b. of three acres, and further grants, that if the rent be behind,


that he ſhall diſtrain for the rent in one of the acres, the rent is

* Kelw. 104. a. entire, and cannot be a rent- ſeck * out of two acres, and a rent-
Co, Lit. 153. . charge out of the third acre, and therefore it is a rent- ſeck
Perk. ſeQ. 323. for the whole; and yet he ſhall diſtrain for it in the chird
(4) Co. Lit, acre. So if a (4) rent be grauted to two and their heirs out
147. b. of one acre of land, and that it ſhall be lawful for one of them
and his heirs to diſtrain in the ſame acre for it, it is a rent-

Oc. Li ſeck, for in regard they ſtand jointly ſeiſed of one entire rent,

„Lit.

147. b. it cannot be as to one a rent-ſeck, and as to the other a rent-
charge, and this diſtreſs is as appurtenant to the rent: and
therefore if he who hath the rent dies, the ſurvivor ſhall diſ-
train; and if boch grant over the rent to one, he ſhall diſ-
train for it. (/ But if a man grants a rent out of Black-acre
to one and his heirs, and grants to him that he may diſtrain
for it in the ſame acre for the term of his life, it 1s a rent-
charge for his life, and a rent-ſeck afterwards diverſis tempori-
(s) Co. Lit, . Otherwiſe (g) is it if the diſtreſs be limited for certain
147. b. years in the ſame land, there it wholly remains a rent-ſeck, be-

| Bridg. 109 .. cauſe the fee and ſrechold are ſeck in ſuch caſe. But it was ad-

judged in the caſe at bar, that the avowry was inſufficient for *

divers cauſes: 1. Becauſe in the avowry he did not make men-

tion of any land but of the land in which he had buta leaſe for

years, /c. quod conceſſit extra terram illam inter alia quendam reddil,

c. Whereas in his avowry he ought to have derived the rent

out of the land in fee-fimple only, for out of that in judg-

ment of law, the rent for life was ifluing : and although

the plaintiff in bar to the avowry hath diſcloſed the whole

truth of the matter in ſpecial, which in judgment of the

law makes for the avowant, and hath made 00

f iter


5
— — — — — — — — —
—— 2 — —— — —


—


a mm.” 7 VI Ge a —


— ——— — — _— > —
— — = —


co. Lit,
147. b.


—


— — —
— — —


- - = -
—— -U  — —— _
— — — —— —


— — —
— | — — — —


—— ——
—— ——e


— —


2
.
— — —


—


> - — OOO IE . i ye


=


}


7
17
.
.
1
Mo |
*
|


Part VII. Bur r's Caſe, 25


better for him than the avowant hath made it for himſelf, yet

that doth not make the avowry, which wants ſubſtance, good; 6 Mod. 119.
for the avowry which is in the nature of a count, ought TR

to contain ſufficient matter upon which he may have judg-

ment to have a return. But if the avowry, or any count

or replication, &c. wants form or omits circumſtance of

time, place, &c. there the plea of the other party may mend

ſuch imperfections (a) but caunot ſupply the defect of matter

of ſubFance. Vide 6 Ed. 4. 2. b. 6 H. 7. 10. 18 Ed. 4. 16.

b. 18 E. 3. 34. Plow Com. Barkley's caſe 230. 38 H 6. 17,

18, & 19. 22 E. 4. 2. 5 H. 5. 13. b. 7H 7. 6. b. &c.

2. The avowant pleaded the grant out of the (5) term for (a) 18 E. 4. 16. b.
years only, and concluded, virtute cujus he was ſeiſed in do- 8 pl. 69.
minics ſuo ut de libero tenemento pro termino vitæ ſug, which is 78 noe”
repugnant to have a freehold out of a term for years. And 133. & infra.
ſo judgment was given againſt the avowant for inſufficient N


I r. Car. 209,
pleading. 11 H. 7. 2


Kelw. 13. 2.
Note; where the plaintiff is general in his writ or count, (5) Dock. pl. 326.
the defendant may be as general in his plea. Plow. 84. Antea 23. 8.
6 Mod. 118, 119. v. 8 Co. 120, 133. 9 Co. 37.


a Leon. 58.
Sav. 107, 108.


Part VII.


5 Caſes of Quare impedit.
Paſzh. 31 Eliz. Rot. 141.


OHN HALL brought a Quare impedit againſt the Biſhop of
Bath and Wells, and Thomas Maunton, Clerk, defend-
ants, for diſturbing him to preſent to the vicarage of Wolla-
vington appendant to the manor of Wollavington, whereof
the Dean of Windſor was ſeiſed in his demeſne as of fee in
right of his deanery, and preſented Robert Pitman his Clerk,
who was inſtituted and induCted, and conveyed that manor to
the Earl of Leiceſter by leaſe for years, who aſſigned all his


Intereſt to George Sydenham, Knt, who granted it to Chriſto-


her Roll; and during his poſſeſſion the vicarage became void

y the death of Robert Pitman ; and the ſaid Chriſtopher Roll
preſented one John Davis his'clerk to the ſaid viearage, who
was admitted, &c. And afterwards the ſaid Chriſtopher Roll
did grant his intereſt in the ſaid leaſe to the plaintiff, And
afterwards the vicarage became void by the deprivation of the
ſaid John Davis, whereby it did belong to the plaintiff to pre-
ſent, and the defendants did diſturb him, to his damages, &c.
to which the Biſhop pleaded, that he claimed nothing but as
Ordinary, and demanded judgment, if without ſpecial diſ-
turbance, &c. And Thomas Maunton ſaid, that he claimed
nothing in the advowſon of the vicarage, but that he is Vicar
of the paid church of the preſentation of the ſaid George Syden-
ham, who is yet alive, not named in the writ, and demanded
judgment of the writ. The. pl. to the Biſhop's plea prayed
Judgment, foraſmuch as he claimed nothing in the vicarage ;
and it was granted, but ceſſet executio until, &c. And as to
the plea of T ho. Maunton he did demur in law. And the ſole
queſtion of the caſe is, if the Quare impedit lies againſt the
Biſhop and the incumbent without naming the patron. And it


(a) Cr. Jae 651. Was reſolved, that the writ (a) ſhould abate, and that the patron
Fitz. Brief 582. ought to be named in the writ, and that for two reaſons. 1. Be-


Br. Quare im-
petit 24.
3 Lev, 16,


cauſe the patronage would in this caſe be recovered *
im


part VII. Caſes of Quare impedit.


him who hath nothing in the patronage. And it is not reaſonable
that he who is patron ſhould be diſpoſſeſſed and oafted of his pa-
tronage, when he 1s a ſtranger, and not party to the writ, and e-
ſpecially in this caſe, when he may be made party to the writ. 2.
At the common (a) law the incumbent could not plead any plea
which concerned the right of patronage, and therefore it would
be againſt reaſon that he ſhould be only named in the writ, who
at the common law cannot defend the patronage, and he who
hath the patronage, and can plead to the right of it, omitted in
the writ: for at the common law every one ſhall plead a plea
which is fit for him, and pertinent to his caſe; as in aſſiſe againſt
diſſeiſor (5) and tenant, &c. the tenant ſhall plead a plea which


26


*


(a) Hob. 162.
1 Anderſ. 238,
46 E. 3. 14. 3.
Doct. pl. 230.
1 Leon. 45.

24 E. 3. a. b.
per Wildy.


(5013 H.. 14. b.


concerns the tenancy, and not the diſſeiſin. And the incumbent Ce. Hit. 285. b.


at the common law ſhall not plead to the right of patronage in
which he hath*nothing, but the patron ſhall plead to that. And


303. b. 2 Inſt.
414.


the miſchief was, that (c) by the faint pleading or confeſſion of (c. 45 E. 3. 11.


the patron in a Quare impedit the incumbent was without remedy,

as the book is adjudged in 18 Ed. 3. 23. b. which was before the

ſtatute of 25 Ed. 3. Yide 22 Hen. 6. 28. a. 9 Hen. 6. 30. a. b.

31. a. &c. But the ſtat, of 25 Ed. 3. cap. 7. enables the (4) poſ-

ſeſſor, &c. (which is as much as to ſay, the incumbent, after induc-

tion, as it is held in 4 Hen. 8. Dyer 1.) to counterplead the title

taken for the King, and to have his anſwer, and to ſhew and de-
fend his right upon the matter, altho' he claim nothing in the pa-

tronage, and by equity he ſhall plead againſt all common per-

ſons, as the books are in 9 Hen. 6. 30. a. b. 31. 2. &c. 22 Hen. 6.

28. a. 13 Hen. 8. 13. 14 Hen. 8. 29. Jide 39 Ed. 3. 30. 27 Ed.

3-81. 46 Ed. 3. 13. 19. 47 Ed. 3. 11. a. b. 2 Rich. 2. Incumbent

4.8 Hen. 5.9. 7 H. 4.34. 13 Hen. 4 7. 22 Hen. 6. 26. 16 Ed. 4.

11. 2 Hen. 7. 14. 10 Hen. 4. Statham. And it is to be obſerved,

that always when the incumbent pleads in bar, he firſt ſaith, that

he is, perſona (e) imperſonata cccliſiæ pred”, Sc. by which it is im-

plied, that he is admitted, inſtituted, and able to plead in bar,

cl. againſt the King, that he is admitted, inſtituted, and induct-
ed; and againſt a common // perſon, that he is admitted and

inſtituted, for then % eccle/ia piena et conſalta, againſt a common

perſon, as it is held in 9 H. 6.31. 22 H. 6. 27. 21 E. 4. 34. b.

24 E. 3. 30. 25 E. 3. 47. 38 E. z. 9.2.44 E. 3.3. Kc. But this

difference in the caſe at bar was taken and agreed; thit when

by the judgment in the Qaare impedit, the juheritance, eſtate, or

intereſt of the patron in the patronage is to be diveſted by the

Judgment in the 2uare zmpedit brought by J. 8. there J. N.
(g) who preſented, (and his clerk received) ought to be named

in the writ; but when the inheritance, eſtate, or intereſt

of 'the patron ſhall not be deveſted by the judgment, then, if

another diſturber be named in the writ, it is not needfu] to
name the rightful patron in the writ, and with this difference

agree our books. For in (4) 42 E. 3. 7. a. one brought a Dare

ianpe dit againſt another; the det. ſaid, that be claimed noting
in the patronage, but ſaid, that the Biſhop did preſent him by

lapſe, judgment if, &c. and there Belknap prayed a writ to

the Biſhop, becauſe he had diſclaimed in the patronage ; aud

the court would not grant it, becauſe inaſmuch as neither

the patron, nor the Biſhop (who in the ſame caſe was

in


a. b.


(4) Hob. 419.
Doct. ol. 230,
231. Hob. 161.
1 Leon. 45.
Dyer 1. 1 8.
1 Jones 161.


e) Dot. pl. a3r,


232.

* F. N. B. 34. K.
2 Init. 356.

2 Rall. 349.

Co. Lit. 133. b.
244. a. b.

Cr. Jac. 463.
576 Co. 49. 4.
2 Inſt. 256.

2 Roll. 349.
Co. Lit. I 19. b.
344+ .

Cr. Jac. 463.
(g) Noy 151,

2 Roll. Rep. 239.
2 Show. 167.

3 Lev. 26, 206.


(hb) Cr Jac, 651.
Fitz. Brief 5c2.


Br. Quare impe-


dit 24.


(a) 2 Leon. 58.
Sav. 108, 109.
Cr. El. 324.
Cr. Car. 592.

2 Siderf. 94.
Goldſb. 46,


(5) Cr, Jac. 19.
Dyer 279. pl. 8.
Dall. 7. F. N. B.
35 I. Cr. Car.
529. 10 Co.
134 b. Moor 9.
Cr. El. 324.
Co. Lit, 198. a.


(e) Sav. 109.
47 E. 3. 10. b. 11.
A. b. Fitz. Qu,
imped. 141.

Br. Qu. imp. 40.
Br, Mortmaia 6.


Caſes of Quare impedit. Part VII,


in the plate of the patron) were not named in the writ, it was
adjudged that the writ ſhould abate ; and if ſuch writ ſhould


be maintainable, every patron by covin between a ſtranger


and the incumbent might be ouſted of his advowſon, and there.
with agree 9 H. 6. 30. a. b. 31. a. &c. 3 H. 4. 2. b. & 3.a,
13 H. 8. 13. But in 7 H. 4. 25, 37. there in a Qu imp” be-
cauſe the preſentation was only recovered, and not the advow-
ſon, nor the patron put out of poſſeſſion, the writ was adjudg-
ed good without naming of the patron. If a Quare impedit be
brought againſt the patron and the incumbent, and the patron
dies pending the writ, the death of the patron ſhall not abate
(a) the writ, as it is adjudged in 9 H. 6, 31. For there are two
miſchieſs, one if the writ ſhould abate the diſturbance would be
unpuniſhed; and altho' the writ was well brought, yet the
pl. would be without remedy, becauſe there wants a diſturber:
and of the other part the other miſchief is, that if the writ
ſhould not abate, but the pl. proceed to judgm. and execu-
tion, the very patron would be out of poſſeſſion. And foraſ-
much as in the one caſe, if the rightful patron ſhould be out of
poſſeſſion he hath remedy by a writ of right to recontinue the
ad vowſon, and in the other caſe if the writ ſhould abate, the
pl. would be without remedy, which would be the greater nul-
chief, and for this cauſe the writ ſhall ſtand, and ſhall not a-
bate ; and therewith agree 7 H. 4. 26. b. 13H. 8 13. 9 H 6.57.
Anda Quare imp. well brought by divers, as coparceners, ot
joint-tenants, &c. ſhall not abate by the (/) death of one of
them; nor a Quare impedit brought by the huſband and wife
ſhall not abate by the death of the wife, becauſe otherwiſe the
5 (if the ſix months be paſt) would be without remedy, as the
oks are in F. N. B. 35. b. 38 E. 3. 43. 37.9 H 6. 11. 7 H.
4. 19. 14 H. 4. 12. 9 fl. C. 30. 57.1 H. 5. 13 17 E. 3. 11.
17 E. 3. 304. But it the K. preſents, and his clerk is admitted
and inſtituted, &c. there the Quære imped. may be brought for
neceſſity againſt the Biſhop or incumbent, for it doth not lie
againſt the King: fo of the Pope, if he had uſurped, 12 Ul. 8.
12. 4 H. 7. 15, &c. Vide 47 E 3. (c) 11. a b. The K. brought
a Quare impedit againſt W. Dawtree of the chuich of Ret-
held, and made his title, ſoraſmuch as Hamond Biſhop of Ro-
chefter had preſented to the ſaid church by uſurpation being
void (the advowlon of which of right did appertain to three
daughters and heirs) his clerk, who was admitted, inſtt-
tuted. and inducted, and afterwards the incumbent reſigned,
and the fuccefior preſented another, who was admitted, inſti—
tuted, and inducted, and he died, by which it belonged to
the K. to preſent, foraſmuch as the Bp. had gained that advow-
ſon to him and his ſuccetlors without licence, by which the ad-
vowſon was become in mortmain. The def. pleaded, that he is
Parſon of the preſentment of W. Wycleſey, predeceſſor of ihe
Biſhop that now is, Tho, by name, ſo that the patronage is in
Thomas; who we conceive ought to be named in the writ, by
which we conceive that our lord the King to this writ, in
which the patron is not named, ought not to be anſwered, for
we


—


oe Ah. fu - a 8 Þ&f


Part vIL Caſes of Quare impedit.


we conceive, that a Quare impedit doth not lie againſt the in-
cumbent alone, without naming the patron, where it is ex-
preſfly ſhewed that there is a patron, who may plead in bar
of the plaintitf or other thing to ouſt the King of the action,
which lieth not in the knowledge of the incumbent to plead.
And it was adjudged, that the King's writ was good againſt
the incumbent alone, becauſe he might give by the ſtatute
what anſwer he would alone in maintenance of his poſſeſſion
of his church; and the now Biſhop who is ſucceſſor, is no
diſturber, for the defendant came in by the predeceſſor, and
therefore ſhall not be charged with damages or coſts. And
afterwards the plaintiff John Hall perceiving, in the principal
caſe, the reſolution of the court, diſcontinued his ſuit, and
. loſt his preſentat on, illa vice.


3 + Sir


27


25 Ed. 3. ch. 7.


(a) Co. Ent. 48 1.
pl.


(5) Br. Quare
imped. 136,

Br. Perempt. 74.
Br. Brief al E-,
veſque 21. Br.
Non ſuit 62.

2 Roll. 388.
Hob. 138.

Co. Lit. 139. As
Dall. 81, 82.


5 Ed. 3. 35, 36.
c) Hob. 138.

92 Brief al E-

veſque 26.


(d) 2 Roll. 387,
388.


(e) F. N. B. 38. m.


(IE. 6. e. 7.
Stile 187.


L. 5. E. 4. 19. b.
35 H. 8. Dy. 55.


4.
2 Salk. 559. fam


4%


Caſes of Puare impedit, Part VII,


£7
„ I ah


Sir Hucn PORTMAN's Caſe.


Paſch. 40 Elis.


N a (a) Quare impedit by Sir Hugh Portman againſt the
Archbiſhop of Canterb. and Mountgomery, clerk, ad eccl:-
de Chedſey in the county of Somerſet, and made his title
by reaſon of a grant of the next avoidance wnica vice, divers
points were reſolved : 1. If the plaintiff in a Quare impedit be
nonſuit (5) after appearance, it is peremptory and a good bar
in another Quare impedit, although it be brought within the
ſix months ; and the reaſon thereof is, becauſe the defendant
upon title made (by which he is become actor) ſhall have a
writ to the Biſhop to admit, &c. his clerk into the ſame church,
&c. which is a good bar in another Quare impedit, and
therewith agree 19 E. 4. 9. a. 22 f. 6. 44. b. 45 a. 33 U.
6. 1. 55. 20 E. 4. 14. 21 E. 4. 2. b. & c. F. N. B. 38. k.
The ſame law if the plaintiff in the Quare impedit diſcontinues
(e) his ſuit, the defendant upon title made ſhall have a writ
to the Biſhop, and by conſequence it is peremptory, and
therewith agreeth 31 H. 6. 15. a. But if the writ of Quare
impedit within the fix months abates for falſe (4) Latin, or
inſufficiency of form, that is the fault of the clerk, and ſhall
not be peremptory to the plaintiff, nor ſhall the defendant
thereupon have a writ to the Biſhop, but the plaintiff may
have a new writ of Quare impedit, and therewith agree 3 H.
6. 3. a. 31 H. 6. 15. a. F. N. B. 38 H. Vide 34 AT. pl. 9.
the like. So if the writ abate for miſnomer (e) of the plaintiff
or defendant, if the plaintiff confeſſeth it, the defendant ſhall
not havea writ to the Biſhop, for it may be the fault of the
clerk in the writing of it. And therewith agreeth F. N. B.

8. M. Vide 31 H. 6. 15. a. But if the plaintiff be made 3

night (/) hanging the writ, the writ ſhall abate, and the de-
{endant ſhall have a writ to the Biſhop, and by conſequence -
that is peremptory; for (as we fee by common experience in
theſe times) the fame is the plaintiff's act, and none is fo: ced
or compelled to it. ;


(a) BA S-


Part VII. Caſes of Quare impedit. 2?


@BASKERVILE's Caſe. cm


489. pl. 7. Cro.
El. 356. 1 Lecn,
"= 280, 281.


Trin. 27 El. Rot. 3 20. "AMEN?


N a Quare impedit in the Common Pleas, the caſe was,

that 1 Mar. title to preſent by lapſe was devolved to the

Queen to the church of Cuſep in the county of Hereford,

Sir Nicholas Arnold the patron preſented one Evans, who

was thereto admitted, inſtituted, and inducted, and died,

and if the Queen had loſt her title to preſent by lapſe, or not,

was the queſtion; and it was adjudged, that the Queen had

(5) loſtit. For the Queen had but unam & unicam præſenta- (3) palm. 145,
tionem hac vice; which cannot be extended to the ſecond a- 257. 1 Roll.
voidance ; for negligence to preſent ſhall loſe the ſubject one Rev: 459-


preſentment only by lapſe, and not divers; and if the Queen: re ia


has (c) primam & proximam præſentationem granted to her, ſhe Ney 25. Winch,
cannot take the ſecond. And otherwiſe great inconvenience _ ods xs
would enſue to the patron ; for the Queen might ſorbear to 25


& + qd : 119, 120, 790.
preſent, and ſuffer divers to preſent by uſurpation one after 070. Jac. 44, 54,


the other, and take her turn when the would, and the patron 216, 697. Cro.


might be in a manner thereby diſinherited. And the ſtat. of 8 2 FOR
(d) Prerogativa Regis, quod (e] nullum tempus occurrit Regi, Goldſb. 86, 78,


is to be intended when the King hath an eſtate or (/ intereſt * wh
certain and permanent, and not when his intereſt is ſpecially 5” wid. wave


* a y. 277. pl. 66.
limited, when and how he ſhall take it, and not otherwiſe; Schaf. Beat. 5


for there time is the ſubſtance of his title, and in ſuch caſe 2 Dr. & Stud.
tempus occurrit Regi. And fo was it at another time adjudg- id. 2. ©. 36.


, Lit, Rep. e,
ed, Paſch. 28 El. Rot. 412. in the Common Pleas, between 383. $96 ha. 7.


Beverley (g) plaintiff, and the Archbiſhop of Canterbury and Au e. 18.
Gabriel Cornwal, defendants for the church of Somerby in 64% , 149.


. Plowd. 242. 8.
the county of Lincoln. See CO


roYg. 32 .
(+) 6 Co. 49. b. Hob. 347. Lit. Rep. 99, 340. Co. Lit. 41. b. 90. b. 118. a. 294. b. . ++ 26,
1 Jones 79. 2 Inſt, 273, 360. Godb. 297, 305, 312, 317 Plowd. 243. 4. 22 1. a. 1 Roll. Rep. 165,
2 Ro. Rep. 422. 1 Anderl. 149. Pal. 354, 357. Cr. El. 44. (J) Goeb. 305. (g) Moor 224, 269,
270, Cro, El. 44. Cro, Jac, 216. Owen a, 1 And: 148, 149. Colaſb. 44. 5


Ver; 1V.-- 3 MAUN D'


( Moor 9.
2 Roll. Rep. 473
Co. Lit. 144. a.
Dy. 65 pl. t.
8 12 Co. 71.

„Lit. IQ, as
166. a. 180. a.
Godb. 254.
I Roll.Rep.262.
2 Roll. Rep. 33a.
2 Sand. 167.
Winch. 48, 96.
Hob. 40.
Lit. Rep. 208.
Godb. 254.
(c) 1 Roll. Rep.
235. 2 Roll. 426.
Co. Lit. 144. a.
202. a. Noy 22,
23. Hob. 207.
(4) Co. Lit.
144. a. 202. a.
(Mo. 357,358.

ob. 82, 133,
208. 1 Roll. 459.
Cro. El. 383.
Goldſb. 129,
130, 186.
Hott, 42, 114.
1 Brown], 179.
Palm. 206, 460.
1 Mod. Rep. 89.
(f) 1 Sand. 2 63,
&c. Cr. El. 5485
721. 1 Leon.

o, 191.
(C) Hetl. 16.
Lit. Rep. 34.
Hob. 207. Cro.
Car. 508. 2 Koll.
427.


MAUN D's Caſe.
Hil. 43 Eliz. Rot. 1108.


In the Common Pleas.


1 a replevin between Maund and Gregory, the deſendant
ſhewed, that a rent- charge out of a houſe and certain lands
was granted by deed to one and his aſſigns, for his life, pro con-
filio impendendo, payable yearly at four fealls, and for default ..
of payment, if it be demanded, that it ſhould be lawful for
the grantee and his aſſigns to diſtrain, the grantee aſſigned
the rent to the avowant, the tenant attorned, the aſſignee on
the land demanded the rent after the day, and for default of
payment did diſtrain and avow, on which the plaintiff did de-
mur in law. In this caſe it was reſolved, 1. That a rent
granted to one and his alhigns, pro conſilis impendendo, may (a)
be alligne.| over by the expreſs words of the grantor, who:
granted it to him and his alligns ; for modus (b) & conventt
vincunt legem. 2. That in this caſe the aſſignee need not de-
mand the rent at the (c) day, as he ought in caſe of (d) re-
entry, (for there the whole intereſt or eſtate ſhall be defeated}
or when any ſum (e) nomine pœnæ ſhall be forfeited, in both
theſe caſes the demand ought to be made preciſely i the day
a convenient time before ſun-ſet, in the one caſe in reſpect
of the condition, and in the other in reſpect of the penalty.
But in the caſe of diſtreſs, he who hath the rent may de-
mand it at what time he will, for no loſs or penalty will
thereon enſue, but only a remedy to come at his rent,
which is arrear, and which is due to him; and ſo was it ad-
judged in the Common Pleas, Mich. 40 & 41 Eliz. be-
tween Stanley and Read, where the caſe was, that a rent-
charge was granted payable at a certain day, and if it be
behind and (/) demanded, that it ſhould be lawful for the
grantee to diſtrain. The avowant ſhewed, how that he
made a demand at the day; the plaintiff traverſed that he
did not make a demand at the ſame day (intenging t9
make the day part of the iſtue) upon which the def. demur-
red in law, and it was adjudged againſt the plaintiff; for
if the demand were at any time aſter the day, and be-
fore the diſtreſs, it is ſufficient. 3. It was reſolved,
that if a man who hath a (g) rent-leck, payable yearly


—


part VII. Mavn p's Caſe.


at the feaſt of Eaſter, and hath once ſeiſin of the rent, and the
feaſt of Eaſter paſſes, and no tender or demand made of the
rent, he may, although it b. after the day of payment, come
to the land, and there demand the rent, and although the
tenant of the land he not there, yet on ſuch demand, if none
be ready to pay the rent, itis a denial in law, upon which he
who hath the rent ſhall have an aſſiſe, for as much as no pe-
nalty will enſue thereon, but only to have remedy to recover
his rent and the arrearages, with coſts and damages, and
therewith agree Litt. fo. 5 1. and the Book of Entries, fo. 79.
b. 20 Aſſ. p. 52. But in the fame caſe, if the tenant at the
laſt inſtant of the feaſt of Eaſter be ready on the land to pay
the rent, and he who hath the rent, nor any for him comes
to demand or receive it, there he who hath the rent cannot
come in the abſence of liim who is tenant of the land, and
demand it, and fo make him a diflcifor, and render damages
and coſts, without any deſault in him. But in ſuch caſe, he
who hath the rent, becauſe the default was in him, ought .to
make a demand of it on the land of the perſon of the tenant,
and if he cannot find him on any part of the land out of which
the rent is iſſuing, then in ſuch caſe he ought to demand the
rent at the next feaſt of Eaſter, with all the arrearages, and
although it be in the abſence of the tenant, yet it will amount
to a denial in law, and thereupon he who hath the rent ſhall
recover all the arrearages, damages, and colts,


See the caſe Kidwelly and Brand in Plowden,


I 2 Diſcons


29
Co. Lit. 153. b


——


Cro, Car. 502,
1 Roll. Rep. 60.
2 Roll. 427.
Hob, 207.


Co. Lit. ſect.
233. 2 Roll. 427.
Hob. 207. F


2 Roll. 427,428.


2 Roll. 428.


Part VII.


Diſcontinuance of Procels, &c.
by the Death of the Queen.


Trin. 1 Jacobi. hy 5


— ¶ ͤne — ——


2. Aer 748) Croy TH reſolution of the Juſtices after the death of Q. Eliza
— * beth, concerning diſcontinuance of proceſs, &c. There
Cro. Car, . are two manners of re- ſummons and re- attachments, the one
general, the other ſpecial. The effect of the general is, that
the King doth direct a writ (exempli gratia) to the King's Bench
in this form; Mandamus vobis, quod ad ſectam noſtram omnium-
gue ligeorum populi noſiri, qui proſequt voluerint extra & ſuper
omma ſiue aliqua recorda, placita, brevia, præcepta, proceſſas,

billas, loquelas, appella, fines, & alia memoranda quacunque in
curia noſird coram nobis exiſten”, vel in poſterum coram nobis pro-
ventur, omnimoda brevia, reſummonit', reattachment', & omnium
alior proceſs pro nobis & didtis ligeis populi noſiri in hac parte
habend”, ſecund bonas intentiones & propoſita ſubſcript', mu-
tat mutandis prout caſus requirit, ſecund* diſcretiones veſtras
adjudicetis. Special reſummons is in ſuch form; Rex vic
falut. Reſummoneas per bonos ſummonitores A. B. quod ſit
coram nobis in craflino, &c. ubicunque tunc fuer” in Anglia,
audit record & judic” ſuum de loquela que fuit in cur* dom? H. nu-
per Regis, Sc. ita quod loquela illa tunc fit in ead flatu quo fuit
in prifling curià pred” nuper Regis in oftabis, &c. ultim' græte-
rit, de quo die loquela pred” adjornat' fuit uſque, Ec. tunc proxim”
ſequent”, ante quem diem loquela pred” remanſit fine die, eo quid
præd' nuper Rex diem ſuum clauſit extremum, And note, on
the general reſummons the original and the iſſue (if any be
Joined) is revived, for it is a ſull record, and ought to be
entire entered, but the proceſs before the iſſue joined, nor
the voucher, nor the garniſhment, &c. ſhall not be re-
vived without a ſpecial writ reciting all the ſpecial proceed-


ing, 5 H. 7. 40. a. 9 H. b. 41. a. 13 E. 4. 1. a. b. 1 *


7


Part VII. Diſcontinuance of Proceſs, &c. 30


And it appears by the Book of Entries, tit Reattachm. 499.

that if iſſue be joined, and * returned, and day given

for trial, before which day the King dies, yet by ſpecial re-

ſummons all ſhall be revived, for the jury was returned of re-

cord, and the record thereof was made full and 1 ; and

therewith agrees 1 Ma. (a) 118. Dyer. Vide 21 E. 3. 44. con- (e) Dyer 118.
trary in the caſe of aid prayer, for there the jury is not re- FH 7%

vived as it is there held: but a Venire facias de novo ſhall be

awarded. And it is to be known, that the (6) def. ſhall never (%) Co. Lit. 130.
have a reſummons or reattachm. becauſe he had not nor can b.
have ſummons or attachment; and therefore at the com. law, 9 E. 4. f
if a verdict had paſſed for the def. and before the day in bank 68, 69.

the King died, in that caſe the plea is diſcontinued, and the Ste L 5. E. 4.
def. might by Cerliorari remove the record, and altho' the 17 K. 2 b.
parties ſhall never plead any plea, yet the def. ought to ſue pi. 57.

forth a Scire fac', and thereupon have judgm. but without a

Sciꝰ ſac he ſhall not have judgm. becauſe the parties have no

day in court, and the Sci fac' ſhall revive the record, and give

day to the parties, againſt the opinion of Litt. 10. E. 4. 13. b.

altho' he faith that it was ſo adjudged, that the defend, in ſuch

caſe ſhould preſently have judgment. But at the com. law

the demafe of the King the plea was diſcontinued, and the pro-

ceſs which was awarded and not returned before the King's zit ee gat 3
death, was loſt: for by the writ of the predeceſſor nothing 8. W. z. Ec
can be executed in the time of the new K. unleſs it be in ſpe- is continued.
cial caſes : for by the demiſe of the K. not only the (c) Juſtices $4 qr 176.
of the one Bench, and the other, and the Barons of the Exche- B. N. "of
quer, but the Sheriffs alſo, and eſcheators, and all commiſhons 1 And. 44, 45.


of Oyer and Term. gaol delivery, and Juſtices of Peace are de- Pi 3 26 3


termined by the death of the predeceſſor who made them. And E. 4. 3. 1 E.


for the remedy thereof was the ſtat. of 1 Ed. 6. (d) c. 7. made, 5: 1. 4 Ed. 4.
which provides, that by the demiſe of the K. any action, ſuit, 0% , =o 22
bill, or plaint, “that ſhall depend between party and party, in 45. cre. 3
d any of theK 's courts, and other courts of record, ſhall not any Cro. Car. 10.


e wiſe be diſcontinued, or put without day, but that the pro- . Roll. Rep. 165.


Co. Lit. 325. a.


* cels, pleas, demurrers, and continuances ſhall ſtand good and y,. 52.

_ * effectual, and be proſecuted and ſued forth in ſuch manner Hutt, 82.

« and form, and in the fame eſtate, condition, and order, as if

the ſame K. had lived.” So that now, if any judicial writ or

proceſs in any court of record were awarded in the time of the

. predeceſſor, it may now be executed in the time of the ſucceſ-

lor. 1 El. Dy. 165. Accord. But yet that act hath not provided

remedy for all the miſchiefs. For, 1. If the original be not (e) (e) Dy. 65. pl.


returned before the K.'s death, it is loſt; for the words are de- * 8 mou 45.


pending in any court : but in an appeal of death, if the writ be 5 Co. 47. b. 2 Sid.


delivered to the Sheriff within the year, and before the return 94. Cr. El. 677,
thereof ; or that the Sheriff hath done any thing, the K. dies, Cro. Jac. 11.
and the year expires before the day of the return, in that caſe
the com. law gives remedy to the plaintiff, ſcil. a Certisrari to
the Sheriff, returnable in the og Bench ; and thereupon
3 the


5,
=
4
.
b 2
44
We
*
a
ho
_-*
4
7


42 * * . * 7 _


—


3 "IE
* > * > . = ano tapes o


© E a
* —


to E. 4. 314.


(a) Dy. 1685 pl. 2.
1 And. 44.
(5) Co, 72. b.


(c) 6 Co. 11. b.
Co. Lit. 260.


Cd) Cro. Car. 10.


(0 Moor 748.
Cro. Jac. 14.
Cro. Car. 10,11.
Doct. pl. 8. Hutt.
82. Cawly 80.


9 7 Co. 12. 2,
Calvin's caſe.
Note, the caſe
of the abdication
is an exception
to this rule.


Diſcontinvance of Proceſs, &c. Part VII,


the pl. ſhall have a re-attachment, although it comes not in
by the return of the Sheriff, but by Certior'; and the reaſon is,
for the neceſſity of the matter, for otherwiſe the pl. who law.
fully brought this writ within the year, without any fault in
him, would loſe his appeal, the year being now paſt. And
therefore foraſmuch as by the act of law the writ is diſconti-
nued, the law will givea means to revive it, to the end the par.
ty ſhall not be without remedy. So ifa man brings a Formedm
againſt a pernor of the profits within the year after the title
accrued, if before the return of the writ, &c. the King dies,
the writ ſhall be removed into the Com. Pleas by Certior', and
thereupon he ſhall have reſummons for the miſchief, as it is
held in 10E. 4. 13. b. & 14. a. 2. By the demiſe of the K. all
offices of (a) Sheriffs are determined; and therefore till new
patents of their offices nothing can be done. But in (5) Lon-
don and other places, where there are Sheriffs of inheritance
by charter, there they may execute any proceſs, or Judicial
writ awarded in the time of the predeceſſor. 3. In the county
court, and the like courts which are not courts of (c) record,
it remains as it was at the com. law: for the words of the act
are, in any of the K. 's courts, or other courts of record.”
Allo the ſtat. extends only to actions, ſuits, &c. between party
and party; and therefore it ſhall not extend to caſes where
the (4) King is party; and therewith agrees Stamf. 98. b.
And therefore it is neceſſary to know what the com. law 1s
in ſuch caſes. If (e) an information of intrufion, or other in-
formation be prelerred, either merely for the K. or tam pro
dom Rege quam pro ſeipſo, and the defendant pleads to iſſue,
or a demurrer be joined, and afterwards the King dies, all is
abated and Joſt, but only the information, and that ſhall ſtand:
for the entry in the Exchequer is (ſhewing the continuance
and death of the K. H. 8.) per qued loquela remanſit fine dit,
dom Edw. ipſum nuper Regem in regimine hujus regni ſut-
ceſſit, ac regimen ejuſdem regni ſuper ſe afſumpſit, ſuper quo con-
cordat” quod præd defend” attachietur de novo ad reſpond' dif
dem” Regi nunc, and thereupon an attachment is awarded,
on the return of which the defend. ſhall appear and plead d-
novo; for although it is true, that the K. in genere doth not
die (ſor there is no, * interregnum) yet in hoc individuo, H. the
K. and Ed, the K. &c. dies. And that appears by record, Hil.
anns 6 Ed. 6 Rot. 50. an information of intruſion was preſet-
red againſt J. Schrymſal, Efq. for intruding into the manor of
Offeley, in the county of Stafford. The like record Mich.


anno 6 Ed. 6. Rot 15. an information preferred by the King's


Attorney, for the King only, againſt Michael Harecourt on
the ſtatute of maintenance, Hil. 5 Ed. 6. Rot. 23. In the
Exchequer in an information on the ſtatute 32 H. 8. for
buying of titles, tam pro domina Rege quam pro ſeipſt, and
after iſſue joined the King died, the defendant 7
t


Part VII. Diſcontinuance of Proceſs, &c.


the attachment, and pleaded de novo. Stmile per idem record”
Rt. 24. Simile per idem record Rot. 54. Simile Mic. 1 & 2
Ph. & Mar. in the Excheq. Rot. 131. in an information of
intruſion againit Rich. Alford, who appeared and pleaded a
ſpecial plea z on which there was a demurrer in Jaw, and the
demurrer entered; and afterwards Q. Mary died, and upon
that a Subpora iſſued to appear de novo, returnable Hil. 1 El.
which is in ligula brevium ibidem; and thereupon the def. plead-
ed another ſpecial plea, on which iſſue was taken. And note,
to ſuch effect as the precedents are in the Exchequer, ſo they
are alſo in the King's Bench as to all manner of informations.
The like Paſch. 5. Ed. 6. Rot. 38. where in a popular aCtion
the King died after demurrer on the evidence, and before


judgment, and the defendant pleaded de novo. Upon which


records the law appears to be, that in all the ſaid caſes the K.
being merely party, or when the information is tam pro dom”
Rege quam pro ſeipſo, when the K. dies before judgment, all
the proceeding on the information is utterly abated and loft,
quia Rex Henric', Cc. fuit pars qui mortuus eft, But the in ſor-—
mation or indictment which is recorded for the King ſhall
ſtand, and the ſaid def. ſhall be driven to anſwer it de nous,
and nothing ſhall ſtand but the information, for that is a re-
cord, and cannot abate. And the law hath great reaſon in
it; for on many penal ſtatutes the ſuit is to be commenced
within a certain time, and therefore if the information or in-
dictment ſhould not continue in force after the K.'s death, by
the K.'s death, which is the act of God, the offence would be
unpuniſhed. But if the K. brings an original writ, as Quare
impedit, &c. there by the K.'s death the writ ſhall abate, be-
cauſe the K. for whom judgment ſhould be given, is dead,
and after the death of the K. who is party, no proceſs can
be awarded on the original, as it may he on an information
or inditment. Vide Mic. 3 & 4 El. 206. vid. 4 Ed. 4. 43. &
44 Br. Offices 25. If one be indicted in the time of one K.
and pleads to ifſue, and afterwards the K. dies, he ſhall plead
de novo, as you may fee in the caſe of Edw. Smith, who plead-
ed to iſſue on an indictment of felony in Middleſex in 3 & 4


Phil. & Mar. in the King's Bench, and after the death of Q.


Mary repleaded in 3 & 4 El. and was acquitted. 80 Cle-


31


Cro. Jac. 14.
Cro, Car. 10, 17s


Cro. Jac. 14.
Doct. pl. 3.


—


Dy. 206. pl, $,


ment Palmer being arraigned in the King's Bench on a non- Cto. Jac. 14.


ſuit in an appeal, at the ſuit of the Queen, Trin. 4 & 5 Phil.
& Mary, and pleaded to iſſue, Qucen Mary died, and Mich,
1& 2 El. he repleaded. Vide Paſch. 1. Ed. 5. Traverſe of
an office in Chancery, and the record ſent into the King's
Bench, and afterwards the King died. And by che ſaid ſtat.
of 1 Ed. 6. ik is enacted, „that in all caſes where any
per ſon or perſons heretofore have been, or hereafter ſhall


* be tound guilty of any manner of treaſon, murder, man-
I 4 « ſlaughter,


Diſcontinuance of Proceſs, &c. Part VII.


* ſlaughter, rape, or other felony whatſoever, for the which

* judgment of death ſhall, or may enſue, and ſhall be re-
“ pried to priſon without judgment, &c. that the Juſtices
of gaol delivery ſhall have full power and authority to give
« judgment of death againſt ſuch perſon ſo found guilty, and
6 repried, &c.” Before that act at the common law, if a
man had been indicted and convicted by verdict or confeſ-
hon before any Commiſſioners, and before judgment the K.
died, in that caſe no judgment could have been given; for
the King, for whom the juqhment ſhould be given, was
dead; and the authority of the Judges who ſhould give judg-
ment was determined: and this act doth remedy thoſe ſpecial
caſes, But all the King's ſuits by original bill, information,
or indictment, for any other offence, do remain as at the
common law.

But note, by the ſtat. 6 Anne, c. 7. the Judges commiſſions

do not now determine by the King's death. 7 |


The


Part VII.


The Caſe of a Fine levied by the King
PP ĩ ͤ K


M ich. 2 Jacobi.


HE King was informed, that divers manors and lands

were entailed to Gilbert de Clare Earl of Glouceſter,

and the King who now is, is heir of the body of the ſaid

Gilbert inheritable to the ſaid land; ſome of which manors,

the King and others his progenitors, for good conſideration,

had granted to divers ſubjects; all which grants (as was pre-

tended) were in reſpect of the ſaid ancient eſtate · tail utterly

void. The King that now is, of grace and good will to his

ſubjects, and for their quiet and repoſe, required Popham

Chief Juſtice, and Coke Attorney-General, to conſider how

by law he might eſtabliſh the eſtate of the ſaid patentees and

others claiming under them, againſt the ſaid eſtate- tail.

Whereupon, they ſeverally in the vacation time did conſider

on that point ; and afterwards on conference they agreed in

one, that the King being tenant in tail, by a gift made to

ſome of his anceſtors being ſubjects (as the queſtion is moved)

might by fine levied on a grant and render bar the eſtate- tail,

and that for divers reaſons. - 1. For as much as the King is

bound (a) by the ſtat. De donis conditionalibus, as it is adjudged (a) Ant. at

in Lord Barkley's Caſe, Plow. Com. 240. By which act the 1 Co. 44. b.

Sing 5 reſtrained from alienation | for it 1s enacted by the "+ 4 * The
aid act, quod finis ipſo jure ſit nullus; reaſon requires, that A

the King wall ooh duet of the acts of 4 (6) H. 7. & N

32 (c) H. 8. which enables tenant in tail to bar his iſſues: 344. 2. b. 248.b.

for it is agreed in all our books, that the King ſhall take IS

benefit of any act, although he be not named, 12 (4) H. 7. 24. Sn

21. a. 35 (e) H. b. 60. the Lord Barkley's caſe, Plow. Com. (% 32 H. 8.

240. And it would be hard, that the King being iſſue in tail un 68. b.

of a gift made to a ſubject, ſhould be in worſe condition than 1 Roll. Rep. 151.

1f he had not been K. 2. There is a great difference when the (4) 11Co. 68: b.

K claims in reſpect of his natural capacity, as heir of the body, 6

per for mam doni, as heir of the body of a ſubject; for there he ſhall 137. *

be bound by an act of parliam (and that was the principal rea-

ton of the judgment in the Lord Backley's caſe, where the giſt
. | . was


(a) Plow. 248. b.


} 4 H. 7. Co 24.


() 10 Co. 50. a.
32 Hi. 8. c. 36.


The Caſe of a Fine levied by the K. &c. Part VII,


was to King H. 7. and to the heirs of his body) and when the
King claims a thing in reſpect of his royal and politic capa-
City, there a general act ſhall not bind him, unleſs he be ex-
preſly named, unleſs it be in ſpecial caſes. 3. In the caſe at
bar, the bar which the ftat. De donis conditionalibus doth work,
is againſt the iſſues in tail; for the tenant in tail himſelf,
without any help of the act might bar himſelf (and ſo might
the King alſo by ſpecial grant.) Then the iſſues in tail at the
time of the fine levied by the King are but ſubjeAs, who are
bound by the ſaid acts, and the eſtate-tail barred by the fine
and proclamations, And note, that the act of 32 H. 8. doth
recite, that (for avoiding all ſtrifes and controverſies) which
general word (all) includes alſo the caſe of the King. And
it was obſerved that the ſtat. De dznis, &c. which binds the
K ing ſaith, quod deminus Rex (a) perpendens quod necefſarium ef!
in caſibus prædictis ponere remedium, ſlatuit, quod voluntas dona-
toris, &c. And the ſtat, of || 4 H. 7. which gives power to
dock the eſtate tail, faith, © Ihe King conſidereth that. fines
„ ought to be of greateſt ſtrength to avoid ſtrifes and debates,
“ and to be a final end and concluſion : it is enacted that
s after the fine engroſſed and proclaimed, &c. the ſame fine
* ſhall conclude privies, &c.” - Within which words the
King's iſſues are included. Alſo the ſtat. of 32 (6) H. 8.
enacts, © That all fines levied of any lands entailed to the
«« perſon ſo levying the ſame fine, or to any of his anceſtors,
« &c.” And Gilbert de Clare was in - propriety of ſpeech
the King's anceſtor, and ſo within the exprels letter of the act.
But it ſeemed to them, that after the render made, it was ne-
ceſſary to have letters patent, to grant to the conuſee by ex-
preſs words, that he may enter into the land; for otherwiſe
the fine being executory on a grant and render, it may be
doubted if the conuſee, without any ſuch grant can enter on
the King. And afterwards, Mich. 5 Jacobi, after the death
of Popham, this opinion on conſideration and conference had
with Fleming and Coke, Chief Juſtices, and Tanfield, Chief
Baron, was affirmed for good law for the reaſons and cauſes
before given. And divers fines have been levied by the King


according to that reſolution,


>


NEVILis


part VII. py z
Arr.. 75 A 2 ee ee .


ebe de-de, Aer, Lots Lew Lens, Bf L RE
4 — RANK © peahs dey A 22 1 a.
n .. "Af penny pe


ers IO came — K. . nat 7 xp .
. care he . 3 — . r˖ö. ...d


Ae. pure.”
© M-E CC


Fee p A; Ae. „ 1 ment 1, ſaid, -
PERL + BE of © © Pam F<" of 2 Fac Hat HA 22 — . > 2 that 4 dignity 18


W not ſubje@t
* e 5 Mic. acobi, * | of — 4 :
Caf lofor0 — Keb. „ .. 2 * — common law,


— — te. nor entailable
* 8 . PE , — MM £9 the Rat. De by
o donis, nor bar-


TN this term, this caſe by the command of the King was rable by<the tat,

propounded to all the Judges. Anno 21 R. 2. Ralph Ne- of Fives, not-
vil, Lord of Raby, was by letters patent under the great ſeal —
8 Earl of Weſtmorland, to him, and the heirs males of Nevil's = *
his body; which Ralph, by Margaret Stafford his firſt wife ib 3. That ſew
had iſſue, Ralph Earl of Weſtmorland, to whom Charles late n
Earl of Weſtmorland was lineal heir male of the body of the & — * — =
ſaid Ralph the firſt donee ; and the ſaid Ralph the firſt donee, Jon 12.3, &207.
by Joan, daughter of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaſter, had 1 CG N
iſſue, George Lord Latimer (for all his elder brothers were dead land? 8
n iſſue male) from whom is lineally deſcended Edward nours cannot be
Nevil? ho now is the Tearelt iſſue male to the faid donee; — ws
and afterwards Charles Earl of Weſtmorland was attainted by To 7 ES {1 pal
outlawry and by Parliamenfof high treaſon, and died without S 57.
iſſue male; and now the ſaid Edward Nevil claimed to be 22
Earl of Weſtmorland. And in this caſe three queſtions were 22 . _
moved to all the Judges of England. I. If the ſaid limitation „ ry
of the ſaid dignity to the ſaid Ralph and the heirs males of his * —_ 2
body be within the ſtat. De donis condittonalibus, or a fee- ſimple See 5 > aur.
conditional at the common law, 2. Admitting that it was 3 <a u. —
an eſtate-tail within the ſaid ſtatute, if by the attainder of 25 Cf pA
treaſon the eſtate-tail was forfeited by a condition in law tacie 2 %; had
annexed to the ſtate of the dignity. 3. If the eſtate of the 22 EY ou
dignity was forfeited by the act of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. Or that 4em. HAIR
the ſaid Edward Nevil as heir male of the body of the firſt Zoe Gone of 1/1
donee ough Ao be Earl of Weſtmorland. And theſe points r + /<-79<
were argued and debated at Serjeant's Inn in Fleet-ſtreet by E Ante —
the King's Attorney, and by the counſel of the faid Edward i, . (bar, 346:
Nevil. And as to the firſt it was objected, that the L.
ſaid dignity was not within the ſtatute De denis,
Fc, oy divers cauſes. 1. Becauſe it was a great dig-* , Ae


nity derived from the King, as the fountain of 1
X —— 74 A Aer. F FILE LE Ls Gignityy
42 2 RS, . 2 — & SO .
S . eee. . . 8
Fo e e gp ea drag 7 a ifs wo ete 7 /btcy


C54 of rien Lt ae, > a xls 7.
8388 £7 2 e, .


25 er rd AE.


[
.
l
1


1
|
i}
|

j


(!
4
|
N


*


|
1


*


Hem


—


Hes, 9


7 471-17
Ax
1 4) 1


Caſes in Parl. 1.


(a) Co. Lit. 20. a.
(% Co. Lit. 19. a.
20. 8. 1 Roll. 8 37.


NE VII 's Caſe. Part VI,


dignity, and therefore it is not within the ſaid act, which
ſpeaks only de tenement” que multetiens dantur ſub conditions,
viz. cum aliquis terr” ſuam dat alicui viro, &c. ſo this dignity
cannot be included within this word Tenements or Land.
2. The ſtat. ſaith, in omnibus pra dif? caſibus poſt prolem ſuf.
citatꝰ hujuſm” feoffati habuerunt poteftat” alienandi, &c. But this
dignity was adherent to the blood of the donee, and could
not be aliened or granted, neither after nor before iſſue; and
therefore ſuch caſes of dignities were out of the miſchief, the
words and the intent of the makers of the act De dons, Sc.
And the opinion in Manxel's cafe in Pl. Com, the grant of a
thing which doth not concern land or tenements, nor (a) ex-
erciſable in lands and tenements, as an (5) aunuity which is
perſonal, is not within the ſtat. De donis, Sc. And it was
ſaid this dignity was perſonal, and annexed to the blood of
the donee, and by conſequence could not be entailed within


. gibt was made by the ſaid letters patent Earl of Weſtmorland,


V,

br the le eee, d.

e A. lol
Leng

724and therefore may be entailed within the ſaid ſtat, as it is ſaid


— were as deputies to Earls, though now it is changed.
7 therefore ſuch office of dignity of any place doth concern land,


who by the common law isa great conſervator of the peace, and
and ſheriffs are called Vicecom' becauſe in ancient times they
And


Roll. 838. in Pl. Com. in Manxel's caſe. The office of ſteward, (d) re-


erte A, barre ceiver, or bailiff of ſuch a manor may be entailed within the


Hof cr


| 2


the ſaid ſtat. becauſe it is exerciſable within lands, 5 E. 4.


(% Co. Lit. ac. a. The office of (e) Marſhal of England was entailed, 1 H. 7. 28.


5 E. 4. 3. 8.
(Co. Lit. 20. a,
(z) Roll. $38.
Co, Lit. 20. a.


b. An eſtate- tail may be of a ſoſterſhip, (/) 18 E. 3. 27. The
office of ſerjeancy or cuſtody of the (g) church of Nichol” was
intailed. 32 H. 6. 28. The earldom of Shrewſbury was en-
tailed to ]. Talbot, Ent. and the heirs males of his body. And
have ſeen a Parliament writ in ann. 27 H. 6 by which Brom-


with limitation in the writ to him and the heirs males of hi


(Co. Lit. 20. a. ſtet was ſummoned to Parliament by the name Lord (5) Gin


*


(i) 9 Co. 124. b.
Co. Lit. (9. a.
F. N. B. 82. C.


(90 9 Co. 124. b.
2 Roll. 515,516.
Co. Lit. 69. b.


body. And it is to be known, that as in ancient time th
ſenators of Rome were elected @ cenſu of their revenues, ſo
here in ancient times in conferring of nobility, reſpect was
had to their revenues, by which their dignity and nobility
- might be ſupported and maintained. And therefore a Knigit
ought to have (i) 201. land per ann. a Baron 13 Knights lees
and a quarter, an Earl 20 Knights fees (for there was not any
Duke in England from the time of the Conqueſt until 11 E. 3.
and the D. of Cornwal was the firſt D, after the Conquelt in
England) And that appears by the ſtat. of Hag Charta, c 2.
For always the 4th part of ſuch revenue, which is requiſite by
the law to the dignity ſhall be paid to the K. for (4) a relief;
as the relief of a Kt. is 51. which is the 4th part of 20 1. which


83. b. 2 laſt. 5, is a Kt's revenue; and the relief of a Baron is 100 marks, which


6, 7. 17 E. 3.
4 64. a,


is the 4th part of his revenue, viz. 400 marks, and includes 13
| | Knights


ee, , Kue, ee.


| x
part VII. be E Ji Ls Caſ AA We Abd fron
| err f
an Earl is 100). F-#- \


, women Eats Nx |
— n — £ * bY
. | 0 . 33 g ö


224
Knights fees and a quarter; and the reliefof
which is the 4th part of 4001. which is the revenue of an Earl. Co. Lit. 69. a.
Andit appears by the records of the Exchequer, that the relief
of a Duke ſhall amount to (a) 2001. and by conſequence his ( 9 Co. 124.b,
revenue ought to be 800 J. per ann. and that is the reaſon in
our books, that every one of the nobility. is preſumed in law ,
to have (6) ſufficient freehold ad ſu/tinend' nomen & onus, Vide (5)6 Co. 52. db. \
H. 6. 48. 11 H. 4. 15. 14 UI. 6.2. See the Counteſs of 1 *
Rutland's caſe in the Sixth Part of my Reports. Vide Camd. 367. N
f. 107. Nec dum hereditaria fuit hæc dignitas (ſc. Comitis) ve- {

rum cum Gulielm Normanus, jam victor, ſummam rerum in hoc

regns adminiſtraret, Comites creati ſunt feudales, hæreditarii &
patrimaniales, ut in antiquis cartis videre eſt, de tertio denaris
comitat', i. qui de placitis proven' in cod comitatu. And every


Baron and other of nobility is always created of ſome place; f


and now to what value the ſaid old rents in the time of H. 3.
& E. 1. at this day do amount to, every one knows. And ſo
it was clearly reſolved, that the dignity in the caſe in queſtion
was within the ſtat. De donis conditional” ; and with this reſo-
lution agree divers precedents, and the experience and prac-
tice always uſed ; for the earldom of Northumberland was en-
tailed by Q. Mary to 'F. Percy, and the heirs males of his
body; and for default of fuch iſſue that H. his brother ſhould -

be Earl, to him and the heirs males of his body: and in that

caſe by the attainder of T. of treaſon, H. was after his death

Larl of Northumberland by force of his remainder, and
his iſſue enjoy it at this day, So A. Dudley was by Q. El.
created Earl of Warwick to him and the heirs males of his
body, and for default of ſuch iſſue, that R. his brother ſhould
be Earl, to him and the heirs males of his body: and R. was
created Earl of L. in tail, with ſuch limitation to his brother 8 \
A. and many other precedents are to the ſame effet. As to 2 Prat. * N
the 2d point it was reſolved, that although this dignity be o_,
within the ſtat. De donis conditional”, yet by the attainder of (c) * _—
treaſon if the ſtat. of 26 H. 8. had 6, made, this dig- Law (6 Good.
nity had been forfeited by force of a condition in law zacite zus., Sawyer's
annexed to the eſtate of the dignity : for thoſe who are Earls 8 a
have an office of great truſt and confidence, and are created AAA 2
to two purpoſes; Cd) 1. Ad conſulend Regi tem?” pacic. 2. Ad (% 1 Ce- 58.
defendend Regem & patr* temp” belli : and therefore antiquity

hath given them two enſigns to reſemble theſe two duties;

for It, their head is adorned with a cap of honour and coro-

net, and their body with a robe in reſemblnnce of counſel. 2.

They are girt with a ſword in reſemblance that they ſhould be

faithful and icyal to defend their Prince and country. And of |
both theſe Bracton ſpeaks, lib. 1. c. 8. (e) Comites, viz. ſive a co- (*) Co. 49. 3
mitat ſive a 2 nomen ſumpſer, qui etiam dici paſſunt conſules a |
conſulendo; Reges enim tales ſibi aſſociant, ad conſulendum & regend*

populum Dei, ordinantes tos in magna honore et poteſtale, et nomine,

quando


(s) 2 Roll. 155.


2 Roll. Rep. 34 l.
Lane 46. Godb.


by.
. Jim 1303 410.356.


Cro. Jac. 512,
513.


Co. Lit. 19. a.


/


NE VvII's Caſe, - Part VII.


guando accingunt gladiis, i. ringis gladior'. By which appear
theſe two ends, counſel and defence. Then when ſuch per-


ſon againſt the duty and end of 3 dignity, takes not only
counſel but arms alſo againſt the Ki


ng to deſtroy him, and
thereof is attainted by due courſe of law, by that he hath for-


feited his dignity by a condition tacit? annexed to the eſtate of
the dignity ; in the ſame manner, as if tenant in tail of an (a)
office of truſt miſuſe it, or uſe it not, theſe are ſorfeitures
of ſuch offices for ever by force of a condition in law tacit} an-
nexed to their eſtates, as it is held in 11 Ed. 4. 1. 20 E. 4. 5,
6. 39 H. 6. 32. 22 Aſſ. 34. 8 H. 4. 18. 2H. 7. 11. 14 U.
7. I. Plow. Com. 370. Nevil's caſe. As to the third point
it was reſolved by all the Juſtices, if that it had not been for-
feited by the common law, that by the fat. of 26 H. 8 c. 13.
the ſaid Charles had forfeited the dignity. For the words of
the act are, ** ſhall loſe and forfeit to the King's highneſs, his
c heirs and ſucceſſors, all ſuch lands, tenements, and here-


© ditaments, which any ſuch offender ſhall have of any ctate -


© of inheritance in uſe or poſſeſſion, by any right, title, or
« means :” and this dignity was an hereditament, and therein
the ſaid Charles had an eſtate of inheritance. And where the
ſtat. ſaith (in uſe or poſſeſſion) that was to expreſs, that all
manner of inheritances ſhould be forfgited for treaſon, and in
their judgments all inheritances were cither in uſe or in poſ-


| ſeſſion, (for that act doth not extend to rights or titles) and it


was neceſſary to add this word Uſe, for by the common law
an uſe, which was but a truſt and confidence, was not for-
feited by attainder of treaſon, And when an uſe was ex-


preſſed, then the addition of poſſeſſion was neceſſary, for


otherwiſe nothing but uſes would be given to the K. And
therefore it was reſolved, that an annuity of inheritance ſhall
be forfeited by force of this act by attainder of treaſon, for
that is an hereditament; and that was the firſt general act by
which an eſtate-tail was forfeited to the King for treaſon. At
the common law before the ſtat. De donis conditionalibus, it
lands had been given to one and the heirs males of his body,
in that caſe, as well the donor as the donee had a poſſibility,
the donor of a reverter, if the donee died without iffue male,
and the donee to have power to alien, if he had iſſue male. For
if the donee had iſſue a ſon, now to ſome intent the condition
was performed, for poſ? prolem ſuſcitatam, he had pote/latem
alienandi; and the reaſon thereof was, becauſe he having a
fee-ſimple, and having iſſue, his iſſue could not avoid the


alienation, becauſe he claimed fee ſimple, whereof his father


might bar him. And although the donee and his iſſue alſo
after ſuch alienation died without ifſue, yet the donor, who
had but a poſhbility or condition in law, and no reverſion ot
eſtate in bim, could not recover the land againſt the alie-
nee; for by the haivng of iſſue the condition was per-
formed as to this intent, ſcil. to make an alienation. But
in the ſame caſe at the common law, if the donee =

* : ill


— wm 2 ©


Part VII. NEevir's Caſe.


'&
iſſue a ſon and died, yet the ſon had not an abſolute fee - ſimple
in him, but only the fame power which his father had, ſc. to
alien; and if ſuch iſſue died without iſſue, and without any
alienation made, the land ſhall revert to the donor, as Brian
held, 12 E. 4- 3. & 18 E. 3. 46. by Huſe. For a collateral
heir who is not of the body of the donee is not within the form
of the gift, the limitation being to the heirs males of the body
of the donee, which limitation of heirs males of the body,
doth exclude all collateral heirs to inherit : but the policy of
the law was, to give power after iſſue to alien for two cauſes ;
one that the eſtate of a purchaſor ſhould not be avoided by a
remote poſſibility, /c. if the donee and his iſſue alſo ſhould die
without iſſue : 2. If he having a fee-{imple ſhould not have
power after iſſue to alien, it would be in a manner a perpe-
tuity, and a reſtraint of alienation for ever, which the com-
mon law for many cauſes will not ſuffer, and in 4 H. 3 For-
medon 64. it is adjudged, that where lands were given in
frank-marriage, and the donees had iſſue and died, and after-
wards the iſiue died without iſſue; that his collateral heir
ſhould not inherit ; for the donor recovered the land in a For-
medon in the Reverter ; and in the ſaid caſe if the donee had
ifluc two ſons, and died, and the elder fon had iſſue a daughter
and died without iſſue male, the younger ſon ſhould inherit
a ſee· ſimple, per formam dont at the common law: fo it lands


35
Co, Lit. 19. Js.


8 Co. 35. b.


1 Roll. 841.


were given to one, and to his heirs females of his body, and he


had iiſue a ſon and a daughter, and died, the daughter ſhould
inherit an eſtate in fee-fmple per farmam dom. And mark well
the ſtat, De donis, Ec, doth not create an eſtate- tail, but of ſuch
eſtate as was fee-ſimple conditional, and deſcendible in ſuch
form at the common law, as now by the ſtat. the land ſhall de-
icend ; and the only miſchief was, that the donee after iſſue
had power to alien in difinheriſon of his iiſues, and bar of the
reverſion : but it doth appear by the ſaichaCt, that although the
donee had iſſue, yet he had not an abſolute fee, fo that the
collateral heir of the iſſue ſhould inherit; for the words of the
act are, Et præterea cum defictente exitu de hujuſm' feoffatis, tene-
ment” fic datum ad donator* vel ad ejus hæred revert: debuit per
form” in carta de dono hujuſm* expreſſam, licet exitus, ft quis fucrit,
obiiſſet, per fatlum tamen & ferffamentum, Sc. excluſt fuerunt
bucuſque de reves ſione, &c. by which it appears, that if the
heir iy tail dies without iſſue, and without any alienation made,
that the land ſhall revert, and by conſequence {hall not deſcend
to the collateral heir, 30 E. 1. Formed. 65. If the donee in


12 E. 4. 3. b.
acc' But ice
Plow. 250. b.


per Dyer.


Co. Lit. 19. 4.


tail had aliened before the ſtat. and afterwards had iflue, and>11 Co 72.


then the iſſue died without iſſue, the land ſhould revert : for
he had not power to alien at the time of the alienation but
ſuch alienation ſhould bar the iſſue, as it is adjudged in 19 E.
2. Formed. 61. becauſe he claimed fee-ſimple. N. E. Theſe
rules yet hold place in cafe of a grant of an annuity to one and
the heirs males of his body, and all other inheritances whic
ale not within the ſtat. De donis conditionalitus,
| | Penal


*.


Plow. 235. b.
245. b.


Co. Lit. Ig. 2


h 2. I Roll. 835.


Plow. 2, 3.


Dav. 69. b.

Hard. 448.

1 Siderf. 6.

3 Inft. 186, 187.

1 Show: 398.

1 Salk. 134.
Mod. 144,
Mod, 86.


Part VII,


PENAL STATUTES.


Hil. 2 Jacobi.


z


HIS term upon letters directed to the Judges to hare

| their reſolution concerning the validity of a grant made
by Queen Elizabeth, under the great ſeal, of the penalty and
benefit of a penal ſtatute, with power to diſpenſe with the ſaid
ſtatute, and to make a warrant to the Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper of the great ſeal, to make as many diſpenſations, and
to whom. he pleaſed; and on great conſideration and deli-
beration by all the Judges of England, it was reſol ved, that the
ſaid grant was utterly againſt law. And in this caſe theſe points
were reſolved, that when a ſtatute is made by Parliament for
the good of the commonwealth, the King cannot give the
penalty, benefit, and diſpenſation of ſuch-.aCt to any ſubject;
or give power to any ſubject to diſpenſe with it, and to make
a warrant to the great ſeal for licences in ſuch caſe to be made:
for when a ſtatute is made pro bono publics, and the King (as
the head of the commonwealth, and the fountain of juſtice


and mercy) is by the whole realm truſted with it, this confi-


dence and trult is ſo inſeparably joined and annexed to the
royal perſon of the King in ſo high a point of ſovereignty, that
he cannot transfer it to the diſpoſition or power of any private
rſon, or to any private uſe ; for it was committed to the
ing by all his ſubjects for the good of the commonwealth,
And it he may grant the penalty of one act, he may
grant the penalty of two, and fo in infinitum. And ſuch
grant of any penal law was never ſeen in our books, nor be-
fore this age was any ſuch grant ever made; but it is true,
that the King may (upon ſome cauſe moving him in re-
ſpect of time, place, or perſon, &c.) make a non o/tante
| =


part VII.


Penal Statutes.
to diſpenſe with any particular perſon, that he ſhall not incur 3 Iaſt. 154.


the penalty of the ſtat. and therewith agree our books. But
the King cannot commit the ſword of his juſtice, or the oil
of his mercy concerning any penal ſtatute to any ſubject, as


is aforeſaid, It was alſo reſolved, that the penalty of an act Cro. Arg. 109.
of Parliament cannot be levied by any grant of the King,


only according to the purport and purview of the act; for the
act which gives the penalty ought to be followed only in the
proſecution and levying thereof; and great inconveniences
would thereon follow, if penal laws ſhould be transferred to


ſubjects. 1. Juſtice thereby would be ſcandalized ; for when 2 Inft, 43.


ſuch forfeitures are granted, or promiſed to be granted before
they are recovered, it is the cauſe of a more violent and undue


proceeding. 2. When it is publicly known that the for- 2 Inft. 229.


teiture and penalty of the act is granted, it is a great cauſe
that the act itſelf is not executed; for the Judge and Jurors,
and every other is thereby diſcouraged, 3. It will thereupon
follow, that no penalty will by any act of Parliament be given
to the King, but limited to ſuch uſes with which the King


cannot diſpenſe,


And hereupon divers who had ſued to have


the benefit of certain penal laws, were upon this reſolution


denied. And the certificate of all the Judges of England


concerning ſuch grants of penal laws, and ſtatutes, was in


theſe words.


& May it pleaſe your Lordſhips, we have (as


« we are required by your honourable letters of the 21ſt of
« Ottob. laſt) conferred and conſidered amongſt ourſelves
« (calling to us his Majeſty's counſel learned) of ſuch matters
&« as were thereby referred unto us, and have thereupon with
one conſent reſolved for law and conveniency as followeth.
5 11t, That the proſecution and execution of any penal ſtatute
cannot be granted to any, for that the act being made by
* the policy and wiſdom of the parliament for the general
« good of the whole realm, and of truſt committed to the
King as to the head of juſtice and of the weal public, the
* ſame cannot by law be transferred over to any ſubject; nei-
* ther can any penal ſtatute be proſecuted or executed by his
© Majeſty's grant, in other manner or order of proceeding,
than by the act itſelf is provided and preſcribed : neither do
* we find any ſuch grants to any in former ages: and of late
* years, upon doubt conceived, that penal laws might be
* ſought to be granted over, ſome Parliaments have forborn to
give forfeitures to the crown, and have diſpoſed thereof
to the relief of the poor, and other charitable uſes, which


11
cc


cannot be granted or employed otherwife. We are alſo Cr. Arg. 19g,


of opinion, that it is inconvenient, that the forkeitures
upon penal laws, or others of like nature, ſhould be
granted to any, before the ſame be recovered or veſted in his
Majeſty by due and lawful proceeding ; for that in our ex-


Vol. LV.


perience


[37] 36


6 Mod. 86.
but Skinner 173.


bs r neg


; | Penal Statutes. Part VII.


tc perience it maketh the more violent and undue proceeding
cc againſt the ſubject, to the ſcandal of juſtice, and the offence
« of many. But if by the induſtry or diligence of any, there
& accrueth any benefit to his Majeſty, after the recovery,
& ſuch have been rewarded out of the fame at the King's
c good pleaſure, &c. Dated 8 Novemb. 1604.“ And to
this letter all the Judges of England ſet their hands,


LILLINGe


e + 1 F - aids © MA. aan ooo _ ;,  % w_ 7 ET *'


as fd a, ” _ FLY =


as


Patt VII.


ä a : 1 8


—


——


LILLINGSTON's Caſe.


*


Mich. 5 Jacobi in C. B.


OHN DUNCOMB brought an action of debt againſt
Tho. Lillingſton, (which began in the Common Pleas,
Paſch. 4 Jacobi, rot. 704.) for 195 l. and declared, that one
Fauſtin Dixwell, and Mary his wife, and the ſaid Tho. Lil-
lingſton, and Mary his wife, were ſeiſed of the rectory of
Lillingſton in the county of Bedford in fee, and Mi. 31 El.
thereof levied a fine to Papworth and Chambers, and the
heirs of Papworth, who grarited and rendered a rent-charge
of 301. out of the ſaid rectory to the ſaid Fauſtin for his life,
to begin after the death of Mary his wife, the rent yearly to
be paid at the feaſts of St. Michael the Archangel, and the
Annunciation: Proviſo ſemper, quod predie?” conceſſio predic”
annualis redditus 30 l. non aliqualit” ſe extendat ad onerand” per-


[38] 37


Paſch. 4 Jae.
Rot. 704.

4 Leon. 275»
279. bo


fonas dic! Papworth & Chambers, ſed tantummads ad onerand”


dif rectoriam totd vita ipſius Fauſtint ; and rendered the ſaid
rectory to Fauſtin and Mary, during the life of Mary, the
remainder to Thomas Lillingſton and Mary his wife in tail,
the remainder to the right heirs of Lillingſton. 2 Octob.


.
Eliz. the ſaid Fauſtin before Sir Chriſt. Wray, Chief Juſtice,


acknowledged a recognizance of 5001. in the nature of a
ſtatute ſtaple, according to the ſtatute of 23 H. 8. to Dun-
comb now plaintiff: 20 Aug. 39 Eliz. Mary the wife of
Fauſtin died, after whoſe death Lillingſton and Mary his
wife entered into the faid rectory, and were thereof ſeiſed
in tail, the remainder in fee to Lillingſton. The ſaid Fauſtin,
15 Aprilis 40 El. by his deed releaſed to the ſaid Lillingſton
and his heirs the ſaid rent of 30l. per ann. The plaintiff 21
Apr. 40 Eliz. ſued out of the Chancery a Certiorari to the
Clerk of the Statutes, &c. whereupon the ſaid recognizance
in the nature of a ſtatute was certified; and ſued forth
an Extent, by which the ſaid rent was extended, and upon
Liberate delivered to the plaintiff, the plaintiff, for ſix years
and a half ending at the feaſt of St. Michael the Archangel,
an. 2 Facobi, brought an action of debt againſt Lillingſton,
5 who all that time was tenant of the land, and averred the
life of Fauſtin. And upon all this caſe two queſtions
were moved; 1. Whether this rent of 3ol! per ann. being

| 2 extinct


* p


rr


LIIIIN Gs rox's Caſe, Part vn.


extinct by the ſaid releaſe, had ſuch eſſence as to the plaintiff
the conuſee, that it might be extended and delivered to the
plaintiff. 2. Admitting that it might be extended and delivered
to the plaintiff, whether the plaintiff as this caſe is, could
maintain an action of debt. As to the firſt it was objeCted,
that this recognizance is in the nature of a ſtatute-ſtaple, and
the ſtatute of 27 E. 3. c. 9. to which the ſtatute of 23 H. 8.
c. 6. refers, gives power to the Mayors of the Staple to take
recognizance of debts, &c. and that, on certificate of ſuch
recognizance into the Chancery, a writ be ſent to arreſt the
bodies of the debtors, without letting them to mainprize, and
to ſeiſe their lands and tenements, goods and chattels, and
that the writ be returned into the Chancery with the certifi-
cate of the value of the ſaid lands and tenements, goods and
chattels, and that thereon execution be made from time to
time in the ſame manner as is contained in the ſtatute mer-
chant: upon which words it was argued, that rent extinct
before execution ſued was not within the faid words, /c. to
ſeize the lands and tenements of the ſaid debtors. For at the
time of the execution ſued the debtor had not the rent, but it
was utterly extinct, and gone by the ſaid reledſe. 2. The
writ of Extent is to extend amnia terras & catalla ipſius Fauſtin,
& in manus dict nuper Reginæ ſeifiri faceret, ut ea prefat' Ji
hanni liberart faciat; and foraſmuch as the rent was extinct
before the ſaid writ of Extent, it is not in efſe, or to be ex-
tended, or taken into the King's hands, or to be delivered to
the plaintiff. 3. It would be againſt reaſon, that the freehold
of the rent being extinct, the plaintiff ſhould have execution
of it, and thereby to have but a chattel: and the opinion of 3 '
(a) Dy. 205-P-7- & 4 Phil. & Ma. (a) Dyer fo. 205. was cited, where the opi-
Poſtea 38. b. nion is, that a rent extinct cannot be extended, &c. To
3 which it was anſwered and reſolved, that to ſome purpoſes by
(b) 4 Leon. 235. the common law a rent extinct ſhall be ſaid in eſe (6) as to a
239-2 Ig. 3. ſtranger ; and therefore, if the huſband ſeiſed of a rent in fee,
2 Roll. 471. releaſes the rent to the tenant of the land, and aſterwards the
Hob. 165, huſband dies, now the wife ſhall be (c) endowed of this rent
() 12 2 ſo extinct, and ſhall have a writ of Dower. The words of
1 Co. 8), b. Which writ are, Præcipe A. quod juſle reddat B. tertiam partem
$ Co. 145. a. b. 30 tbr” reddit” and the writ of Dower, unde nihil habet is,
| precipe A. quod juſie reddat B. &c. rationabilem dotem ſuam que
ei contingit de libero tenemento quod fuit, Ic. and ſhe ſhall have
grand Cape, or a petit Cape, as her caſe requires, to ſeize the
rent into the King's hands: for quoad petentem, it is in eſſe,
although in truth the rent is extinct; and ſee in the lord
(4) 6 Co. 79. a. Abergaveny's caſe, fo. 78. ( 4 ) in the Sixth Part of my Re-
ports, many caſes where a thing extinct ſhall be ſaid in ff
(e) x Jones 62. (e) for the benefit of a ſtranger. 2. It was obſerved, that
(1 3 Co, 13. a. the ſaid act of (f) 23 H. 8. cap. 6. (by force of which the
ſaid recognizance in the caſe at bar was taken) for the exe-
cution refers to the ſtatute ſtaple and ſtatute merchant,
ſeit, the ſaid act of 27 E. 3. refers to ſtatute 2
| chan


Part VI. LIILINGSTox's Caſe. [39] 38


chant, de an. 13 (a) E. 1. The words of which ſtatute are, () 3 Co. 12. a.
( And when the lands of the debtor be delivered to the
«© merchant, he {hall have ſeiſin of all the lands that were in
ce the hands of the debtor, the day of the recognizance made,
« jn whoſe hands ſoever that they come afterwards, by feof-
« ment or otherwiſe.)” Then preſently by the recognizance
acknowledged the rent was bound, and ſhall be extended by
the expreſs purview of the ſtat. in whoſe hand ſoever it ſhall
come, and no more than the releaſe of Fauſtin ſhall hurt after
execution had by the conuſee, no more ſhall it before execu-
tion, for the rent was liable to execution preſently, by the re-
cognizance acknowledged. So if a man hath judgment to
recover debt or damages, the rent which he hath of any
eſtate of freehold is thereby liable to it; and therefore although
after judgment he releaſes it, * plaintiff ſhall have execu-
tion of a moiety by Elegit, which is given by the ſtatute of
Weſt. x. (or 2.) c. 18. the words of which ſtatute are; /iberent
ei medietatem terræ debitoris ; which by conſtruCtion of law, is


o


of all which he had at the time of the judgment given, or at Ze< . N


2


any time after. And in Cheny's caſe, 27 El. in the court of 7 C9: 20. Co,
Wards it was reſolved, that eu $1 he 2 reverſion did en- Et. ga. Sec Cro.
ſeoff leſſee for years to the uſe of others, that alchough the .

leaſe would be ſurrendered and extinct by the common law, _

yet by the (5) ſaving of the ſtatute of 27 H. 8. of uſes, the (5) Moor 126.8,
term of the feoffee-was ſaved. Alſo in the ſame court 28 El. 1
in one [fed's caſe it was reſolved, that where the lord did en- 509, 119. 2
feoff the copyholder to the uſe of others, that the copyhold O. Bendl. 57,
eſtate by the ſaving of the ſaid act was preſerved. So in caſe _ 19. 0.

at bar, by the act De mercatoribus, all the lands (which includes Riya. 148.

all hereditaments extendable) which the debtor had at the day

of the recognizance acknowledged, ſhall be delivered; which


act doth preſerve the rent to be in eſſe as to the execution of


the conuſee. And the caſe in 21 (c) E. 3. 18. b. and (4) (/) Fitz. Mortm.


F. N. B. 223. I. is, if L. and tenant Abbot be, and the L. (4) ; Ca. 3. 4.
releaſes to the Abbot his ſeigniory, it is Mortmain by the ſtat. 9
De religioſis, and the lord paramount ſhall have it by force of
the ſaid act, and yet the words of the act are dominus frodi
taliter alienati ſhall have it, and by the releaſe it is extinct,
and yet as to the lord paramount it is by conſtruction of the
act in in eſſe, and he ſhall have it. 3. It would be hard, that
the conuſor by his own act ſhould bar the conuſee, who is a
ſtranger to the releaſe, of his execution of the rent, which
perhaps was a chief cauſe of taking of the ſaid recognizance
to have execution of it; and it is more reaſon to relieve the
conuſee in whom no fault or lacheſs was, than the terretenant,
who ought not to be miſconuſant of ſuch charges of record.
4. Every execution hath in judgment of law relation and re- |
troſpect to the (e) judgment as appears in Shelly's caſe in the (0) Co. 94. b.
Firlt Part of my Reports. And the ſaid caſe of Dower, and — 8
the grand Cape, and petit Cape thereupon, and the ſtatute 3“
De mercatoribus, which binds all the land of the conuſor

| K 3 that


LILLIxGSsrTOx's Caſe. Part VII.


that he had the day of the recognizance acknowledged in
whoſe hands ſoever it ſhall come, give a full and ſufficient


| anſwer to all the ſaid objections. And the opinion of a Ser-


00 Ant. * a
y. 205. pl. 7.
(5) 1 Roll. 596.


( c 6 Co. 41. b.


(4) Co, Lit,
246. b.
6 Co. 41. b.


8 4 Co. 49. b.
oO, Lit. 162. b.


(f) x Co. 99. a,

5 Co. 24+ d.

100. a.

Co. Lit. 231. a.

2 Inſt. 489

Cart. 142.
Keb. 592.

| Pioud. 249.

4 Co. 49. b.


26 E. 3. 64.


jeant obiter in 3 (a) & 4 Ph. & Mar. was utterly denied. As
to the ſecond point, it was reſolved by the whole court, that
the action of debt (5) lies not fo long as the Extent endures,
for ſo long hath the rent continuance, although the freehold
thereof be determined. And all that, as to this point, which
was reſolved in Ognel's caſe in the Fourth Part of my Re-
ports, fol. 49. was affirmed to be good law: and 9g H. 7. 1).
a. That if the lord grants his ſeigniory for years; the grantee
during the years ſhall not have an action of debt. And it was
alſo reſolved, that although there is an expreſs (c) Provilo,
that the perſon ſhall not be charged in a writ of annuity, yet
in ſuch caſe after the annuity or rent determined, the perſon
of the terre-tenant ſhall be charged in debt for the arrearages,


becauſe the annuity is determined, and he hath no other


remedy, as it is held in Ognel's caſe, and 6 El. Dy. (4) 227.
there cited. It was alſo reſolved, that if a man grants a rent-
charge for life out of his land, and the rent is behind ; and
the grantor enfeoffs A. and the rent is behind in his time;
and afterwards A. enfeoffs B. and the rent is behind in his
time, and afterwards the grantee dies, his executors ſhall
have an action of debt againſt each of them, for the rent (e)
behind in his time. For (/) qui ſentit commodum ſentire debit
& onus, as it is alſo held in Ognel's caſe. |


BEDELL's


part VII.


B E DE L Ls Caſe.
Mich. 5 Jacobi, in B. R.


IL. 1 Jacobi, Rot. 37 5. in the King's Bench. Between

Eliz. Bedell plaintiff in debt, and Michael (3) Bedell
defendant, the caſe was ſuch. Rob. Bedell ſeiſed of a mef-
ſuage, &c. in Iverand Langley in the county of Bucks in fee,
by the ſaid El. his wife had iſſue three ſons ; James was the ſe-
cond ſon, and Michael the defend. the third. The ſaid Ro-
bert by indenture tripartite, between him and his wife of the
firſt part; the ſaid James his ſecond ſon of the ſecond part ;
and the ſaid Michael his third ſon of the third part, in conſi-
deration of the natural affection and paternal love which he
had to the faid James and Michael, and for their better pre-
ferment and advancement, and to the intent that the ſame te-
nements ſhould continue in his name and blood, covenanted
by the ſaid indenture, that he and his heirs would ſtand ſeiſed
of the ſaid tenements to the uſe of himſelf for life; and after
his deceaſe to the uſe of the ſaid Elizabeth his wife for life,
and after their deceaſes, of one moiety to the uſe of the ſaid
James in tail, and of the other moiety to the uſe of the ſaid
Michael in tail, &c. and afterwards Robert died, and all this
matter was found by ſpecial verdict. And the ſole queſ-
tion was, whether (as the caſe is) any uſe aroſe to Elizabeth
his wife, or not. And it was objected, that the wife was
not within the conſiderations which were expreſſed in the in-
denture, and no other conſideration can be averred than is
contained in the deed, for the whole ſubſtance of the agree-
ment of the parties was referred to the deed, and the whole
ought to appear therein, and nothing is left to the word or
averment of the parties. 'To which it was anſwered and re-
lolved, that a conſideration which ſtands with the deed, and
15 not repugnant to it, might be well (5), averred, as it is
adjudged in 3 & 4 Phil. & Mar. Dyer 146. in (c) Vil-
ler's caſe; which ſee in the Firſt Part of my Reports in
Mildmay's caſe, 176. a. 2. Admitting that other conſidera-
tion than what is expreſſed in the deed could not be aver-
red, yet in this caſe there is an expreſs (4) conſideration :
for when he limits it to the uſe of his wife for term of
her life, that imports a ſufficient conſideration in it-
ſelf; and chere needs not any averment; for (e) manife/td
> S proba-


(a) 2 Roll. 782,
785. 11 Co. 24. b.
2 F. a. Jenk, Cent.
289. 1 Jones
419. 2 is 105.
March 50, 51.


(5) 2 Roll. 790.
x Co. 176. a.

2 Co. 76. a.

5 Co, 26. a. b.
68. d. 9 Co. 10.
a. b. 11 Co. 2 5. 8.
Cr. Jac. 29.

1 Roll. Rep. 42.
2 Roll. Rep. 36a,
363. Lane 119.
1 And. 313.

1 Brownl. 191.
Moor 192.

Dy, 147. pl. 72,
73. 1 Vent.368,
(c) 4 Co. 3 d.
11 Co. 25. a.

2 And. 47.

N. Benl. 39.
Renl, in Kelw.
208. 2 Roll. 781.
2 Roll. Rep. 68.
2 Inſt. 672 Ow.
33. Raym. 47,
50. Cart. 140.
Palm. 214, 215,
506, 507.

Moor 92, 505.
(4) 11 Co. 34. b.
25. 4, 2 Roll.
782, 785. Jenk.
Cent. 289. Cra.
Jac. 168, 624,
625.

(e) 11 Co. 24,


25+ A.


(a) 8 Co. 126. b.
Co. 54. b.
Dock. pl. 86.
Br. Mortdan, 8.
(5) Plowd. 49. b.


Ce) Roll. Rep.
68. Plowd. 304.
a. 1 And. 79.
Cro. Jac. 624.
Cro, Car. 530.

8 Co. 94. a.

1 Jones 419.

® 4 Co. 94. a.
11 Co. 24- b,
25. 2.

1 Ventt. 138.
Cart. 138, 146.
Palm. 214, 215.
Winch. 59, 60.
(d) 27 H. 8. c. 16.
le) Co. Lit. 183.
b. 5 Co. 97. a.
11 Co. 24 b.
Godb. 449.
Latch, 26 5.
Raymond 46.
Cart. 146.


(f) 37 El. c. 8.


\


BEDELI's Caſe. Part VII,


probatione non indigent, as in 13 H. 4. 17. a. where the ſtat,
Weſtm. 1. cap. 38. ordains, that the writ of aſſiſe of Mortdaun-
ceſter ſhall have the term of limitation from the coronation of
King H. 3 there it is held, that if an infant brings an aſſiſe
of Mortdaunceſter of the poſſeſſion of his father or mother, he
(a) need not alledge, that it was after the coronation of King
H. 3. for it appears. So if the father, tenant by knight's ſer-
vice enfeofts his ſon and heir apparent within age, it need not
be averred to be by (5) colluſion, for it is apparent. Wim-
biſh's caſe, Pl. Com. and 27 H. 8 Dacre's caſe. 33 H. 6. 14.
33 H. 6. 32. & quedam tacita habentur pro expreſſis. So if J
covenant that in conſideration of paternal love and affection to
my eldeſt ſon, to ſtand ſeiſed to the uſe of my eldeſt ſon for
life or in tail, and afterwards to the uſe of my ſecond ſon in
tail, and afterwards to the uſe of ſuch one my couſin in fee,
altho' the conſideration expreſſed in words reſpects only the
eldeſt ſon, yet the conſideration apparent in the deed, in li-
miting the uſe to my ſecond ſon, or my coufin, is ſufficient
in law to raiſe the uſe. So if I covenant to ſtand ſeiſed to the
uſe of my wife, ſon, (c) or couſin, it ſhall well raiſe an uſe
without any expreſs words of conſideration : for ſufficient con-
ſideration appears, and paternal love and affection appear.
But 1f the father by deed indented in conſideration of an *
hundred pounds paid by the ſon, covenants to fland ſeiſed to
the uſe ot his ſon, there no uſe ſhall be raiſed to the ſon, un-
leſs the deed be enrolled, by the ſtat. of 27 (4) H. 8. cap. 10.
For it is in the nature of a bargain and fale, and there (e) ex-
preſſum facit ceſſare tacitum. And afterwards on this judgment
a writ of error was brought the ſame term on the / new
ſtat. and by all the Juſtices of the Common Pleas, and Barons
of the Exchequer, the judgment was affirmed. Quod nota bene.


BERES-


B E RE SFOR D's Caſe.
Mich. 5 Jacobi.


N the Court of Wards between James Beresford relator,
and Thomas Beresford and others, defendants, the caſe
was briefly ſuch 3 Aden Beresford being ſeiſed of the manors
of Fennibently, Bircham, and other lands in fee, by his deed,
14 Junii, 40 El. did enfeoff William Fleetwood and others in
ſee to the uſes of certain indentures bearing date the 29th of
Novemb. 34 Eliz. {c. to the uſe of the ſaid Aden the father,
&« for term of his life, and after his deceaſe to the uſe of George
« Beresford, ſon and heir apparent of the ſaid Aden, and
e the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten ; and for de-
« fault of ſuch iſſue, to the uſe of Aden Beresford, ſon of
« James Beresford, and of the heirs males of the ſaid Aden,
&« ſon of the ſaid James, lawfully begotten, and for default of
i ſuch ifſue, to the uſe of the heirs males of the body of the
« ſaid James Beresford, lawfully begotten ; and for default of
« ſuch ifſue, to the uſe of Thomas Beresford, third ſon of the
« ſaid Aden, and of the heirs males of the body of the ſaid
Thomas lawfully begotten ; and for default of ſuch iſſue, to
* the uſe of Humph. Beresford, fourth fon of the ſaid Aden,
and of the heirs males of his body, lawfully begotten, with
« divers remainders over, and with remainder to the heirs
*« females of the body of George, and ſo of Aden, the ſon
„of James, lawfully begotten, &c. with the remainder to
&© the right heirs of Aden the father for ever.” And the only
queſtion of the caſe was, what eſtate Aden the ſon of James
had? and this caſe was twice argued before the two Chief Juſ-
tices, and Ch. Baron, at Serjeants Inn. And it was object-
ed, that Aden the ſon of James had not fee-tail but fee-
ſimple; for the limitation to him is, ** to the uſe of Aden,
and of the heirs males of the ſaid Aden lawfully begotten ;”
and here want theſe words „ of the body” of the ſaid
Aden, ſo that now the limitation is in effect, “ only
to the uſe of Aden, and the heirs males of = rg
* N 166 en,


[41] 40


Cr. Jac. 448,
591. 2 Roll.
Rep. 196, 217.
Lit. Rep. 3205
347»

Hutt, 85,


2 Salk. 620, &c,


| (a) Moor 424.
Lit. Rep. 287,
247. El. 478.


uit, 86.


(5) Lit. g. zi.
Co. Lit. 27. a,


(c) Hutt. $5,
Cr. Jac. 448,


591.
2 Siderf. 42.


(4) Lit. Rep. 6.
2 Siderf. 73.
Cr. El. 40.

Co. Lit. 27. b.
(e) Perk. ſect.
169.

2 Rol!.Rep.196.
Lit. Rep. 260,
220. Bridem. 2.
Br. Tail 12.

Br. Eſtatrs 62.
Fitz. Tail 11.
Co. Lit. 20. b.

1 Bulſtr. 222.


(F) Cr Jac. 59 r.
Co. Lit. 20. b.


BERE SFOR D's Caſe, Part VII.


* Aden,” for the ſubſequent words (lawfully begotten) are
implied : for every heir ought to be lawfully begotten. And
a limitation to one, and to his heirs males, is without queſ-
tion a fee ſimple. And a judgment in the King's Bench be-
tween (a) Abrabam and T rigge, Hil. 38 El. Rot. 739. was
ſtrongly urged, where a feoftment was made to the uſes of
certain indentures (as this caſe 1s) where one limitation was
ad opus & uſum Gabrielis Dormer & heredum maſculorum


ſuorum legitimè procreator* & pro defectu talis exitus, to the uſe


of divers others in tail in remainder: and upon argument at
the bar and bench, it was adjudged that Gabriel had a fee-
ſimple; for it is not limited of what body the heirs males
ſhould be begotten, but his intent was, guod ſinguli heredes
ſui maſculi ſhould inberit, which intent did not ſtand with
the rule of law; and altho* a remainder be limited over, which
could not be upon a fee ſimple, yet that could not againſt the
rule of law make words of fee- ſimple to be converted to an e-
ſtate tail. And they concluded with Litt. fol. 6. b. that the
reaſon, wherefore when lands are given to one and his heirs
males, or females, it is a fee-ſimple, is, becauſe it is not li-
mited by the gift of (5) what body the iſſue male or female
ſhall be begotten, and ſo cannot in any manner be taken by
the equity of the ſtat. De donis conditionalibus, and therefore it
is a fee-ſimple. So in the caſe at bar; and therewith agrees
8 E. 3. 49. where lands were given to one & heredibus ſuis
legitimis, the ſame is fee-{limple, which is all one with a limita-
tion to one & heredibus ſuis legitime procreatis, But it was an-
ſwered and refolved by the ſaid Ch. Juſt. and Ch. Baron, (c)


that the ſaid Aden fon of the ſaid J. had an eſtate- tail, by


which all the remainders over were lawfully veſted : for it was
agreed that to an eſtate in tail is requiſite in all gifts and li-
mitations of uſes, that the heirs be limited to be procreated or
begotten on ſome body in certain, either by expreſs words, or
by words which tantamount (4) for theſe preciſe words (de cor-
pore) are not neceſſary to the creation of an eſtate-tail, ſo long
as there are words which are equivalent; as in (e) 5 H. 5.
6. a. b. where the gift was Dedi unum meſuag R. & K. uxir
ejus & hæredib eor & aliis haredil dif? R. ſi dit? hæred' de R.
et K. exeuntes obierint fine hæredibus de ſe. In that caſe, theſe
words (de corpore) are omitted, and yet it was adjudged a good
eſtate · tail, ſor there are words which arc equivalent; for the
giſt in effect is to the huſband and wife, and to the heirs of the
huſband and wife begotten or of the ſaid R. et X. exeunt' or he-
redib de ſe, and all this is by force of this prepoſition (de) and (iſ-
ſuing). And in 12 H. 4. Brev. land was given to one S-
redib' quos ſibi contigerit habere de ux3r? ſud, here wanted the


words (de corpore) yet becauſe it doth amount to as much, it is


C) Co. Lit. 20. b.


adjudged an eſtate tail. And 3 Edw. 3. Biev. 743. (2) land


is given to one & heredibus ſuis de primd uxare ſud, it is à


good eſtate-tail. And it was reſolved, if land be given to
one


Part VII. B RESFTORD's Caſe,


one & heredibus de ſe exeuntibus, that it is a good eſtate tail,
And in theſe caſes, the principal cauſe is by force of this
prepoſition (de.) And divers other caſes were put, for which
cauſe it was concluded, that either words (de corpore) or which
are equivalent, are requiſite to the creation of an eſtate-tail,
And it was reſolved in the caſe at bar, there were words which
were equivalent; for by the ſtat. De donis conditionalibus, vo-
luntas donatoris in charta doni ſui mani feſtè expreſſa de cætero oh-
ſervetur; and therefore in this caſe ſuch conſtruction ſhall
be made as will produce three effects, 1. To ſtand with the
rule of law, 2. With the intent of the donor, 3. 'That all the
parts of the indenture may ſtand together. And therefore
tranſlate the ſaid limitation to Aden into Latin, and then the
limitation is, ad uſum Adeni & heredum maſculorum de ditto
Adeno ligitimd procreatorum, or & hæred' maſculorum legitimè
procreatorum de ditto Adeno, which is as much as if he had ſaid,
fer di?” Adenum legitime procreat” : for it is all one in effect:
for this word (de) or (ex) coupled with the word ſubſequent
procraat doth appropriate the heirs males to be of the body of
Aden; for de Aden, or ex Adeno, and de corpore Adeni, are
all one. And that is directly proved by the judgment in the
faid caſe of (a) 5 H. 5. 6. a. b. For there was (de) and (ex-
eunt') and here is (de) and (procreat”) which are all one in ef-
fect. And in the ſaid caſe of Abraham (5) and Trigge there
wanted (d. And as to that it was objected, that the limita-
tion in Latin might well be, ad uſum dicti Adeni, & beredum
maſculorum dicti Adeni (in the genitive caſe) ligitimè procreat',
and not (de dicto Adeno) or if the limitation be not certain to
make an eſtate tail, there are words certain enough to make
an eſtate in fee. To which it was anſwered and reſolved :
I. It ought to be, de dicto Adeno; for otherwiſe it would be
againſt the meaning of the donor, and all the remainders over
would be void; and always ſuch (c) conſtruction ought to be
made, that all the parts of the deed may ſtand together, if it
may ſtand with the rule of the law. 2: The ſubſequent clauſe
is, „and for default of ſuch ifſue,” and iſſue cannot be of A-
den, unleſs the words be (de dicto Adeno) and therefore one
Clauſe is well explained by the other. And according to this
reſolution the caſe was decreed accordingly. Vide 35 (d) A.-
iſe pla. 14. (e) 37 AM. pla. 14. ( 39 Aſſ. pla. 20. 24 Edw.
3- 28. 18 Edw. 2. Brief 8 36. N


See the caſe of Idle and Cook. 2 Salk. 621, 622. and 2
Lord Raym, 1144. | 1 N | f


*RENN's


[42] 41


(a) Cr. Jac. 591.
Perk, ſect. 169.
Antea 40. b.

2 Roll. Rep. 196.
Lit. Rep. 260,
320. Bridgm. 2.
Br, Eſtates 62.
Fitz. Tail 11.
Co. Lit. 20. b.
1 Bulſt. 222.
(5) Moor 424.
Antea 40. b.
Lit. Rep. 287,
347. Cr. El. 478.
Hutt. 86.

(c) Wing. Max.
238.

(4) Fitz. Tail 17.
Br. Eſtates 36.
Br. Tail 20.

(e) 1 Roll. 836.
Perk. ect. 171.
Cr Jac. 591.
37 Aſſ. pl. 15.
Br, Eſtates 61.
Br, Tail 21.
(f) 29ATl.pl 20,
Br, Eſtates 48,
Br. Tail 23.
Fiz. Tail 19,
Co. Lit. 20. b.
22.3. Cr. El,

I 53, 313
Owen 148.

I Ventr. 228.
Palm. 33.


Wr


* Skinner 470,
485, 496.


Cr. Jac. 186.
Jenk. Cent. 289.
1 Roll. 360 H. 3.


* K E N N s Caſe.
Mich 4 Jacobi.


N the Court of Wards between Thomas Robertſon, and
Elizabeth his wife, plaintiff, and Florence Lady Stallenge,
defendant, the caſe was ſuch, Chriſtopher Kenn, Eſq. was
ſeiſed of the ſaid manor of Kenn, in the county of Somerſet,
held by Knight's ſervice in capite, and 37 Hen. 8. de facto took
to wife Elizabeth Stowel, and afterward the ſaid Elizabeth
Stowel had iſſue Martha, mother of Elizabeth, one of the
now plaintifts ; and afterwards 1 & 2 P. & Mar. in the Court
of Audience, between the ſaid Chriſtopher Kenn plaintiff, and
Elizabeth Stowel defendant, the Judge there gave ſentence in
theſe words; Prætenſ. trafat.contratt. ſponſalia, & matrimonium,
guin verius effigiem matrimonit inter C. Kenn & El. Steel in mi-
nore & ſud impubertatis ætate eorundem aut eorum alterius de act
habit. contract. & celebrat, fuiſſe & eſſe, eoſdemgue Chriſtopbo-
rum & Eli. tam tempore contractus, & ſolemnizationis dif? præ-
tenſ. matrimonii, quam etiam continuo poſtea eidem matrimonio
Poe: & ſolemntzationi ejuſdem diſſenſiſſe, contraveniſſe, recla-
maſſe & reluciaſſe, uc eo prætextu hujuſmodi prætenſ. tratat. con-
tract. ſponſalia & matrimonium de jure nullum & nulla, irritum
& irrita, caſſum & caſſa, invalidum & invalida, & minus effi-
cax & inefficacia fuiſſe & eſſe, viribuſque juris caruiſſe, carere,
& carere debere; necnon ante didtas Chriſt. Kenn & Eliz, Stowe!,
19-366" de facto fuer” ad invicem matrimon. ut prædicitur copu-
„ab invicem ſeparand. & divorciand. fore debere pronuncia-
mus, decernimus, & declaramus, ecſque ſeparamus & divorcia-
mus, eiſdemgue Chriſtaphoro et Eliz. licentiam et libertatem ad
alia vota convolanda concedimus, tribuimus, et impertimur per
banc ſententiam noſtram definitivam, five hoc finale naſtrum decre-
tum, quam ſive quod ferimus et promulgamus in bits ſeriptis,
etc. And after the ſaid divorce the ſaid Chriſtopher
Kenn married and took to wife Elizabeth Beckwith. And
afterwards, anno 5 Eliz. before divers commiſſioners _
Ical,


Part VII. KEN M's Caſe,


aſtical, the ſaid E. Beckwith did libel againſt the ſaid Ch. Kenn,
that he (before the marriage contracted betwixt them) had mar-
ried with the ſaid E. Stowel, whereupon proceſs was awarded
againſt the ſaid E. pro intereſſe, and on due examination of the
cauſe there was a ſentence, that the marriage betwixt the ſaid
C. Kenn and E. Beckwith was lawful, and ſentenced them ad
exequenda conjugal' obſequia, &c. And that the ſaid C. Kenn was
never lawfully married to the ſaid E. Stowel ; and afterwards
the ſaid E. Beckwith died, after whoſe death the ſaid C. Kenn
married the ſaid Florence, by whom he had ifſue one daughter
E. and died; and ann. 36 El. it was found by office in the coun-
ty of Som. by force of a Mandamus, after the death of the ſaid
C. Kenn, that the ſaid E. Kenn was his daughter and heir, and


[43] 42


that ſhe was within age, c. of the age of ten months. The


wardſhip and cuſtody of whom the Q. granted to Sir N. Stal-
lenge, and the ſaid Florence then his wife: whereupon the faid
Martha prerending herſelf to be daughter and heir to the ſaid
C. Kenn, with her huſband Silv. Williams exhibited their bill
in the Court of Wards againſt the ſaid Sir N. and Florence, ſut-
miſing that the ſaid Martha was daughter and heir of the ſaid
C. Kenn on the body of E. Stowel his lawful wife (as. ſhe pre-
tended alledging that they at the time of their marriage, in an.
37 H. 8. were both of them above the age of conſent, and that
they did cohabit together ꝙ or 10 years before the ſaid ſuppoſed
divorce, during which cohabitation the ſaid Martha was gotten
betwixt them, and prayed leave that the ſaid Sil. and M. might
traverſe the ſaid office. To which the ſaid Sir N. and Florence
anſwered, and the plaintiff examined divers witneſſes, and be-
fore publication Sir N. died; and thereupon the ſaid Sil. and
M. exhibited a bill of revivor againſt the ſaid Flor. and aſter-
wards M. having iſſue El. wiſe of the now plaintiff died, after
whoſe death the ſaid T. Robertſon and El. his wife brought a
new bill of rgvivor to revive the firſt ſuit, in which the wit-
neſſes were examined. And this caſe was referred to Fleming
and Coke Ch. Juſtices, and to Tanfield Ch. Baron, and to
Yelverton and Williams Juſtices, and Snigg and Altham Ba-
rons of the Exchequer, And in this caſe three queſtions were
moved, 1. If againſt the firſt divorce the plaintiffs ſhould be
received, ſo long as it remained in force, to aver, that they did
agree and conſent to the marriage; or that they ſhould be
concluded by the ſaid divorce. 2. The ſecond queſtion was


if they ſhou'd have a traverſe to the ſaid office before an office
found for them. 3. If they ſhould have a bill of revivor upon a bill


of revivor, as this caſe is, and the Juſtices heard many arguments
before them at ſeveral days and in ſeveral terms at Serjeants Inn.
And as to the 1ſt it was objected, that it appears by Lit. Iib. 2. fai.
22. and by the ſtat. of Merton, c. 6. & 35 H. 6. 40. b. &c. That


the common law and Parliaments have taken notice of the (a) Lit. ed.


age of conſent of the male to be (a) fourteen, and of the fe-
maie


104.
Co. Lit. 79. 4A, bs
2 Inſt. go,


KEN xN's Caſe; Part VII.


male to be 12; and therefore it is triable at the common law.
And if in truth the huſband and wife are of age of conſent at
the time of the marriage, no divorce after, pretending that
they were within age of conſent ſhall conclude the parties or
their heirs, but they may prove the contrary at the common
law and chiefly in the caſe at bar, becauſe it concerns inttri-
tance and the true deſcent thereof; & ſententia contra matri-
mon” nunquam tranſit in rem judicat', 2. Admitting that they
were within age of conſent, and after age of conſent they al.
ſent or cohabit, and have iſſue, although a divorce for impu-
berty and minority of years be had, yet it is but evidence, and
ſhall not conclude the parties in any aCtion at the common
law to prove the aſſent, for inaſmuch as the divorce is had for
that cauſe, and the cauſe is triable by the common law, the


divorce ſhall not conclude. And 11 H. 7. 27. a. was cited,


(a) Cr. Jac.186.


(5) enk. Cent.
289.


(<) Jenk. Cent.
289. 4 Co. 29. a.
2 Roll. 7.

5 Co. 7. As
Caucry's caſe,

8 Co. 135. b.

2 Ventr. 43.
Cawly 31.


that he who pleads a divorce ought to ſhew the cauſe of the
divorce ; and it the cauſe be triable at the common law (as it
is in the cafe at bar) there it ſhall not conclude ; but if it be
a thing not triable at the common law, as a precontract, pro-
ſeſſion, &c. there it is otherwiſe. But as to that it was re-
ſolved by all the ſaid Juſtices and Barons, that the ſaid ſen -
tence ſhould conclude as long as it remained in force, and that
for divers cauſes. 1. The Eccleſiaſtical (a) Judge hath ſen-
tenced the contract and marriage to be void and of no effect,
and although they were of the age of conſent, yet if the o1i-
ginal contract was void, and of no effect, then there was jult
cauſe of divorce. 2. There were words of divorce and ſepa-
ration, eoſd' divorciamus & ſeparamus ; and gives each of them
liberty ad alia votaconvolanda. 3. If the marriage had been infra
an. nubiles, the Eceleſiaſtical Judge is judge as well of the aſſent
as of the firſt contract, and what ſhall be a ſuſhcient aſſent or not;
and although the Eccleſiaſtical Judge ſhews the (5) cauſe of
his ſentence, yet foraſmuch as he is judge of the original
matter, /c. of the lawfulneſs of the marriage, we will never .
examine the cauſe whether it' be true or not; for of things,
(the cognizance whereof belongs to the Eccleliaſtical Court)
we ought to give (c) credit to their ſentences, as they give to
the judgments in our courts. Alſo the rule of their law is, 9
maſcult quidem puberes, farming viri potentes matrimon” con-
ſentiri poſſunt ; and the determination thercof doth belong to


their cognizance. And as to the caſe of 11 H. 7. 27. a. it is true,


that the cauſe of the divorce ought to be ſhewed, becauſe
ſome divorces diſſolve the marriage, /c. a vinculs matrimonit,


baſtardiſe the ifſue, and bar the wife of her dower, and ſome 4


(4) 1 Sid. 71,
251.


menſd et thoro, which do not diflolve the marriage, nor bar the
wife of dower, nor baſtardiſe the iſſue; but in the caſe of de-
privation the (4) cauſe need not be ſhewed, for be it right or
wrong, upon cauſe or without cauſe, it ſtands, and every depi1-
vation diſables and removes the party deprived, as weil tor


one cauſe as for another, as long as the deprivation remains
| f *


part VII. KEux's Caſe, 44] 43


in force. Vide 8 Aſſ. q. (a) E. 4. 24. a. 7 E. 4. (0) 32. a. 3H. 6. 12. (a) Br. pleading
H. 8. 5. And Coke C. J. cited the caſe in 22 E. 4. Lit. Con- Na
ſuitat. 5. Corbet's caſe, where the caſe was, that Sir R. Corb. had (% Fus. bo wk
by El. his wife two ſons, Rob. the elder, and Roger the younger, Br. Abbe &
and died; Rob. the elder being within the age of 14 years, 8
took one Maud to wife, and at full age they cohabited toge- 1275 .
ther, et habuerunt carnal” copulam, et cogniti et reputati pro viro
et uxore palam; and afterwards the ſaid Rob. put away the ſaid
Maud his wife, having no iſſue by her, and married one Let-
tice, &c. living the ſaid Maud, and had iſſue Rob. by her, and
afterwards Rob. who ſo married Lettice, died, and Lettice de-
clared publicly, that ſhe was the lawful wife of Rob. and her
ſon a multer, for which the ſaid Roger the ſon of the ſaid Sir
Rob. Cor bet ſued in the Spiritual Court to reverſe the marriage
between Rob. his brother and Lettice, and that Lettice be put
to ſilence ; for which cauſe Lettice ſued a prohibition. And
in that caſe three points were reſolved. 1. That if Rob. and
Maud had had iſſue and had been unjuſtly divorced, and af-
terwards Rob. had married Lettice and had iſſue and died, the
iſſue of Rob. and Maud might ſue in the Eccleſiaſtical Court
to avoid the divorce, for ſo long as the divorce itood in force
(the common law gives ſo great credit (c) to it) the iſſue could (c) Jenk. Cent.
not have remedy by the common law. And note in the caſe 289. 4 Co. 49.
no cauſe of the divorce doth appear, but becauſe the marriage 70851 57
was had when the parties were infra annos nubiles ; and in the Cauary's caſe,
ſaid caſe of divorce, the iſſue ſhall have his ſuit to reverſe it 8 Co. 135. b.
originally in the Spiritual Court, for the divorce is a ſpiritual CP
judgment and ought to be reverſed in the Spiritual Court.
But in the caſe of Corbett there is no divorce, nor other ſpiri-
tual judgment that ſhould diſable the ſaid Roger; and therefore See i Ric. 4.4.44
he ought originally to begin at the common law as heir, and he pl. 7.
ſhall have all aCtions in the temporal court as heir, and all be-
nefits as heir againſt the iſſue of Lettice notwithſtanding the ſe-
cond marriage; for that is void in all laws temporal and ſpiri-
| tual, and the action and original to baſtardize any, ſhall
not be moved originally in the Spiritual Court, when no ſpiri-
tual ſentence doth diſable him, but he ſhall begin in the tem-
poral court, and then if need be, they ſhall write to the ſpiri-
tual Judge, if general baſtardy be alledged; and the reaſon there-
of 1s, becauſe a man may be a baſtard in the temporal law, and
mulier in the ſpiritual law, and e converſo, As a man who is
begotten in adultry during the coverture is mulier by the tem- |
poral law, and baſtard by the ſpiritual law. And if a man (4) (% F. N. B. 51 Fo.
beats a clerk, if he ſues in the Spiritual Court to excommuni- K. 51. f. 45 2
cate him for the offence, he doth well; but if he ſues there to 23. 2. 4 Cœ. c. b.
have amends, he ſhall have a prohibition. 2. It was reſolved 5 C0. 51. 4.
in the ſaid caſe of Corbett, that when the Spiritual Court ſhall
have juriſdiction, the whole cauſe ought to be ſpiritual ; as if
a Parſon libels againſt a lay-man for taking away his tithes,
the temporal court ſhall have juriſdiction, for it is mixed
with the temporality: and in the ſame caſe the matter

16


(a) 2 Int. 488.


(9 Inft. 488.


(e) Fitz. Juriſ-
diction 39.
Br. Juriſdict. 30.


d) 1 Roll. 360.
1 Brown]. 42.
Moor 228.

Co. Lit. 244. a.
Noy. 29.

4 Mod. 182.
Comb. 200.


Selk. 151, 548.


Cr. Jac. 186.


KEN n's. Caſe; Part VII.
is mixt (by conſequence) with the temporalty, /c. that the one
is heir, and that the other is a baſtard ; but if the ſaid caſe of
tithes be between Parſon and Parſon, or between a Parſon and
a lay-man, if the right of tithes comes in queſtion, the Spi-
ritual Court ſhall have the juriſdiction. See the ſtatute Dy cy.
cumſpecte agatis, where it is ſaid, that (a) mere ſpiritualia belon

to the eccleſiaſtical cognizance. And Linwood cap. De fore
competent. fo. 7. ſaith, mere ſpiritualia fic dicta, quia non habent
mixturam temporalium : and where the ſaid act faith, de mort ali
peccato, Linwood expounds it, and faith, non (5) intelligas d
omni peccato mortali, ſed de tali cujus punitio de ſud naturd ſpeftat
ad forum eccleſiaft” : nam ft de ratione cujuflib peccati mortal” cag-
noſceret eccleſia, fic- periret temporal” gladii juriſdiftio, cum vix
efſet dare cauſ. quin ratione peccati poſſit deferri ad eccleſ*, 3. It
was reſolved in the ſaid caſe of Corbet, that when the whole
cauſe 1s originally ſpiritual, vet if after in the Spiritual Court
they are totry a temporal conuſance, a prohibition ſhall iſſue;
as if one Parſon ſaith, that the place is within his pariſh, and
the other contrary, after ſuch matter ſhewed, a prohibition ſhall
iſſue, and therewith agree 39 E. 3. 23. & (c) 5 H. 5. 10. b.
Note reader, a good difference between a repeal of a ſentence
of divorce given in the life of the parties, and to give ſentence
of divorce after the death of the parties. For it appears by the
ſaid caſe of 22 E. 4. that a ſentence of divorce may be repealed
in the Spiritual Court by a ſuit there after the death of the par-


ties; but if any of the parties be (4) dead before any divorce /


ſentenced in the Eccleſiaſtical Court, there they cannot ſue in
the Spiritual Court, to declare the marriage void, and to bal-
tardize the iſſue. For the trial doth originally belong to the
King's Court, where no diſability is by ſentence in the Spiti—
tual Court, and therewith agree 39 Aſſ. p. 10. 39 E. 3. 31.
and 24 H. 8. Tit. Baſtardy 44. b. That a divorce after the
death of any of the parties, or a ſentence declaratory that the
marriage was void after the death of any of the parties, ſhall
not bind them; for it is but in effect to e the iſſue, of
which they have not originally cognizance, as hath been ſaid.
Vide 19 Afl. p. 2. that if two be married ih annos nubiles, and
after the full age a divorce be between them, it diſſolves the
marriage, for there the wife brought an aſliſe againſt her huſ-
band: ſee Bury's caſe in the Fifth Part of my Reports, fol. 98.
and ſee Cawdry's caſe in the ſame book, and ſee Bunting's caſe in
the Fourth Part of my Reports, f. 29. & 11 H. 7.9. 34 H. b.
14. 12 Hf. 8. 5. As to the 2d point it was objected, that the
plaintiff ſhould have a traverſe without any office found for him;
for when a direct and ſuſhcient office is found in one county by
force of a Diem clauſit extremum, or Mandamus, after the death ot
the anceſtor there ſhall never.be an office found again for the
ſame land, as long as that ſtands in its force; for otherwiſe the
law would never have an end; and therewith agree 4 H. 4-
(or 7.) 15. 14 E. 4. 5. 15 E. 4. 11. 2 E. 7. 12. 18. and there-
fore it would be hard to compel him to find an office for hin,


3T


part VII. KEN n's Cafe.


before he can traverſe ; where by the law he cannot find in ſuch
caſe any office. 2. It was objected, that the ſtatuteof 2 E. 6. c. 8.
hath remedied it if any office were requiſite by the com. law, the
words of which act are; ©* And whereas one perſon or more is or
&« ſhall be found heir to the King's tenant by office where any other
6 perſon is or ſhall be heir, or it one perſon cr more be or ſhall be
« found heir by office in one county, and another perſon or perſons
« js or ſhall be found heir to the ſame party. in another county,
« &c, be it enacted, that every perſon grieved by any ſuch office


«© ſhall and may have his or their traverie to the ſame immediate-


[45] 44


2 Inſt, 688,
689, &c.


ly, or after, at his or their pleaſure, and proceed and have like


« trial and advantage, as in other caſes of traverſe” By which it
appears that the party grieved ſhall have a traverſe (without ſpeak-
ing of any office) and proceed and have ſuch advantage as in other
caſes of traverſe; and in other caſes of traverſe there needs not
any office. But it was reſolved, that as this caſe at bar is, the pl.
ought to have an office ſound Before he can traverſe. And as to
the firſt objeQion it was anſwered and reſolved, that in ſuch ſpe-
cial caſe of finding of an heir, he who is right heir and grieved by
the office, ſhall have a new writ of Diem claufit extremrm, or Mau-
damas, For he is a ſtranger to the ſaid office, and therefore the
office ſhall not conclude him. And the ſaid rule, and the books are
to be intended, that the ſame perſon ſhall not have a new Dien
claufit extremum, or Mandamus, after an ofhice once duly found,
but another perſon ſhall have one in that caſe to prove himſelf
heir, and therewith agree 30 Aſſ. p. 28. F. N. B. 261, 262. 4 H.
7. 18. b. 12 R. 2. Livery 28. Stamf. Pizrog. 52. b. And that
there ought to be an office before he can traverſe, the com. law
therein hath great reaſon; for when the King is ſure of ward ſhip,
or primer ſeiſin by the office, it is not reaſun that any one wna
pretends himſelf heir ſhould traverſe the firſt office that the other is
not heir, until the King be ſure to have profit by him, «ither
by wardſhip or primier ſeiſin; for then after the firſt office a-
voided by traverſe, he might ſhew matter to bar the King of
wardſhip and primer feiin, which would not be reaſonable.
Alſo at the common law interpleader lies, where by two ſeveral
offices in one and the ſame county ſeveral perſons are ſeverally
found heirs to one and the ſame perſan, to one and the ſame
land ; ergo the party grieved may have a writ to find an office
for him; for otherwile no interpleader can be; for the heir
who was firſt found heir ſhall have a Scire facias in the Chancery,
againſt him who is found heir by the ſecond office, (becau'e
the King is in doubt to whom to make livery) upon which
if he appear, and juſtify the ſecond office, for the trial of
the privity of the blood, then he ought to traverſe the firſt
office, (tor all the interpleading ſhall be thereupon) and
upon the trial thereof, he who 1» found heir ſhall have li-
very. 80 that it clearly appears, that he who traverſes the
office in ſuch caſe ought to have an office found for him
by the common law; and therewith agree 36 E. 3. Traverſ.
44. 16 E. 4. 4. Fitz. Nat, Br. i62, 202. For he who ought to ſue

L livery,


Jenk. Cent. 289.
Cro. Jac. 185,
Co. Lit. 77. b.
2 Inſt, 690.


*


13 Es.
A 439.


(s) 2 E. 6. C. 8.
2 Inſt. 688, 2
68g, &c.


(3) 2 Inſt, 690,


(e) Cro. Jac.186.


(4) 6 Co. 45. a.
9 Co. 168. d.
12 Co. 24.

2 Inſt. 340.

2 Bulſtr. 99.
Hob. 159.
Hardr. 201. con-
tra.


K E x n's Caſe, Part VIT,


livery, ought to have an office before he traverſes. Otherwiſe
of a ſtranger who deſtroys the King's title. Vide 36 E. 3.
Traverſe 44. 12 E. 4. 18. b. 16 E. 4. 4. a. 43 Af. 20. 9 l.
7. 24. 5 E. 4, 5. 12 H. 6. 46 E. 3. Bre. 618. As to the ſe-
cond objection, it was anſwered and reſolved, that the ſaid act
of 2 E. 6. gives not a traverſe to him who pretends himſelf to
Ne heir againſt an office finding for another heir, without an
office found for him; for that is incident to it, which is not
taken away by the general words of the act, for then all inter-
pleaders would be thereby alſo taken away, which never was
the intention ofthe act; but the intention of the makers of the
act was, to take away a great doubt that was at the common
law, if one be found heir within age by one office, and after-
wards another 1s found heir in the ſame county of full age, if
any traverſe and interpleader ſhould be immediately, or if the
traverſe and interpleading ſhould ſtay until the full age of the
infant, fuit vexata queſto, as appears in our books, ſcil. 26 E.
3. Traverſe 44. 5 E. 4. 4. 1H. 7. 14. a. F. N. B. 162. And
therefore to ouſt that doubt was the ſtat. of (a) 2 E. 6. made,
by which it is enacted, ** that the party grieved ſhall have a
* traverſe immediately,“ which word (immediately) proves
the intention of the ſaid act to provide for the ſaid doubt, and
to give him who was grieved in ſuch caſe a traverſe preſentiy;
but not to alter the foundation of the traverſe, /c. office, which
ought to be found for the party grieved before he could tra-
verſe: and where the ſtat. ſaith, that he ſhall have a traverſe
preſently, it is intended that he ought to obſerve all (5) inci-
dents to a traverſe : for the office is the ground and founda-
tion of his traverſe. As to the third point it was reſolved by
the greater part, that a bill of (c) revivor on a bill of revivor
ſhould not be admitted for the infiniteneſs : for (4) infinitum
in jure reprobatur; and no writ of journeys accompts on jour-
neys accompts ſhall be brought. But it was reſolved by all,
that, as this caſe is, the laſt bill of revivor was abſurd, for it
prays that the firſt bill might be revived ; and the firſt bill
prays, that Martha might traverſe, and Martha is dead; and
therefore the bill of revivor ought to have prayed that her heir
might traverſe. And fo firſt the divorce, ſo long as it doth
remain in force, doth bind the right. 2. The not finding of


an office doth diſable the plaintiff to traverſe the office : and


laſtly the bill of revivor on the bill of frevivor, as this caſe is,
is not maintainable.


r


3


EIGHTH PART


& F738


TTT


O F


Sir EDWARD COKE, Kat.
Lord Chief Juſtice of the Common PLEAs.


Q F


Divers Reſolutions and Judgments given upon ſolemn Arguments, and with
reat Deliberation and Conference of the moſt reverend Judges and Sages of the
3 of Caſes in Law which were never reſolved or adjudged before: and


the Reaſons and Cauſes of the ſaid Reſolutions and Judgments.


Publiſhed in the Ninth Year of the moſt High and moſt Illuſtrious JAMES King
of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the XLIV. the Fountain of


all Piety and Juſtice, and the Life of the Law,

With REFERENCES to all the BOOKS of the COMMON LAW, as well
Ancient as Modern: And the PLEADIN GS in ENGLISH, carefully Reviſed
and Cor ected, |


| By GEORGE WILSON, Serjeant at Law.


Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus juſlitiam aut rectum.
 _ Magna Charta, c1p. 29.


Rex pracepit ut pax ſacroſandtæ eccleſiæ & regni ſolide conſervetur & colatur in omnibus,
& quod juftitia ſingulis, tam pauperibus quam divitibus, adminiſtretur, nulla habita per-
Weſtmonaſt. 1. cap. 1.


ſonarum ratione.


—
_—
—
—


DEQO, AT NIX. FIBL


UOD ſcripſi Cut

noverit leflor eru-

ditus) priorum mea-
rum in nonnullis Prefa-
tionum de legiim Angliæ,
& antiquitate & excel-
lentid, duas has produxit
queſtiones : I. An hiſto-
riographi in hoc mibi
conveniunt quod in illis
adeo confidenier aſſerui :
2. Cum tam crebra facta
fit de legibus Anglia mu-
nicipalibus repetitio, quod-
nam ſit corpus five tettus
Juris municipalis & i
deinde inveniendum. Ad
utraſque quarum reſpon-
Jon” tandem reddere vi-
Jum eſt. Primam quod
attinet, quanguam libri
& adia publica (que ſunt
& vetuſtatis & veritatis
reſtigia) a me in præ-
fationibus in tertiam
& in ſextam Commenta-


HAT which I have
written as you know
(learned reader) in ſome of
my former Pretaces of the
antiquity and excellency of
our laws of England, hath
produced thele two queſti-


ons: firſt, Whether hiſto-


riographers do concur with
that which there ſo con-


ſtantly hath been affirmed?


Secondly, Seeing ſo great
and fo often rehearſal is
niade of the common laws
of England, what the bo-
dy or text of the common
law is, and conlequently
where a man may find it?
To both which in the end
I yielded to make auſwer.


For the firſt : albeit the


books and records (which
are & vetuſtatis & veri-
tatis veſtigia) cited by me
in the pretaces to the Third

L 3 and


Ex vita Abbatis
Sancti Albani.


Fs lib. Monaſt.
de Litchfield.


diſcreet


To the READER.


and Sixth Parts of my
Commentaries, are of that
authority that they need
not the aid of any hiſto-
rian: yet will I with a light
touch ſet down out of the
conſent of hiſtory, ſome
proofs of the antiquity,
(and from the cenſure of
thoſe perſans, who in re-
ſpect of their profeſſion (for
they were monks and clcr-
gymen) may rather be ſul-
pected of reſervedneſs than
flattery) ſomewhat of the


equity and excellency of


our laws; and that it doth


appear moſt plain by ſuc-


ceſſive authority in hiſtory
what I have poſitively af-
firmed out of record, that
the grounds of our common
laws at this day were be-
yond the memory or regiſ-
ter of any beginning, and
the ſame which the Norman
conqueror then found with-
in this realm of England.
The laws that William the
Conqueror ſwore to obſerve,
were bone & approbatæ
antique regni leges, that
is, the laws of this king-
dom were in the begin-
ning of the Conqueror's
reign good, approved, and
ancient, Aud, that the
people might the better
obſerve their duty, and
the Conqueror his oath, he
cauſed twelve of the moſt
and wiſe men


riorum meorum partem
prolata, ejus fidei ſunt
& authoritatis quod hiſto-
riograpbi auxilio negua-
quam opus eſt; leviori ta-
men ut dicam tactu, ex
conſentiente hiftoriarum
ſuffragio de antiquitate, et
(cenſura eor”, quos forſan
non immerito (fi ſpectes
eorum ordinem) ſuſpiceris
potius de vitio reticendi
quam blandiendi) de æqui-
tate & excellentid legum
naſtrar', nonnulla adjiciam
argumenta; et quod teſli-
moniis hiſtoria omnium ſu-
perior tempor” liquet hc
imprimis manifeſto, quod
poſutive ex monumentis
affrmavi, principia nempe
legim noſtrar” hodie mu-
nicipalium tanto ævo ino-
luiſſe, quod nihil omnind
illorum de origine oftendi
poteſt; hecque illa fuiſſe
eadem que victor ille Nor-
mannus in hoc Ang! reg-
no inveniebat. Leges, quas
Gulielmus gentis noſtr* ſub-
acter jurejurando ſe aſirin-
xit obſervaturum, fuerunt
bone et approbale antique
regni leges. Et, quo retit-


us populus ſua officia &


victor jurament' ſantiis
obſervarent, conſtituit, ul
de ſingulis totius Angl com-
tatibus 12, viri ſapientiores
coram ſe jurarent, quod nec
ad dextram nec ad finiſir
declinantes, hoc eſt, nec

pr 2


Jo the R E A D ER.


prerogative blandientes,
nec privilegia dilatantes,
legiim ſuarum ſanctitatem
patefacerent, nil præter-
mittentes, nil addentes, nil
prevaricando miltentes :
Et Aldredus Archiepiſ (qui
corona Regis caput cinxit
triumpbali) et Hugo Lon-
dinen/is Epiſcop', per præ-
cept” Regis ſcripſerunt pro-
priis manibus omnia que
pred jurati dixerunt. Et
has (teſte Ingulpþho) au-
thenticas eſſe & perpetuas
per totum regnum Angl”
inviolabiliter tenendas ſub
penis graviſſimis procla-
mavit, Summam Cujus,
cum digeſſiſet in Magn”
(ut loquimur) Chartam,
ſalum proculdubio & fun-
damen leg omnium poſte-
rior” ſignaculo ſecuritaits
& voto beavit etermtatis,
hoc generali concludens e-
dicto: hoc quoque præci-
pimus, ut omnes habent et
teneant legem Edwardi
Regis in omnibus rebus :


benignique ſui operis præ-


luſtri bac ſua inſcrip* e-
rexit frontiſpicium: Mil-


lielmus Dei gatia Rex An-


glorum, Dux Normannor,


in every ſhire throughout
all England, to be ſworn
before himſelf, that, with-
out ſwerving, either ad
dextr” or finiſtram, that is,
neither to flatter preroga-
tive, or extend privilege,
they ſhould declare the in-
tegrity of their laws with-
out concealing, adding, or
in any ſort varyang trom
the truth. And Aldred,
the Archbiſhop that had
crowned him, and Hugh,
the Biſhop of London, by
the King's commandment
wrote that which the ſaid
jurats had delivered? and
theſe, (as ſaith Ingulphus)
by public proclamation,
he declared to be authen-
tic, and, for ever, under
grievous puniſhment, to
be. inviolably obſerved,
The ſum of which, com-
poſed by him into a Mag-
na Charta, (the ground-
work of all thoſe that after
followed) he bleſſed with
the ſeal of ſecurity, and
wiſh of eternity, cloſing
it up with this general
edict: And we further
command that all men
keep and oblerve duly the


omnib* hominib' ſuis Fran- laws of K. Edward: rear-


cs & Anglicis ſalutem.
Statuimus imprimis ſuper
emnia unum Deum per
letum regn' noſir' vene-
rari, unam fidem Chriſti
Jemper inviolatam cuſto-
diri, pacem et concordi-
am, judicium et fuſticiam


ing up the frontiſpiece of
his gracious work with his
glorious ſtyle J/lielmus
Dei gratia Rex Anglorum,
Dux Normanor” omnibus
hominibus ſuis Francis &
Anglicis Jalutem. Statui-

E 4 mus


Ex Ingulpho
Abbate Crows
landenſe.

Ex libro Anti-
quarum legume


Ex libro manu-
ſcripto de legi-
bus antiquis.


Ex Mat. Par.
monache Sancti
Albani.


Ex Rogero
Hoveden, Preſ-


; byter O.


mus imprimis ſuper om-
nia unum Deum per to-
tum regu' noſir* venerari,
unam fidem Chriſti ſemper in-
violatam cuſtodiri, pacem et ſe-
curitatem et cencordiam judi
cium et juſtitiam inter Anglos
et Normannos Francos et Bri-


To the READER.


inter Anglos et Norman-
nos Frances et Britones,
MWalliæ et Cornubie, Pic-
tos et Scotos Albaniæ, fi-
militer inter et inſu-
lanos, provincias et patri-
as, que pertinent ad coro-
nam et argnitatam, defen-


tones Malliæ et Cornubia, ſionem et obſervationem et


Picbos
Similiter inter et
inſulanos, provincias et pa-
trias que pertinent ad co-
ronam et dignitatem, de-
fenjionem et obſervationem( et
honorem regni noſi', et tn-
ter omnes nobis ſubjectos per
univerſum monarchiam reg-
ni Brilanniæ firmiter et in-
violabiliter obſervari. W.
Rufus that ſucceeded his
father, ſo exceeded him-
ſelf in miſrule and oppreſ-


ſion, that there is left no zuſticiaque


regiſter of his goodneſs in
this kind, for in his time
the kingdom was oppreſl-


cd with unjuſt exactions,


and juſtice itſelf corrupted
with evil uſages, as ap-
peareth by the Great Char-
ter of his ſucceeding bro-


et Scotos Albani, honorem regni naſtri, et in-


ter omnes nobis ſubjectos
per univerſam monarchiam
regni Brilanniæ firmiter it
iuviolabiliier ob ſervari.
Palri qui ſucceſſit Guliel-
mus Rufus, rem male gu-
bernando libertateſque om-
nes ſupprimendo ita ſe ex-
ceſſit, quod virtulis ſux
hujuſmodi ne reliquum om-
nino eſt veſtigium; ſub
illo enim, regnum oppreſſum
erat injuſtis exatiionibus,
ipſa malis
adulterabatur conſuetudi-
nibus, ut plane conſtat ex
Magna illa Charta ſucce-
dentis ſui fratris Henrici
primi, qua penitùs abro-
gavit Omnes malas conſue-
tudines quit” regn' Ang”
injuſte imprimebatur, re-


ther King Henry I. who ſcauravit legem regis Ed-


thereby took away all the
evil cuſtoms wherewith
the Kingdom of England
was unjuſtly oppreſſed,
and reſtored the law of
King Edward, ſuch Jaw
as was in the time of the
holy Confeſſor) with thoſe
amendments which his


wardi, (hanc nimiruùm,
gue ſandti illus Confeſſo-
ris viguiſſet temporibus)
cum illi emendationiÞ quit
ater eam emendavit cum

conſilio Baroniim ſuorum.
Leges be a Mat. Par.
(cujus hiſtoria hanc habet
inſertam donationem) edo-
centur fore, Libertates ei
Con-


Conſuetudines antique, que
flruerunt in regno tempore
Sancti Regis Edwards. Hoc
etiam teſtatur Hoveden, in
hec verba; Rex Henricus
mus omnes malas conſue-
tudines & iniquas exacTio-
nes,quibusregnum ing] in-
juſte opprimebatur, abſtu-
lit, pacem firmam in toto
regno ſuo po'uit, © tenert
præcepit legem Reg. Ea-
wardi, omnibus in commu-
ne reddidit, &c. Quod e-


tiam Florentius Monachus


Migorn (qui vixit ſub


Henrico primo) in iiſdem
fere verbis demonſtrat.
Yun et, injuſticia ſeculi
Jupertorts unde extorta fu-
it, et unde et quomodo e-
mendata Gulielmus Mona-
cbus Malmeſhurienſis his
memintt ver bis. Herricus
nal in Anglid et regie nat”,
Sc. edicto ſtatim per An-
glam miſſo injuſtitias a
fratre et Ranulpho inſti-
iutas prohibuit, &c. a-
liguarum moderation? le-
gum revocavit inſolitam,
Jacramento ſuo et omnium
procerimne luderentur cor-
roborans, Sc. Rex Steph,
gui in gvunculi ſucceſſit
regnum, charta ſua magna
libertatum, Baronibus et
bomin bus de Anglid, con-
firmavit bis verbis, omnes
libertates et bonas leges
quas Henricus Rex Angliæ
avunculus meus eis dedit et
concefſit, et omnes bonas


To the READER


father added by the advice
of his Barons. What theſe
were Mar. Par. (who hath
inſerted the charter in his
ſtory) declareth to be the


vii


Ex Mat, Par.


ancient liberties and cuſ-


toms which flouriſhed
this kingdom in the time
of holy King Edward. And
herewith agreeth Hoveden
in theſe words: King Hen-
ry I. took away all the
evil cuſtoms and unjuſt
exactions wherewith the
kingdom of England was
unjuſtly oppreſſed: he
ſettled an aſſured peace
in his whole kingdom,
and commanded the law
of K. Edward to be ob-
ſerved, he reſtored to all,


in


Ex Roger Hove-
den,


&c. The which, almoſt in Fx Florentio


the ſame phraſe, Florent1-
us, a Monk of Worceſter,
and living in the reign of
Henry I. alſo obſerveth.
And by whom the injuſtice
of the foregoing age pro-
ceeded, and by whom and
how redrefſed, William the


Monacho Wi-


gorn.


Monk of Malmeſbury de- Ex Willielme


livereth in theſe words:
Henry born in England, of
kingly birth, &c. by his
proclamation ſpeedily ſent
thro! England: reſtrain—
ed the injuſtice brought
in by his brother, and
Ranulph, &c. and abol ſh-
ed the unwonted lenity
of ſome laws, giving al-
ſurance by his own and

all


Monacho


Malmeſbury.


Ex libro legiim
Antiquarum,


Ex libro Rogeri
Bacon de impe-
diment' ſapien-


Ex libro legiim
Antiquarum.


To the READER.


all the nobility's oath,
that they ſhould not be
. deluded, &c. King Ste-
phen that ſucceeded his
uncle, confirmeth in his
Great Charter of Libertics
to the Barons and Com-
mons of England in theſe
words, all the liberties
and good laws which
Henry King of England
my uncle granted unto
them : and I prant them
all the good laws and
good cuſtoms which they
enjoyed in the reign of
King Edward, and was
ſo jealous of innovation,
as Roger Bacon the learn-
ed Friar faith in his book,
De impedimentis ſapientis :
King Stephen forbad by
public edict, that no man
ſhould retain the laws of
Italy formerly brought
into England. The next
that ſucceeded was Hen-
ry II. who in another
Great Charter eſtabliſhed
the former laws in theſe
words. Henry, by the
grace of God, King of
England, Duke of Nor-
mandy and Acquitain, E.
of Anjou, to all Earls, Ba-
rons, and his faithful ſub-
Jets of France and Eng-
land, greeting: know ye
that I, to the honour of
God and holy church, and
for the common amend-
ment of my whole king-
dom, have granted and


leges et bonas conſuetudines


eis concedo quas habuerunt


tempore Reg. Edwardi : cu.
raque illi tanta imprimis
fuit innovationt viam in-
tercludendi, quod Rogerus
Bacon frater ille perquam
eruditus, in libro ſuo de
impedimentis ſapientiæ,
dicit ; Rex quidem Stepha-
nus, allatus legibus Italie
in Angliam, publico edido
prohibuit ne ab aliquo de-
tinerentur. Huic ſucceſſione
proximus fuit Henricus ſe.
cundus, qui alia Magna
Charta priores ſtabilivit li.
ges, in hec verba; Henri-
cus Dei gratid Rex Ang!
Dux Normannie et Aqui-
taniæ, Comes Andegavie,
omnibus Comitibus, Ba-
ronibus, et fidelibus ſuis
Francis & Ang! ſalu-
tem. Sciatis me, ad bo-
norem Dei et ſandtæ ect
fie, et pro communt emen-
datione totius reg ni mei cou-
ceſſiſſe et reddidiſſe, et char-
ta mea confirmaſſe Deo tt
ſundtæ ecclefiz, et omnibus
Comitibꝰ et Baron et omni)
hominib' meis omnes conte/”
ſiones et donationes, et li-
bertates et liberas conſuclu-
dines quas Rex Henr avis
meus eis dedit & condeſit.
Similiter etiam amnes mais
con ſuetudines quasipſe dele-
vit et remiſit, ego remitii t
deleri concedo pro me et ba-
redibus meis. Unde lique!


eum in chartam *
art


fore relaturum, qud ini-
quas exacbiones et conſue-
tudines a reg nante fratre
injtitutas aboleviſſet et an-
tiquiores preſtantioreſque
Sandti Ed. leges corrobo-
raſſet Nec minus antique
parti etiam teſtimonio con-
flabunt nonnullæ civita-
tim noſtrarum conſuetu-
dines : de Londino enim
ait Fit-Stephen Monachus
Cantuarienſis: Prius con-
dita eſt quam illa a Kemo
S Remulo, (Romam in-
telligens)} unde & adbuc
ant:quis eiſdem utuntur le-
gibus communibus inſtitutis,
Sc. Pauls inferius per ve-
niamus uſque ad tempora
Regis Jobannis flii Reg is
Henrici ſecundi. Hic an-
no decimo ſeptimo a ſuſ-
cepto gubernaculo, duas
illas conſlituit magnas
chartas, unam, quam di-
cimus, magnam Chartam
(ob rei potius momentum
quam c quantitatem) a-
liam vero Chartam de
Foreſtd, que in bodier-
num uſque extant diem:
de quibus Monachus Sanc-
tt Albani: que ex parie
maxima leges antiquas et
regni conſuetudines contine-
bant, Et non mullo poſt
inguit : capitula queque le-
gum et libertatiim, que 161
mag nales confirmare quere-
bant, partem in charta Re-
Si Henrici ſuperius ſcripta


To the READER.


ix


reſtored, and by my char-


ter confirmed to God and
holy church, and to all
Earls and Barons, and to
all my ſubjects, all grants
and donations, and liber-
ties and free cuſtoms,
which King Henry my
grandfather gave and
granted unto them. And
all thoſe evil cuſtoms
which he aboliſhed and
remitted, I likewiſe do
remit, and for me and my
heirs do agree ſhall be
aboliſhed. By which words
it appeareth, that he had
reference to that charter of
his grandſather that abo-
liſhed the unjuſt exaction
and uſages of his brother's
reign, and confirmed the
old and excellent laws under
St, Edward's government.
And no leſs ancient, even
by the like authorities will
appear the cuſtoms of ſome


Ex Stephanide


Monacho Cant'.


of ourcities : forof London“ * See the charter


ſaith Fitz: Stephen (a Monk


of K. W. 1. in
the Preface to


of Canterbury) it was built Privilegia Lon-


before that of Remus and
Romulus (meaning Rome)
wheretore ' even to this
day they uſe the ſame an-
cient laws, public ordi-
nances, &c. Let us deſcend
a little lower ta the times
of King John, the ſon of
Henry the Second, in the
19th yearof his reign, made
the two great chaxters, the
one called Mag. Char. (not

IN


INI,


Mat. Par. ann.
dom. 1215.


p 246, 247.


Mat. Par. page
246. Mag.
Char, 9 H. Jo


To the READER.
in reſpe of the quantity, ſunt, partimque legibus Re-


but of the weight) and the
other Charta de Foreſta,
which are yet extant to this
day. Of which the Monk
of St. Alban's faith, Due
ex parte maxima leges
antiquas & regni conſue-
tudines continebant : that
is, which for the moſt part


did contain the ancient laws


And cuſtoms of this realm.
and ſoon after he faith:
and thoſe laws and li—
berties which the nobili-
ty of the realm did there


ſeek to confirm, are part-


ly in the aboveſaid char-
ter of King Henry, and
partly taken out of the
ancient laws of King Ed-
ward: not that King Ed-
ward the Confeſſor did in-
ſtitute them, but that he out
of the huge heap of the
laws, &c. choſe the beſt
and. reduced them into


one, as in the Preface to the


gis Edwardi antiquis ex-
cerpta: non equidem quod
has inſtituiſſe putes Regen
Edwardum, ſed quod ex
immenſa legum congerie,
Sc. optima queque ſelegit,
ac in unam cocgit; ut in
Tertiæ Partis Relationim
mearum Prefatione copio-
ze magis videri eſt, Quas
quidem Mag nas Chartas
Regis Jobannis in hæc ver-
ba habet Mat. Par. p. 246.
& eædem plane ſunt cum
Mag illa Chart et Charid
de Foreſta, que ſtabiliun-
tur firmeque redduntur in
Magna Charta, anno no-
no Henrici tertit ſancita:
quarum tanta et excel-
lentia, quod diverſcrum
exinde Parliamentor pru-
dentia et authoritas ultra
trigefies illas approbave-
runt et executioni manda-
verunt. In Regiſtro præ-
terea, leges iſtæ in re-


Third Part of my Reports ſcriptis quamplurimis di.


more at large it appeareth.
The ſaid Great Charters
made by King John are ſet
down in bæc verba in Mat.
Par. pag. 246. and in ef-
fect do agree with Magna
Charta and Charta de Fo-


reſta eſtabliſhed and con-


firmed by the Great Charter
made in 9 Hen. 3. which


for their excellency have
ſince that time been con-
fit med and commandedto be


cuntur libertates; ubi di-
citur, juxta tenorem Mag.
Char. de Libertatibus An-
gliæ, ab eſfectu, quia libe-
ros faciunt: Quas Mat.
Par. & alii (ut patet ſu-
pra) ſub eodem habent no-
mine. Fam tandem, non
folum ex biſtoriograpli,
quibus idem ac nobis i
religione ſuadetur, ſed ts


hiſce etiam monaſticis,


legim naſtrarum mun-
cipaliun


To the READER.


cipalium excellentia & an-
tiquas eluceant perſpicue.


Hoc illi meis in prioribus


prafationibus aſſertioni fu-
ſins ſubtexui, ut earum
unita vis facilius utrinque
adimat opinioniim diſcre-
pantiam de veritate cla-
riſſunis adeo multis Ar-
miſſimiſque argument” (in
ſuprad tertiæ partis proge-
mio, imm & teſtimonio
Jobannis Forteſcue, militis
aurati (qui, regnante Hen-
rico ſexto, e ſupremo An-
gliæ tribunalt jus dixit)
inter alia prolato in pre-


fatione ſextæ mearum re-


lationum partis) demon-
ſtrata. Yue omnia evin-
cunt manifeſt} leg mu-
nicipal um corpus ante de-
vidam hanc notion” in-
ſcriptꝰ non fuiſſe in frag-
mentis illis eatttorun at-
que conſtitutionum pro-
mulgatis ſub titulo legiim
Regis Alvredi, Edwardi
primi, Edwardi ſecundi,
Ethelſtini, Edmundi, Ed.
gari, Ethelredi, Canuti,
Edwardi Conf. ſſoris, alio-
rumve regim Anglia,
gente bac noudum ſulju-
gata: quin C, illa adbuc
reliquia leu per pauca
capitula, majure ex parte
ſunt edicta quædam &
conſtitutie n, ab iiſdem
regibus, ex aſſenſu comi-
o um regni, ſeparatin
anita. |


put in execution by the wiſ-


dom and authority of thir-
ty ſeveral Parliaments*, and
above. And theſe laws are


in the regiſter in many


writs called liberties, for
there it is ſaid, according
ro the tenor of the Great
Charter of the Liberties of
England, ſo called of the
effect, becauſe they make
free: and Mat. of Par.
and others (as it appeareth
before) ſtyleth them by the
ſame name. So as the an-
tiquity and excellency of our
common laws do not only
appear by hiſtorians of our
own peilualion in religion,
but by theſe monaſtical wri-
ters: the which I have add-
ed the more at large in this
point to that which I at-
firmed in my former pre-
faces, to the end that they


Jab
xi


See the preſace
to 2 Iaſtit.


agreeing together, may the


better perſuade both parties
to agree to the truth mani-
feſtly proved by many unan-
ſwerable arguments in the
ſaid preface to the Third
Part; and alſo by the autho—
rity of Sir John Forteſcuc,
Ch. Juſtice in the reign of K.
Hen. 6. amongſt others at
large, cited in my preface to
the Sixth Part: by all which
It is manifeſt, that in effect,
the very body of the com-
mon laws before the con-
queſt are omitted out of the
tragments of ſuch acts and

or-


— — — — — —


|
þ
|
l
|
N


— -
II In —
—— —— 2 tp. — —— —u——
— — — —Ä——ö— ———— y2—


23 I
— — —— ¶WAlTH;I
— — — —


= 2
—
—


— IG IE


_ — ——
DT ———
— _
—_ —


— —


3 —
— — — —— — — —
— <_ — — — —


—_— - -


—
—[— — —


Ex Monacho
Crowlandiæ.


Ex Mat. Weſtm.


——


To the READER,


ordinances as are publiſhed
under the title of the Laws
of King Alfred, Edward
the Firſt, Edward the Se-
cond, Ethelſtane, Edward,
Edgar, Etheldred, Canutus,
Edward the Confeſſor, or of
other Kings of England be-
fore the Conqueſt. And thoſe
few chapters of laws yet re-
maining, are for the moſt
part certain acts and ordi -
nances eſtabliſhed hy the ſaid
ſeveral Kings by aſſent 6f
the Common Council of
their kingdom.

2dly. As for the ex-
cellency of our municipal
laws, I will add to that
which hath been ſaid before,
that the Monk of Crowland


calleth them the moſt juſt


laws, and Mat. of Weſtm.
of them ſaith, they being
by the appointment of
King Cnute tranſlated out
of Engliſh into Latin, were


- by him, for their equity,


Trials by jury
appear to have
been in uſe
among the old
Britons.


See LL. Hoeli.


commanded to be obſerved
as well in Denmark as in
England. And of this mat-
ter thus much ſhall ſuffice,
But yet before I take my
leave of theſe hiſtorians, I
muſt encounter ſome of
them in two main points,
Firſt, that the trial by ju-
ries of 12 men (which is one
of the invincible arguments
of the antiquity of the com-
mon laws, being only ap-
propriated to them) was not


inſtituted by the powerful


85


20 De præſtantia le-
gum noſtrarum communi-
um, hoc adjiciam, quod


| Monachus Crowlandenfis


illas nequaquam immerit)
appellavit leges aquiſſimas,
Et de illis ait Matth,
Weſtmonaſterienſis : juben-
te Cnutone ab Anglicd
lingud in Latinam tran/-
late, tam in Dacia quam
in Anglia prepter eorum
æquitatem a rege prefato
obſervari jubentur. Atque
de hac re hac ſufficiant.


Miſſos tandem faciamus
hiſtoricos, fi in duobus
magni ponderis et momen-
ti illis prius occurramus.

Primò, morem experi-
undi cauſas per duodecim
viros juratos (qui frmiſ-
Jumorum unum eſt arg u-
mentor antiquitalis le-
giim communium, ut his
folis proprius) prom:

. 407


To the READER.


Jubjugatoris ex arbitrio
non fuiſſe introductum ut
eorum nonnulli audatter
ſatis affirmarunt.

Secundo, curiam adli-
oniim communium inſti-
tutam non fuiſſe poſt ſta-
tutum Magnæ Chart an-
jo nono Ilenrici tertii ſan-
citum) hos quod opinioni
quorundam aitorum peni-
„ tus adverſatur. Ad pri-
mum quod attinet, conſu-
lat leftor doctus proæmi-
um in Tertiam Relationiſm
mearum partem, ubi ha-
beat in quo hac de re edoc-
tas ſatts acquieſcat: inte-
rea tamen magni illius
' ( ſuo genere) bujus regni
ornaments attexam ſen-
tentiam in elaborata ejus
Britannia, pag. 109, qua
clauſam habes hanc rem,
Duodvero Polidorus Virgi-
lus ſcribit, Gulielm' illum
Vittorem duodecim virorum
judicium primum induxiſſe,
nibil a vero alienius; mul-
lis enim ante annis in uſu
fuiſſe cer tiſimum eſt ex legi-
bas Etheldred : nec eſt cur
terribile judiciumvocaret,e
populo enim duodecim viri
liberi et legales evicinia rite
evocantur ;, hi jurejurando
obligantur vere de facto ſen-
lentiam dicere; advocates
Coram iribunali utring” diſ-
ſerentes, et teſtes audiunt;
inde, receptisutriuſqu par-
lißinſtrumentis, concludun-


will of a conqueror, as ſome
of them peremptorily affirm
they were.


The 29d, that the Court
of Common Pleas was not


erected after the ſtatute of


Magna Charia (which was
made in the ninth year of
King Hen. 3.) contrary to
that which others do hold.
For the firſt, I refer the
learned reader tothe preface
before the Third Part of
my Reports, where he ſhall
receive full and clear ſatis-
faction herein, and will only
add the judgment of the

reat ornament (in his kind)
of this kingdom 1n his Bri-
tannia, p. 109. with which


TI will conclude this point:


«© But whereas Polidore Vir-
gil writeth, that William
the Conqueror firſt brought
in the trial by twelve
men, there is nothing
more untrue, for it is moſt
certain and apparent by


the laws of K. Etheldred,


xili


Cam. Brit.
p- 109.


that it was in uſe many


years before: neither hath
he any cauſe to term
it a terrible judgment;
for free- born and lawful
men, are duly by order
impannelled and called
forth of the neighbour-
hood, theſe are bound by
oath to pronounce and de-
liver” up their verdict
touching the fact; they

hear


xiv


Forteſcue. See


gal ſo Sir M.


H. les's Hiſt. of
the law, cap. 13.


—


To the READER.


hear the counſel plead on
both ſides before the
bench or tribunal, and
the depoſitions of witnel-
ſes; then taking with them
the evidences of both par-
ties, they are ſhut up to-
gether and kept from
meat, drink, and fire,
(unleſs peradventure ſome
one of them be in danger
of death) until they be
agreed of the matter in
tact : which when they
have pronounced before
the Judge, he according
to law giveth ſentence.
For this manner of irial
our molt wiſe and provi-
dent anceſtors thought the
beſt ro find out the truth,
to avoid corruption, and to
cut off all partialiry and
affections.” And for the
excellency and indifferency
of this kind of trial, and
why it is only appropriated
to the common laws of
England, read Juſtice For-
teſcue, ca. 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, &c. which
being worthy to be written
in letters of gold for the
weight and worthineſs


thereof, I will not abridge


any part of the ſame, but
refer the learned reader to
to the fountain itſelf.

As to the ſecond, it is
clearer than the light at


noon day, that the Court of


tur, fine cibo, pou, et 'gne ©
detinentur, (niſi forte peri.
culum fit ne ex illis quiſpiam
moriatur) donec de ſacto in.
ter ſe convenerint, quod uli
coram judice pronunciave-
rint, ille de jure ſententiam
profert. Hanc enim ratiq-
nem frud:niifſimi majores
noſtr opt imam eſſe ad veri-
tatem eliciendam, tum ad
ccrruptelas ev tandas, &
affettus intercludendos ex-
iti mar unt.“ Et modus hic
eru ndi veritatem pra-
ftant fſimus omnino, plan,
ægullimus) qua de cauſa
Juri municipali Angliæ pe-
culiaris eft, diſcas evoluen-
do Lc que ſcripfit Fuſtics
atis Forteſcue, cap. 25,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,32,
Sc. Due cum, ut literis
effingerentur aureis, opti-
me pro meruerunt (fi vel
gravilatem vel excellen-
tiam ſpectemus) nullam
inde partem a me babes ab-
ſtractam, propterd quod
fonteſ ipſos petal velim lec-
tor eruditus.


Serundo loco, luce ipſa
meridiana apparet clar ius


curiam communium pla-
citorun


To the RE A D E R.


titorum originem neuti-
quam habuiſſe poſt ſtatu-
tum, 9 Hen. 3. cap. 11.
Communia placita non ſe-
guantur curiam noſtram,
ſed teneantur in aliquo loco
certo. Primo eodem ipſo
tempore, eademque charta,
capite decimo tertio, curia
aftionum communium ex-
preſim nominatur : aſſiſæ
de ultima præſentatione
ſemper captantur coram
Juſticiariis de Banco, &
tht terminentur': et dubi-
um nemini eſt quin 7uſti-
ciarii de Banco ſint Com-
munium action juſticiarii,
ſecundo, Rex Henricus
Primus, filius victoris,
chartam Abbati de B. fe-
cit confirmation" omniu m
ſuarum conſuetudinum, etc,
S ulterius ei conceſſit cog-
nilionem actionum omnium
guarumcunque, adeo ut
neutrius Banti, ſive aſſiſ-
ar”, Juſticiariis liceret
inter ponere authoritatem
ſuam: et boc perſpicu-
um eſt ex 26 Al. pl. 24.
tertio, in 6 E. 3. fol.
54» 55. conſtat, 15 Mi-
chaelis anno ſexto regis
Richardi


fuiſſe levatum (ut loqui-


Primi, finem


Common Pleas was not e-
tected after the ſtatute of
9 H. 3. cap. 11. Common
Pleas ſhall nor follow our
Court, but ſhall be holden in
ſome place certain. Firſt, at
the ſame time, and in the
ſame great Charter, and in


Xv


the next chapter ſaving one,


the Court of Common Pleas
is expreſly named; aſſiſes of
darrein preſentment ſhall
always be taken before the
Juſtices of the Bench, and
no man doubted but 7a/tt-
ciarii de Banco are juſtices
of the Common Pleas.
2 K. Henry the Firſt, the
ſon of the Conqueror, by
his charter, granted to the
Abbot of B. a charter of
confirmation of all his* u-
ſages, &c. And farther
granted, that he ſhould
have conuſance of all man-
ner of pleas, ſo that the
Juſtice of the one Bench, vr
of the other, or Juſtices of
aſſiſe, ſhould not meddle,
&c. and this charter ap-
peareth in 26 lib. Aſſ. pl.


24. 3. In the book-caſe of


6 Ed. 3. fol. 54, 55, it ap-
peareth, that 15 Mich. in
the ſixth vear of King Rich-
ard the Firlt, a fine was le-


nur) inter Abbatem dæ vied between the Abbot of


S. & Theoband C. de jure

patronatus ecclęſiæ de

Preſton, coram Arcbiep

Catuarienſi, epiſcop* Rof-

fenſi; & aliis Juſticiariis
Vor. IV.


S. and Theoband C. of the
ad vowſon of the church of
Preſton, before the Arch-
biſnop of Canterbury, the
Biſhop of Rocheſter, and

M others,


26 1ib, Aft.
pl. 24.

6E. 3. 54. 55.
15 Mich. |
6 Ri. Prim, |


1


1
i}
Ul
Tt
1
5
1


CI RT


— - — —
— — —


——= —_—_


— —— — — —_


— —


a. - =
4 = —W_
. - ——


— . A — —
— — =
——_ — — — —
— —ͤ—0 -
III IEEE! ——
*


—
—— — — 2 ——
= —
——_— ws n= ry —


—


Pl. Com. in.
Stowel's ce iſe,


Fx, rot. Pat. de
anno 1H. 3.
10 E. 4. f. 53.


To the READER.


others, (Juſtices del Banke,
that is, of the Courtof Com-
mon Pleas.) And it ap-
peareth in Maſter Plow-
den's Com. in Stowel's caſe,
that fines were levied be-
fore the conqueſt, In the
treaſury there are yet re-
maining ſome fragments of
records and judgments in
the reign of King Richard


the Firſt, as well coram Juſ-


ticiartis de Banco, as coram
Rege. Martin de Pateſhull


was made Juſticiariusde Ban-


co, in the firſt year of H. 3.
which was before the ſta-
tute of Magna Charta,
And in anno 10 Ed. 4.
fol. 53. all the Judges of


ticiarits de Banco, quam


de Banco, id eſt, de cnria
placitorum five adion
communium. Quin & in
commentar magiſt Plow-
den in caſu Stowell, fines
fuiſſe levatos, nondum
hoc regno ſubjugato, ma-
nifeſtum eſt. In archivo,
etiamnum hodie extant
fragmenta nonnulla adlo-
ram publicorum adq. ju-
diciorum ſub rege Richar-
do Primo, tam coram Ja-


coram rege. Martinus ds
Pateſhull conſtitutus erat
Fuſticiarius de Banco, an-
v primo regis H. Tertis,
nondum adbuc edito ſta-
tuto Magnæ Charte. Et


England did affirm that n anno decimo Edward:


the Chancery,King's Bench,
Common Pleas, and Ex-
chequer, be all the King's
Courts, and have been time
out of memory of man ; ſo
as no man knoweth which
of them is the moſt ancient.
But in a caſe ſo clear this
Mall ſuffice. And yet let
me obſerve, that divers Bi-
fhops and other eccleſiaſti-
cal perſons in ancient time,
did ſtudiouſly read over the
laws of England, and there-
by attained to great and
perfect knowledge of the
lame. And the ſaid Martin
de Pateſhull, who was, as
before is ſaid, Chief Juſtice
of the Court of Common
Pleas in the firſt year of


Quarti, F. 53. omnes to-
tius Angliæ Judices, Can-
cellariam, Bancum Kegi-
um, Bancum Communem, et
ſcaccarium, eſſe regis fora
affirmabunt, ficque ex om-
ni etarum memoria exti-
tiſſe; adeo ut dicitur ne-
mo ſciat, hos eſt eorum
antiguiſſimum. In bac
vero per ſpicua veritate hec
nobis ſufficiant. Hic tamen
objervem Epiſcopos olim
guamplurimos, alio/q. vircs
ecclefiaſticos, ſtudio legum
municipalium Ang!” cupi-
de iuvigilaſſe, plenamęut
inde uberioremque adeptas
fuiſſe cognitionem : iden
enim Martinus de Pateſpull
capitalis de Banco Juſti.
| 1 9 ciarius


ciarius anno primo Regis
Henrici tertii (ut ſupra
memeratur) decanus item
fuit eccleſiæ Santi Pauli:
de quo dicitur ; vir uit
ſummæ prudentiæ, & in le-
pibus hujus regni peritiſſi-
mus, Et Fobannes Britton
Epiſcopus Hereſordenſis,
optime ſub Rege Edward
I ſcripſit de munici palibus


Anglie legibus, cijjus bo-


die habemus opera. Mul-
ti etiam magnatum, in le-
gibus Angl* periti impri-
mis evaſerunt, utputa
(quod unum inſtar multor
habeas, u hec egrediatur


ſuos fines prefatio) Ran-


ulphus de Meſchines, cla-
rus ille et illuſtris comes
Ceſtriæ, ejuſque familiæ
tertius et poſtremus (vir
niſi, me meus fallat author,
ſumma ſcientia et perita
bujus regni legiim ſingula-
ri) de eiſdem librum com-
poſait, qui ſuam in illis
cognition” abunde ſatis teſ-
tatur : de quo M. Par. p.
350. meminit (eſfeci' ej us
dofring legumque hujts


reg prudentiæ certiffimum:)


ſelus autem comesCeſtrenſis
Ranulphus ſtetit viriliter,
nolens terram ſuam redige-
re in ſervitutem (i. decimas
ſelvere domino Papa) nec
permiſit de feodo ſus viros
religioſos vel cleric? decimas
memoratas ſolvere, quam-
Vs Anglia et Mallia, Scotia


*


To the READER.


King Henry the third, was
alſo Dean of Paul's, of
whom it is ſaid that he was
a man of great wiſdom,
and exceeding well learned
in the laws of this land.
And John Britton Biſhop
of Hereford, wrote an ex-
cellent work in the days of
King Edward the firſt, of
the common laws of Eng-
land, which remains to this
day. And many noblemen
have been excellently learn-
ed in the laws of England,


xvii


Joh. Britton
Epiſcopus
Heret,


Q


as taking one example for


many, leſt this preface
ſhould grow too large. Ra-
nulphus de Meſchines the
reat and worthy Earl of

Cheſter, and the 3d and laſt
of that family, (having as
mine author faith) great
knowledge and underſtand-
ing in the laws of this land,
compiled a book of the ſame
laws, as a witneſs of his
great ſkill therein: of whom
Mat. Par. p. 350. reporteth
(as an effect of his learning
and knowledge in the laws
of this realm:) but Ra-
nulph Earl of Cheſter alone
valiantly reſiſted, as not
willing to bring his country
into ſervitude (by paying
of tenths to the Pope :)
And would not ſuffer
the religious or clerks
of his fee to pay the
ſaid tenths, although all
England and Wales, Scot-
M 2 land


Mat. Par- p.
3302


7


—


— — —-ü— —
<S—- — —


—— med


TH


WS


—_ EE
—


—— —
— 2


==. CE
a.2


3


— 2:58 —
g — _ — —
Dr „


1


— ooo


See the ſtat. of
Merton.


land and Ireland, were
compelled to pay them.
And at a Parliament holden
in the twentieth year of K.
Henry the third, the act
faith : all the Biſhops de-
fired the Lords that they
would conſent, that all
fuch as were born afore
matrimony ſhould be le-
itimate as well as they
that be born within ma-
trimony, as to the ſucceſ-
ſion of inheritance, foral-
much as the church accept-
eth ſuch for legitimate:
and all the Earls and Ba-
rons with one voice an-
fwered, that they would


not change the laws of


this realm, which hither-
to have been uſed and ap-

roved. Which uniform
and reſolute anſwer of all
the nobility of England,
nullo contradicente, doth
fhew the inward and affec-
tionate love and reverence
they bear unto the common
laws of their dear country,
The certain and continual
practice of the common
laws of England, ſoon af-
ter the conqueſt, even in the
time of King Henry the
firſt, the Conqueror's ſon,
(which almoſt was within
the imoak of that fiery con-
queſt) and continued ever
ſince, do plainly demonſtrate
that thoſe laws were before


the days of William the


To the READER.


& Hiberna, ad ſolutionem
compellarentur. Et ad Co.
mitium Parliamentarium
anno Regis Henrici tertii
viceſimo, adtus fic ſe ba-
bet : Rogaverunt omnes
Epiſcopi magnates ut con-
ſemirent, quod nati ante
matrimon" eſſent legitimi,
ficut illi qui nati ſunt peſt
matrimon” quantum ad ſuc-
cefſi onem bereditariam,
quia eceleſia tales habet
pro legitimis; et omnes Co-
mites et Barones una vcce
reſponderunt, quod nolue-
runt leges Angliæ mulare
gue bucuſque uſitate ſunt
approbate. Fixa cujuſms-
di et hniformis omnium
Angliæ magnatum reſpon-
fio, nullo contradicente,
interiorem ecrum ⁊elum et
reverentiam, que medulli-
tus (ſi dicam) in patriz
ſue chariſſimæ leges com-
munes haberent, palefecit.
Certa quidem et continua
tam inde a devicta hac na-
tione in municipalibus An-
gliælegibus praxis regnan-
te ipſius vicloris fillo Hen-
rico primo ( cum flagrantis
illius ſubjugationis vix ad-
huc evanuiſſet fumus) el a-
binde bucuſque deduFta, il
las ante ingreſſum v1ttoris
Gulielmi in uſu fuiſſe evin-
cit manifeſte. Nequaquan
enim forct poſſibile, talem
leges atligiſſe perfection
fub ſuccedente Henrico fe-


cunds,


*


exndo, qualem tunc habu-
iſſent, fi a vittore adeo nu-

rime introductæ vel in-
itute fuiſſent. De quibus
be confidenter ſta-
tuam, nullam eſſe legem
(bumanam dico) in toto hoc
terrarum erbe, qua cum
honore, pace et concordia
res in hoc regno aganiur
publice, infinitis prorſus
gradibus, æque commode
atque his antiguiſſimis ac
præſtantiſſimis Angliæ le-
gibus.


To the READER.


Conqueror. For it had not
been poſſible to have
brought the laws to ſuch a
perfection as they were in the
reign of K. H. 2. ſucceeding,
if the ſame had been ſo ſud-
denly brought in or inſtitut-
ed by the Conqueror: of
which laws this I will ſay,
that there is no human law
within the circuit of the
whole world, by infinite de-
grees, ſo apt and profitable
tor the henourable, peacea-
ble, and proſperous govern-
ment of this kingdom, as


theſe ancient and excellent


Ranulphus de Glanvil-
la, Fuſticiarius Capitalis


ſub Henrico ſecundo, legiim


Angliæ partem doctiſſime
pariter atque conſultiſſime
literis commendavit (cujus
opera in hodiernum uſque
diem ſuperſunt ejuſdemq”.
tractatus progmio ſcribit,
Regem hanc gentem gu-
bernaſſe legibus regni &
conſuetudinibas de ratione
insroductis et diu obtentis:
ex quibus verbis; adeo
multis abhinc ſeculis, e-
miſſis, manifeſtum eſt, quod
tunc fuerunt leges regni
& conſuetudines ratione
fundate et antiquis tempo-
ribus acquifite ; que pro-
culdubio nec potuit nec aſ-
ſerere voluit, fi adeo re-
center & fere immediate
anle per expugnatorem


laws of England be.
Ranulphus de Glanvil-


la, Chief Juſtice, in the


reign of King Henry the
ſecond, learnedly and pro-
foundly wrote of part of the
laws of England (whoſe
works remain extant at this
day :) and in his preface
he writeth, that the King
did govern this realm by
the laws of the kingdom,
and by cuſtoms founded
upon reaſon, and of anci-
ent time obrained? By
which words ſpoken ſo ma-
ny hundred years ſince, it
appeareth, that then there
were laws and cuſtoms of
this kingdom grounded up-
on reaſon, and of ancient
time obtained, which he nei-
ther could nor would have
affirmed, if they had been to
recently and almoſt preſently

M 3 be-


X1X


—


FU To the RE AD E R.


before that time inſtituted fuiſſent inſtitutæ. Ft 7
i | by the Conqueror. And in reverendiſſimo illi judici
| token of my thankfulneſs to videar ingratus (cujus te-
| that worthy Judge, whom I timoniam hiſce meis lucy-
| cite many times in theſe Re- brationibus (ficut alias)
! | ports, (as I have done in my ſepe a me habes prolatum)
if former) for the fruit, which pro fructu quem ex pul.
J confeſs myſelf to have cherrimis ejus operum ar-
reaped out of the fair fields vis me collegiſſe confileer,
; | of his Jabours, I will, for in honorem ejus, & v0.
| the honour of him, and of his minis, et ſobslis hodie flo-

name and poſterity, which rentis (ſicut optima mihi
remain to this day (as I cognoſcendi eſt occaſio) in
have good cauſe to know) ſecula futura emittere &
impart and publiſh both ro in medium proferri viſun


He did hear a» all future and ſucceeding eft, que magne fore vetuſ⸗
zure; a chief ages Which I have found of tatig et exploratæ veritatis


1"dented, Or:


which coat-ary Ereat Antiquity, and of un- ſepiſſime ſum expertus :
mour the Paſtons COUbted Verity 3 the origl- quorum origo apud me
CG nal whereof remaineth with et, et hiſce verbis ſequun-
6; me at this day, and fol- tur. Ranulphus de Glan-
lues. Fusdater loweth in theſe words. Ra- villa Juſtitiar Angh, fun-
Beuel. nul pbus de Glanvilla Juſtici- dator fuit domus de But-
9 arius Angliæ, fundator fuit teley in comitat' SuffoÞ que

domus de Buttel'ly in com fundata erat an. Reg Hen-

Suff. que fundata erat anno ria filii imperatricis de-

Regis H. filii imperatricis 17, cimo ſeptimo et an dow

et anno dom. 1171. 4% 1171. quo an' Tho. Becbit

anno Tho. Becket Cantuar Ar- Cantuarienſis Architpiſc

. chiepiſcopus erat occiſus. erat occiſus. Fit ditius

Es diflus Ranulphus naſce- Ranulph' noſcebatur in

batur in villa de Straiford villa de Straiferd in com

in com Suff. et habuit ma- Suffol" et habuit manerium

nerium de Benhall cum de Benball cum toto domi-

| Donum Reg'. 2010 deminio ex dimo dic- mio ex dono didi Reg Hen-
j Vor equi ti Regis H. Et duxit in rici: et duxit in uxorem
6 uxorem quandam Bertam quandam Bertam filiam
Wi filiam adomini Thecbaldi dom? Theobaldi de Va-
Jj de Valeymz ſenioris, dom? leymz ſenioris, dom de Par-
"i | de Parham, qui Theobald bam; qui Theobaldus
"ut per chartam ſuam dedit dic- per chartam ſuam deait
4% Ran et Bertæ uxori ſus dio Ranulpho et Beriæ
l uxori ſuæ totam wes de
ro-


2 — ER—R oe; —_ 7 _——— 7
OS —


— ————


— — — —
— —— ᷓ⏑᷑᷑: 2 CE


— — —
F


* A . „
og mg ——_ =


2 C =


— IIA) ö
—


—


*


Brochous cum pertinent”, in
qua domus de Butteley fita
et, cum aliis terris et tene-
mentis in libero maritagio.
Prædictus vero Ranulphus
procreavit tres filias de dicta
Berta, viz, Matildam, A-
mabiliam, et Helewiſam,
quit” dedit terram ſuam an-
te progreſſum ſuum verſus
terram ſantlam. Matilda,
prima ſoror, habuit ex dono
patris ſus totam villam de
Benhall integraliter
cum advocatione eccleſiæ five
monaſterii beate Marie de
Butteley, et nupſit cuidam
militi nomine Willielmo de
Auberville, de quibus pro-
ceſit Hugo de Anberville :
de ipſo Hugone WMillielmus
de Auberville: de ipſo
Willieimo proceſſit quædam
Jchanna filia unica et he-
res, que nupſit cuidam mi-
lili de Cancia nomine Nicho-
lao Kyryell, qui duxit in
uxorem Margaretam filiam
dom Galfridi
ille Nicholaus vendidit do-
mino Guydoni Ferr pred”
manerium de Benhall » et
tum ille Nicholaus de uxore
fua genuit alium dominum
Nicholaum militem in Can-


cia, qui vixit ante primam


heſtilentiam. Tpſe autem
Guido talliavit pred? maner
in curia dom" Regis apud
Meſimonaſtir in craſtino aſ-
cenfionis dom, anno regni


Regis Edwardi filii Edwar-


ſus terram


una


Peche;, et


To the READER.


totam terram de Brochous
cum pertin', in qua do-
mus de Butteley fita eſt,
cum alits terris et tene-
mentis in libero marita-
gio. Pred' vero Ranulph?
procreavit tres filias dedic-
fa Berta, viz. Matildam,
Amabiliam, et Helewiſam,
gui bus dedit terram ſuam
ante progreſſum ſuun ver-
ſandtam, Ma-
tilda, prima ſoror, habuit
ex dono patris ſui totam
villam de Benhall inte-
graliter unam cum advoca-
tiene ecclefie five monaſ-
terii beate Marie de But-
teley, & mnupſit cuidam
militi nomine Willielmo de
Auberville, de quibus pro-
ceſſit Hugo de Auberville,
de ipſo Hugone Wil de
Auberville, de ipſo Williel-
mo proceſſit quedam Fo-
hanna filia unica et heres,
que nupfit cuidam militi
de Cancia nomine Nicholao
Kyryell qui duxit in uxorem
Margaretam filiam dom”
Galfridi Peche ;_ et ille
Nich* vendidit dom' Gui-
doni Ferr' præd' maneri-
um de Benhall : et tum ille
Nich. de uxore ſua genuit
alium dom Nich* militem
in Cancia, qui vixit ante
primam peſtilentiam. Ip-
ſe autem Guido talliavit
pred maner* in cur” dom
Regis apud Weſtm' in craſ-
tino aſcenſionis dom”, anno

M 4 regni


XX1


Filiæ <us.


Nuptiæ & dona-
tiones filiarum,
& earum poſteri-
das.


Vir præclwiffi-
mus et de nobili
fanguine,


regni Regis E. filu E. pri-
mo, ſibi et Alianor@ uxori
ſue et heredibus de ſe exe-
unt” : et fi ipſe Guido fine
herede diſcederet, rem
Wil de S. Quintino et bæ-
redibus. Amabilia, ſecun-
da, ſoror, habuit ex dono
patris ſui medietatem vill
ae Bawdeſeia et medietatꝰ
will” de Fynbergb. Amabi-
lia pred” habuit virum no-
mine Radulph' de Ardern,
de quo proceſſit Tho. de
Ardern filius et heres, de
The" Radul' filius et bares,


gui feoffavit priorem et


cenventum de Butteley de
medietate ville de Bawde-
fey. De præd' Radulpho
proceſſit quidam Tho. Ar-
dern filius et heres. He-


lewiſa, tertia ſoror, babuit


ex dono patris ſui aliam
medietat* ville de Batude-
fey pred*, et aliam medie-
tatem vilia de Fynbergb
pred. Helewiſa praditia
habuit virum nomine Ro-
bertum filium Rob. de quo
preceſſit Rad” filius et bæ-
res, qui Tau Warinum
de inſulâ de medietate præ-
dicta ville de FHynbergb.
De Rad” preceſſit Rob. fili-
us ef bares qui feoffavit
Ran fratrem ſuum de me-
dietate predif® ville de
Batodeſey. Et nota, quod


prefatus Ranulph* de Glan-
villa fuit vir præclariſſimus
genere, utpote de nobili


To the READER.


di primo, fibi et Alianoræ
uxori ſur, et heredibus de
fe exeunt'ꝰ et fi ipſe Guido
fine herede diſcederet, rem
Willieimo de ſandto Quin-
tino et heredibus, Ama-
bilia, ſecunda ſoror, habuit
ex dono patris ſui medieta-
tem ville de Batodeſeiæ, &
medietatem ville de Hu.
bergh : Amabilia prædidla
habuit virum namine Ra-
nulphum de Ardern ; de


"quo proceſſit Tho. de Ardern


filius et beres; de Thoma
Ranulphus filius et heres,
qui feoffavit priorem et con-
ventum de Butteley de me-
dietate ville de Bawdeſey,
De prædidio Ranulpho pro-
cefſit quidam Tho. Ardern
filius et heres. Helewija,
tertia ſoror, habuit ex dono
patris ſui aliam medietatem
ville de Bawdeſey pradifle,
et alam medietatem ville
de Fynbergh prædidta: He-
lewiſa predic? habuit virum
nomine Robertum filium
Roberti, de quo proceſſit
Radulphus filius et hates,
qui feoffavit Warinum de
inſula de medietate preditt
ville de Hynbergb. De Ra-
aulpho procefſit Robertus
Julius et bares, qui feaſfavit
Rau fratrem ſuum de me-
dietale prædictæ villa de
Bawdeſey. Et nota quod
præfatus Ranulph* de Glan-
villa fuit vir præclariſſimus
genere, utpote de nobile ſan-

ED guine


To the READER.


nine, vir inſuper ſtrenuiſ- ſanguine,
mus corpore, qui provec-


tiori etate ad terram ſanc-
tam properavit, et ibidem
contra inimicos Crucis
Chriſti ſtrenuiſſime uſque
ad necem dimicavit, Fuit
autem Berta ex illuſtri

oſapia orta, filia dom
Theobald: Valeymz ſenio-
ris, dom” de Parham, quo-
rum et Ranulp' et Berte
corſanguinei mulit, de qui-
bus plures milites, omnes
vero gentiles et gendvaſi, iſ-
tam par temòuffolciæ eorum
incolatu et gencroſa carms
propagine honor iſice illuſ-


trabant aunis multis.


9


iſſimus corpore, qui provec-


 tiori ætate ad terram ſanc-


tam properavit, & ibidem
contra inimicos crucis Cbriſti
ſtrenuiſſime uſque ad necem
dimicavit. Fuit autem Berta
ex illuſtri proſapia orta, filia
dom Theobald: Valeymz ſe-
noris dow de Parham, quo-
rum et Ranulphi et Bertz
conſanguinei multi de quibus
plures milites, omnes vero gen-
tiles & generofi, iſtam part
Suff. eor' incolatu & generoſa
carnis propagine honorifice il-
luſtrabant annis multis.


/


Et Henricus de Brac-


ton, Regis Hen” tertii tem-
poribus, hijjus regni Ju-
dex, capite primo libri ſui
prim!, numero tertio, in-
quit : ego Hen. de Brac-
ton animum erm ad ve-
tera judicia juſtorum per ſ-
crutanda diligenter, non
ine vigiliis et labore, Sc.
adeo ut leges Angliæ vete-
ra judicia juſtorum ab illo
nuncupantur. Author li-
bri gai inſcribitur Fleta
(qui regnante Edwardo
primo ſcrigſit) in operis
ſui exordio idem ſentit quod
e Glanvilla de Angliæ le-
gim tum anliguitate
tum Fonore ; et ibidem,
libr” quem ſcripfit cur
diſtinxit appellatione Fle-
le plenius tibi ſatisfaci-


And Hen” de Bratton, a


Judge of this realm, in the
reign of King Henry the
Third, in his firſt. chapter
of his firſt book, Numero
tertio, faith: I Henry de
Bratton have ſet my mind
to ſearch out diligently


the ancient_ judgments of


the juſt, not without
much pains and labour,
&c. So as he ſtyleth the
laws of England, by the


name of the ancient judg-


ments of the juſt, The au-
thor of the book called Fle-
ta (who wrote in the reign


of King Edward the Firſt).


in his Preface to his work
agreeth with Glanvill con-
cerning the antiquity and
honour of the laws of

Eng-


XX111


vir inſup ſtrenu- Vir ſtrenuiſſi-


mus. Vide Pl.
Com. f. 368. b.
obiit apud acres.
Ad terram ſanc-
tam peregrina-
tus. Effuſio
ſanguinis contra
inimicos Chriſti,
Proſapia uxoris
Bertz,


XXIV


þ
*
j
q
1
|
ö
1
+


> oro on —— — — -——ooes—n —_


name of Fleta:


To the READER.


England, and there ſhew-
eth the reaſon wherefore he
intitled his book by the
but this
treatiſe, which may wor-
thily be called Fleta, be-
cauſe it was compiled in
the Fleet, of the laws of
England. I have a regiſter
of our writs original, writ-


ten in the reign of K. Hen.


the Second, (in whole time


Glanvill wrote) containing


the original writs which
were long before the Con-


queſt, as in the ſaid Pre-


face to the Third Part ap-
peareth, and yet alſo re-
maining in force, ſuch ex-
cepted as have been inſti-


tuted or altered by acts of


Parliament fince that time,
which is the moſt ancient
book yet extant of the com-
mon law, and ſo ancient,
as the beginning whereof
cannot be ſhewed, |

To the ſecond queſtion I
do affirm, that the ſtatutes


of Magna Charta, Charta


de Foreſta, Merton, Marle-
bridge, Weſtm' 1. De Bi-
gamis, Gloue Weſim' 2.
Articuli ſuper cartas, Arti-
culi Cleri, Statutum Ebo-


raic', Prærogativa Regis,


and ſome few others, that
be ancient, amongſt which,
the ſtatute of 25 Ed. 3. is
not to be omitted, 1

treaſons (which for the gs
part are but declarations of


as: trettatus autem iſte,
qui Fleta merito poterit
appellari; quia in Fleta, d-
jure Anglorum, fuit com.
poſitus. Reſcript“ mibi eſ
originalium Regiſtrum, ſub
Rege Henrico ſecundo lite-
ris conſignatum qua (tem-
pore /ſcripfit Glanvilla)
brevia five reſcripta con-
tinens originalia, que mul.
to ante ſubattam hanc na-
tion (prout conſtat in
memorata illa Tertiæ Par-
tis Prefatione) in vigore
extiterunt pleno ut et bo-
die exiſtunt; eis modo ex.
ceptis que in comitiis Par-
liamentariis inſtituta aut
immutata fuere, qui liber,
omnium de lege munici-
pali extantium, eſt vetuſ-
tiſimus, adeoque antiquus
ut de origine ejus nibil
prorſus aſtendatur.


Ad ſecundam quaſtion
affirmo, quod flatuta, que
inſcribuntur, Mag? Char!”
Charta de Foreſta, Merton,
Marlebridge, Weſtm' i. De
Bigamis, Glouceft Meſt'2.
Artliculi ſuper chartas, Ar-
ticuli cleri, Statutum Ebo-
rate Prerogativa Reg, et
antiqua alia nonnulla (in-
ter que ſtatutum anno vi-
ceſimo quinto Edwardi
tertii de crimine læſæ ma-

jeſtatis ſancitum omil ten-


dum non eſt) pleriſq' quo-
fun


To the R E A D E R.


rum ſolummodo declaratur
lex municipalis : una cum
reſcriptis originalibus de
aclionibus froe placitis (ut
loquimur) communibus,
que in Regiſtro compre-
henduntur, cum & ex-
quifite et vere indicandi
crimina delinguentium for-
mulæ, ſunt corpus ipſum
et quaſi textus legum An-
gli municipal: cauſa-
rumque et judiciorum re-
latorum vetuſtiores libri
olim editi, et monumenta
ſeu acta publica, ab annis
© quadringentis et ultra in
bunc uſque diem dedutia
et ſumma fide reſervata,
ſunt commentaria tantum,
et ear leg*, reſcript” ori-
ginalium, et indicandi
formularum expoſitiones.
Et cum alias, tum pre-
cipue ex duobus cauſis (al-
tera, ſcil', Febu Webb,
allera Blackamore) jam
prelo, ut et aliæ, commiſ-
s (vereque hoc fauſtiſſimo
immo florentiſſimo Juſticiæ
a Regia Majeſtate unicui-
que adminiſtratæ deter mi-
natis) patet clariſſime li-
bros noſtros et monumenta,


apta fare commentaria, et


veras ſtatutorum decreto-
rumque comitialium expli-
caliones. Et, fi ſtu-
aſus lector exemplum
de reſcripto originali que-
fiverit, caſum Calye,\ in
termino Paſche 26 Eliz.
Ræinæ feliciſſime memo-


the common law) together
with the original writs con-
tained in the Regiſter con-
cerning Common Pleas, and
the exact and true forms of
indictments and judgments
thereupon in criminal cau-
ſes, are the very body, and
as it were the very text of
the common laws of Eng-
land. And our year books
and records yet extant for
above theſe four hundred
years, are but commenta-
ries and expoſitions of thoſe
laws, original writs, in-
dictments and judgments.
By two caſes, the one of
Jehu Webb, and the other
called Blackamore's caſe,
now among others pub-
liſhed and reſolved in this
bleſſed and flouriſhing
ſpring-time of his Majeſty's
juſtice, ſpecially * (among
many others) it appeareth,
that our book caſes and
records are alſo right com-
mentaries, and true expo-
ſitions of ſtatutes and acts
of Parliament. And for an
example of an original writ,
among many others, I re-
fer the ſtudious reader eſpe-
cially to Caly's caſe in
Paſcb' 26 of the reign of
the late Queen Elizabeth,
of ever bleſſed memory, now
publiſhed, whereby it more
clearly appeareth how judi-
cious the opinion of Juſtice
Fitzh. is in his Preface to
his Na, Br, where he faith,
e OT OM ot that


XXV


To the RE AD E R.


that original writs are the
foundations whereupon the
law dependeth, and how
truly he calleth them the
principles of the law, and
fortifieth alſo the opinion
of Bracton, lib. 5. fol. 413.
where he ſaith,” that (breve
formatum eft ad fimilitud”
regulæ juris) which caſe I
have reported in that form
to this end, that ſtudents
ſeeing the ſingular uſe of
original writs, will in the
beginning of their ſtudy
learn them, or at leaſt the
principalleſt of them with-
out book, whereby they
ſhall attain unto three things


of no ſmall moment: 1.


to the right underſtanding
of their books: 2. To the


riæ agitatum, et jam edi.
tum, conſulat, ex qu
clare patet conſultam im-
primis fuiſſe Judicis Fitz-
herbert opinionem judicio.
que latam optimo in prog-
mio libri ſui de Matura
Brevium, ubi afſerit re.
ſcripta originalia funda-
menta eſſe, et totius legis
quaſi cardines; et quam
refte ab eo juris principia
appellantur : firmat eli.
am hic caſus illud quid
ſentit Bratton, lib. 5. fal.
414. bi dicit, Breve
formatum eſſe ad ſimilitu-
dinem regulæ juris, quem
caſum in medium profe-
rendo hunc mihi popoſui
finem, quod uſum ſingu-


larem brevium originalum


true ſenſe and judgment of ex hoc perſpicientes ſtudi-


law: and laſtly, to the ex-


quiſite form and manner


of pleading. And the caſe
of Barretry ſtandeth for an
example of an indictment.


ofi, dum adbuc in hoc li-
terarum genere lyrones
ſunt, ea vel ſaltem eorum
in uſu frequentiora, ne-
moriter ediſcerent ; quid
ft faciant ad hac tria plu-
rimi momenti facillime
perveniant. Primo, rec-
tius librorum appreben-
dant rationem : ſecundo,
ſenſum ſententiamque ju-
ris genuinam felicius mitl-
ligant : exquiſitam dem-
que cauſas agendi for mam
aſſeguantur. Et caſus di


Barratria (ut loquimur)


formulam indicandi cri-
mina refe libi demon-


ſtrat.
Ale


To the READER.


Aſiſarum actionumque
realium intermiſſio, bina
in rembub' induxerunt
mala, & tertiam (fi modo


non ſurrepſerit) ſequi veri-


fimile eſt. Primo litium
multitudo in actionibus
perſonalibus quibus libert


tenementi ei juris hæredi-


tarii realitas controverſa
eſt, in ſulditi impenſam
et vexationem mimnime to-
lerandas. Secundo, con-
tentiones multiplices in
uno eodemque caſu, adeo
ut ſententiæ duodecim vi-
rorum juratorum (quas Ve-
redifla vocamus) di ver ſæ
ſepius feruntur ex ultra-
gue parte; nec tamen lis
demum inter partes ali-
quatenus dirimitur, nec
fixa alterutri ſeu paciſica
manet poſſeſſio, utrinque
licet fequentius exploretur
pariter ac judicetur,

Et hoc fit, dum refa
legum inſtitutio declina-
tur : unde lex municipa-
lis dente capitur maledi-
co, et detrimenta reipub-
lice eveniunt non ferenda.
In aftionibus per ſonalibus
de ere alieno, bonis, et
catallis (ut dicimus) recu-
peratio vel barra (ut apud
nos eſt) in una a#tiione,
barra eſt et in alia, et bu-
juſnodi litis finis eft. In


attionibus vero realibus


de libero tenemento et


The neglect of aſſiſes and
real actions hath produced
two inconveniencies in the
commonwealth, and a 3
is (if it be not ſtept on al-
ready) like to enſue: 1.
The multitude of ſuits in
perſonal actions, wherein
the realty of freehold and


inheritance is tried, to the


intolerable charge and vex-
ation of the ſubject. 2.
Multiplicity of ſuits in one


and the ſame caſe ; wherein


oftentimes there are divers
verdicts on the one fide,
and divers on the other,
and yet the plaintiff or de-
tendant can come to no fi-
nite end, nor can hold the
poſſeſhon in quiet, though
it be often tried and ad-
Judged for either party,


And this groweth, for
that the right inſtitution of
the law is not obſerved, to
the unjuſt Nander of the
common law, and to the


intollerable hindranceof the


commonwealth. In perſonal
actions concerning debts,
goods and chattels, a re-
covery or bar in one action
is a bar in another, and


xxvii


*


Ke e
aue.


. * *
mu.
3. ..


6 Co. 7,
4 Co. 43»


there is an end of the con-


troverly. In real actions for
freehold and inheritance,
being of a higher and wor-
e thier


—— — —
—— ——


vyY * p
- Os *


.
* 7


To the READER.


thier nature, and ſtanding
upon greater variety of ti-
tles and difficulties in law,
there could not beabove two
trials, or at the moſt (and
that very rarely) three, and
in the mean time, after one
recovery, the poſſeſſion reſt-
eth quiet: 3. The diſcon-
tinuance of real actions will
produce in the end, two
dangerous effects, viz. want
of true judgment in the
profeſſors of the law, and
groſs ignorance in clerks of
the right entries and pro-
ceedings in thoſe caſes. We
ſee that works of nature are
beſt preſerved from their
own beginnings, frames of
policy are beſt ſtrengthened
from the ſame ground they
were firſt founded, and juſ-
tice is ever beſt adminiſter-
ed when laws be executed
according to their true and


genuine inſtitution. And


therefore to the end the
antient and excellent inſti-
tution of the common law


might be re- continued for


the good of the common-
wealth, (for it is conveni-
ent for the commonwealth,


that there be an end of


controverſies.) I have
therefore reported two ca-
ies of Aſſiſes, for that the
writ of Aſſiſe (in caſe where
it lieth) is optimum et
maxime feſtinum remedi-
um: and the caſes of
Buckmere and Syms of


bereditate (que alliori
prorſus ſunt nature et dig.
nioris, et in quibus jura
diſſimiliora decernuntur,
ſubtilioreſque agitantur in
lege queſtiones) ultra du-
as, vel tres (idque rariſi.
me) eſſe nequeant explo-
rationes, et interim, una
jam habita recuperaticne,
quiete agitur poſſeſſio.
Tertio, attionum realium
deſuetudo duo efficient te-
riculoſa, videlicet, veri
judicii in legiim profeſſo-
ribus defefium, et in cle-
ricis, formularum rite in.
trandi, aptique in iiſden
cauſis proceſſus craſſun
ignorantiam. Opera na-
ture ſuis a primordiis ma-
xime preſervari perſpici-
mus, res politice ab iid
optime fundamentis mu-
niuntur a quibus primo
inſtituuntur, et juſticia æ-
quius ſemper adminiſira-
tur, quum leges ſecund
veram et genumam earum
inſtilutionem executwni
mandentur : ideoque ul
antiqua legim municipa-
lium et praclara inſiitu-
tio, ad reipub” utilitatem
retineatur (expedit enim
reipub*, ut finis litiun)
duos in publicum protuit
caſus de Aſiſis, eo qued
breve de Aſſſa (in caſt
quo. habeatur ) optimum i
et maxime feſtinum remear-
um: et caſus Buckmert, ei

| | Sy Ms


Y


To the R EADER. 4


Syms de brevibus de For-
- medon (ut logui mur) in re-
manere et caſum Ed-
ward Altham de brevi de
dote recuperanda.

Et nos, quos regia ma-
jeſtas publicos in boc ſuo
regno ſubſtituit Judices,
moras omnes ſi per vaca-
neas et indebitas, omneſ=
que fiftas et curioſas nimis
in placitando agitationes
(quoad poſſumus) penitus
amputare ſtatuimus: que,
dum irrepſerunt, multum
nuper in cauſa fuerunt
uare attiones reales et
præſertim de Aﬀſſis bre-
via ut quondam fuerint,
non adeo ſunt frequentia.

Et quamvis in attoni-
bus realibus, ficut cauſe
pondus in ſe exigit, long i-
ora tempora in proceſſu,
quam in attionibus per ſo-
nalibus concedantur, ficut
inlibello Judicis Forteſcue,
cap. 53. manifeſtum eſt
(ubi apparet dilationes il-
las nec nimis longas eſſe,
nec juſta non niſi de cauſa
admiſſas : crebro enim (in-
quit ille)in deliberationibus
judicia matureſcunt, ſed
in accelerato proceſſu nun-
quam :) petens tamen tem-
Pore opportuno per has
reales actiones ad finem
litis pervenerit ; ad quem
per atlion” perſonalium
proſecutionem. de libero
lenemento vel bereditale


writs of Formedon in re-
mainder : Edw. Altham's
caſe of a writ of dower.


—


And we, that are Judges
of the realm, have reſolved
to cut off all ſuperfluous and
unjuſt delays, and as much
as we can, all fained dila-
tory and curious pleadings:
the admittance whereof, of
late time, hath been a great
cauſe why real actions, and
ſpecially writs of Aſſiſe,
have not been ſo frequent
as they have formerly been.


And though in real acti-
ons, as the weight of the
cauſe requireth, there are
longer times given in the
proceeding, than in perſo-
nal actions, as appeareth
in Juſtice Forteſcue's book, nette,
cap. 53. (where it appear- cap. 53.
eth that thoſe times are nei-
ther overlong, nor without
Juſt cauſe; for many.
times in dchberations,
judgments grow to ripe-
neſs, but in over-haſty
proceſs never :) yet ſhall
the demandant come to a
timely final end by theſe
real actions, which he ſhall
never do by proſecution of
perſonal actions for the
trial of freehold or inhe-
ritance, And they that well
+ 'ob-


To the READER.


obſerve the three parts of
the Reports in the reign
of King Edwatd the third,
ſhall find few or no acti-
ons of treſpaſs or perſo-
nal actions brought con-
cerning any lands or tene-
ments, but either where
no title of freehold or in-
heritance came in queſti-
on, or where the plaintiff
could not have any real
action: and therefore a-
mongſt many others it
appeareth in an action of
treſpaſs, quare clauſum


fregit brought by the Bi-
6 E. 3. fol. 34. b. ſhop


of Coventry and
Litchfield, in 6 Ed. 3. fol.


34. b. exception was taken


to the replication of the
Biſhop for that he plead-
ed in the realty, for al-
ways in thoſe days real
caſes were determined in
real actions, which made
Judges in thoſe times to
merit that honourable te-
ſtimony which Thirning
Chief Juſtice attributeth ro
them in the 12th year of


the reign of K. H. 4. that


they were the greateſt ſages
that ever were: and that
in the reign of K. Ed. 3. the
law was of the greateſt per-
fection that ever it was; and
that pleading (the ' greateſt
honour and ornament of
the law) grew in the reign
of that King to that excel-
lency, as that the pleading


experiundo, nunquam pt:
teſl. Tres autem Relq-
Honum partes regnante E.
3. promulgatas qui penji-
taverint, paucas aut om:
nino nullas tranſereſſin',
aliaſque perſonales action
de terris ſeu tenementis
latas invenerint, nifi ubi


nulla de libero tenements


aut jure bhaeretitari
queſtio criebatur, aut ubi
petenti nulla realis adio
data fuit, Liquet igitur,
cum alias tum præcipue
ex attione quadam tranſ-
greſſionis, Quare clauſun
fregit, per Epiſcopum Co-
vent et Litchfield proſe-
cuta in 6 Edtvardi 3. fel.
34. J. ad Epiſcopi repli-
cationem fattam fuiſſe ex-
ceptionem, quod in reali-
tate litem agitabat, ſem-
per enim, ut tunc fe ba-
buerunt tempora, caſts
reales in actionibus reaub
diſcuſſi fuerunt : unde eo-
rum temporum Judicts
præclarum illud merut-
re teſtimonium quod T hir-


ning, JuſticieriusCapilalis,


illis atiribuit anno Hen. 4.
12. videlicet, quod aliorum
omn' longe fuerunt conju!-
tifſimi famul et ſepienti/-
ſimi; et quod ſub Rage
Edw. 3. majcrem quail
antea habuiſſet lex Per-
fectionem; et quod cau-
ſarumin'jureagitatic(/un-
mum legis decus et orna-

neui


To the RE A D E R.


mentum) ad eam in ejuſ-
dem Regis temporibus cre-
viſſet excellentiam, ut u-
periorum temporum agim-
tiones, fe ad illas ſub Rege
Edtvardo 3. compararen-
tur, mancas quaſi et im-
b:lles a Thirning exiſtima-
rent ur.

Magnam ducatus Cor-
nubiæ caſum variis de cau-
fis retuli. Primo, quam-
vis ille idem caſus olim
(ut hec mearum Relatio-
num parte conſtare pote-
rit) adjudicatus ſuerit; de
eodem tamen jamdudum
queſtio nova exorta eſt,
partim quod judicia inter
alia Regis monu menta,
paucis cognita, clauſa af-
ſervantur, et partim quod
judiciorum ration et cau-
Je (ut legis mos eft (in
tiſdem non expreſſe mo-
numentis, nulli plene et
' tntegre ſatisfecerunt ; præ-
ſerum vero, quod nulla
de eorum determinatio-
um ac judiciorum Veris
caufts et rationibus facta
fuerit et divulgata rela-
liv, Secundo, quod 11/1
qui nullam inde habent
partem, de vero Pollefjio-
num bujus ducatus ſtatu
tlituantuar, eogque mo-
nean ur ne cum iis pactio-
nem ineant qui poſſeſſio-
nes inde aliquas emerunt
aut adepti fuerunt et quod
bl {x ullam ejuſdem par-

Vol. IV.


in former times having re-
gard to the pleadings in
the Reign of King Ed 3.
holden by Thirning to be
but feeble.


I have reported the great
caſe of the duchy of Corn-
wall for divers cauſes. 1.
Altho' this very caſe hath
been long ſince (as ſhall
appear in this Report) ju-
dicially adjudged, yet hath
the ſame of late been called
in queſtion again, partly
for that the ſaid judgments
remain privately amongſt
the reſt of the King's re-
cords unknown but to a few,
and partly, for that the rea-


ſons and cauſes of the judg-


ments being (according to
law, not expreſſed in the
record itſelf, gave no full
and clear ſatisfaction: but
principallyfor that there was
no report made and pub-
liſhed of the true cauſes and
reaſons of thoſe reſolutions


and judgments. 2 To the


end that ſuch as have not
any part thereof, may heres
by be inſtructed of the true
ſtate of the poſſeſſions of this
duchy, and by-this means
be ad moniſhed how theydeal
with any that have bought
or purchaſed any of theſe


poſſeſſions; and that ſuch as


N have


xxxi


To the READER.


have acquired or gotten any
of them, knowing that the


judgment was given in this


caſe, both upon many direct
authorities in the point, and
upon plain and demonſtra-
tive reaſon (the two main
cauſes of true ſatisfaction)
may therewith reſt ſatisfied.
The laſt, but not the leaſt,
is for that the molt noble
and excellent Prince, who
is omine, nomine, numine
magnus, and the greateſt
that ever was before him,
hath in his firſt cauſe in hoc


forenſi dicendi genere gotten


victory. I ,have for ſome
reſpects reported the ſame
in Latin, wherein I have
been contented, polius ſcri-
bere proprie quam Latine ;
and for that the words of
art which will bear no tranſ-
lation, are herein ſo many
and ſo frequent, I have add-
ed the report thereof in
the vulgar language, that


the reader may uſe either


of them at his pleaſure.
There are certain other
caſes now publiſhed by me,


concerning ſome of the moſt
abſtruſe, dark, and difficult


points in the law, and yet
very neceſſary to be known,
as in Arthur Blackamore's
caſe concerning amend-
ments, Beecher's caſe of a
Retraxit, departure in de-
ſpite of the court, and of
fines and amercements,


tem acquifiverunt, aliot:
patio nati: ſunt, intelli.
gentes ſententiam in boe
caſu latam fuiſſe cum ex
quamplurimis directis ad.
modum & luculentis au-
thoritatibus & indiciis
tum ex plend deminſtra-
tivaque ratione (duobus
veris & præcipuis ſati;fa-
ciendi cauſis) habeant quo
acquieſcant. Ultima hunc
caſum referendi cauſa (ne-
quaquam tamen minima)
eſt, quod termaximus ille
& excellentiſſumus Prin.
ceps, qui omine, nomine,
numine mag nus, & omni-
um qui anteceſſerunt il-
luſtriſſimus, in primd ſud
cauſa palmam in hoc fo-
renſi dicendi genere adeptu
eſt. Nonnullæ mibi ani-
mum induxerunt rationes,
ut Latine in ſcripta red.
gerem hunc caſum, quod
dum facerem, contentus
fui potius ſcribere proprie
quam Latine, & quia vo-
ces artis (in aliam ſe con-
verti linguam minime
patientes) adeo multæ ſunt
& frequenter interceden-*
tes, lingua etiam aſſueta
bec loquitur relatio; u-
traque igitur lector pro
aui mo ſuo utatur. Quoſ-
dam alios @ me modo re-
latus Habes caſus de que-
ſtionibus in lege nonmul-
lis abſtruſiſſimis, difficitt-
mis, et ſpinofiſſimis, in-

| elleclu


To the


tellefu tamen valde neceſ-
ſariis, ul puia caſum Ar-
thuri Blackamore de a-
mendationibus, caſum Bee-
cher de formula juris quam
dicimus retraxit, de re-
ceſſu in contemplum cu.
ric, & de mulctis (quas
fines & amerciamenta vo-
camus) caſum Gricfley de
amerciamentis afferendis,
et nonnullos alios. Hos, de
induſtria, = perſpicue,
luculentur, & ſummatim
quam potui, perfect : le-
ges enim plane ſunt diſſi-
miles illis nature que gra-
tius per cbriſtallum aut
fuccinum pelluceant quam
i nuda conſpiciantur, nec
pictis aſſimulentur tabulis
que delicias tum affuerunt
maximas, quum recenti-
bus adhuc et floridis poli-
aniur coloribus, et umbris


graphice indufiis haud pa-


rum illuſtrantur et exor-
nantur.

Utrum res ipſa, five
elas mea proveciter (an-
no jam ſexageſimo etatis
meg propemodum adde)
ve aliud quicquam in
cauſa qt: labore magis,
in hoc oftavo opuſeu-
lo quam ſuperiorum ait-
quibus, eniſum me ſuiſſe
pro certo ſcio: Deus ta-
men optimus maximus
Propitia ſua benignitate
(dum in gravioribus rei-
publice negotiis verſatus


READER.


XXXiil
Greiſley's caſe of affering of 2 Wilſon 26,
amercements, and {ome o-

thers. And I have of pur-

poſe done theſe as plainly

and clearly, and therewith

as briefly as I could, For

the laws are not like to thoſe

things of nature, which

ſhine much brighter thro?

cryſtal or amber, than if

they be beheld naked : nor

like to pictures that ever

delight moſt when they are
garniſhed and adorned with

freſn and lively colours,

and are much ſet out and

graced by artificial ſha-

dos.


And whether it be in re-
ſpect of the matter, or my
years growing faſt on, be- |
ing now in the Goth year ee,
of my age, or for what o- -: od
ther reſpect ſoeverit be, ſure * F INES 5
[ am, I have felt this Eighth ee
work much more painful 7 *:-


oa. tt Lo
than any of the other have, , .


been unto me. And yet hath ,,._ CM
Almighty God of his great ,- e a
ooodneſs,(amidft my public 4g *
employ ments) enabled me
hereunto, And as-the na-

N 2 turaliſts


To the RE A D E R.


turaliſts ſay, that there is
no kind of bird or fowl of
the wood or of the plain
that doth not bring fome-
what to the building and
garniſhing the eagle's neſt,
ſome cinnamon, and others
things of price, and fome
Juniper, and ſuch like of
leſſer value, every one ac-
cording to their quality,
power, and ability: ſoought
every man, according to his
power, place, and capacity,
to bring ſomewhat, not only
to the profit and adorning
of our dear country (our
great eaple's neſt) but
therein allo, as much as
{ſuch mean inſtruments can,
to expreſs their inward in-
tention and deſire, to ho-
nour the peaceable days of
his Majeſty's happy and
bleſſed government to all
poſterity. And for that I
have been called to this
place of judicature by his
Majeſty's exceeding grace
and favour, I hold it my du-
fy, having obſerved many
things concerning my pro-
feſſion, to publiſh amongſt
others, certain caſes that
have been adjudged and re-
ſolved ſince his Majeſty's
reign, in his higheſt courts
of ordinary juſtice, in this
calm and flouriſhing ſpring-

time of hisMajeſty's juſtice,
_ amounting with thoſe of
my former cdition in all


fui) hoc ut perficerem vi.
res dedit. Et, ut dicunt
naturaliſtæ, ſicut nulla
Hlvarum aut camporum
volatilium genera ſunt,
que non aliquid afferunt
ad nidum acquileum con-
ſtruendum & adornandum
nonnulla cinnamonum a-
liaque magni pretii &
momenti, nonnulla juni-
perum & talia id gems
minoris pretii, ſecundum
illorum qualilatem, po-
tentiam, & facultatem:
ita cuilibet ſecundum po-
teſtat', ordinem & men-
tis accumen, addendum eli
aliguid, non ſolum patrie
noſtre chariſſime { alique
noſtræ nido potentiſſune)
ut profit & illuſtret, ſel
in eo etiam pro virili, ut
interiorem animi inlenti-
onem & affectum expri-
mat, ad regiæ Majeſtalis
dies pacificos, guber natio-
nemque ejus feliciſſiman
atque heatiſſimam in po-
ſterum celebrandum. Eg
vero, cum ſue Majeſtatis
gratia ad hanc ſedem ju-
diciariam ſummo cum fa-
vore me c vocarit, in officio
meo me defuiſſe exiſtima-
di, ſo non, dum mulla
mea in profeſſione objer-
davi, in lucem (derem
caſus nonnullos inter a-
lies) ſub regia ſua Ma-
jeſtate in eminenlilſimis
Juſtitiæ ordinariæ Ccuris

Judicates


* —— ——_ "IN -* 0p"


CECT ME TT. d % T Ea Rod


To the R EAD ER.


judicatos & diſcuſſos, ſe-


reniſſimo hoc florentiſſimo-


que vera Juſtitiæ a ſua


Majeſtate pie adminiſtra-
te; qui caſus cum illis
editionum mearum ſuperi-
crum numerum atiimgunt
aftaginta quatuor. Et
(V Deo placeat) opus a-
liud poſthuc edere inſtitui;
cujus quidem elementa tan-
tum collegi, non tamen ut
propoſitum mihi eſt, for-
navi, ne forſan ſi relin-
querem qualecunque fit poſt
meam ex hac vita emigra-
tionem (quod re pari acci-


diſſe vidimus) promulga-


retur imperfefium. Sin-
gularis veſtrum ſuperior”
mearum Relationum ap-


probatio, continuis aliar'


lucubrationum aſſociata
votis, ad onus hoc aggre-
diendum multum me inci-
tavit, Et, fi non mino-
rem vos veſtris in ſtudiis
fructum ex his perceperi-
tis, quam ego exanimo vo-
bis opto, voſque ( ſtientie
veſira ex cupiditate) ſpe-
ratis, faciles mee mihi e-


runt vigiliæ, notis enim


mers abunde ſatisſatum
exit.


to 84. And (if it ſhall
pleaſe God) I intend here-
after to ſet out another
work, whereof I have only
collected the materials, but
not reduced them to ſuch a
form as I intend, leſt if I
ſhould leave it as it is, it
might, after my death be
publiſhed (as hath . been
done in the like caſe) before
it be perfected. Your ex-


traordinary allowance of


my former works, together
with your continual and


earneſt defire of other edi-


tions, have much encou-
raged me to undertake theſe


pains: and if you ſhall
reap in your ſtudies ſuch


profits thereby, as I from
my heart deſire, and as you
(from your defire of know-
ledge) do expect, then
ſhall my labours ſeem light
unto me, for my expecta-
tion ſhall be ſatisfied.


XXXV


part VIII. ,


0


— —R—


The PRIN C E's Caſe.
Hil. 3 Tac. 1.


In Chancery.


Pleas before the Lord the now King in

his Chancery at Weſtminſter, in the

County of Middleſex, of Hilary Term,

in the third Year of the Lord James by

the Grace of God, King of England,

France, and Ireland ; and of Scotland

HE lord the now King ſent his cloſe writ, directed to , . >=

the Sheriff of Cornwall in theſe words. James by the ELLE Foy

ace of God of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Yo Hof p0gh- ay

King, defender of the faith, &c. To the Sheriff of Cornwall Tg Sow

greeting, Whereas in the ſtatute made in the Parliament of ----=*


the lord Edward the third, late King of England, in the 11th Stab, . 65. J. 3.
* of his reign, holden at Weſtminſter in the county of —


iddleſex, it was amongſt other things enacted by au- 2 7


thority of the faid Parliament, that the eldeſt fon of the For
King of England, who ſhould be inheritable to the kingdom 4. .:

of England, ſhould be Duke of Cornwall, and that the duch Ku. 7 N
7 Cornwall ſhould always be, from thenceforth to the a 7.

on of the Kings of England, who ſhould be next heir o LAT WA -
A EF
Lo leg


the aforeſaid kingdom, and that the aforeſaid eldeſt ſon of


the Kings of England, ſhould have and enjoy towards their *
maintenance and for ſupport of their princely ſtate WET


dignity, all the whole duchy of Cornwall, and all caſtles,
honours, lordſhips, manors, lands, tenements, and all


other hereditaments to the ſaid duchy belonging or ap-/” AP 7/
. Pertaining, or reputed or taken to be part, parcel, or meme
ber of the ſaid duchy. And whereas the ſaid late Kin "OY


%

SW *

4

Edward the third, in the aforeſ. Parliament, held in the laid . 25

Itth year of his reign, by his certain charter (made) with ,d, P's
the common aſſent and council of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and other of the King's Council in the ſaid Parliament
called together, and by authority of the ſame Parliament,
N 4 had


:


rn | The Prince's Caſe, Part VIII.
pad given to Edward then Earl of Cheſter his firſt begotten

ſon, the name and honour of Duke of Cornwall; and him in
the dukedom of Cornwall eſtabliſned, and by the ſame bis

charter, with the common aſſent and council aforefaid, gave

and granted to his ſald ſon, in the name and title of the duch

aforeſaid, and under the name and honour of Dake of the

faid place, amongſt other things the caſtle of Wallingford

with its hamlets and members, andthe Fearly farm of he

town of Wallingford, with the honours of Wallingford, and

of St. Walerie with the appurtenances in the county of Ox-

ford and other counties, whereſoever the ſaid honours were,
to have and to hold to the ſame Duke and to the firſt begotten -

| ſons - him n England, and of the ſame

ice Dukes in the kingdom of England, therein to ſucceed,

0 arr wich the Knights fees, + wars ha of churches, ab.

deys, priories, hoſpitals, chapels, and with hundreds, fiſh-

inge, foreſts, chaces, parks, warrens, fairs, markets, liber-

ties, free cuſtoms, wards, reliefs, eſcheats, and ſervices of

tenants, as well free as villains, and all other things to the

aforeſaid caſtles, towns, honours, lands, and tenements, how-
ſoever belonging or appertaining, of the aforeſaid King Ed-

; | ward the 3d, and his heirs for ever. And the ſaid late Kin
Edward the 3d, by his charter aforeſaid, in Parliament aforef
with the common conſent aforeſaid, and, by authority of
that Parliament, the aforeſaid caſtle of Wallingford, and
other the - premiſes. with the appurtenances, amongſt other

5 things, to the ſaid duchy annexed and united, to remain
: to the La duchy for 84 a as from the ſaid duchy at

* y | any time by no means they be ſeparated, nor to any other,
nme. 4 f. a 14/9 wx than to the Dukes of the ſame place, by _ afore-
* i aid late King, or his heirs ſhould. be given, or any ways
5 from granted, ſo alſo that to the aforeſaid Duke, and other Dukes
_—. df the ſame place, deceaſing, and to the fon or ſons to whom
the aforeſaid duchy, by colour of the grants aforeſaid it
ſhould belong, not appearing, the faid duchy, with the
aforeſaid caſtle, and other the premiſes being granted, to

the aforeſaid late King, or his heirs,” Kings of England,

| ſhould return into the hands of him the ſaid late King, and
. of his heirs Kings of England to be holden, until any of

Tuch ſon or ſons of the ſaid kingdom of England heredit-

ably to ſucceed, ſhould appear (as is aforeſajd) to whom ſuc-
celhvely the ſaid duchy with the appurtenances, the afore-

faid late King for him and his heirs, granted and willed to

"INE be delivered, to be holden of the ſaid King, and his heirs
23 1 for ever. And whereas likewiſe, by a certain act made in
A.. 3 Parliament of the lord Henry, late King of Epgland the on
en f Mie - bolden at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, that is to ſay, in the ſecon
7 ſeſſions of the ſame Parliament, begun and holden the 24
Z (21 of April, in the 31ſt year of the reign of the fa

| 'y


0 lor


\


. 9


Part VIII. The Parnex's Cafe.


lord late King Henry the 8th, and by divers gations un-
til the 25th day of May, in the 32d year of the reign of the
faid late King Henry the 8th, and from thence holden and
continued, until the diſſolution of the ſaid Parliament, the
24th day of July, in the 32d year aforeſaid, reciting, that
whereas in the Parliament holden, in the 11th year of the
reign of the late King of famous memory King Edward the

amongſt other things eſtabliſhed ; it was enacted and or-
Kot. that the eldeſt ſon of the King of England, who ſhall
be inheritable to this kingdom of England, ſhould be Duke of
Cornwall, and that the ſame duchy of Cornwall, ſhould ever
be to the eldeſt ſon of the King of England, who ſhould be
next heir of the ſaid kingdom; and that, he ſhould have and
enjoy towards the maintenance and ſupport of his princely |
eſtate, the whole and entire duchy of Cornwall, and all caſtles,
honours, dominions, manors, lands, tenements, and all other
hereditaments belonging or appertaining to the ſaid duchy, or
reputed or taken to be part, parcel, or member of the ſaid
duchy : and for that, the honour and caſtle of Wallingford in
the county of Berks, then was, and from long time had been part
and parcel of the inheritance and poſſeſhons of the ſaid Duke
of Cornwall, and reputed and taken to be a member of the
faid duchy ; which honour and caſtle lay near to the manor
of the ſaid late King Henry the 8th of Newelm, otherwiſe
Ewelm in the county of Oxford, and was very commodious,
decent and pleaſant for the ſaid late King Henry the 8th.
In conſideration whereof, and for other urgent cauſes, the
ſaid late King Henry the 8th, eſpecially moving, it was enaQt-
| ed and ordained by the authority of the ſame Parliament of
the ſaid late King Henry the 8th, that the faid honour and
caſtle of Wallingford, and all dominions, manors, lands, tene-
ments, and other hereditaments whatſoever they ſhould be,
being parts, parcels, or members of the ſaid honour and caſtle,
or appendant, or belonging to the ſaid honour and caſtle, or


to any lordſhip or manor to the ſame appertaining, or reputed,


or taken to be part or parcel of the ſaid honour and caſtle, or
any member thereof. ſhould be from thenceſorth ſor ever b
authority of the ſaid Parliament ſevered, diſannexed, and wi.
membered from the ſaid duchy of Cornwall, and ſhould not
be in any manner from thence after reputed, called, accepted,
or taken by the name of the honour of Wallingford, nor be
any part,. parcel, or member of the ſaid duchy of Cornwall:
and that the aforefaid manor of the ſaid King of Newelm,
atherwiſe Ewelm, from thence for ever aſter, ſhould be
named, called, accepted, and be reputed and adjudged to be
the honour of Newelm, otherwiſe Ewelm. And that the faid
ate King Henry the Sch, ſhould have and enjoy the like li-
| berties,


*>


The Pxince's Caſe. Part VIII.


berties, franchiſes, privileges, royalties, and juriſdictions, as
well in the aforeſaid honour of Newelm otherwiſe Ewelm, as
in the aforeſaid manors, caſtles, lands, tenements, and here.
ditaments, being part, parcel, or member of the ſaid honour
of Wallingford, to all intents and purpoſes as were in any
manner belonging, appertaining, or uſed in or to the ſaid
honour of Wallingford. And that the like proceſs, ſuits, and
pleas ſhould be for ever holden, received, and ſhould be ufed
in the ſaid honour of Newelm, otherwiſe Ewelm, as at the
firſt day of the ſame Parliament were uſed or exerciſed in the
ſaid honour of Wallingford : and that the faid late King Henry
the 8th ſhould have to him, his heirs, and ſucceſſors for ever,
the ſaid honour and caſtle of Wallingford, and all lordſhips,
manors, lands, tenements, and other hereditaments whatſo-
ever, appertaining to the ſaid honour or caſtle, or reputed, or
taken to be any part of the poſſeſſions, or parcel or member
of the ſaid honour or caſtle, from thence for ever to be ſevered
and divided from the aforeſaid duchy : and that the ſaid ho-
nour and caſtle of Wallingford, from thence for ever ſhould
be named and called the caſtle and manor of Wallingford.
And alſo that the ſaid caſtle and manor of Wallingford, and
all lordſhips, manors lands, tenements, and other heredita-
ments whatſoever, which then ſhould be belonging or appertain-
ing to the ſaid caſtle and manor, or reputed or taken to be any
part, parcel, or member thereof, and all manner of liberties,
franchiſes, privileges, royaltics, and juriſdictions before that
time uſed within the ſaid honour of Wallingford, from thence
for ever ſhould be united, annexed, knit, adjudged, deemed,
accepted, reputed, and called part, parcel, and member of the
ſaid honour of Newelm, otherwiſe Ewelm, in the aforeſaid
county of Oxſord: and further it was enacted by authority of
the aforeſ. Parliament of the aforeſaid late K. Henry the 8th.
That all and fingular perſon and perſons who then held any
manors, lands, tenements, or hereditaments of the aforeſ. late
King Henry the 8th, and of the moſt excellent and undoubted
Prince Edward, the fon and heir apparent of the faid late
King Henry the 8th, as of the ſaid honour of Wallingford, or
of any other lordſhips or manors being parcel or member of
the ſaid honour of Wallingford, from thence for ever after
ſhould hold their ſaid manors, lands, tenements, and heredi.
taments of the ſaid late King Henry the Sth, his heirs: and
ſucceſſors, as of the aforeſaid manor and his caſtle of Wal.
lingford, or of the ſaid lordſhips or manors being parcel and
members of the ſaid honour of Wallingford, parcel of the
ſaid honour of Newelm, otherwiſe Ewelm, by the ſaid rents,
ſuits, cuſtoms, and ſervices, as they and every of them


held, paid, or did before the making of the ſaid act of
Parliament,


part VIII. The Parnce's Caſe.


Parliament, and not by more, or other rents, ſuits, cuſtoms,
or ſervices: ſaving to every perſon and perſons, bodies cor-
porate of politic, their heirs and ſucceſſors, and to every of
them, other than the moſt excellent and undoubted lord Prince
Edward which then was, and his heirs, and to any other who
from thence for ever ſhould happen to be the King's eldeſt
ſon, and next heir of the crown of this kingdom of England,
all ſuch right, title, intereſt, poſſeſhon, fees, offices, annui-
ties, rents, commons, and all other commodities and here-
ditaments whatſoever, which they, or any other of them law-
fully held, had, could, or ought to have had, if the ſaid act
of Parliament had never been had or made: and further, it
was enacted by the authority of the aforeſaid Parliament, o
the aforeſaid late King Henry the 8th, that the aforeſaid ex-
cellent and undoubted Prince Edward, which then was, and
every other who from thenceforth for ever, ſhould happen to
be the eldeſt ſon of the King, and next heir of the crown of this
kingdom, ſhould have, hold, and enjoy for ever annexed,
united, and knit, to the aforeſaid duchy of Cornwall, for and
in full recompence of the aforeſaid honour and caſtle of Wal-
lingford, and other the premiſes in the ſaid act before men-
tioned, to the ſaid honour of Wallingford then before belong-
ing as part and parcel of the ſaid duchy of Cornwall, the
manor of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the
appurtenan. in the county of Cornwall, amongſt other things,
in ſuch manner and form, and of ſuch like eſtate, as the ſaid
excellent and undoubted Prince Edward, before the making
of the ſame act of Parliament, had, held, or enjoyed the aforeſ.
honour and caſtie of Wallingford, and all other the premiſes,
parcel of the ſaid honour. And that all and fingular the aforeſ.
mauors, with all and ſingular their appurtenances, then a-
mongſt other things limited and aſſigned, by the ſaid act in the
aforeſaid Parliament of the aforeſaid late King Henry the 8th,
to the aforeſ. duchy of Cornwall, and every of them, from
thence for ever, ſhould be reputed, deemed, adjudged, accept-
ed, and taken, by authority of the fame Parliament, as part,
parcel and member of the ſaid duchy of Cornwall, in ſuch and
the like manner and form, to all purpoſes and intents, as the
aid honour and caſtle of Wallingtord, and the members and
parcels of the ſame, were before the making of the ſame act,
any act, law, cuſtom, or uſe to the contrary notwithſtanding,
as by the ſaid act in the aforeſaid Parliament of the aforeſaid
late K. Henry the 8th, made, amongſt other things it more
fully appears: and whereas before, and until the time of the
making of the aforclaid act of Parliament, made in the
atoreſaid Parliament of the aforeſaid late King Henry the 8th,
the aforeſaid honour and caſtle of Wallingford, and the
members and parcel thereof, were part, parcel, and me
| ers


The Prince's Caſe, Part VIT,


bers of the aforeſaid duchy of Cornwall, according to the form
and effect of the aforeſaid charter and grant by the aforeſaid
late King Edward the Third, with the common aſſent afore-
ſaid, and authority of his Parliament aforeſaid, (as before is
faid) made, and as in the aforeſaid charter are mentioned,
and above recited, and the aforeſaid excellent and undoubted
Prince Edward in the aforeſaid act made in the aforeſaid Par-
liament of the aforeſaid late King Henry the eighth, before
the time of making of the aforeſaid act made in the Parlia-
ment aforeſaid, of the aforeſaid late King Henry the 8th, had
held and enjoyed the aforeſaid honour and caſtle of Walling.
ford, and other the premiſes, parcel of the ſame honour, in
ſuch manner and form, and of ſuch eſtate as is enacted and
limited in the aforeſaid charter and grant aforeſaid of the afore-
ſaid late King Edward the 3d, in the year of his reign the
Tith aforeſaid, by the authority of Parliament made as before
is ſaid. And the aforeſaid honour and caftle of Wallingford
in the aforeſaid act, made in the ſaid Parliament of the ſaid
late King Henry VIII. mentioned, and the aforeſaid Caſtle of
Wallingford, with the hamlets and members thereof : and
the aforeſaid honour of Wallingford, with the appurtenances
in the aforeſaid charter and grant, by the aforeſaid late K. Ed.
the za, as beſore is ſaid, made, ſpecified, are one and the
ſame, and not others or divers. By virtue of which the ſaid
| late Prince Edward, eldeſt ſon of the aforeſaid late King Henry
Herr bas fs the 8th, and Duke of Cornwall was ſeiſed of the aforeſaid
'manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph with the
N in his demeſne as of fee, as parcel of his duch
of Cornwall aforeſaid, according to the form and effect of the
© aforeſaid act of Parliament; and he thereof being ſo ſeized,
3 6 72 the aforeſaid late King Henry the 8th, afterwards at Weſt-
Je, minſter aforeſaid died, the ſaid Edward late Prince, being
fun · 4 the ſon and heir of the aforeſaid late King Henry the 8th.
Feat And the ſaid Edward late Prince, to the ſaid King Henry the
> 140 Sch, in the aforeſaid kingdom of England by right of inberi-
£47 Jau 4 tance ſucceeded, and King of the aforeſaid 9 of Eng-
5 , land by the name of Edward the 6th King of kngland came
ZN. to be. And afterwards the ſaid Edward the 6th late King of
4 Ag England, at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, died without heir of his


4 » body begotten ; the Lady Mary late Q. of England, being ſiſ-
4 7, hg 92 ter * beit of the {aid 9 K. Edw. Wein, or the aforeſaid
gu Lady Mary to the ſaid late K. Edw. the 6th in the aforeſaid

| her le, kingdom of Eugland by right of inheritance ſucceeded, and
. became Q. of the aforeſaid kingdom of England; and aſter-

8 Aut Y #441, wards the ſaid Q. Mary at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, died, wich-
dl. Ah out heir of her body begotten; the Lady Elizabeth, late
7 : Queen of England being filter and heir of the aforeſaid late
Queen Mary; the aforeſaid Lady Elizabeth to the ſaid late Q.


Mary


part VIII. The PRIxcz's Caſe. 4


Mary in the aforeſaid kingdom of England, by right of in-
heritance ſucceeded, and became Queen of the kingdom of 7;
England: and afterwards, the ſaid Queen Elizabeth at Weſt-
minſter aforeſaid, died, without heir of her body begotten
we then and yet being couſin and heir to the faid late _ As
Elizabeth; and we ſucceeded to the ſaid late Queen Elizabeth, K

in right of inheritance, in the ſame kingdom of England, and oat 4
became, and now are King of England; and now the moſt $27
excellent Prince Henry our eldeſt ſon, now Duke of Corn- .
wall hath requeſted us, that, whereas, the aforeſaid lady


Elizabeth late Queen of England, by her letters patent ſealed e .
with the Pay. x of 3 bearing date at Weſtminſter zz Yan
aforeſaid, the ſecond day of May in the 37th year of her reign, EA Cs
granted to Gellio Merick, then Eſq. afterwards Kt. now de- . 2 7
ceaſed, and Henry Lindley then Eſq. now Knight, the afore= 4 1
ſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph with AW be |

the appurtenances, to have and to hold, to thei the ſaid At pp Hee:
Gellio Meyrick, and Henry Lindley, and their heirs for ever, g 42.
as in the letters patents thereof more fully it is contained. k

And whereas the aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, - ++ 1k. —
and Landalph, to the aforeſaid duchy (as is ſaid) annexed and ,5 fox *
united, to the ſame now Duke by virtue of the gift, grant, 7


. 7
and union aforeſaid, by the authority of Parliament aforeſaid, 45 3 Jace


—
-


belonged, and yet ought to belong, and were members and
parcel of the ſame duchy, and yet are, as the ſaid now Prince Lopuer Foote
and Duke by ways and means convenient, is ready to ſhew; "229 2
that we would the ſaid letters patent aforeſaid, of the afore- 3 r |
ſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, as nent
before is ſaid, made, revoke and annul, and the ſaid manors her
with the appurtenances ſeize into our hands; that we cauſe

the ſaid manors to the ſaid now Duke, as members and par-
cel of the duchy aforefaid, to have and to hold according to 4

the form and effect of the gift, grant, and union aforeſaid to

be delivered: we willing to do in this behalf what is juſt, , VAC
command you that by good and lawful men of your bailiwic, Lew ® of Yr:
ou give notice to the aforeſaid Henry Lindley, Knt and Pls Er. RAE
ohn Hele, Knut. Serjeant at law, tenants of the ſaid minors, 1.4 or7
of Weſt Taunton, {relowia, and Landalph, and alſo to Ha
whoſoever other or others, tenants of the ſaid manors of 3 ci$


Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, or any of them, that Cf | Z ©
they be before us in our Chancery in eight days of St. Hil- fy Heu


_ ary next coming, whereſoever we ſhall be, to ſhew what for . :
us or for themſelves, they have or can jay, wherefore the let- of ne Os
8


ters patent aforeſaid of the aforeſaid manors of Welt 'Taun-
ton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the appurtenances (as .
beſore is ſaid) made, ought not to be revoked and annulled, ©
and the ſaid manors with the appurtenances into our hands
be ſeiſed, and the fame, to the now Duke, as members and


parceh\ |


The PRINcE's Caſe. Part VIII.


parcel of the duchy aforeſaid, according to the form and ef.
fect of the gift, grant, and union aforeſaid, to have and to hold,
to be delivered, and to do and receive, what our ſaid Court
then and there ſhall farther conſider in this behalf: and have you
there the names of thoſe by whom you ſhall give themnoticeand
this writ, witneſs myſelf at Weſtm. the 18, day of Nov. in the
yearof our reign of England, France, and Ireland, the 3d, and


„ of Scotland the 3gth ; and now at this day, that is to ſay,


Breees ,.


-
*


| the aforeſaid eight days of St. Hilary, before the faid lord
the King that now is, in his ſaid Court of Chancery, here
cometh Edward Coke, Knight, Attorney General of the ſaid
lord the King, that now is, who proſecuteth in this behalf
for the ſaid Lord the King, in his proper perſon. And Fran-
cis Godolphin, Knight, being Sheriff of the county of Corn-
wall, now ſendeth here the writ aforeſaid, ſerved and executed,
in form following, the 21ft day of December, in the 3d year
aboveſaid, by virtue of the writ aforeſaid, to him directed,
that he gave warning by John Edgcombe and Walter Blunt, -
ood and lawful men of his bailiwick, to the aforeſaid Henry
Lindley, Knight, and alſo the ſame day and year by the faid
ood and lawful men, he gave warning to the aforeſaid John
Flele, Knt. and to one Warwick Hele, Knt. tenants of the
aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, *ſrelowia, and Landalph,
abovementioned, to be before the ſaid lord the now King
here, at this day, to ſhew, do, and receive, what that writ
in itſelf requireth and demands. And the aforeſaid Henry
Lindley, Kt. John Hele, Kt. and Warwick Hele, Kt. the 4th
day of pleas being ſolemnly called, by Richard Wilkinſon
their attorney come, and. pray licence to imparl, and it is
granted to them, &c, and upon this, day is given to the
aforeſaid Henry 1 John Hele, and Warwick Hele, be-
fore the ſaid lord the King in the ſaid Court here, that is
to ſay, at Weſtminſter, aforeſaid, until in eight days of the
Purification of the bleſſed Mary then next, &c. whereſoever,
&c. that is to ſay, to the aforeſaid Henry, John, and Warwick,
to imparl and then to anſwer, &c. The ſame day is given
to the aforeſaid Edward Coke, Kt. the Attorney General of
the lord the now King, who, &c. then to be here, &c.
At which eight days of the Purification of the bleſſed
Mary, before the ſaid lord the King in the ſaid Court here,
that 1s to ſay, at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, come as well the afore-
ſaid Edward Coke, Knight, who, &c. in his proper perſon, 23
the aforeſaid Henry Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele,


by their attorney aforeſaid, and upon this, the ſaid Henry,


John, and Warwick, by their attorney aforeſaid, pray farther
licenſe thereof to imparl, before the ſaid lord the King
now in the ſaid Court here, that is to ſay, at Weſtminſter
aforeſaid, until in fifteen days of Eaſter, then next fol-
lowing, &c. whereſoever, &c. and then to anſwer, &c. and
they have it, &c. and the ſame day is given to the aforeſaid
Edward Coke, Knight, the Attorney General of the laid
lord the now King, who, &c. then here, &c. At 22

cen


part VIII. The PaIxNox's Caſe,


fifteen days of Eaſter before the faid lord the King that now
is, in the ſaid Court here, that is to ſay, at Weſtminſter afore-
ſaid, come as well the aforeſaid Edward Coke, Attorney Ge-
neral of the Lord the now King, who, &c. in his-proper
perſon, as the aforeſaid Henry Lindley, Jobn Hele, and War-
wick Hele, by their attorney aforeſaid, and upon this the
aforeſaid Henry, John, and Warwick, by their attorney afore-
ſaid, farther pray leave thereof to imparl before the ſaid
lord the King, in the faid Court here, that is to ſay, at
Weſtminſter, aforeſaid, until the morrow of the Holy Trinity,
then next following, whereſoever, &c. and then to anſwer,
Kc. and they have it, &c. And the ſame day is given to the
aforeſaid Edward Coke, Knt. Attorney General of the lord
the King, who, &c. then here, &c. At which morrow
of Holy Trinity, before the ſaid lord the now King, in the
{aid Court, &c. that is to ſay, at Weſtminſter, aforeſaid, come
as well the aforeſaid Edward Coke, Kt. Attorney General of the
Lord the now King, who, &c. in his proper perſon, as the
aforeſaid Henry Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele, by
their attorney aforeſaid ; and upon this, the ſaid Henry, Jobn,
and Warwick, by their attorney aforeſaid, pray farther li-
cence thereof to imparl, before the ſaid lord the now Kin
in the ſaid Court here, that is to ſay, at Weſtminſter afore-
faid, until the morrow of All-Souls then next following,
whereſoever, &c. and then to anſwer, &c. and they have it,
&c. And the ſame day is given to the Edward Coke, Kt. At-
torney General of the Lord the now King, &c. then here, &c.
At which morrow of All Souls, before the Lord the King in the
ſaid Court here, that is to ſay, at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, come
as well Henry Hobart, Kt. then Attorney General of the ſaid
lord the now King, who for the ſaid lord the now King, pro—
ſecutes in his proper perſon, as the aforeſaid Henry Lindley,
John Hele, and Warwick Hele, by their attorney aforefaid,
upon which, the ſaid Henry Lindley, by his attorney afore-
ſaid, prayeth the hearing of the ſaid writ of Sire facias above-
mentioned, and it is read unto him, &c. Which being read
and heard, the ſaid Henry Lindley faith, that neither the
atoreſaid letters patent, of the aforeſaid late Queen Eliza-
beth, of the aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, 'Trelowia, and
Landalph, with the appurtenances iu form aforeſaid made,
Ought to be revoked and annulled, nor the ſaid manors into
the hands of the ſaid lord the now King ought to be
ſeized ; becauſe he ſaith, that there is not any ſuch record
of any ſuch act of Parliament, of the aforeſaid King Ed-
ward the third made, as in the aforeſaid wilt of Scire facids,
above thereof is recited and ſpecified : nor is there any ſuch
record of the aforeſaid charter, by the aforeſaid late King
dward the third, by authority of the Parliament aforeſaid,
above ſuppoſed to have been made, as in the ſaid writ of
are facias above is likewiſe recited and ſpecified, and this
e ſaid Henry Lindley is ready to verify, wherefore he ne
| mands


* n 5 x * Y - WY — 3 I'S - J 4 IL —
D n — ² ͤö] . ReIIEET
12 n * a2” =


—


fd. ia nine 2A Cw +" ern Cr oh -
PY — —— — o "44." 2
—


2


— I


ns


—


—


- _


ER" oh
121 „ 7
* 2


The Prince's Caſe. Part VIII.


mands judgment, if the aforeſaid letters patent of the
aforeſaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the manors aforeſaid with
their appurtenances, ſo as before is ſaid made, ought to be.
revoked or annulled, or the ſaid manors with the appurte-
nances, to be ſeized into the hands of the ſaid lord the
now King, &c. And the aforeſaid John He'e and Warwick
Hele, by their attorney aforeſaid, by proteſting, that there
is not any record of any ſuch act of Parliament of the aid
11th year of Edward, late King of England the third, nor
that there is any ſuch record of the aforeſaid charter, by the
aforeſaid late King Edward the third, by authority of Parlia-
ment aforeſaid, as in the ſaid writ of Scire facias is mention-
tioned ; for plea they ſay, that neither the aforeſaid letters
patent of the aforeſaid Jady Elizabeth of the aforeſaid
manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the
appurtenances, in form aforeſaid made, ought to be re-
voked or annulled, or the manors aforeſaid with the ap-
pa be ſeized into the hands of the lord the now

ing, or any of them ought to be ſeized, becauſe they ſay,
that the aforeſaid late lady Queen Elizabeth, before the
making of the letters patent aforeſaid, to the aforeſaid
Gellio Meyrick, and Henry Lindley, was ſeized in her de-
mein as of fee, in the right of her crown of England, of the
aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph,
with the appurtenances, in the aforeſaid writ of Scire fa-
ciat mentioned and expreſſed, and ſo thereof being ſeized,
the ſaid late . Elizabeth, by her letters patent under
the great ſeal of England ſealed, bearing date at Weſtmin-
ſter, in the county of Middleſex, the 2d day of May, in
the 37th year of her reign, and here into Court brought,
in conſideration of the good, true, faithful, and. acceptable
ſervice to the aforeſaid lady the Queen, by her then well-be-
loved faithful couſin and counſellor, Robert late Earl of
Eſſex, of the moſt noble order of the Gatter, Knight, and
Maſter of her Horſe, before that many times done and per-
formed, as for other good cauſes and conſiderations, the
ſaid late lady the Queen then ſpecially moving; as allo at the
humble requeſt of the ſaid late Earl of Eſſex, of her ſpecial
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, gave and granted
the manors aforeſaid with their appurtenances amongſt other
things to the aforeſaid Gellio Meyrick, and Hen. Lindley, then
Eſquires, and afterwards Kts. Jo have, and to hold the faid
manors with the appurtenances, to the aforeſaid Gellio Mey-
rick, and Henry Lindley, their heirs and aſſigns for ever. And
the aforeſaid late Lady the Queen, by the ſame her letters pa-
tent, granted for her, her heirs, and ſucceſſors, that the atore-
ſaid Gellio Meyrick, and Henry Lindley, their heirs and al-
ſigns, ſhould have, hold and enjoy, the aforeſaid manors with
the appurtenances, according to the intent of the ſaid late


Queen, in the faid letters patent contained, and that boy
al


part VIII. The Patrczk's Caſe,


ſaid letters patent ſhould be firm, valid, good, ſufficient and
effectual in law, againſt the ſaid lady the Queen, her
heirs, and ſucceſſors, as well in all her courts, as elſewhere
within the kingdom of England, without any manner of con—


firmations, licences, or tollerations of the ſaid lady the


Queen, her heirs and ſucceſſors then for ever, by the aforeſaid
Gellio Merick, and Henry Lindley, or their heirs or aſſigns to
be procyred or obtained, notwithſtanding the ſtatute in Par-
liament of the lord Henry, late King of England the 8th, in
the 37th year of his reign made, concerning, the duchy of
Cornwall, and honour of Newelm otherwiſe Ewelm, as in
and by the ſaid letters patent more fully appears. By virtue
of which ſaid letters patent, the aforeſaid Gellio Merick and
Henry Lindley, into the aſoreſaid manors with their appurten.
entered, and were thereof ſeiſed in their demeſne as of fee,
and ſo thereof being ſciſcd, by their writing indented, made
between the aforeſaid late Earl of Efſex, Gellio Merick, and
Henry Lindley of the one part, and Auguſtine Steward and
Michael Corſellis, on the other part, bearing date the 26th
day of December, in the 38th year of the reign of the ſaid
late lady Queen Elizabeth, in the court of Chancery of the
aforeſaid late Queen at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, within fix
months then next following, according to the form of the ſta-
tute thereof made and provided, in due manner of record in-
rolled, as well in conſideration of the ſum of 35901. to the
aforeſaid late Earl of Eſſex, by the aforeſaid Auguſtine Stew-
ard, and Michael Corſellis paid, as for 208. to the ſaid Gellio
and Henry, by the aforeſaid Auguſtine and Michael likewiſe
paid, bargained, and fold to the aforeſaid Auguſtine and Mi-
chael, the manors aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, to have
and to hold, to the ſaid Auguſtine and Michael, their heirs
and aſſigns for ever. By virtue of which bargain and ſale, and
inrollment, and by force of a certain ſtatute in the Parlia-
ment of the lord Henry, late King of England the Bth,


the 4th day of February, in the 27th year of his reign, of


transferring uſes into poſſeſſion, at Weltminſter aforetaid,
holden, made, and provided, the aforeſaid Auguſtine and
Michael, were ſeiſed of the manors aforeſaid, with the appur-
tenances, in his demeſne as of fee : and ſo thereof being ſeiz-
ed, the ſaid Auguſtine and Michael, in conſideration of the
lum of 35001. to the aforeſaid Auguſtine and Michael, by
the aforeſaid John Hele paid, afterwards of the ſaid manors
with the appurtenances, enfeoffed them the ſaid John Hele,
then Serjeant at Law, and the aforeſaid Warwick Hele, then
Eſq. now Kant. to have and to hold, to the ſaid John and
Warwick, and to the heirs and aſſigns of the aforeſaid John,
to the ſole and proper uſe and behoof of the aforeſaid Juhn
and Warwick, and the heirs and aſſigns of the ſaid John
Hele for ever. By virtue of which feoffment, the afore-


faid John Hele, and Warwick Hele were, and yet ae ſeiſed
Vox. IV. O of


7 SE EE CSS


The Prince's Cafe. Part VIII.


of the aſoreſaid manors with the appurtenances, that is to ſay,
the ſaid John Hele, in his demeſne as of fee, and the aforeſ.
Warwick, in his demeſne as of freehold for the term of his
life. And the aforeſaid John Hele, and Warwick Hele, fur—
ther ſay, that afterwards, in and by a certain act of Parliament
of the aforeſaid late Queen at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, the 27th
day of October, in the 43d year of the reign of the ſaid Jate
Queen Elizabeth holden made, (amongſt other things) recit.
ing, that whereas, the ſaid late Queen, from the 8th day of
February, in the 25th year of her reign, as well for divers,
and great ſums of money, as for divers other ſeveral conſidera-
tions, had bargained, ſold, given, and granted, by divers her
letters patent, indentures, or other writings under the great
ſeal of England ſealed, or the feal of the duchy of Lancaſter,
or the ſeal of the county palatine of Lancaſter, as well to bo-
dies politic and corporate, as to divers and ſeveral other ſub-
jects, of the ſaid lady the Queen, divers and ſeveral honours,
manors, lands, tenements, rents, reverſions, ſervices, and
other hereditaments in fee ſimple, fee tail, or for term of life,
lives, or years, as in the ſaid ſeveral letters patent, indentures,
and other writings are mentioned and declared: it was enaQ-
ed by authority of the fame Parliament, to_the intent that the
ſaid letters patent, indentures, or other writings, ſhould be
of good, available, and perfect force and effect, to all and
ſingular the ſaid late Queen's ſubjects, according to the tiue
Intent and effect of the ſame ; that as well all and ſingular let.
ters patent, indentures, and other writings, ſealed under the
great ſeal of England, or under the ſeal of the duchy of Lan-
caſter, or the ſeal of the county palatine of Lancaſter, be-
fore then made and granted, by the aforeſaid late Queen, for
any ſum or ſums of money whatſoever, or for or upon any
other conſiderations whatſoever, from the aforeſaid 8th day of
February, in the 25th year aforeſaid, as all other letters pa-
tent, then after by the ſaid late Queen to be made, for any
ſum or ſums of money, or other conſiderations before the laſt
day of the ſaid then preſent ſeſſion of the ſaid Parliament:
and moreover, all other letters patent, within the ſpace of
one year then next following, to be made, by force, or ac-
cording to the true purport or true meaning of a commiſſion
under the great ſeal of England, then in being, for the ſale
of the land, of the faid late Qneen, to any body politic,
or corporate, or to any other perſon or perſons whatſoever,
of any honours, caſtles, manors, lordſhips, granaries, meſ-
ſuages, lands, tenements, meadows, paſtures, rents, re-
verſions, ſervices, woods, advowſons, nominations, patro-
nages, annuities, rights, intereſts, entries, conditions,
leaſes, courts, liberties, privileges, franchiſes, or of *
Other


. nne n


part VIII. The Prtnce's Caſe.


other hereditaments with the appurtenances, or of any part or
parcel thereof, with or under the great ſeal of England, or un-
der the ſeal of the duchy of Lancaſter, or the ſeal of the county
palatine of Lancaſter, of whatſoever kind, nature, or quality,
they or any of them are, or were reputed, known, or taken,
with the appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, ſhould
be good, perfect, and effectual in law, and ſhould ſtand, be
taken, reputed, eſteemed, and ſhould be adjudged to be good z
certain, perfect, available, and effectual in the law, againſt
the ſaid late Queen, her heirs and ſucceſſors, according to the
tenor and effecł of the aforeſaid letters patent and indentures,
or other writings, and that the ſame thould be expounded,
conſtrued, eſteemed, and ſhould be adjudged moſt beneficially
for thoſe, to whom the aforeſaid letters patent, and grants
thereof ſo are made, the heirs, aſhpns, executors, and admi-
niſtrators of them, according to the words and purport of the
ſaid letters patent, indentures, or other writings, without
any confirmations, licences, or tolerations of the faid late
Queen, her heirs or ſucceilors, any ill naming, ill reciting,
or not reciting, of the faid honours, caſtles, manors, lands,
tenements, or other the premiſes, or of any part or parce}
thereof, or any defect in finding of office or inquiſition, of
and in the premiſes, or any part thereof, by which the title of
the ſaid late lady the Q. of and in the premiſes ought to be
found, before the publiſhing of the atoreſaid letters patent,
indentures, or other writing, or any ill reciting, or not recit—
ing, of demiſes thereof made, as well of record, as not of re-
cord, or any ill reciting, or not reciting, or not true mention-
ing in any ſuch letters patent, grants, or writings of the
eſtate or eſtates of the ſaid late Queen, of frechold, or in-
heritance, of or in the premiſes, or any part thereof, to
which the ſaid late Queen, after the beginning of her reign
was, or then after ſhould be be intitied, by any attainder,
eſcheat, conveyance or aſſurance whatſoever ; and in which
letters patent, grants, or wiitings, no eltate tail then belore
made, or ſuppoled to be made was recited, or from hence-
torth ſhould be, and the reverſion or remainder thereof
expectant, in the aid letters patent, grants, or writings,
granted or mentioned to be granted, or any defect of cer-
tainty, or ill computing, miſtaking, rating, or ſetting forth
of the yearly value or rate of the premiſes, or yearly rents
relerved of and for the premiſes, or any paicel thereof men-
tioned or contained in the ſame letters patent aforeſaid,
or other writings, or for that the premiſes then were, or
any part thereof, were then valued at a greater or lefler
value, in the ſaid letters patent, or writings, than the
laid manors, lands, tenements, and other premiſes then
were, or were in yearly value, or any miluaming or not true

- nanung,


—


The Px INncE's Caſe. Part VIII.


naming, of any town, hamlet, pariſh, or county where the
ſaid honours, manors, lands, tenements, rents, hereditaments,
and other the premiſes, and every part thereof, or any par-
cel thereof lay, or were, or any defect of true naming of
the lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or any parcel thereof,
or of the nature, kind, quality, or quantity, of the aforeſaid
poſſeſſions or hereditaments, or of any parcel thereof, or any
default of true naming of any corporation, or any default of
attornment, livery, or ſeiſin, or any ill naming” of any the late
tenants of the aforeſaid honours, manors, lands, tenements,
and hereditaments, or of any part thereof, ſo ſold, granted, or
given, or any ill naming of any perſon or perſons, bodies po-
litic or corporate, who any time before the making of ſuch
letters patent, were, or then after ſhould be proprietors of the
premiſes, or any part thereof to the contrary notwithſtanding ;
as by the ſaid act, amongſt ocher things, it more fully appeareth,
And the faid John Hele, and Warwick further ſay, that the
ſaid late Queen Elizabeth never had any ſon ; and that the
aforeſaid Gellio Merick, and Henry Lindley, were at, and
before the time of the making of the ſaid letters patent, ſo
as before is ſaid made, ſubjects of the ſaid late Q. Elizabeth,
and born at Weſtminſter aforeſaid ; all and fingular which,
the ſaid John Hele and Warwick, are ready to aver; where-
upon they demand judgment, if the ſaid letters patent of the
aforeſaid late Queen Elizabeth, of the manors aforeſaid with
the appurtenances, fo as before is ſaid made, ought to be
revoked and annulled, or the manors aforeſaid, with the ap-

urtenances, or any of them, ought to be ſeiſed into the
— of the lord the now King, &c. And the aforeſaid
Henry Hobart, Kt. Attorney General of the lord the now
King, who, &c. preſent in court in his proper perſon, as
to the aforeſaid plea of the ſaid Henry Lindley, above in
form aforeſaid pleaded, for the ſaid lord the King faith,
that the ſaid Henry Lindley ought not to be admitted to
plead, that there is not any ſuch record of any ſuch act
of Parliament, of the aforeſaid lord King Edward the 3d
made, as in the ſaid writ of Scire facias is recited. Nor
that there is not any ſuch record of the aforeſaid charter
of the ſaid late King Edward the zd, by authority of Fat-
liament made, as in the aforeſaid writ of Scire facas there-
of is recited and ſpecified. Becauſe he faith, that the ſaid
lord King James, now King of England (inſpexit) hath
ſeen the incollment of the aforeſaid act of Parliament, of
the ſaid late King Edward the 3d, as in the ſaid Scire fac
is alſo recited, in the Rolls of the Chancery of the now King,
within his Tower of London, of the 11th year of the reign
of the aforeſaid late King Edward the 3d inrolled, upon te-


cord there remaining. The tenor of the incollment, of
E Whic


Part VIII. The Paincz's Caſe.


which act of Parliament, and charter aforeſaid, the ſaid James,
now King of England, by his letters patent under the great
ſeal of England ſealed, here in court by the aforeſaid Attor-
ney General of the lord the now King, for the ſaid lord the
now King, now brings into court, bearing date at Weſtmin—


ſter aforeſaid, the 5th day of March, in the year of the rein


of the ſaid lord the King that now is, of England, France,
and Ireland, the 3d, and of Scotland the 3gth, exemplified a-
mongſt other things, which exemplification, as to the inroll-
ment of the aforeſaid act of Parliament, and charter aforefaid
followeth in theſe words, James by the grace of God of Eng-
land, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith,
&c, To all to whom thele preſent letters ſhall come greeting;


We have ſeen the inrollment of a certain charter, bearing


date 17th day of March, in the 11th year of the reign of the
Jord Edward the 3d, late K. of England, to his well-bejoved
and faithful Edward Earl of Cheſter, his firſt begotten ſon
granted, in the Rolls of our Chancery, within the 'Tower of
London, remaining of record in theſe words. Edward b
the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Treland, and
Duke of Aquitain, to the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, Juſtices, Sheriffs, Provoſts, Miniſters,
and all Bailiffs, and his faithful people, greeting; amongſt
other the enſigns of honour of our kingdom, we eſteemed it
the chiefeſt, that the order of dignities and offices of our
kingdom be fortified with the beſt and ſtrongeſt counſels ;
therefore there being many degrees of honour of inheri—
tance in our kingdom, where by deſcent the inheritance, ac-
cording to the law of this kingdom, to co-heirs and parce-
ners, and for want of ſuch iſſue and parceners and ſuch like
various events, the ſame came to our royal hands; where-
by our ſaid kingdom hath long and many ways ſuffered a
defect in names, dignities, and titles of honour: we
thereſore deſiring to beautify our kingdom, and in the beſt
manner to defend our kingdom, and the holy church there-
of, and our ſubjects and dominions againſt the endeavours
of the enemies and adverſaries thereof, and conſidering and
defiring that peace between us and our ſubjects be inviolabiy
maintained ; and to dignify the places of honour of our
kingdom; and taking into conſideration the perſon of our
well-beloved and faithful Edw. Earl of Cheſter our eldeſt ſon,
and intending to honour the ſame our fon, with the name
and honour of Duke of Cornwall, with the common con-
lent and counſel of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others
of our council in this our preſent Parliament at Weltminſter,
upon Monday next after the feaſt of St. Matthew the Apoſtle
laſt paſt, being aſſembled, we have given, and made him
Duke of Cornwall, and girt him with a ſword as betoveth ;
aud that there may be no doubt hereafter, what, or how
O 3 much


— r — 4.
2 «
25 — ae


8 * 2 — v ⁵½⁵r? „% 2 K—2 ae — -vũĩ ' r —
- — . PL» n - -


*


—
—


n


jr Y
2


—


n
5 2


„ — — . — 5 2
on —_— . ' 3 2 —


——


— —


Ser?


The PRixck's Caſe. Part VIII.


much the ſame Duke, or other Dukes of the ſame place, who
for the time ſhall be, in the name of the ſaid duch
ought to have: our will is, that all in ſpecialty, which to
the ſaid duchy doth belong, be inſerted in this our char-
ter: therefore for us and our heirs, we have given and
granted, and by this our charter confirmed, to the ſame our
fon under the name and honour of Duke of the ſaid place,
the caſtles, manors, lands, and tenements, and other things
under written, 'That he the ſtate and honour of the faid
Duke might uphold according to the nobility of his ſtock,
and the charges and burthens thereof the better uphold,
that is to ſay, the ſheriftwick of the county of Cornwall,
with the appurtenances, ſo as the ſaid Duke, and other
Dukes of the ſame place for the time being, meke, conſti-
tute and appoint Sheriffs of the ſaid county of Cornwall at
their will and pleaſures, and to do and execute the office
of Sherifts there, as heretofore it uſed to be done, without
any hindrance of us, or our heirs for ever. As allo the
caſtle, borough, manor and honour of Launceſtor, with the
park there, and other, the appurtenances in the county of
Cornwall, and Devonſhire; the caſtle and manor of Treme+
ton, with the town of Saltath, and the park there, aud other
the appurtenances in the faid county; the caſtle, borough
and manor et I intagei, with the appurtenances in the ſeid
county of Cornwall; the caſtle and manor of Reſtormel, with
the park there, and other the appurtenances in the faid
county; and the manor of Clymeſtond, with the park of
Keribullock, and other their appurtenances, Tibeſte, with
the bailiwick of Powderſtire, awd other their appurtenances,
'Fewynton, with the appurtenances, Helleſton in Kerrier, with
the appurtenances, NMureik, with the appurtenances, Tewer-
naile, with the appurtenances, Penkneth, with the appur-
tenances, Penlyn with the park there, and other the appur-
tenances, Rellaton, with the bede!ry of Eſtwyneleſhite, and
other the appurtenances, Helleſton in Tringſhire, with the
Park of Heileſbury, and other its appurtenances, Lyſkirett,
with the park there, and other the appurtenances, Caliſtock,
with the fiſhing there, and other the appurtenances, and Tal-
ſkid with the appurtenances, in the ſaid county of Cornwall,
and the town of Leſtwithiell in the ſaid county, with the
mill there, and other the. appurtenances ; and the prizage
and cuſtoms of our wines, in the ſaid county of Cornwall,
and alſo the profits of all the ports within the ſame our
county of Cornwall, to us belonging, together with wreck of
the ſea, as well of whales and ſturgeon, and other fithes
which do belong to us, by reaſon of our prerogative, and
whatſoever belongs to any wreck of the ſea with the appur-
tenances, in our ſaid county of Cornwall. And the profits
and emoluments of our county holden in our county of
Cornwall, and hundreds and courts in the ſaid county to
us belonging; as alſo our ſtannary in the ſaid county of


Cornwall,


Part VIII. The Prince's Caſe.


Cornwall, together with the coinage of the faid ſtannary,
and all iſſues and profits thereof ariſing ; and alſo al! the if-
ſues, profits and perquiſites to the Court of Stannary, and
the mines of the ſaid county, (except only 1000 marks
which to our well beloved and faithful Will. de Monte acuto,
Farl of Saliſbury, we have granted for us and our heirs, to
be taken to him and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, of the iſſues and profits of the aforeſaid coinage,
until the caſtle and manor of Tonbridge, with the appurte -
nances in the county of Wilts, and the manors of Aldebourn,
Ambreſbury and Winterbourn, with the appurtenances in the
ſaid county, and the manor of Caneford with the appurte-
nances in the county of Dorſet, and the manor of Hengſtrig
and Charleton, with the appurtenances in the county of So-
merſet, which our beloved and faithful John de Warren, Earl
of Surrey, and Joan his wiſe hold, for the term of their
lives, and which after their deaths to us and our hetrs,
ought to return (but) after the deceaſe of the ſaid E. and Joan,
to the aforeſaid Earl of Saliſbury, and the heirs males of his
body lawfully begotton, to the value of 800 marks by the
year, we granted, to remain ; and 200 marks of land and
rent, which to the faid Earl of Saliſbury to have in form
aloreſaid, we granted (when the fame came to our hands.)
And alſo our ſtannary in the aforeſaid county of Devon with
the coinage, and all iſſues and profits of the ſame: and
alſo the iſſues, profits, and perquiſites of the ſaid Court of
Stannary, and the water of Dertmouth in the ſaid county:
and the yearly farm of 201. of our city of Exeter, and the
prizage and cuſtoms of our Wines, in the water of Sutton,
in the ſaid county of Devon; as allo the caſtle of Walling-
ford, with its hamlets and members, and the yearly farm
of the town of Wallingford, with the honours of Wallingford,
and De Sancto Wallerico, with the appurtenances in the
county of Oxford, and other counties whereſoever thoſe ho-
nours were, and the caſtle, manor, and town of Berkham-
ſtead, with the park there, together with the honour of Berk-
hamſtead, in the counties of Hertford, Bucks, and Northamp-
ton, and other their appurtenances, and the manor of Biflet,
with the park there, and other the appurtenances in the
county of Surrey, to have and to hold to the ſaid Duke, and
of him, and his heirs, Kings of England, eldeſt ſons, and
Dukes of the ſaid place in the kingdom of England, by in-
heritance to ſucceed, together with the knights fees, ad-
vowlons of churches, abbies, priories, hoiputals, chapels,
and with the hundreds, fiſhings, foreſts, chaſes, parks,
woods, warrens, fairs, markets, liberties, free cultoms,
wards,” reliefs, eſcheats, and fervices of tenants, as well
free as villains, and all other things to the aforeſaid caſ-
tles, boroughs, towns, manors, honours, ſtannaries, and
coinage, lands and tenements howlvever and whatſoever


O 4 be-


The Pzince's Caſe, Part VIII.


belonging or appertaining, of us and our heirs for ever,
together with 24 J. of yearly farm, which our well beloved
and faithful John de Meere, to us by the year, for all his
life is bound to pay for the caſtle and manor of Meere,
with the appurtenances in the county of Wilts, granted to
him by us ſor the term of his life, to be taken every year
by the hands of the ſaid John, for the term of his life, and
with the aforeſaid 1000 marks yearly, to the aforeſaid Earl
of Surrey, of the iſſues of the coinage aforeſaid, by us fo
granted, after obtained by him, or his heirs males of his
body to be begotten, ſeiſin of the ſaid caſtle and manor of
Tunbridge, and the manors of Aldebourn, Ambreſbury, Win-
terbourn, Caneford, Hengſtrigg and Charleton, after the deaths
of the ſame Earl of Surry, and Joan; and the ſaid 200 marks,
land and rent to the faid Earl of Saliſbury, and the heirs
males of his body begotten, fo to be provided, for the pro-
portions of the ſaid caſtles, manors, lands, and tenements,
with the whole, or particutars which to the hands of the
faid Earl of Saliſbury, and the heirs males of his body ſhouid
come: we have moreover granted, for us and our heirs, and
by this our charter we have confirmed, that the caſtle and
manor of Knareſburgh, with the hamlets and members
thereof, and the honour of Knareſburgh, in the county of York,
and other counties wheœreſoever the ſame honour ſhould be;
the manor of Ifleworth, with the appurtenances in the coun-
ty of Middleſex, which Philippa Queen of England our moſt
dear conſort holdeth for term of lite; and the caſtle and
manor of Lydeford with the appurtenances, and with the
chace of [Dertmore with the appurtenances in the ſaid county
of Devon, and the manor of Bradenz{he with the appurte-
nances in the ſaid county. which our beloved and taithſul
Hugh de Audley, Harl of Gioucelter, and Margaret his wile,
have for the life of the ſaid Margaret; and the ſaid caſtle
and manor of Meere with the appurtenances, which the
aforeſaid Joan ſo fur liſe holdeth by our grant, and which
aſter the death of the ſaid Queen Margaret.and joan, to us
and our heirs ought to revert, after the deceale of the afore-
ſaid Queen aforeſaid, that is to ſay, the ca{tie and manor cf
EK nareſburgh, with the honours, hamlets, and members there-
of aforeſaid, and other their appurtenances, and the manor
of Iſleworth with the appurtenances; and after the death of
the faid Margaret, the ſaid caſtle and manor of Lydetorc,
with the ſajd Chace of Dertmore, and other the appuite-
nances, and the manor of Bradeneſhe with the appurtenances;
and after the death of the ſaid Joan; the ſaid caſtle and ma-
nor of Meere with the appurtenances, ſhall remain to the
aforeſaid Duke, and of him and his heirs, Kings, of Eug—
land, eldeſt fons, and Dukes of the {aid place, in the king-
dom of England, heceditarily to ſucceed, as before is ſaid, to
have and to hold, together with the faid knights fees, ad-
| vos tons


part VIII. The Prince's Caſe.


vowſons of churches, abbies, priories, hoſpitals, chapels,
and with hundreds, wapentakes, fiſhings, foreſts, chaces,
parks, woods, warrens, fairs, markets, liberties, free
cuſtoms, wards, reliefs, eſcheats, ſervices of tenants, as
well free as villains, and all other things to the ſame caſ-
tles, manors, and honours, howſoever and whereſoever be-
longing or appertaining, of us likewiſe, and our heirs for
ever; all which caſtles, boroughs, towns, manors, honours,
ſtannaries, coinage, farms of Exeter and Wallingford, lands
and tenements, as above are ſpecified, together with the
fees, advowſons, and all other things aforeſaid, to the
aforeſaid duchy by our preſent charter, for us and our
heirs, we do annex and unite to the ſame for ever to fe-
main; ſo that from the ſaid duchy, at no time they be
any ways ſevered, nor to any one other than Dukes of the


ſame place, by us, or our heirs they be given, or any manner


of way granted; fo alſo as that of the aforeſaid Duke, and
other Dukes of the ſame place they do deſcend, and to the
ſon or ſons, to whom the ſaid duchy, by colour of our
grant aforeſaid it ſhall belong, then not appearing, the ſaid
duchy, with the caſtles, boroughs, towns, and all other
the aboveſaid, to us or our heirs, Kings of England, ſhall re-
torn in our hands ; and in the hands of our heirs Kings of
England, to be kept until ſuch fon or ſons, of the ſaid king-
dom of England hereditably to ſucceed ſhall appear, as it is
ſaid, to whom, then ſucceſſively, the ſaid duchy with the
appurtenances, for us and our heirs, we grant, and will,
that they be delivered, to hold, as above is exprefled. We
have moreover, for us and our heirs, and by this our charter
we have confirmed to the aforeſaid Duke, that the ſaid
Duke, and the heirs of him, eldeſt ſons, Dukes of the ſame
place for ever, have free warren in all the lordſhips, ma-
nors, caſtles, lands, and other places aforeſaid, ſo as the
ſaid lands be not within the bounds of our foreſts; and
that none enter into them, to hunt in them, or to take any
thing which to warren appertaineth, without the licence
and will of the ſaid Duke, or other Dukes of the ſame
place, upon pain of * of 10 l. wherefore we will,
and firmly command, for us and our heirs, that the faid
Duke have and hold to him and his heirs, eldeſt ſons of the
Kings of England, and Dukes of the ſaid place, in the ſaid
kingdom of England, inheritably to ſucceed, the aforeſaid
theriFalty of the aforeſaid county of Cornwall with the ap-
purtenances z ſo that they, and others, Dukes aforeſaid, at
their wills make and conſtitute the Sheriff aforeſaid, of the
faid county of Cornwall, to do and execute the othce of She»
riff there, as hitherto is uſed to be done, without the hin-
drance of us, or our heirs for ever; as alſo the aforeſaid
caltles, botoughs, manors, and honours of Launcelion, the
Caltle and manor of I'remeton, with the town of ding

the


10


The PRIxex's Caſe. Part VIII.


the caſtle, borough, and manor of Tintagel, the caſtle and ma-
nor of Reſtormel, and the manors of Clymeſlond, Tibeſte, Tew-
nton, Helleſton in Kerier, Moreſk, Lewarnaile, Pengkneth,
Penkyn, Rellaton, Helleſton in Trigſhire, Lyſkirett, Caliſtock,
Talſkid, and town of Leſtwithiel, with the appurtenances,
together with the parks, bailiwicks, bedelry, fiſhings, and
other things aboveſaid, in the aforeſaid county of Cornwall,
and the aforeſaid priſages, cuſtoms, and profits of ports
aforeſaid, together with the ſaid wreck of ſea, and the ſaid
profits and emoluments with the hundreds and courts a—
foreſaid to us belonging, and the ſaid ſtannary in the faid
county of Cornwa'l, together with the coinage of the faid
ſtannary, and with all iſſues and profits thereot arifing, and
alſo the explees, profits, and perquiſites of the courts afore-
ſaid (except only the ſaid 1c00 marks, which to our well
beloved and faithful William de Monte acuto, Earl of Saliſ-
bury, we granted for us and our heirs, to be taken to him,
and the heirs males of his body lawfully begotton) of the iſſues
and profits of the coinage aſoreſaid, until the ſaid caſtle
and manor of Tunbridge with the appurtenances, and the
ſaid manors of Aldebourn, Ambreſbury, and Winterbourn,
with the appurtenances, and the ſaid manor of tiengſtrig and
Charlton with the appurtenances, which the aforefaid Earl of
Surrey, and Joan his wife, hold tor the term of their lives,
and which after their deaths, to us and our heirs, ought to
revert, after the deceaſes ot the faid Earl and Joan, to the
ſaid Earl of Saliſbury, and the heirs males of his body law-
fully begotten, to the value of 800 marks by the year we
have granted to remain ; and the ſaid 200 marks, land and
rent, which to the ſaid Earl of Saliſbury, to have in form
aforeſaid we granted, come unto our hand (as before is ſaid)
and the ſaid ſtannary in the county of Devon, with the
coinage, and all iſſues and profits thereof; and allo the ex-
plees, profits, and perquiſites of the court of the ſame ſtan-
nary, water of Dertmouth, and the ſaid yearly farm of 201,
of the ſaid city of Exeter, and the ſaid prizage and cuſtom
of wines, in the water of Sutton, in the ſaid county of
Devon, as alſo the aforeſaid caſtle of Wallingford, with the
hamlets and members thereof, the yearly farm of the town
of Wallingford, with the ſaid honour of Wallingford, and
De Sancto W alerico, the caſtle, manor, and town of Berk-
 hamſtead, with the ſaid honour of Berkhamſtead, and the ma-
nor of Biſlet, with the parks and other their appurtenances
aforeſaid, together with knights fees, advowſons of churches,
abbies, priories, hoſpitals, chapels, and with the hundreds,
ſiſhings, foreſts, chaces, parks, woods, warens, fas,
markets, liberties, free cuſtoms, wards, reliefs, eſcheats,
and ſervices of tenants, as well free as villians, and all
other things to the ſaid caftles, boroughs, towns, manors,


ſtannaries, and coinage, lands and tenements whatſoever
| an


part VIII. The Paox's Caſe,


and whereſoever belonging or appertaining, of us and our heirs
ſor ever, together with the ſaid 241. farm, which the aforeſaid
John de Meere, to us yearly, for his whole life is bound to
pay, for the ſaid caſtle and manor of Meere, granted to him
by us, to hold for the term of his life, to be taken yearly by
the hands of the ſaid John de Meere all his life; and alſo
with the aforeſaid 1000 annual marks, to the aforeſaid Earl
of Saliſbury, of the profits of the coinage aforeſaid, by us ſo
granted, after hall be obtained by him, or the heirs males
of his body begotten. Seiſin of the aforeſaid manor of Fun-
bridge, and manors of Aldebourn, Ambreſbury, Winter-
bourn, Caneford, Hengſtrig and Charlton, after the deceaſe
of the ſaid Earl of Surrey and Joan ; and the ſaid 200 marks
of land and rent to the ſaid Earl of Saliſbury, and the ſaid
heirs males of his body ſo provided, for the like proportion of
the ſaid caſtles, manors, lands, and tenements, with the
whole, and particulars, when to the hands of the ſaid Earl of
Saliſbury, or the heirs males of his body Jawfully begotten,
ſhould come as aforeſaid : and that the aforeſaid caſtle and
manor of Knareſburgh, with its hamlets and members, and the
honour o Knareſburgh, and the manor of Iſleworth with the
appurtenances, aſter the death of our aforeſaid conſort, the
caſtle and manor of Lydeford with the appurtenances, and
with the ſaid chace of Dertmore with the appurtenances, and
the manor of Bradneſh, with the appurtenances, after the
deceaſe of the aforeſaid Margaret, and the. caſtle and manor
of Meere with the appurtenances, after the death of the afore-
ſaid John de Meere, ſhall remain to the faid Duke, to have
and to hold to him and his heirs, eldeſt ſons of the Kings of
England, and Dukes of the ſame place in the kingdom by
inheritance to ſucceed, together with knight's fees, advow-
ſous of churches, abbies, priories, hoſpitals, chapels, and
with hundreds, wapentakes, fiſhings, foreſts, chaces, parks,
woods, warrens, fairs, markets, liberties, free cuſtoms,
wards, reliefs, eſcheats, and ſervices of tenants, as well
free as villains, and all other things to the ſaid caſtles, manors,
and honours, howſoever and wherefoever belonging or ap-
pertaining, (to hold) of us likewiſe, and our heirs for ever,
as before is ſaid ; all which caſtles, boroughs, towns, manors,
and honours, ſtanna ies, and coinage, farms of Exeter and
Wallingford, lands and tenements, as above are ſpecified,
together with the knights fees, advowſons and all other
things above ſaid, to the ſaid duchy by this our preſent char-
ter, for us and our heirs, we do annex and unite, to the ſame
to remain for ever; ſo as from the {aid duchy, at no time
hereafter they be ſevered, nor to any perſon or perſons than
the Dukes of the ſame place, by us or our heirs they be given,
or in any ways granted; ſo that to the aforeſaid Duke, or
other Dukes of the ſame place they do deſcend, and the ſon

or


11


——— ̃ —— r


The Prixce's Caſe, Part VIII.


or ſons, to whom the ſaid duchy, by colour of the aforeſaid
our grants it behoves to belong then not appearing, the ſame
duchy with the caſtles, boroughs, towns, and all other things
aforeſaid, to us, and our heirs Kings of England ſhall revert,
in our hands, and in the hands of our heirs to be kept, until
ſuch ſon or ſons, in the ſaid kingdom of England hereditably
to ſucceed ſhall appear, as before is ſaid, to whom ſucceſſively
the ſaid duchy with the appurtenances, for us and our heirs
we grant, and will to be delivered, to be holden as above is
expreſſed. And that the ſaid Duke and his heirs, eldeſt ſons;
Dukes of the ſaid place for ever, have free warren in all the
demeſnes of the lands aforeſaid, ſo that the fame lands are not
within the bounds of our foreſts ; ſo as none enter into thoſe
lands to hunt in them, or to take any thing which to warren
belongeth, without the licence and will of the ſaid Duke, and
the other Dukes of the ſaid place, upon pain of forfeiture of
101. as before is ſaid; theſe being witneſſes, the moſt Rev.
father John Archbiſhop of Canterbury, Primate of all Eng-
land our Chancellor, Henry Biſhop of Lincoln our Treaſurer,
Richard Biſhop of Durham, John de Warren Earl of Surrey,
Thomas de Bello Campo Earl of Warwick, Tho. Wake of
Lydell, and John de Mowbray, John Darcy le Neuen ftew-
ard of our houſe, and others, given by our hands at Welit-
minſter, the 17th day of March, in the 11th year of our reign,
by the King himſelf, and whole council in Parlament.
But we, the tenor of the charter, record, and act of Parlia-
ment aforeſaid, at the requeſt of our well-beloved and faith-
ful Tho. Stephens, Eſq. Attorney-General of our well-
beloved, and moſt dear ſon, our eldeſt ſon Henry, Prince
and Duke of Cornwall, cauſed to be exemplified by theſe
preſents. In witneſs whereof we have cauſed theſe our letters
to be made patent. Witneſs myſelf at Weſtminſter the 5th
day of March, in the year of our reign of England, France,
and Ireland the third, and of Scotland the 39, as by the ſaid
letters pateat of exemplificatioa aforeſaid * into court
brought more fully appeareth. And the ſaid Henry Hobart
Attorney-General of the ſaid lord the now King, for the ſaid
lord the now King ſaith, and will aver, that the aforeſaid act
of Parliament aforeſaid, of the aforeſaid late King Edu. g.
made, and the aforeſaid charter, by the aforeſaid late King
Edw. 3. by authority .aforeſaid, of the parliament of ibe
| ſame late King Edw.' 3. by authority of Parliament aforeſaid
made, whereof is the enrolment aforeſaid, and in the afore-
ſaid exemplification of the inrolment aforeſaid, as before 1
ſaid, is made mention, are one and the ſame, and not other
nor divers: whereupon the ſaid Attorney General of the iaid
lord the now King, for the ſaid lord the King here demandeth
judgment, if the aforeſaid Henry Lindley, to ſay, that
there is not any ſuch record of ſuch act of Parliament _


part VIII. The PRINCE“ Caſe.


ſaid, of the aforeſaid late King Edward 3. nor any ſuch
record of the aforeſaid charter, by the faid late King
Edw. 3- by authority of the Parliament aforeſaid, in the writ
aforeſaid of Scire facias ſpecified, againſt the ſaid letters patent
of exemplification aforeſaid, here into court, by the ſaid At-
torney of the aforeſaid lord the now King, for the ſaid lord
the now King ſhewed forth, ought to be admitted. And
further. the ſaid Henry Hobart, the Attorney General of the
ſaid lord the now King, for the ſaid lord the King prayeth
that the ſaid letters patent of the aforeſaid late Q. Eliz. as unto
the aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, 'I'relowia, and Lan-
dalph, with the appurtenances, be revoked and annulled
and that the aſoreſaid manors of Welt Taunton, Trelowia,
and Landalph with the appurtenances, into the hands of the
{aid lord the now King be taken and ſeiſed: and the aforeſaid
Henry Hobart, Knt. Attorney General of the ſaid lord the
now King, who, &c. As to the faid plea of the aforeſaid
John Hele and Warwick Hele, by them above in form afore-
faid pleaded, for the faid lord the King faith, that that plea,
and the matter therein contained, is not ſufficient in law to
maintain, that the aforeſaid letters patent of the aforeſaid late

. Eliz. of theatoreſaid manors of Weit Taunton, Trelowia,
and Landalph, ought not to be revoked and annulled, or that
the manor aforeſaid with the appurtenances, into the hands
of the ſaid lord the now King, ought not to be ſeiſed. To
which plea in manner and form aforeſaid pleaded, the ſaid
Attorney General for the ſaid lord the K. needeth not, nor by
the law of the land is bound to anſwer, and this he is ready to
aver: whereſore for want of a ſufficient plea of the ſaid John
Hele and Warwick Hele in this behalf, the ſaid Attorney
General for the ſaid lord the King demandeth judgment, and
that the ſaid letters patent of the aforeſaid late Q. Eliz. of the
aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph
with the appurtenances made, be revoked and annulled, and
the manors aforeſaid with the appurtenances, be taken and
ſeiſed into the hands of the lord the King, &c. Upon which
the aforeſaid Henry Lindley faith, that the plea of the atore-
laid Attorney General, for the ſaid lord the now King, to


the plea of the ſaid Henry Lindley, above by replication


pleaded, and the matters therein contained, are not ſuſhcient
to bar him the ſaid Henry Lindley, to ſay, that there is not
any ſuch record of ſuch act of parliament, of the aforeſaid late
King Edw. 3 made, as in the aforeſaid writ of Scire fucics
thereof is recited and ſpecified, nor that there is any ſuch re-
cord of the aforeſaid charter, by the ſaid late King Fdw. 3.
by Authority of the Parliament aforeſaid made, as in the afore-
laid writ of Scire facias thereof is above recited and ſpecited.
And that the ſaid Henry Lindley, to that plea in manner afore-
laid by replication pleaded, needeth not, nor by the law of the

land


The PRINT E“'s Caſe, Part VII.


land is bound to rejoin, and this he is ready to aver; where.
fore for want of a ſufficient replication in his behalf, the faid
Henry Lindley as at firſt demandeth judgment, if the afore-
faid letters patent of the aforeſaid late Q Eliz. of the aforeſaid
manors of Weſt Taunton, 'Trelowia, and Landalph, with the
appurtenances made, ought to be annulled, or the aforeſaid
manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph, with the
appurtenances, or any of them, ought to be taken and ſeiſed
into the hands of the lord the now King. And the aforeſaid
John Hele and Warwick Hele for themſelves ſay, that inaſ.
much as they ſufficient matter in their plea aforefaid, by them
above pleaded, have alledged, that is to ſay, the aforeſaid
ſeiſin of the aforeſaid late Q. Elizabeth of the aforeſaid manors
of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and Landalph with the appur-
tenances in her demeſne as of fee, in the right of her crown
of England, and the grant aforeſaid, by the aforeſaid letters
patent of the ſaid late Queen, and the reſt of the matters by
them above pleaded, which the aſoreſaid John Hele and War-
wick Hele are ready to aver, which matter the aforeſaid At-
torney General of the lord the now King, doth not deny,
nor to the ſame any ways anſwereth, but the ſame averment
to admit altogether refuſeth, as at fitſt demands judgment, if
the aforeſaid letters patent of the aforeſaid late Q. Eliz. of
of the aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton, Trelowia, and
Landalph, with the appurtenances made, ought to be revoked
or annulled, or the ſaid manors with the appurtenances, ot
any of them, into the hands of the ſaid lord the now King,
ought to be taken or ſeiſed. And farther, for the better in-


formation, and more fully to inform the ſaid lord the now


King, and the court here, of the ſtate of the lord the now
King, to the aforeſaid duchy of Cornwall, and to other ma-
nors to the ſaid late duchy any manner of way belonging or
annexed, or any part or parcel thereof, the ſaid John and
Warwick fay, that in the ſtatute in Parliament of the Lord
Henry late King of England the 5th, held at Weſtminſter in
the county of Middleſex, the 7th day of November, in the
firſt year of his reign made, amongſt other things ordained, it
was enacted and eſtabliſhed by authority of Parliament, that
the ſaid lord King Hen. 7. ſhould have, hold, enjoy, and pol-
leſs, to him and his heirs for ever, from the 21ſt day of Au-
guſt then laſt paſt, the aforeſaid duchy of Cornwall, and all
and fingular the honours, caſtles, lordſhips, mano:3, lands,
tenements, rents, reverſions, ſervices, poſſeſſions, advowſons,
and other hereditaments, with all and ſingular their members,
and appurtenances, to the aforeſaid duchy belonging and ap-
pertaining, or which were belonging, annexed, reputed, ot
taken, parcel of the ſame, any time of the reigns of Hen. 6.
and Edw. 4. late Kings of England, in as ample and large man-
ner, with all liberties, franchiſes, and other things to the ſame

belongings


part VIII. The PRINCE's Caſe.


belonging, in like manner, form, and condition as the aſore-
ſaid Kings, or either of them had, held, occupied, uſed, or

enjoyed, or had, held, occupied, uſed and enjoyed in the
| ſame, in any time during the ſaid Kings reigns, as in the
ſlatute aforeſaid, in the firſt year of the reign of the aforeſaid
late King Hen. 7. aboveſaid, amongſt other things it is more
fully contained, and appeareth: by which the ſaid King
James, now King, was and yet is ſeiſed of the reſt of the
manors, lands, and tenements, to the aforeſaid duchy of Corn-
wall belonging, by the aforeſaid late Q. Eliz. not aliened, in
his demeſne as of fee, in the right of his crown of England,
whereupon they pray that the court here take knowledge and
notice of the aforeſaid ſtatute in the ſaid firſt year of the afore-
ſaid late King H. 7. as aboveſaid made, and of the aforeſaid
ſtatute of the lord the now King, to the aforeſaid duchy of
Cornwall belonging, they would take, accept, &c. And the


aforeſaid Hen. Hobart, Attorney General of the aforeſaid


lord the now King, who, &c. as to that, whereupon the
aforeſaid Henry Lindley above demurreth in law, inaſmuch
as, he ſufficient matter in law for the ſaid lord the King to
bar the aforeſaid Hen. Lindley from ſaying, that there is not
any ſuch record of any ſuch act of Parliament, of the afore-
ſaid late King Edw. 3. made, nor any ſuch record of the
aforeſaid charter by the ſaid late King Edw. 3. by authority
of Parliament aforeſaid, made, as in the aforeſaid writ of Scire
facias thereof it is recited and ſpecified, above alledged, which
matter the aforeſaid Hen. Lindley doth not deny, nor to the
lame any ways anſwereth, but that averment to admit utterly
— the ſaid Attorney General of the ſaid lord the now
King, for the ſaid lord the King demandeth judgment, and
that the aforeſaid letters patent of the aforeſaid late Q. Eliz.
of the aforeſaid manors of Welt Taunton, Trelowia, and
Landalph, with the appurtenances made, be revoked and
annulled ; and that the faid manors with the appurtenances
into the hands of the ſaid lord the now King, be taken and
ſeiſed, &c, And becauſe the court of the ſaid lord the now
King here, will adviſe of and upon the premiſes, before it
proceeded to judgment thereof, day is given as well to the
atoreſaid Henry Hobart, Knt. Attorney General of the ſaid
lord the now K. who, &c. as to the aforeſ. Hen. Lindley, John


Hele, and Warwick Hele, before the ſaid lord the now K. in


the ſaid court here, until in eight days of St. Hilary next, &c.
whereſoever, &c. to hear their judgment thereof, becauſe the
laid court here thereof are not yet, &c. At which day of eight
days of St. Hil. that is to fay. at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, come
as well the aforeſ Hen. Hobart, Kt. Attorney General of the
laid lord the now King, who, &c. in his proper perſon, as the
aforeſ. Hen. Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele, by their
attorney aforeſ. and upon this the Attorney General of **

the


12


- —— a.


The Px1wcr's Caſe, Part VIII.


the King, as at firſt demandeth judgment, and that the afore.
ſaid letters patent, of the aforeſaid manors of Weſt Taunton,
Trelowia, and Landalph, with the appurtenances in form
aforeſaid made, be revoked and annulled, and that the ſaid
manors with the appurtenances into the hands of the ſaid lord
the now King, be taken and ſeiſed, &c. And becauſe the
ſaid court of the lord the now King, here, will farther adviſe
before that it proceed to judgment thereof, day farther is given
as well to the aforeſaid Henry Hobart Knt. Attorney General
of the ſaid lord the King, who, &c. as to the aforefaid Henry
Lindley, John Hele, and Warwick Hele, here until in 15
days of Eaſter next, &c. whereſoever, &c. to hear their judg-
ment thereof, becaufe the ſaid court of the ſaid lord the now
King here, thereof are not yet, &c.


See the form of the judgment hereupon at the end of the
caſe, viz. fol 30. b. | |


ca


Caſus Princi-
Pis.


D Rex, ad peti-


tionem illuſtriſſimi Prin-


cipis Henrici, filit ſui primo-


geniti, Ducis Cornubiæ, pro-
ſecutus eft breve de Scire fa-
cias verſus Henricum Lind-
ley militem & Fohannem Hele
Servientem ad Legem, ad re-
vacandum literas
nußer Reginæ Elizabetha,
datas ſecundo die Maii anno
regni ſui triceſimo ſepti-
m) (per quas dicta Regi-
na conceſſit dicto Henrico
Lindley & cuidam Gellio
Mericke, (jam defuncto) et
heredibus ſuis maneria, de
WWift Taunton, Trelowia, et
Landulph in com' Cornub')
ut eadem maner* pref. Duct


patentes


The


Prince's
Caſe *.

Je LA Hep 244:
PHE King, at the petition of


the molt noble Prince Hen-
ry, his firſt begotten ſon, Duke
of Cornwall, brought a (a) Sire


facias againſt Henry Lindley,


Kt. and J. Hele, Serjeant at
Law, to repeal letters patent of
the late Q. Elizabeth, bearing
date the 2d of May, in the 37th
year of her reign, by which the
Queen granted to the ſaid H.
Lindley, and to one Gelly Me-
ricke (now dead) and their
heirs, the manors of Welt
Taunton, Trelowia, and Lan-
dulph, in the county of Corn—
wall, to the end the King
might make livery of them
to the ſaid Duke, as members


* Note, Edward the firſt, when he ſubdued Wales, found the natives obſtinate


and unwilling to be governed by a Prince who was not born of their own nation,
directed that when his Queen was with child ſhe ſhould go in'o Wales to Carnar-
von, and there be brought to bed, which accordingly ſhe was; and therg the
King told them that they had a Prince of their own country born there, which
Was to rule over them, which was Edward the ſecond. called Edward of Carnars
van; and from that time the King's eldeſt ſon was called Prince of Wales.
Heylin in his Deſcription of England, tit. Wales. Sce Buine't's Hiſt. of the
Reformation, Part 1. fol. 134. Q. Eliz. when born was declared Princeſs of Wales,
Which could not be, as appears by this caſe, ſhe being but heir preſumptive.


Vol. IV. P and


1a


See 3 caſes in
Lucas 260, 412,


. *


-


tee .


2


(a) þ Rall. 192,
A |


N _ 4
a — — —ͤ —-— *


and parts of the duchy aforeſaid,
and that by force of three acts


of Parliament, two in 11 E.


3. whereof the one is in form
ot a charter by authority of Par-
liament, by which the Prince
was created Duke of Cornwall,
and the poſſeſſions of the duke-
dom of Cornwall thereby given
to him, with ſpecial limitation,
and the poſſeſſions, annexed to
the ſaid duchy, ſo as * ſhall
not be ſevered, with a ſpecial
clauſe of revivification, altho'”
the ſpecial limitation at an
time ſhould ceaſe, &c. and of
the aCt of 32 H. 8. by which the
bree manors are made parcels
f the duchy of Cornwall for
ever to all intents and purpoſes,
&c. the Sheriff returned Sir
Henry Lindley, and Serjeant
Hele and one Warwick Hele,
Kant. terre-tenants of the ſaid
three manors ſummoned ; and
after four imparlances, Sir
Henry Lindley, as to the ſaid
two ſeveral acts of Parliament,
anno 11 E. 3. ſeverally plead-
ed Nul tiel record: Serjeant
Hele and the ſaid Warwick
pleaded the ſaid letters patent


of Queen Elizabeth with a


non obſiante the ſaid act of
32 Hen, 8. and conveyed to
themſelves a joint eſtate,
to them, and to the heirs
of the ſaid Serjeant; and
further pleaded the act
of confirmation- of letters


8


Caſus PRINcI is.


Part VIII.


tanguam membra & parcellas
ducatus prædicti liberati fa-
ceret : et hoc vigore 3. flatu-
torum Parliamentariorum, ſci-
licet duorum anno undeci mo
Ediuardi tertii editorum;
(quorum unum habet for mam
churtæ authoritate Parlia-
menti fafte, per quod Princep;
in ducem Cornubiæ prafetins


fit, ejuſcdlemgue ducatus peſ.


ſelſiones illi date cum ſprciali
limitatione, et fit ducatui an-
tedicto annexe quod ab eo ſe-
parari minime poſſunt : idque
cum ſpeciali clauſula revivifica.
tionis, licet quandoque ſpecialis
illa ceſſaret limitatio, c.)
Tertit wero flatutt anno 32
Hen. 8. per quod difta il
maneria devenunt parceil' du-
cat” Cornubiæ imperpetuum ad
omnia propoſita et inteniio-
nes, fc. Vicecomes retur-
nat diclos H. Lindley, et Js.
Hale, & quendam II. Hele
mil”, terre tenentes prædict
trium maner', eſſe ſummu-
mitos. Et poſt guatuor ad
interloquendum dies datos,
Hen. Lindley, qucad pred


duo ParP ſlatuta, an. 11 E. g.


ſepara?” placut”, quod nullum
tale hab' record: J. Hele, &
IVWarw anted” reſpond” allt-
gant di? Reg Elix' hter” pa-
tent” cum clauſ. de Non h..
pred” flat” de anno 32 H. 8.
oflend* ſeipſos conjunct eſſe
feeffat ad ſelum ſui propr
ujum, et her” ejuſd' J. Hele:

| actum


Part VIII. The PRTNCE's Caſe,


afum inſuper allegant con-
firmationis literarum paten-
tium ad Parliament” anno 43
Reginæ Eliz. edit”, Et quod
placita Hen. Lindley, Attorn'


Reg replicando dic, et pro-


fert (per inſpeximus) dict char-
iz de an 11 E. 3. exemplifi-
cationem ſub magno Angliæ ſi-
gil prout in recordo, 1. Ac-
tis publicis, ubi intratur, in
hzzc ver ba: et pet” jud', ft,
contra hanc exemplificat', ad
dicendum, nullum tale record”,
admitti debeat. Et ſuper pla-
cito dicti J. Hele et I at to.
dic? alt' moratur in lege: et
illi ſcil. dicti Job. & Warw
fimliter. Et ulter', ut amici
cu, ad informand* cur de
verit & de flatu Regis in re-
fiduo dict“ maner* parcel!” die-
ti ducat', repetꝰ cur” partem


atuti anno 1 H. 7. edit de


antedic! Duc Cornub', Et
ſuper replicatione Actor nati-
generalis dif? Henr' Lindley
moratur in lege : et ille, ſcili-
cet dic? altorn', ſil'ter. Rem,
hac tantum modo compend' re-
tali, co, qued latius totam ex
record adjeci: et fi caſum e-
tram fuſius dicere, prolixa ni-
mis (ut caſus hic ſe habet hac
et relatio.

In bac cauſa 4 mote fue-
runt gueſt” confiderat” dig-
ne, 1, St inſlrum' faf 17.
die Martii, an' 11 E. 3. Prin-
up Edu fit charta tempore
Parliamenti fa& vel charta
authoritate Parliamenti la-


bilita. Et ſum' totius litis in


loc articuls conſtitutd ęſt.


patent at the Parliament held 43
Eliz. And as to the pleas of
Sir Henry Lindley, the King's
Attorney replied and ſhewed an
exemp'ihcation by Inſpeximus of
the ſaid charter of 11 E. 3. un-
der the great ſeal, (as in the re-
cord where it is entered in hec
verba) and demanded judgment
if againſt the ſame he ſhould be
admitted to plead u⁰ tie“ record,
And demurred in law upon the
plea of Serjeant Hele and War—
wick, who joined with him,


And further, ut amici curiæ, and!


t5 inform the coutt of the truth,
ant of the ſtate which the K. that
nody is, hat in the reſidueofthe
ſaid manots, parcel of the ſaid
duchy, they repeated to the court


15


Ante 8.
Palm, 92.


part of the act of 1 H. 7. con-


a


cerning the ſaid duchy of Corn-


wall. And H. Lindley demutred


in law upon the replication of
the Attorney - general, with
whom the attorney joined,

The reaſon why 1 have made
an abſtract of the caſe, to com-
pendious, is becauſe I have
added the whole record at length,
and if the caſe ſhould alſo be
put at large, it would extend,
as this cale is, to an unneceſſary
prolixity. In this cafe four
queſtions were moved being
thought worthy of conſideration.
1. If the inſtrument made 17
Mar. an' 11 E. 3. to Prince Ed-
ward be a charter made in time
of Parliament, or a charter e-
ſtabliſhed by authority of Parlia-
ment, and this is the prin-
cipal and fundamental point
on which the whole depends.

2 2. If


Four points;


|
|


—V— to a öÄ _ -


12 "A
i —
_


——_


AA ReP i. wi
ͤ—— FÄ—̃— ton


5 eee ied ates otad
- — — —
- * < — 2


*


Caſus PR INCI ISò.


2. If there was any other act
of Parliament but the ſaid char-
ter; and if there is no other act,
if the King's writ be good
which alledges another act. 3.
Admitting the Prince to be
Duke of Cornwall, what eſtate
has the Prince in the honour
and dukedom of Cornwall?
and how has it he? by deſcent
or by purchaſe? For if the
Prince has but a particular e-
ſtate, then, after the particular
eſtate ended, the ſaid Serjeant
Hele and his heirs ſhall have
the ſaid manors until, &c.
And then a ſpecial judgment
ought to be given, with a
Durad, Fo, and no general
judgment that the letters patent
ſhall be void, nor the inrollment
cancelled. 4. If againſt ſuch
act of Parliament Nl tiel record
may be pleaded. And the Lord
Chancellor, becauſe the cauſe
was of great importance and
conlequence, aſſiſted himſelf
with a judge of each of the
courts at Weltminſter, /cilicet,
Coke, Chief Juſtice of the Com-
mon Pleas, Fleming, Chief Ba-
ron of the Exchequer, and Wil-
liams one of the Judges of the
King's Bench, (for Sir John


Popham, Knight, late Chief


Juſtice of the King's Bench,
who was called to it, and
heard ſome of the argu-


Part VIII.


2. Si præter didtam chartam
aliguod fuerit aliud Natutum
Parliam' : & ft non fit, cujus
denique wvaloris fit breve don?
Reg, in quo alterius mentio
eft flat'. 3. Si admittatur
Principem fuiſſe Duc Cornul,
quem habet Princeps ſlatum in
dicto honore et ducatu Cornul) ;
et quonam habet modo, ſcil
per deſcenſum, vel per acquiſi- ©
tionem : fi enim Princeps ha-
beat ſolummodo particul” ſlat,
tunc poſt particul” lulum fint-
tum dict“ fo. Hele, et hare
fur haber maner* pred” que
que, &c. et tunc judicium delet
eſſe ſpeciale cum Quoad, &c. et
nin generale, quod irt itæ ſint
art? liter” patent”, et enrundem
irrotulament” cancelletur, 4.
Si contra tale Parliamenti


flatutum nullum tale record


poſſu allegari. Et Domin' Can-
cellarius in re tantd tantique
momenti, e ſingulis M eſi monaſ-
ter tribus curiis unum ſibi
aſſaciavit Judicem, ſcil. Coke
Capitalem Juſticiarium de
anco, Fieming Capitalem
Scaccarii Baranem, et Mil-
liams unum Fuſticiariorun
ad Placita coram dom.
no Rege tenenda aſſigna-
tum (dominus enim Job
Popham miles nuper Capi-
talis Fuſticiarius, qui huc
evicatus fuit, et arguments:
run


part VIII.


rum nonnulla ad barram au-
diverat, diem clauſit extremum
pendente placito. Et bac
cauſa ſcite ad barram argu-
mentata fuit per Stephens,
Princ' Attor* pro Rege, et per
Heron Servient' ad Legem pro
deſendent'; et ſecunda vice per
Dodderidge Solicitatorem Regis
Generalem, et per Houghton
Servientem ad Legem pro de-


fendentibus; et deinde per


Hobart Generalem Regis At-
tornatum et poſtea iſis eo-
dem termino cauſa bc per
Williams et Capitalem Bar1-
nem prima vice diſceptata fu-
it; et per Capitalem Fuſticia-
rium de Banco et Dominum
Cancellar vice ſecunda. Et
guoad articulum primum, uno
oſſinſu deter minatum fuit per
Cancellarium et dictos Juſ-
ticiarios, quod dicta charta
facla fuit authoritate Parlia-
menti. At quoniam duo
ſunt inſlrumenta ad omnes
res aut con ir mandas, aut im-


pugnandas, ratio et authori-


tas, ſuas firmarunt opinio-
nes, I. Ratione, 2. Ex le-
g's autharitate. Quoad pri-
mum duas afferunt ralio-
nes ex viſceribus cauſe, pri-


mam ex impolſibili; et ho: tri-


bus de cauſis. 1. Impoſſi-
bile foret, fs difla charta
non fuerit Parltamenta a-


 bilita, ſtatum, wel honoris


pref. in Duc Cornut*, vel


5% V. ind, iſio ſpecial” mo-


The Prx1nce's Caſe.


ments at the bar, died pendente
placito.) And this caſe was ar-
gued very well at the bar, by
Stephens the Prince's Attorney,
for the King, and by Heron
Serjeant for the defendants ; and
at another day by Dodderidge
the King's Solicitor, and by
Houghton Serjeant for the de-
fendants ; and, laſtly, by Hobart
the King's Attorney General,
And afterwards, the ſame term,
the caſe was argued by Williams
and the Chief Baron in one day;
and at another by the Chief
Juſtice of the Common Pleas
and the Lord Chancellor. And


as to the firſt point, it was un-


animouſly reſolved by the Lord


16


Firſt point.
Co. Lit. 81. A.
98. b.


Chancellor and the ſaid Juſ-
tices, that the ſaid charter was


made by (a) authority of Par-
liament. And becaule duo ſunt
in/lrumenta ad omnes res aut con-


firmandas, aut impugnandas, ra-


tio et authoritas ; they confirm-
ed their opinions, 1. by reaſon,
and then by authorities in law,
For the firſt they gave two
reaſons, ex wiſceribus cauſe :
1. Ex impoſſibili, and that for
three cauſes: 1. It would
be impoſſible if the ſaid char-
ter was not eſtabliſhed by
Parliament, that the eſtate,
either of the honour to be
Duke of Cornwall, or of the
poſſeſſions thereof being li-
mited in ſuch ſpecial manner
as it is, ſhould be tufhcient in
law. For the limitation of both


(a) 1 Jon. 1064.


—— — - ———— _ — —


nge — Ow OE
— — * — — 0 —
4 — —
— A - -
— * - *


Caſus PRINx IIS.


( a) Jenk. Cent. 18, (a) Jabendum et tenendumeidem


Raym. 355


Duci, & ipſius & herediim ſuo-


rum Reg um Angliæ filits fprimog. *
nitis & didli lod Ducibus, in
regno Angliæ færeditarie ſucceſſu-
ris. So that he who ought to
inherit by force of this grant,
ought to be the firſt begotten
fon and heir apparent of the K.
of England, and of ſuch king
as is heir to Prince Edward, and
that ſuch firſt begotten ſon and
heir apparent to the crown ſhall
inherit the ſaid dukedom in the
life-time of the King his fa-
ther. So that if there be King,
grandfather, father and ſon, now
the father being the firſt begot-
ten ſon of the grandfather, is
Duke of Cornwall in the liſe of
the King, and es inflante that
the grandfather dies, the father
is King, and eo inſlante alſo the
ſon is Duke of Cornwall; which


\ courſe of inheritance being a-


gainſt tHe rules of the common


(3) Co. Lit.27.a. law, (Y) cannot be created by
6/42 J. charter without the force and
n (gs. 8f9firength of an act of Parlia-


2 /A-
(e) Co. Lit. 16.2.


ment. And in this caſe the
King's eldeſt ſon has (c) this
dignity by right of inheritance,
in like manner as the eldeſt ſons
of grandees and Peers of the
realm who have ſupereminent
dignities in them, have in ap-
pellation and curteſy only; as
ſuppoſe there be a grandfather
Baron, and a father and ſon ;
and the King creates the
grandfather an Earl, eo in-


unte the father is a Baron in ap-


pellation and curteſy, and eo in-
ſlanie that the grandfather dics,


Part VIII.


do limitatarum quo he ſunt,
fore ſufficient in lege; ambiy
enim limitatis /t. Haben.
dum et tenendum e:dem Duci,
& ipfeus & hæredum ſuorum
Regum Angliæ filits primoge-
nitis et dicti loa Ducibus, in
regno Anęliæ bareditarie ſuc-
ceſſuris. Ita quod hunc, qui
hereditare debet virtute hujns
conceſſionts, oportet eſſe fliun
primogenitum et hæredem af-
parentem Regis Angliæ, immy
hujuſmodi Regis qui heres «ff
dic! Principi Edwards; et
guod primogenitus ille filius
et heres corona apparens jury
hereditario haberet didtun
Ducat', vivente Rege ſus ga.
tre: utputa fit Rex avus,
pater, et filius, hic pater
(primogenitus exiſtens filius
avi) eft Dux Cornubiæ vi-
vente Rege; et co inſtante quo
abus decedit pater eft Rex, et
eo etiam inſtante filius eft Dux
Cornub', qui hered” ordo, cum
fit contra regulas legis con-
munis, creari non poteſt char-
ta, flat Parliament“ viri
& oigore non adhibitis, Fit
in hoc caſu filius Regis natu
maximus hanc habet digni-
tatem jure et hered”, codem
modo quo fila natu maxi-
mi primatum & procerum
regni (quorum ſuperemi-
nentcs ſunt dignitates) ba-
bent appeliat et urbanitale
tant” ; utputa fit auus Bart,
pater, et filius, et Rex avum
treat” in comit', es inſlanie


puter eſi Baro appellat” et u-


Lanitale, et es etiam injlante


79


Part VIII.


quo avus decedit, pater eff
Comes et filius Baro urbani-
tate: et fic de ſimilibus. 2.
Impoſſibile feret poſſeſſions
ducatus fic efſe annexe ditta
charta, eodem modo prout
charta in ſe exigit; clauſula


enim connexionis oft: que


idem omnia caſtra, burg',
vill, maneria, c. prædicto
ducatui præſenti charta naſira


pro nobis et hæredibus naſiris


anneftimus et unimus eidem
imperpetuum remanſur, ita
quod ab eodem Ducatu aliguo
modo nullatenus ſeparentur,
nec alicui ſeu aliquibus aliis,
quam difti loci Ducibus per
nos vel hæredes noſtros donen-
tur, ſeu quomodolibet conce-
dantur ; que indiſſolubilis et
inſepar abilis connexto tali moda
feri non poteſt charta tantum,
Pariiamenti flatuto non adli-
bit, 3. Impoſſibile foret,
legis regula, ſlatum in terra
oſſare et rurſus reviviſcere
(/cut clauſula revivificationts
mtendit ) charta tantum : que
dunſula eft, ita quod prefato
Duce ſeu aliis ejuſdem loci
Ducibus decedent', et filio ſeu
filiis, ad quos dictus Ducatus
pretextu, dont et conceſſionis
roſtrorum prædictorum ſpec-
tare di gnoſcitur tunc non} ap-
parenttbus, idem Ducatus cum
caſtris, burg', villis, Cc. ad
nos vel heredes noſtros Reges
Angliæ revertatur, in mani-
bus ne/tris et ipſorum heredum
rerum Regum Angliæ reti-


nend', quouſque de hujuſmodi


The PRTNOoE's Cafe,


dies, the father is Earl, and
the ſon Baron by curteſy :
& fic de ſimilibus. 2. It would
be impoſſible that the
ſions of the duchy ſhould be
ſo annexed by the charter in
the ſame manner as the char-
ter purports; for the clauſe
of annexation


poſſeſ-


"7


is, Que. qui-


dem omnia caſtra, burg', vill,


maneria, Qc. pred ducatui,
reſenti charta noſtra pro nobis
et haredibus naſiris annectimus
et unimus eidem imperpetuum re-
manſur', ita quod ab eodem du-
catu aliqus mode nullatenus ſe-
parentur, nec alicui ſeu aliqui=
bus aliis, quam diftt loci duci-
bus per nos vel heredes noſtros


donentur, ſeu quomodolibet con-
cedantur ; which indiſſoluble
and inſeparable annexation


cannot be made in ſuch man-
ner by charter only, with-
out act of Parliament. 2. *
It would be impoſſible by the
rule of law, that an eſtate
in land ſhould ceaſe and re-
vive again, as by the clauſe
of revivification is intend-
ed, by charter only; which
clauſe is, ita quod prefat”
Duce, ſeu aliis ejuſdem luci
ducibus decedent, & filio


ſeu filiis, ad quos dlictus du-


catus prætextu dani et con-
ceſſionis mnoflrorum prædicto-
rum ſpeftare dignoſcitur, tune
non apparentibus, idem du-
catus cum caſtris, burg* vil-


lis, Cc, ad nos vel bæredes


noflros Reges Angliæ rever-
of tatury


Co. Lit. 27. a+
T Co, 87, Jo


| | Caſus PR INxIIõò.


1 tatur in manibus noſtris & it 9
W rum heredum noſtrorum Reg
Angliæ retinend', gquouſque de hu-
juſmodi ſilio ſeu filiis in dicto reg-
no Angliæ hereditarie ſucceſſur
| appareat, ut diflum eſt, quibus
1 tunc ſucceſſiue ducatum illum cum
| pertinentiis, pro nobis et haredi-

bus noſlris concedimus et volumus

liberari, tenend prout ſuperius

eft expreſſum. For although a
{a) t Co. 85. a. (a) rent newly created (to which
130. a. Perk. no man can have an ancient


. 327.Plowd. _ 1
ſect. 327.Plow right) may ceaſe for a time,


156. a. 10. H. 7.


— —


—— ——ꝛ—̃— gout ———
. — —_ —
— —


— — —


r r —


13. b. 5 E. 2. and revive again, yet land,
Dower 143. which 1s of a more ſolid nature,


E. 3. Condit. .
— of gary and to which another may have


4 alLeon. 83. 6 Co, an ancient right, cannot ſo do,
i! 41-2, 5 Co. 17.9 as it is reſolved in Corbet's


1 r caſe, in the Firſt Part of my
| | 2 eports.


1 , £/R

| CEA error The ſecond reaſon was, ex
1 . . ;- abſurdo, that fix others being
WH /A 7 Yoo created Earls at the fame time
8 Poſts . 4 for the honour of the Prince,
1 e. ge ui, e, all their creations and donations
mould be firm and good in law


WY or 7 Apnreber, ſome of them and the heirs


| 22
tt J. le £449. A of their bodies ; and to others
J in fee-fimple; and that the


-


- © - — —
— —


creation of the Prince himſelf,


and of ſuch a moſt noble Prince,
and the grant to him of the
ſaid caſtles, manors, &c. ſhould
be either void in law, or but an
eſtate at will ; and eſpecially in
ſuch a time when the Judges
(who always attended the Par-


and learned in the law.


It remains then to ſee what
authoritizs and precedents
there are in Jaw to prove


che ſaid charter has the


liament) were the moſt wiſe


Videre
ſunt in lege


Part vill.


filio 7 filus in dicto regno
Angliæ hereditarie ſucceſſur*
appareat ut didtum eft, qui-
bus tunc ſucceſſive ducatum
illum cum pertinentiis pro
nobis et hæredibus noſtr1s con-
cedimus, et volumus liberari:
tenendum prout ſuperius e
expreſſum. g EE &
redditus de novo creatus (ad

uem nullus homo haber poteſft
jus ſuperius) pro tempore ceſ-
fare poteſt et rurſus reviviſcere,
terra tamen (que ſolidioris eff
nature, & ad quam alter
habere poteſt jus ſuperius) ita
facere non poteſt, ſicuti deter-
minatum ęſi in caſu Corbet in
prima Relationum mearum
parte.


Secunda ratio fuit ex alſurdd,
eo quad, cum eodem tempore
ſex ali fuerint creati Comites
in honorem Principis, llorum
omnes creationes et donationes
firme forent et in lege validæ,


 quibuſdam eorum et heredibus


de corporibus ſuis exeuntibus,
et alus in feodo ſimplici, crea-
tio vero Principis ipſius,
Principiſque tam celeberrimi,
& conceſſio dictorum caſtro-
rum, maneriorum, c. in
lege forent invalidæ, vel de
flatu tantum ad voluntatem,
et hoc tunc temporis quanas
fuerunt Fudices (qui ſemper
attendunt Parliamentum) op-
time eruditi et juriſperi-
tiſſimi.
deinde eff que
authoritales
et exempla ad proband
dict chartam in ſe habere
VIM


part VIII.


vim flatut' Parliamentarii.
Et hoc quadrupliciter proba-
tum fult : 1. Ex ipſd charta
et tx authoritatibus in lege
cum bac concurrentibus 2.
Ex conceſſionibus et flatibus
per Principem fa#tis, et ſub
literis patentibus Regum : 3.

udiciis ſecundum uſitatum
1 modum latis, et deter mi-
nationibus Fudicum in curis
Regits : 4. Determinationtbus
in Parliamento per Regem et
totum corpus regni. 1. In ipſd
charta factd Principi due
clauſule fuerint obſervate :
1. In Principio chartæ dictum
eft, Conſiderationis noflre in-
tuitus ad perſonam dilecti &
fidelis noflri Edwardi, comitis
Ceſtriæ, filii naſtri primoge=
uit, intimos con dertentes, vo-
lenteſque per ſonam ej uſdem ho-
norari, eidem filio naſitro no-
men et honorem Ducis Cornu-


biæ de communt aſſenſu et con-


filio Prælatorum, Comitum,
Baronum, et altorum de con-
ſilio noſtro et preſenti Parlia-


mento convocat” exiſtent”, dedi-


mus, c. Ex quo mani fſtum
elt dictam chartam aut horitate
Parliamenti factam fuiſſe. Et
determinatum fuit hanc clau-
ſulam in omnes chartæ par-
tes ſe extendere : que clau-
ſala per ſe fuiſſet ſufficiens.
2. In concluſione et fine
chartæ (que recordi eff par-
ella) dif? eft, Datum per
manum noſiram apud Meſimo-
1% 17 die Mart', anno regni


The PRIxczE's Caſe.


force of an act of Parliament,
And that was proved four man-
ner of ways. 1. Out of the
charter itſelf, and authorities in
law agreeing to it. 2. B
en and eſtates made by the
rince, and by letters patent of
Kings. 3. By judgments given
according to the ordinary courſe
of law, and reſolutions of the
Judges in the King's courts.
4. By reſolutions in Parlia-
ments by the King and the
whole body of the realm. 1.
In the charter itſelf made to the
Prince, two clauſes were ob-
ſerved, which prove that it had
the authority of an act of Par-
liament. 1. In the beginning
of the charter it is ſaid, Conſi-
derationis noſtræ intuiius ad per-


ſonam dilecti et fidelts noftri Ed-


wardi, Comitis Ceftrie, filu noſ-
tri primogeniti, intimos conver =
tentes, volente/que perſonam ejuſdem
honorari, eidem filio naſiro nomen
et honorem Ducis Cornubiæ de
communi aſſenſu et con ſilio Præla-
torum, Comitum, Baronum, et
aliorum de conſilia noſtro in præ-


ſenti Parliamento convocat” exiſ-


tent” dedimus, &c, + By which t Os Lit. $1, a.


it appears, that the charter was 9*


made by authority of Parlia-
ment. And it was reſolved,
that this clauſe extends to all
the parts of the charter, which
clauſe of itſelf had been


ſufficient. 2. In the cloſe
and end of the charter,
which is parcel] of tbe re-


cord, it is faid, Dat per manum


noſtram apud WeſtmonaſP 17 die


Marti |


—— — —— —— — — ——ů— — > RI — — —


4 — rug 7


Martii, anno regni neflrii 11.
per r Regem et totum conſilium
in Parliamento. Which alſo
proves that it was made by au-
thority of Parliament. And it
was more for the honour of the
King that the creation and do-
nation ſhould be in the form of
a charter, and that witneſſes
ſhould be called to it, ſo that
nothing ſhould be omitted
which belonged to a complete
charter, and ſo principally to
proceed from the King, as the
fountain of all honour and dig-
nity 3 than if the creation and
donation had been only by act
af Parliament; in which all
would be donors. Note, rea-
der, If letters patent paſs by
bill ſigned without privy ſeal,
/- fy be 2:95 the patent is ſubſcribed, per

baus ipſum Regem, (and then the bill


r,, ſigned remains with the Chan-


5 "7/Zccllor ſor his warrant :) and
f — when it paſſes by bill ſigned,
2. , by privy ſeal allo, then


remains with


2. 2 & <C


Areas 3:9r4egigned remains with the Clerks
JL be ua, ef the Signet, and the Lord
CS Privy Seal has an extract


—ͤ—ũäũ3—33 — — ñÆ¹ñr v


eee


— thereof to make the privy
2 * ſeal, and then the letters
. Gs, patent are ſubſcribed, per


A Le eee *breve de private ſigills- and
if authoritate Parliaments be


Ay 445-4 ing to the act of 27 Hen. 8.


ag. 11. And when the Ki
- Cap. 11 nd when the King
* F Ys 4, -Axigns the patent itſelf in the


Ad <4 {Ae upper part, and the figna-

Anrerm 72544 ture and great ſeal go toge-

_ 4 ther, then it is ſubſcrived, per

Riots. ipſum Regem manu ſua propria.
—


Caſus PRI NO IS.


added, then it paſſes accord-


Part VIII.


noſtri undeci mo, per ipſum Re-
gem et totum conſilium in Par.
liament : quo etiam probatur
illam fuiſſe fJattam authoritate
Parliamenti. Et in majorem
Fuit Regis honorem quod crea-
tio et donatio foret in forms
chartæ, et teſtes ad hanc ad.
vocati, (ut nihil emitteretur
quod ad perfeflam ſpectat
chartam) et fic prevpue e
Rege, veluti e fonte totius ho-
noris et dignitatis, emanaret,
quam ft creatio et donatis fuiſe
ſet ſlatuto Parliamentario lan-
tum, in quo omnes eſſent do-
natores. Nota lector, ſi lite.
ra patentes exiture ſint
al bild ſignatd, et non ſub
Aigills private, ſubſeribuntur,
Per ipſum Regem (et tune
billa ſignata manet Cancellaris
in warrantum.) Et quand
exrture ſunt ſub billa fignatd
et ſub figillo etiam privats,
tunc privatum ſigillum manet
Domino Cancellario, & billa
[ignata manet Clericis Signatu-
re, et ex hac allatum «ft Do-
mino Privati Siguli extractum
ad ſaciend' breve de privato
fegtllo + et tunc literæ patentes
ſubſcribuntur, Per breve de
privato ſiorllo ; et ſi bac ver-
ba ( ſcilicet, authoritate Par-
liamentt) apponantur, tune
exeunt ſecundum flatutum de
anno 27 H. 8. cap. 11. .
quando Rex ſignat literas ip
ſas patentes in ſuperiori parte,
et fignatura et magnum ſi-
gillum feribus paſts” ince-
dunt una ct endem tempore,
tunc ſubſeribuntur, Per 15
ſum Regem manu ſud ah ah"


part VIII.


Et quando authoritate et aſ-
lenſu Parliament! con ficiuntur,
Tune ſubſeribuntur, Per ipſum
Regem et totum conſilium in
Parli amento, vel in hujuſmodi
effecium. Et ſare eſt, quod
priſets temporibus, tam quando
terra immunitas, five here-
ditamentum de Rege transfe-
rebat' de flatu hæreditario,
quam in creatine cujuſquam
ad honorem et dignitatem, per


literas patentes, concluſis fuit,


Hiis teſtibus. A diu vero,
ro terris, immunitatibus,
del hereditamentis hac for-
mula intermiſſa fuerit, et
nunc, et fic a diu, literæ pa-
tent” concluduntur, Teſte me-
ipſo, Sc. At in omni” ad
honorem et dignitatem creatt-
onibus, per literas patentes,
antiqua formula ( ſcilicet, Fs
teſtibus) manet uſque in hodi-
ernum diem. Et quod attus
Parliamenti editi ſunt ſub
formula char Reg multa no-
bis in lege ſunt teſlimonia.
Primo Magna Charta, edita
9 H. 3. cujus principium eft,
Imprimis conceſſimus Deo &
bac preſenti charta noſtra
confirmavimus pro nobis et hæ-
redibus no/tris imperpetuum,
Sc. concluditur, Hiis teſtibus,
&c. et datum per manum noſ-
tram, ut noſtræ etiam chartæ
concluſio efl, Et qnamvis in
char td non liqueat, verbis ex-
preſſis, quod fucta fuit autho-
ritate Parliamenti, quia ta-
men diverſe ejus partes legem
communem & invertunt &
mutant (quod charta tan-
um facere non poteſt) & con-
ſeat ex capite ultimo, quod


The Prince's Caſe.


And when it is made by au-
thority and conſent of Parlia-


ment, then it is ſubſcribed, Pef* - 2 J


ipſum Regem, et totum conſilium pf


in Parliaments, or to the like


effect. And it is to be knowñ 2. |


that in ancient times, as welk
when any land, franchiſe, or
hereditament, did paſs from the
King of any eſtate of inherit-
ance, as in the creation of any
to honour and dignity by letters
patent, the concluſion was with
(a) Hiis teſtibus: but of long
time for lands, franchiſes, or
hereditaments, this form has
been diſcontinued, and now,
and ſo it hath been of long
time, the patent concludes,


(b) Tefle meipſn, &c.


(a) Co. Lit. 5. 2.
2 Inſt. 77, 78.


But in (3) Co. Lit. 7. 2,


all creations to honour and 21, 77.


dignity by letters patent, the


ancient form of concluſion of


Fits teſlibus is continued to this
day; and that acts of Parlia-
ment do go in the form of the
King's charter, we have many
examples in law. 1. (c) Mag-
na Charta, made 9 Hen. 3.
which begins, Imprimis, con-
ceſſimus Deo, & hac preſenti
charta noflra confirmavimus pro
nobis & heredibus noſiris imper-
petuum, Cc. and the charter
concludes with His teſlibus,
& datum per manum naſtram, as
ours doth : and although it
doth not appear in the char-
ter itſelf by expreſs words,
that it was made by authority
of Parliament, yet becauſe
many parts of it croſs and
change the common law, which
a charter alone cannot do, and
it appears by the laſt *

that


(e) Co. Lit. 8 . a4


2 Inſt. 78.


N
|
|
|


(a) 2 Inſt. 78.


Caſus PR Ix IHS.


that for the ſaid
charter, Archiepiſcopi, Epiſ
copi, Abbates, Priores, Comi-
tes, Barones, Milites, liberi te-
nentes, & omnes de regno noſ-
tro dederunt nobis quintodect-
mam partem omnium mobilium
vorum This clauſe in the
concluſion of the charter,
proves it by implication to
be an act in (a) form of a
charter. And laſtly, it hath
always had the allowance of
an act of Parliament, and
therefore ought to be ſo taken;
which is a ſtronger caſe than
outs is, for here are full and
expreſs words; and anno
21 H. 2. brev. 881. inthe Earl
of Cheſter's caſe, the 11 chap-
ter of Magna Charta, quod


grand


communia placita non ſeguantur


curiam noſiram, is cited to
take away the juriſdiction of
the King's Bench; and this
grand charter had been al-
lowed and confirmed above (b)
thirty times by acts of Par-
liament. So the act of 21
H. 3. de anno lLiſſextili begins,
Rex Fuſticiariis ſuis de Banco,
Sc. in the form of a patent
or writ. The ſtatute of
protections, anne 33 E. 1. de
conjunctim feoffatis, anno 34 E.
I. which begins, Rex omnibus
ad qurs, Sc. and concludes,
in cujus rei teſlimonium has
literas naſtras fieri fecimus pa-
tentes. Tele, Sc. So the ſta-
tute de Artic' Cleri, ꝙ E. 2. be-
gins E. Dei pratia, Cc. om-
nibus ad quos, etc. and concludes,
in cujus, c. Teſie, Se. Two
{ſtatutes made anno 14 E. 3.
one pro clero, and the other
concerning England, that it
thould not be in ſubjection


runt


Part VIII.


pro difla magna charta Ara
chiepiſcopi, Epiſcopi, Alba.
tes, Priores, Comites, Barone,
Milites, liberi tenentes, &
omnes de regno noſiro dede=
nobis quintodecimam
partem omnium mobilium ſuo-
rum : hac clauſula in con-
cluſione chartæ imbplicitt
probat illam ęſſe actum ſuh
chartæ formula ſemper
denique habuit approbatin«
nem adus Parliament,
zdeoque fic haberi debet
gui caſus noſtro fortior oft,
hic enim plena et expreſſa
ſunt verba : et 21 Hen. z.
titulo Breve 881. in caſy
Comitis Ceſtriæ, undect-
mum caput Magne Charte,
quod communia placita nom
ſequantur curiam noſtram,
citatur, ad juriſdia? Bana
Regii tollendam et hac
magna charta approbata &
confirmata fuerit ſtatutis
Parliamentariis ſupra trige-
fies. Item, adtus de anno
21 Hen. 3. de anno biſſextili,
incipit, Rex Fuſticiariis ſuis
de Banco, &c. ſub formula
diplomatis ſeu brevis. Sta-
tutum de protectionibus, an-
no triceſimo tertis Ed. 1. de
conjunttim feoffatis, anno
triceſimo quarto Ed. 1, quod
incipit, Rex omnibus ad guss
Sc. & concludit, in cujus
rei teſtimonium has literas noſ-
tras fieri fecimus patentes, Oc.
Teſte, &c. Item ſtatulum de
Articul Cieri, ꝙ Ed. 2. exor-


ditur, Edwar' Det gratia, etc,
omnibus ad quos, &c. et diſi-
nit, in cujus rei, etc. Teſte, ele.
Dao ſtat. edita an. 14 Ed. 3
unum pro clero, alterum de
Angl, quod non ſuljjecla rn

| *


part VIII. The Prince's Caſe, : 20


Galliæ, & multa alia flatuta to France, and many other
Parliamentaria edita ſunt acts of Parliament are made
ſub formula chartæ Regiæ. in the form of the King's
Et determinatum fuit, hac charter. And it was relolv-;
werba in attu vel charta ed, that theſe words in an
(ſcilicet authoritate Parlia- act, or charter, (by authori-
menti) ſufficere ad illum fa- ty of Parliament) are ſuſh-
ciendum alum Parliamentt.) cient to make it an act of
Brafton curiam Parliamentt Parliament. Bracton calls the
appellat magna curia, magnu” Court of Parliament, magna
confilium, et commune confil” curia, magnum conſilium, and
regni. Diclum ſtatutum, de commune conſilium regni. ] he
an. biſſextili, eſt, Rex per ſaid ſtatute De anno Biſſextili is
conſilum fideltum ſubdito', Rex per coin ſilium fidelium
Statutum de bigamis, anno ſubditorum. Ihe ſtatute De
4 Ed. 1. In præſentid ve- bigamis, anno 4 E. i. In præ-
nerabilium patrum quorun- ſentid wvenerabilium patrum
dam Epiſcoapor Ang] & quorundam Epriſcoporum Ang-
alior', de conſilio Reg. 7 Ed. lie, et altorum de conſilio
1. de religioſts, de conſilis Regis. 7 E. 1. De religioſis,
Prelatoru', Comit', Baron', de conſilio Prælatorum, Co-
& aliorum fidelium Reg. mitum, Baronum & ali;rum
noſtri, de conſilio noſiro ex- fidelium regni noftri, de con-
iflentium, providimus, fla- fiiia noftro exiſlentium, provi-
tuimus, & ordinavimus : et dimus, ftatuimus & ordinavi-
in ſiatutt (ut dicam) fron= mus: and, as I may ſay, in the
te, daminus Rex in Parlia- front of the act, dom" Rex in | |
mento ſus flatuta edidit, Parliaments ſus (a) Matuta (a) 2 Bullt, 187.
13 E. 1. Statuto de Min- edidit. 13 E. 1. The ſtatutc

ton', in eodem ſiatuto dicitur, of Winceſter, in the ſaid act
domin naler Rex, ad mi- it is ſaid, our Lord the
nuendum vires feljnum, ſla- King, to abate the power of
tuit pœnam hoc caſu, etc. et felons, hath eſtabliſhed a
in concluſiene ftatuti antedic= pain in this caſe, &c. and in
tl, Rex mandat et prohibet the end of the ſaid act the King
quadamodo neque nundinum commands and forbids, that
neque mercatus teneatur in from hencetorth neither fair
c@miteriis. 20 E. i. flatu- nor market be holden in church-
tum de wvocatts ad warrant', yards, 20 E. 1. The ſtatute
dominus Rex de communi De vocat ad warrant” demin' Rex
conſilio ſus ſlatuit. Status de (] communi con/ilia ſus flatu-
tum de appellatis 28 EI. it, The ſtatute De appellatis
Domin' Rex in Parliament” 28 E. 1. Dom' Rex in Parl (c) (c) 2 Bulſt. 187,
flatuit, 27 E. 3. cap. 1. de ſlatuit. 27 Ed. 3. c. 1. Staple,

Jlapuld, cur? Parliam' nomi- the Court of Parliament is calle

natur mag” conſil. Etmulti ac, the Gr, Council and many acts

huc ſpettantes, addeman/irand' to this purpoſe were cited to

varietatem contexts ſlatus thew the variety of pennin


ot


. Ho.


„ << +. ®. JE ae own”


2 2


(5) 2 Bulſt. 187.


of acts of Parliament: and
the original writs which are
founded on any ſtatute ſay,
guare cum de communi con ſi-
lia reg noſtri Ang” proviſum ſit
etc. and the writ on the ſtat.
of labourers ſaith, cum per
conſilium noſtrum pro commu-
ni utilitate regni ordinatum ſit.
11 H. 7. 27. If an act of Par-
liament be penned by aſſent
of the King, and of the Lords


Spiritual and Temporal, and


of the Commons, or, it is en-
acted by authority of Parlia-
ment, it is a good act; but
the moſt uſual way is, that it
is enaCted by the King, by the
aſſent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and of the
Commons. 7. H. 7. 14.a.b &
(39) 34 Ed. 3. 12. acc. and
there it is ſaid, that there are
many ſtatutes which are indited
guad dominus Rex ſtatuit : yet if


they be entered in the Parlia-


(«) Co. Lit. 98.) ment (a) roll, and always al-
. lowefor acts of Parliament,


(4) Co. Lit, 98. N Thall bE Tz) intended That It
b, Wis by authority of Parſia-


2 ment: but If an act he pen-

ned, that the King with the
/ aſſent of the Lords, or with
the aſſent of the Commons,
it is no act of Parliament,
for (c) three ouglit to aſſent to
it, ſcil. the King, the Lords
and the Commons, or other-
wiſe it is not an act of Par-
liament; and by the record of
the act it is expreſſed which of
them gave their allent, and
that excludes all other intend-
ments that any other gave
their aſſent: and ſo there is a
difference bewween a general
and particular penning of
an act of Parliament. Vid
8H, 6. c. 29. and 5 R. 2. c. 2. of


(c) Plowd. 79.
a. b. Dyer 144-
pl. 60. Moor
824. Co. Lit.
159. b. Hob. 111.


Caſus Pa tMelpis.


Part VIII.


tor um Parliamenti citar
fuerunt. Et originalia bre-
via Regis, ſuper aligus fun.
data flatuto, dicunt, © quart
cum de communi confilio regni
noſtri Ang proviſum fit, etc,
et breve ſuper ſtat” de labs-
rator” dic, cum per tonſilium
noſtrum pro communi utilita?
reg. ordinafr fit. 11 H. 5.
27. Si aftus Parliam' ſcrila-
tur, de ajjenſu Regis et Demi-
norum Spiritual et Tempo-
ralꝰ et Camunitat' vel, inatti-
tat” eſt authoritate Parlian'
hujuſmed: valet a7; forma -·
lis vero magis eſt qui ſanci.
tur, per Regem de ajjenſu
Dom” Spirit” & Temp” et Co-
munit' 7 II. 7. 14. et 39.
3. 12. cum hoc concordant : et
ibid dicit', quod multa ſunt
ſtatut” que ſcribunt', demin
Rex ſtatuit, ſi tamen raul
Parliamentario intrentur, et
ſemp' ut act Parliament ab-
probentur, intendetur hat
authoritat” Parliamenti fuiſ-
ſe: ft vero adlus ſcribatur,


Rex cum aſjenſu dom vel


cum afſenſu communitab,
ie nullus eſt Parliamenti
aclus; buic enim tres aſſen-


tire debent, ſerticet, Rex,
domin”, et communitas,
aliter adus Parkament


non eſt; et per recordum
att exprimitur quis bis
rum afſenſit, et hoc am-
nes intentiones (quid ali-
gui alii afſenſerunt) ex-
cludit. Et fic eſt diverſitas
inter generalem et parlicula-
rem contextum adus Parlia-
ment. Vide 8 H. 6. c. 29.
& 5 Rich. 2. c. 2. de Fugi-
tivis, 21 E. 3.6. Epiſcopi
Norvicenſis caſum. Et
hoc ip. Parliament

| 11 £4. 3.


Part VIII.
11 Ed. 3. Hen fi Henrici


Comitis Lancaſtriæ, creatus
fuit per chart” (ad requifitio-
nem Prelatorum & Procerum
it Communitatis regni noftri
in inflante Parliamento noſtro
abud Weſtm convacat') in
in Cemitem Derb', fibi & hæ-
red maſculis de corpore ſus :
item per alam chartam Rex
creat Millibelm' de Bohun (de
communi aſſenſu Prælatorum,
Comit', Baronum, & altarum,
de conſilio neftro in præſenti
Parliam n1/iro) in Com' Nor-
thampt', ſibi & hared" de
corpore ſua : iſlo eod Par-
liam” per chart” creat” Hugo-
nem de Audley in Com” Glou-
eff, de definito dif? Parliam'
mftri conſilio, fc. Et per
chart' in verb” fumil'b” Rex in
end Parliam* creat Millibel-
num Clynton in Com? Hun-
ting in feads talliat, Robert
de Uffard in Com Suff in
feado ſimplici, Millibelm' de
Monte acuto in Com' Sar in
ferd” ſimplici: et he omnes
ſuerunt creationes cum do-
nationibꝰ terrar* (ad ſilſtinen-
dum nomen et onus) per au-
thoritatem Parliam', ſub for-
muld chart Reg' cum con-
diſiane de hits teſlibus, &
or nonnullæ cum ſubſcrip-
tone, per Regem & con-
ſlium in Paritamento alie
vero, per regem et conſilium
in plens Parliamento et aliæ


tetum conſilium in Parliam'
eic. que omnes vim Habent
unam et eandem. At hac
fuerunt argumenta collecta
ex iſa chartd, & aliis ſta»
lutis Parliamenti, que ſcri-
buntur in forma chart
Regis.


etram, per ipſum Regem et


The PRIN ks Caſe.


ſugitives: 21 E. 3. 6. (60.) The
Biſhop of Norwich his caſe,
And at this very Parliament


of 11 E. 3. Henry, ſon of


Henry, Earl of Lancaſter, was
created by charter, ad requt=
fſitionem Prælatorum, et Pro-


cerum et Communitatis


noſtri in inſtante Parliamento
n:ftro apud Meſim' convacat”
to be Earl of Derby, to him
and the heirs males of his
body. Alfo by another char-
ter, the King created Wil-
liam de Bohun, de communt
aljenſu Prælatorum, Comit', Ba-
aliorum de conſi-
lis noſtro in præſenti Parlia-
mento noſtro,


ronum, ei


thampton,


tO


Earl of Nor-
him and the


heirs of his body. And it
TT Tme Parl


arliament, he by
charter created Hugh de Aud-
ley Earl of Glouceſter, de de-
finito diets Parliam' niſtri con-
And by charters Antea 17. by
with the like words, the
King at the fame Parliament,
created William de Clynton
Earl of Huntingdon in tail, Ro-
bert de Uſford Earl of Sut-
folk in fee-ſimple, William de


ſilio, etc,


Monte Acuto Earl of Saliſhury pogea 22


in fee ſimple; and all theie


were Creations


with dona—


tions of lands, ad /u{tinend”
nomen et onus,
of Parliament,
the King's charter, with the
concluſion of His teſtibus, and
ſome with ſuch ſubſcription,
per Regem et cenſilium in Par-
liamento; and fome per Re-
gem et conſilium in plens Par-
liamento; and others, per ip-
ſum Regem et totum conſiirum in
Parliam', etc. all which are of


one and


the


by authority
in form of


ſame effect.


And thoſe were the proots
collected out of the charter,
it-


regni


|


21


"
— —
— enn


r 2
8


—
2 8 277 *


.
2 E a. *


{0) Raym, 55. |


Feli «


Caſus PrinciPrs.


itſelf, and other aQts of Par-
liament which are penned in
the form of the King's char-
ter.

2. The ſame is proved by
letters patent, as ex ro-
tulo patentium de anno 14 E. 3.
num. 18. which was within
three years after this char-
ter: the King granted to
the Prince, by the name of
Edward Duke of Cornwall, &c.
to be Lieutenant of the realm
ſo long as the King ſhould be
beyond the ſea. In anno
21 E. 3. ex rot' patent in Tur-
re, the ſaid Prince (within
ten years after his crea-
tion) for the fine of a thou-
ſand marks, did demiſe to
Tideman de Limbergh, Cu-
nagium flannarie totius Duca-
tus Cornubie pro tribus annis,
necnon emptionem totius flan-
ni tam infra diftlum ducatum
Cornubiæ quam com Devon
fodendi quod vendi de-
bet, reddendo annuatim three
thouſand marks, which the
Prince could not have done,
if he had but an eſtate at
will, as a greater he had not,
if the ſaid charter had not the
force of an act of Parliament.
Other letters patent were
cited in 5 H. 4. ex rot' patent
ibidem, Rex, etc. Sciatis quod
regum Angliæ primogeniti fi-
lit in ducatum Cor nubiæ hered:-
tarie ſunt ſucceſſuri : and di-
vers other letters patent were
cited to the ſame effect.

3- The ſame is proved by
judgments and reſolutions
of Judges: in (a) 18 Afl,
pl. 5. Thorp faith, that it
was adjudged in Parlia-
ment, that if a giſt be
made to one and to his


foi &


Part VIII


2. Hoc probatur litri,
patentibus, ſicuti ex rotuly
patentium de anno 14 E. 3.
num. 18. (quod fuit infra
tres ann poſt con ſectionen
charte) Rex concedit Prin.


cipi, per nomen Edward
Ducis Cornubiz, guid |.
cum tenens eſſet regni tam
diu quam Rex foret ultra
mare. In anno 21 E. 3. er
rot” patentium in Turre,
diftus Princeps (infra d-
cem annos poſt ereationem
ſuam pro fine mille marca-
rum, dimiſu cuidam Tideman
de Limberg cunagium ſlan-
nariæ totius ducatus Cor.
nubiæ pro tribus annis, ne-
non emptionem totius flann
tam infra diflum Ducatum
Cornubiæ quam com" Devon
fodendi, quod vendi
debet, reddendo annuatim
3000 marcas : quod Prin.
ceps facere non potuit, |i
habuifſet flatum ſolummo-
do ad voluntatem, ficuti
majorem non habuerat, |
dicta charta in je non habu-
iſet vim attus Parliament.
Aliæ liter” patentes citaban.
tur in an' 5 H. 4. ex ro
patentium ibidem, Rex, &.
ſciatis quod regnum Angle
primogeniti filit in ducatum
Cornub hereditarie ſunt ſuc:
ceſſuri. Et diverſe aliæ li.
terg patentes citabantur iu
bac propoſitum.


3. Hoc etiam probatur


judicii & deter minatu-
nibus Fudiciarits. 18 Al.
pl. 5. Thorpe dicit, quad
adjudicatum fuit in Pai
»liamento, ſi donatio fal-
ia fir alicui & heredi-
bus © ſuis maſculis, 9
forores & alii be 7

£010”


Part VIII.


eollaterales perinde atque
heredes maſculi, heredita-
butt, quomam fer iſtiuſ-
medi donationem habet feo-
dum ſimplex ; & infereba-
tur, quod tal” determinatio
bene eſſe poteſl ad Parlia-
mentum in anno undecims
Edwardi tertit, ubi dict
creatio princip' & annexa-
tio ditarum terrarum per-
pendebantur 5 et quontam
hc effici non potuit dona-
tione vel conceſſione, con-
ſulebatur quod fieret acłu
Parliamenti z es quod non
fuit aliquis hujuſmodi deſ-
cenſus vel curſus heredita-
rius ad communem legem.
21 Edwardi 3. 41. manerio
de Berkham/led (per dictam
chartam aucatut Cornubiæ
annexo) judices approbant
donationem dlicti maner* fore
in lege validam principi;
quad efſe non potuit (ut
fepius dictum fuit) fo UP
donatis non habuiſſet vim
aftus Parliamenti, 39 E. 3.
12. Rex anno undecimo
regni ſui ad Parliamentum
ſuum tentum apud Mes-
mon” præ fecit Principem in
ducem Cornubiæ, & diver-
fos alias in Comites regni
fu; inter guss fuit Wii
lihelmus de Monte acuto,
Comes de Sarum. Et in 43
4 pl. 15. 45 Af. pl. 6.
onatio & annexatio poſſſſio-
num dicti ducatus, Princ-
pi conceſſarum per diftam
chartam, approbantur foret
in lege valide. 50 E. 3.
inter record in Turre de
endem anno, Johanna uxor
aa Prinapis dotala fuit in
Vol. IV.


The Prince's Caſe,


heirs (a) males, that his ſiſ-
ters and other heirs collate-
ral, as well as heirs males.
ſhall be inheritable, becauſe
by ſuch gift he hath fee
hmple; and it was inferred;
that ſuch reſolution might
well be at the Parliament
11 Edw 2. where the ſaid cre-
ation of the Prince, and an-
nexation of the faid lands,
were in conſideration: and
becauſe it could not take ef-
fect by giit or grant, it was
adviſed that it ſhould be by
act of Parliament, becauſe
there was not any ſuch de-
ſcent or courſe of inheritance
by the common law. 21 E. 3.
41. the manor of Berkhamſted
was by the ſaid charter an-
nexed to the ſaid duchy, the
Judges there allowed the gift
of the ſaid manor to be good
to the Prince, which could not
be, as it hath been often ſaid,
if it had not the force of an
act of Parliament, 39 Ed. 3.
12. The King, anno 11. of his
reign, at his Parliament held
at Weſtminſter, made the
Prince Duke of Cornwall,
and many others, Earls of
this realm; amongſt which
was William de Monte acuto,
Earl of Saliſbury. And in
43 All. pl. 15. & 45 Aſſ. pl.
6. the gift and annexation of


the poſſeſſions of the ſaid
dukedom, granted by the
ſaid charter to the Prince,


was allowed to bg. good, 50
E. 3. inter record? in the
Tower, in the fame year
Johan the wife of the ſaid


Prince, was, by order of
law endowed in Chan-
Q cery,


22


(a) Raym. 55.
Dav 24 b, 35.4.


eviie I.


Br tftatcs 2.33.


— H. 6. 25. A.


18 E. 3. 45 b.

2 And. 138,156.
1 Co. 4:.0.46.4.
49-2. Co. 40. b
Mor 416. Hob.
224 Plow. 251.
a. 325 as

L't. ſect 31.

1 Roll. 860.

« Bulft. 10,223.
1 Mod. Rep. 196.
B. N. C. 5.

1 Brownl. 45.

2 Brownl, 3344


Antea 21.


NE”


Caſus Prrxcrerss


eety, of the poſſeſſions grant-
ed by the faid charter to the
Prince her huſband; ergo,
the charter did convey an
eſtate of inheritance to the
Prince. Anno 5 H. 4. ex Rot.
Par!” the ſame year a peti-
tion in Parliament was ex-
hibited by the Commons, for
the reſumption of all grants
and letters patent before
made, of the lands of the ſaid
duchy of Cornwall, to which
the King and tbe Lords with
great gravity and juſtice, know-
ing the danger ſuch private
bills would introduce, al-
though it concerned the King's
eldeſt ſon (an excellent prece-


dent to give a caveat to paſs


few or no private bills be-
tween ſubject and ſubject,


but to refer them either to the


courts of equity, or of Jaw,
where the cauſe may be duly
examined, and upon delibera-


tion difcerned and adjudged)


(s) 2 Roll, 192.


*


gave ſuch anſwer, it is a-
reed by the King and the
ords in Parliament, that the

faid lord the Prince, by ad-

vice of bis counſel, may have


writs of Scire factas, or other


recovery, the beſt he may have
by the ſtatutes and laws of the
kingdom, according as the caſe
requires: and thereupon a (a)
Scire facias was brought in the
name of the King, at the
petition of the Prince, Trin.
5 H. 4. in the Chancery, to re-
peal a grant which Rich. 2.


made (and which was confirmed


by King Hen. 4.) of the manor
of Riſberghe in the county of
Oxford parcel of the ſaid duchy
to dir Lewis Clifford, and


Part vt,
Cancellaria de Toni.
bus, Principi, * 2
per didtam chart” conceſſu:
ergo ill chart” dat Prin-
cipi flat” hæreditarium. Ay.
no 5 H. 4. ex rot Parliam.
eodem an' petitio in Parlia-
mentum exhibita fuit per cm-
munitatem, ad reſumentas
omnes conceſſiones & literas
patentes ante tunc factas d.
terris difti Ducatus Cornu-
big ad quam Rex, & -
mini, ſumma cum gravitat
& jullitia ( ſcientes periculum
quod bil hujuſm” privat in-
troducerent) quamquanm .ſpec-
tabat ad fil” Reg* natu maxin
(ingulare exemp!” admonition
dandæ, quod perpauce aui
nullæ edantur bille privat,,
int ſubdit” & ſubditum, ſed
potius quod referantur ad cur
vel equitat', vel legis, uli
cauſa & rette exequi, & di-
liberatione diſcerni & adj ud.
cari pete) reſponder unt, ar-
cordatum 7 per regem & di-
minos in Pari, quod dic dv»
minus Princeps de adviſa-
mento concilii ſuit habut
brevia de Scire facias vel a.
liam recuperation', optiman
quam habere poteſi per flat
& leges reg, ſecund buc
gued cafus requir'. Et ſup
hoc brew? de Scire facias latum
fuit Reg nomine ad petites
Principis, Trin. 5 H. 4. in
Cancellarid ad repellendan
conceſſionem faftam per Rid.
2. (& confirmatam per Re
gem H. 4.) de manerio de
Riſberghe in cem' Ox,
parcelP didti ducatus, Lude-
vico Clifford Milit & hared


ſui


. it bo Ke Sud


"25 Y 2.8


Part VIII.

is, qui returnat' fuit ſum-
ach uo fecit defaltam, per
quod de adviſament” Juſticia-
riorum, c. conſideratum fit
tune & ibidem, quod liter &
pred præigato Ludovico ut
prefertur fact revocentur &
adnullentur, &c. Aliud lre-
ve de Scire factas latum fuit
anno 6 Hen. 4. Regis nomi-
ne, ad petitionem Principis,
in Cancell” ad repellendam
conceſſionem faftam per Re-
gem Rich. 2. (& confirma-
tam per Regem Hen. 4.)
de manerio de Fleleflon in
Kerier in comitatu Cornu-
bie, Nicholas Sarnfield Mi-
iti, & Margaretæ uxori
gjus, pro vita corum; & ad
return brevis de Scire facias,
filet, Otta Fil, Prin-
wps per Tha. Beſton attor
ſaum apparet, & didta etiam
Margareta, marito ſuo de-
functo, & predif? Princeps
petit quod literæ prædidtæ in
formd prædictd fact revo-
centur et adnihilentur, et quod
pred? manerium, c. in
manu domini Regis ſeiſiatur,
& eidem Principi tanquam
membrum & parcel ducatns
prædicti juxta for mam & e
feum dictorum deni, conceſ-
foms, & unionis præſati avi
donuni Regis, habendum &
tenendum, liberetur : & hoc
recrdum lihera: fuit per
Cancellarium in Bancum Re-
8's (Gaſcoigne tunc temports
exilen” Capitali Fuſliciario)
& Juper hoc Margereta pla-
etando, producit conceſ-
linen Reg Nich. 2. ſibi
pro vita fattam; & preca-
ur in auxilium de Rege,
& habuit, Sc. Et cuvia
at diem, Sc. Et Princeps


Le.


The Prince's Caſe.


his heirs, who was returned;
ſummoned, and made default ;
per quod de adviſument Tuſlt-
ciariorum, Sc. conſideratum fuit
tunc & ibidein, quod literæ
predie prefat' Ludovic ut
prafertur fate revocentur &
adnullentur, & c. Another (a)
Scire facias was brought anno 6,
H. 4. in the name of the
King, at the petition of the
Prince, in the Chancery, to
repeal a grant made by King
Richard the ſecond, and con-
firmed by King Henry the
fourth, of the manor o
leſfon, in Kerier in the county


of Cornwall, to Nicholas (5) (4) 2 Sand. 24;


Sarnfield, Knight, and Marga-
ret his wife, for their lives,
and at the return of the Scire
facias, ſc. Ofta, Hil. the Prince
by Thomas Beſton his attor-
ney, appeared, and the faid
Margaret alſo, her _ huſband
being dead, et prædictus Prin-
ceps petit quod liters præ-
difte in forma prædictd factæ
revocentur & annihilentur, &
quod prædictum manerium, Cc.
in manus domini Regis ſeiſia-
tur, & eidem Principi tanguam
membrum & parcell ducatus
predifti juxta for mam & effec-


tum dlicltorum don, conceſ-


unis, & unienis prefati aui


habendum &
And that


b
K l —


domini Regis,
tenendum, liberetur.
record was delivered
Chancellor into the


(a) 2 Sand. 25,
Hil. 6 H. 4. in
anco Regis,


68.


Bench (Gaſcoigne being then


Chief Juſtice) and thereupon
Margaret pleaded the grant of
King Richard the ſecond;
to her for lite, and prayed
in aid of the King; and had
it, &c. and the Court gave
day, &c. And the Prince

Q. 2 at


or,


He-


( 2 Sand, 25,


Caſus PR Ixcip is.


at the day brought a Proce-
dende in loqueld, dum tamen
ad judicium reddendum do-
min? Rege inconſulto nullate-
nus procederetur : and there-
upon Margaret made default,
and thereupon day 1s given
by the Court to the Prince, &c.
At which day the Prince
brought a (a) Procedendo ad
judicium, upon which the Court
gave judgment as follows :
conſideratum efl, quod liter
prædic in formd pred” faclæ re-
vocentur & adnullentur, & quod
diftum manerium, Cc. in ma-
nus domini Regis ſeiſiatur,
& eidem Principi tanquam
membrum & parcell* ducatus
pred” juxta formam & effettum
difP doni, conceſſionis & unio-
nis prefati avi dicti Regis, ba-
bendum & tenendum libere-
tur. And in Mich. 30 Hen. 8.
in memorandis Scaccarii. Rot.
16. the record ſaith, ad Par-
liament" 11 E. 3. tent inter
alia ordinatum & inadlitatum
Fuit, qued comit' Cornubiæ
imderpetuum moraretur ut du-
catus fil ſenior” Regum Ang-
lie qui efſent hered' propin-
quiores regni abſque aligquo mo-
ao donari, etc. And there is no
opinion in law againſt it;
for the caſe in 1 Mar. 94. a. b.
Dyer, is ſuch (the record of
which I have ſeen, which is
entered Trin. 7 E. 6. Rot. 303.)
In replevin by Thomas Cha-
fine, Eſq. againſt the Lord
Stourton, for taking, &c. at
Mere in the county of Wilts :
the defendant did avow for
damage-feaſant ; and becauſe
the place where doth contain
200 acres of land, whereof


- Part VIII.


ad diem protulit breve
Procedendo in logueld, dum
tamen ad judicium reddend
domino Rege inconſulto nulla-
tenus Far & ſuper
hoc Margaret” fecit defalt,
et inde dies dat” eft per wy
Principi, etc. Ad quem diem
Princeps protulit breve d.
Procedendo ad Fudicium ;
ſuper quo cur Fudicium red.
didit, ut ſequitur : conſidera-
tum eft, quod literæ pred in
forma pred” fat? revocentur
et adnullentur, et quod dif
manerium, etc. in manus dm
Reg“ ſeiſiatur, et eid Princiji
tanguam membrum et parcel
ducatus pred? juxta form' &
effeftum dictorum dini, con-
ceſſionis, et unionis prefat
avi dict Reg' habend et le-
nend”, liberelur. Et in Mich.
30 H. 8. in memorand” Scac-
car* rot” 16. Record” dicit,
ad ParlP 11 Ed. 3. tent, in-
ter alia, ordinat et inattitat'
fuit, quod com* Cornut” imper-
pet' moraretur et Ducatus fi
ſenior” Reg Angliæ qui efſent
heredes propinquier* reg abſ-
que aliquo modo donari, ett.
Et in lege nulla eſt opinio
contra hoc: caſus enim an.
primo Mar” fol. 94. Dyer, it
(cujus record” ego vidi, quid
intratur Trinitat' 7 Eq. b.
ret 303.) In replegiar per
Thom" Chaſine Armigerum,
verſus Damin' Stourton fro
captione, etc. apud Mere in ©
mitatu Wilts, defendens fact
advacationem pro damns facts,
et pro es quod locus ubi, eic.
continent 200 acras terra,
de quibus Rex Henric 8.


fuit ſeiſitus in frodi, ©


anus


part VIII.


amo 26. ejuſdem H. 8. di-
miſit 7 Fre pro an-
nis, qui eos conceſtt Dom”
Strurton : in barram cujus
advecationis dic“ Chafine
quer placitat, Duod domi-
nus Edward" quondam Rex
Angliæ tertius, progenttor do-
mini Reg nunc, fuit ſeiſitus
de manerio de Mere in comi-
tatu præd unde, &c, in do-
min” ſuo ut de feodo in jure Co-
ronæ ſue Ang & fic inde ſeiſi-
tus exiſlens, ad Parliament” ſu-


um tentumapud Weſtm', in com”
Middleſex, die Lune proxim”
poſt fe S. Matthiæ Apoſloli,
anno regni ſui 11. inter cætera,
per aſſenſum omnium tam Præ-
latorum, Comitum, Baronum,
et alior', quam gentium de com-
munitaꝰ“. accordatum fuit,
quod pro honore dif? nuper Re-
git et terr* ſue, et ad fortifi-
cattonem ejuſdem, et pro eo
quod ex antiquo effet unus Dux
Cornubiæ quod dictus quondam
Rex preficeret dominum Ed-
ward filium ſuum, adtunc Co-
mitem Ceſtriæ, Ducem Cor-
nubiæ, et quod filius ſenior re-
gum Angliæ, videlicet, illi qui
eſſent proximi heredes de regn'
Angliæ, eſſent Duces Cornu-
biæ, quod dictus comitatus da-
tus eſſet dicto domino Edwar-
do in nomine ducatus, et quod
dictus comitatus Cornub im-
Perpetuum moraretur ut du-
cutus filiorum ſeniorum Re-
gum Anglie gui eſſent prox-
im heredes regni abſque
aliter donat exiſten', prout


in eodem actu', inter alia,


plenius continetur : poſtea-
gue prædictus nuper Rex Ed-
wardus tertius ſeiſitus exiſ-
lens ded αα maner de Mere


The Pitt's Caſe.


King H. 8. was ſeiſed in fee
and 35 H. 8. demiſed to one


Pyſter for years, who granted


it to the Lord Stourton; in
bar of which avowry, the
ſaid plaintiff Chafine pleaded,
Duod dominus Edward guon-
dam Rex Angliæ tertius, pro-
genitor domini Regis nunc,


fuit ſeiſitus de manerio de Mere


in comitatu preadifio unde


et cetera, in dominico ſuo ut
de feodo in jure Corone ſue Ang-
lie, & fic inde ſeiſitus exiſ-
tens, ad Parliamentum ſuum
tentum apud MWeſlmonaſ® in
comit” Middleſex, die Lung prox-


im poſt feſlum Sancti Ma-


this Apoſleli anno regni ſui
undecimo, inter cætera, per .
ſenſum omnium tam Præla-


torum, Comitum, Baronum, &
aliorum, quam gentium de
cammunitate, accordatum fuit,
quad pro honore didit nuper
Regis & ter ſue, & ad fortifi-
cationem ejuſdem, & pro eo
quod ex antiquo eſſet unus Dux
Cornubiæ, quod dict“ quon-
dam Rex preficeret dominum


Eqdward* filium ſuum adtunc.


Comit' Ceſiriæ, ducem Cor-
nul, & quod filius ſenior Re-
gum Angl', videlicet, ili qui ef-
ſent proxim” hæred de regno
Angliæ, eſſent Duces Cornub',
& quod dictus comitꝰ dat” efſet
diclo domino Edibar do in ne-
mine ducat', & quod dit com
Cornubiæ imperpetuum mora-
retur ut Ducatus filiorum ſeni-
orum Regum Anglia qui eſſent
proximi beredes regni abſque
aliter donat' exiſlen', prout in
eodem atiu inter alia plenius
continetur : poſteague pradittus
nuper Rex Edwardus 3. ſeiſitus
exiſtens de pred* maner de Mere

3 cum


24


— . — — = adm WE
2 — RR : -
— — <> — — — *
= —— — -


—— —


5
|
|
}

4 4
'
}


3
0


= -


a”


a —
— 45 4 os irene —
— -
— — * =
Wi — —
—


-


Cafus PrxINCIPIS,


cum pertinentiis unde, &c. in
dominico ſus ut de feods &


jure, ut in jure coronæ ſue


Anglia, per literas ſuas pa-
tentes, quarum dat eft apud
Weftmonafterium xvii. die Mar-
iii anno regni ſult undecimo
& im curia hic prolat', recitans
per eaſdm, quod cum nuper
perſonam dilecti et fidelis ip-


ius ruper Regis Edward” tunc


Comitis Cefirie fili ſui pri-
mogeniti honorare volens, ei-
dem filin ſuo nomen et hono-
rem {Ducs Cornubiæ dederit,
ipſumque in Ducem Cornubiæ
prefecerit, & gladio cinxerit, ut
deceret, dederit & conceſſerit,
et per eaſdem literas ſuas pa-
tentes pro ſe et heredibus ſuis
confir maverit, eidem filio ſus


ſub nomine & bonore Ducis


dicti loci, inter alia prædic-
tum manerium de Mere cum
pertinentits: habendum et te-
nendum eidem nuper Duci,
& ipfius & hared” ſuorum Re-
gum Angliæ filiis primogent-
tis, didi loc ducibus, in reg-
no Angliæ hereditarie ſucreſ-
fur” : quod quidem manerium
cum pertinentits idem nuper
Rex Edward 3. prædicto du-
catui pro ſe & heredibus ſuis
per prædidtas literas patentes,
inter alia, annexit et univit
eidem imperpetuum remanſur*,
ita quod, &c. And ſurther
pleaded the cauſe of revi-
vification, as in the charter :
by force of which act, and of
the ſud letters patent, the ſaid
Edward the Prince ſuit ſeift-
tus de manerio predicto, in-
ter alia eidem ducatui unit
& annex” & ejuſdem ducatus
parcell in domnica ſus ut


Part VIII.


cum pertinentiis unde, c. in


domi nico ſuo ut de feods et
jure, ut in jure corona ſu
Angliæ, a literas ſuas 2
tentes, quarum dat” eft apud
IFe/tmonaſter' xvii. die Mar.
tit anno regni ſui undecime,
& im curid hic prolat', reci-
tans per eaſdem, quod cum
nuper per ſonam diledti e ſides
lis ipſius nuper Regis Ed tun
Crmitis Ceſtriæ filu ſui pri.
m-genitt Honorare voiens: ei-
demi filio ſus namen et honorem
Ducis Cornuliæ dederit, ip-
ſumqus in Ducem Cor nubiæ
præfacerit, & gladio cinxerit,
ut deceret, dederit et conceſſe·
rit, et per eaſdem literas juas
patentes pro je & heredibu
ſuis confirmaverit, eidem filt
ſuo ſub nomine & honore Du-
cis dicti loci, inter alia, præ-
diqtum manerium de mere cum
pertinentiis : habendum et te-
nendum eidem n Duci, et
ipſius et hæredum ſuorum Re-
gum Angliæ filiis primogeni-
tis, dicti loci ducibus, in Reg»
no Anglia hæreditarie ſucceſs
fur? ; quad quidem manerium
cum pertinentiis idem nuper
Rex Edward" Tertius pres»
difto ducatui pro fe & bere-
dibus ſuis per pred? literat
patentes, inter alia, annenit et
univit (idem imperpetuum re-
manſur*, ita quad, c. Et
ulter' placitat clauſulam revi-
wvificat” prout in chartd : vir-
tute cujus at? et dif? literar
patent dif? Princeps Edu
fuit ſeifitus de manerio præd
inter alia, eidem Ducatui
unit & an et ejuſdam Ducat
parcell in dom* ſus ut de feode
et ju”, Et poſiꝰ die?”
| obiit -


part VIII. The PR IN OE“s Caſe.


1. per quod Rex Ed. 3.
2 Cie 4 difts manerio [A
feodo © et quod ille obiit, &
idem manerium deſcendebat
Regi H. 8. ut conſangui nes
et hæredi ipſius E. 3. Et
poſtea Rex H. 8. exitum ba-
buit E. 6. filium ſuum pri-
mogenitum , per quod ille fuit
Dux Cornubia, Cc. Et
polea Rex H. 8. fecit dimi/-


fonem dicto Pyſter prout,


Oc. Et poflea Rex Ed. G. an
4. dimiſit dictas 200 acras
dia Chafine pro 21 annis.
Super quo partes morabant
in lege; et quia dif char ta
Reg E. 3. placitabat” ſine
authoritate ſeu vi Parliam',
ibid} videbat', primo quod
Princeps non habuit niſi /ta-
tum ad voluntatem 2. Jud
Rex non potuit unire et an-
neftere dic manerium ditto
ducatui per literas patentes
abſque authoritate Parlia-
menti, et idem facere parcel-
lam ducat, et mutare formam
et curſum ducat': 3. Per
mortem Ducis Cornubiæ, ma-
nerium illud ad regem devenit
ut eſchaeta pro defectu Ducis
et primogeniti filii, et deinde
annexum fuit et reunit” coro-
ne loco dom”, et per nativi-
tatem alicujus alius filii non
poteft ſeparari, &c. Et to-
tum hoc movebat” tantum per
juriſconſultum; liber enim e/t,
Et Juſlicꝰ noluerunt arguere
um caſum ut credo, F
pregnantium Marie Regi
Si vero dif? opinio admit-
teretur, nihil tamen probat
cont” banc determinationem ;
dic enim attus in placito
memorat' mhil transfert,
ſed chartam oportet dictum


eginæ.


ut de feodo et jure: and after -
wards the ſaid Prince Edward
died, by which King Edw. 3.
was ſeiſed of the ſaid manor in
fee, and that he died, and the
ſame deſcended to King Henry
the Eighth, ut conſanguines et
hæredi ipſius Edu. 3. and after-
wards King Hen. 8. had iſſue
Ew. 6. his firſt begotten ſon,
by which he was Duke of Corn-
wall, &c. And afterwards King
Hen. 8. made the leaſe to
Pyſter, proug, &c, and after-
wards King Edw. 6. anno 4.
demiſed the ſaid two hundred


acres to Chafine for one and


twenty years, upon which it
was demurred in law. And
becauſe the ſaid charter of
King Edw. 3. was pleaded
(without authority or force of
Parliament) there it ſeemed,
1. That the Prince had but an
eſtate at will. 2. That the
King could not unite and an-
nex the faid manor to the ſaid
duchy by letters patent with-
out authority of Parliament,
and make it parcel of the


duchy, and to alter the form.


and courſe of the duchy.
3. Per mortem Ducis Cornubiæ,
the manor came to the King
as an eſcheat for want of a
Duke and firſt begotten ſon,
and was then knit and rejoined
to the crown in lieu of the ſeig-
niory, and by the birth of any
other ſon it could not be fever.
ed, &c. And all that was
moved only by one of the
counſel; for the book faith,
Et juſti” nolu arguere iſtu“ caſu
ut credo, propt” pregn' AH. Reg”.
But if the ſaid opin. ſhould be
admitted yet it proves nothing a-
againſt this real, for by the laid


Q4 act


25


Caſus PR IN c Iöð.


act mentioned in the plea no-
thing paſſes, but the charter
ought to paſs the ſaid manor,
&c. and the ſame cannot paſs
in ſuch manner without autho-
rity of Parliament nor can the
charter alone annex the ſaid
manor to be parcel of the duchy,
and the charter was not pleaded
to be made by authority of
Parliament. And as to the
opinion in the caſe of Alton
Woods, in the Firſt Part of
my Reports, it is there alſo
admitted, that the ſaid grant
was only by charter.

4. It is proved by judgments
and reſolutions in Parliament,
that the ſaid charter of creation
hath the authority and force of
Parliament; 1. Ex Rot' Par-
liam” anne 5 Hen. 4. a judgment

iven in Parliament againſt Sir
John Cornwall and his wife,
Counteſs of Huntingdon, for
certain manors which ſhe had
of the duchy of Corawall, and
which were annexed to it : alſo
by the act of 33 H. 6. which
ſee inter originalia de 35 H. 6.
rot 29. ex remem” Theſaurar” in
Scaccario: et ex rot' Parliam' de

H. 5. where it is reſolved
and afhirmed by both acts of
Parliament, that the faid King
Ed. 3. by his charter 17 Mar.
an 11 E. 3. of the common
aſſent and counſel of the Pre-
lates, Earls, Barons, and
others of his council in his
Parliament gare, &c. as in
the charter, And it is provided
by the ſame act of Patliament
of 9 H. 5. that the manor of
Iſleworth, which was annexed b
the ſaid Charter, &c, ſhould be


Part VIII.
manerium transferre ; e tall
modo transferr” non potuit
fine authoritate Parliam' ne-
gue char” tantum diflum ma-
nerit ut parcelP ducatus an-
nectere potuit : et chart” non
placitata fuit fieri authoritati
Parl. Et quoad opinionem
in caſu de AltonIWoods in Pri.
ma mearum Relationum Par-
te, ibidem etiam admittitur,
guod aitta conceſſio fuit per
chartam tantum.
4. Probatur judiciis et de-
determination” in Parliam'
uod dif? tharta creationis
1 authoritatem et vim
Parliam' : ex rot' Part an
5 H. 4. judicio in Parliani
reddito verſus Joban' Cor n-
wall mil” et uxorem ej us Comi-
tiſſam de Huntingdon', de
2 * maner (que il
buit) ducatui Cornubiæ
pertin', et eidem annexis :
attu etiam de an 33 H. 6.
quem vide int” originalia de
35 H. 6. rot 29. ex remem
Theſaur' in Scaccario : et ex
rot Parliam' de anna 9 H.
5 ubi deter minatum et affr-
matum fuit per utroſque actus
Parliamenti, quod dictus
Rex Ed. 3. per chartam ſu-
am 17 die Martit anna 11
Ed. 3 de communi aſſenſu et
cencilis Prelatirum, Comi-
tum, Barorum, ct aliorum,
de ſun concilio in Parlia-
mento ſus, dedit, Cc. prout
in charta. Ft proviſum


eft per eundem actum Par-
liamenti de anno 9 H. 5.
quod mancrium de Iſleworth,
quod per dict chart” an-
neejebatur, Fc, rurſus ſepa-

; rarilzr


part VIII.
raretur et digungeretur, c.
in quo res duæ obſervate
uerunt : 1 Quod dif? char-
4a Regis E. 3. habet autho-
ritatem et vim ParP : quod
diflum manerium de Iſleworth
; anneftebatur, Sc. quod
ſeperart ſeu disjungi non p
tuerat, fi non per aftum Par-
liamenti. Et totam hoc affir-
matur etiam per alium Parliam
afttum anno 38 H. 6. ex rot
ParP. Vide aftum de 3 E. 4.
ex rot' Parliam', et aftum
de 22 E. 4. ex eodem rot',
de excambio quodam prælongo
inter Regem et Comitem de
Huntingdon', qui a revo-
catur per quendum actum an-
no 11 HJ. editum. Et vide
actum de 1 H. 7. ex ro
Parliamenti de eodem anno
(pars cujus placitatur per
Hele Servientem ad Legem et
Warwicum Hele) per quem
inactitatum efl, quod Rex
Hen. 7. haberet et teneret du-
catum Cornub', &c. ſibi et
beredibus ſuis in tam amplo
et largo mods et forma, Oc.
prout Reges H. 6. vel E. 4.
aut eorum alter, gaviſi fuerunt
a? maneria, &c. ſed omi-
ferunt hanc ſubſequentem clau-
ſulam, ſcil. And be it alſo
ordained and eſtabliſhed by
the ſame authority, that
whenſoever our ſovereign
lord, by the grace of God,
have ſirſt a ſon of his body
lawfully begotten, that the
fame ſon and Prince have
and enjoy the ſaid duchy of
Cornwall, &c. in as ample
and large form and manner
a3 any Prince firſt begotten
jon of any King hath had


The Prince's Cafe.


ſevered and diſannexed;


in
which two things were obſerv-
ed: 1. That the ſaid charter
of King Edw. 3. hath the au-
thority and force of Parliament.
2. That the ſaid manor of
Iſleworth was ſo annexed, &c.
that it could not be ſevered or
diſannexed but by act of Par-


26


liament: and all this is like-


wiſe affirmed by another act of
Parliament, anno 30 Hen, 6.
ex rot Parliamenti. Vide the
act of 3 Ed. 4. ex rot' Parlia-
menti, and the act of 22 Edw.
4. ex eodem rot” of a very long
exchange between the King
and the Earl of Huntingdon,
which act is revoked by an
act made 11H. 7. And fee
the act of 1 H. 7. ex rat Par-
liamenti of the ſame year, (part
of which 1s pleaded by Hele
Serjeant, and Warwick Hele)
by which it is enacted, that
Hen. 7. ſhould have and hold
the dukedom of Cornwall, &c.
to him and his heirs, in as
large and ample manner and
form, &c. as the Kings H. 6.
or Ed. 4. or any of them en-
joyed the ſaid manors, &c.
but they omitted this ſubſe-
quent clauſe, ſcilicet, And be
& alſo ordained and eſtabliſhed
« by the ſame authority, that
„ whenſoever our ſovereign
& lord, by the grace of God,
ce have firſt a ſon of his body
c lawfully begotten, that the
« ſame ſon and Prince have
and enjoy the ſaid duchy of
© (a) Cornwall, &c. in as am-
te ple and large form and man-
& ner as any Prince, ſitſthegotten
« ſon of any K. hath had or en-

„ joyed


(a) 1B Iftr. 33.


—— —— — — —


- — - —


2d. Point.


(a) 1 Bulſtr. 133.


Caſus PRIX IIsõò.


4 joyed before this act.“ And
all that which hath been ſaid,
is reſol ved and afirmed by au-
thority of Parliament, anno 32
H. 8. mentioned in the Scire
acias : wheretore it was teſolved
by the Lord Chancellor, and
the ſaid Juſtices, that the ſaid
Charter hath the authority and
force of an act of Parliament.


As to the ſecond point it
was reſolved, that the char-
ter having the authority and
force of Parliament is ſufficient
in itſelf, without any other
act; and if the King's Scire
actas hath ſufhcient matter
it ſhall never abate for ſurplu-
ſage not material. Vide 4 Hen.
6. 16. b. 45 E. 3.6. a. 40 Afl.
pl. 26. Vide the act of 9 Hen.
5. for there it is afhrmed by
the whole Parliament, that at
the Parliament held at Weſt-
minſter, the Monday next
aſter the feaſt of Saint Mat-
thias the Apoftle, in the 11th
year of the reign of King Ed-
ward the third, amongit o-
ther things, it was agreed,
that the eldeſt ſons of the
Kings of England, fſalicet,
thole who ſhouid be next
heirs to the realm of Enp-
land, ſhould be Dukes of (a)
Cornwall, and that the coun-
ty of Cornwall ſhould always
remain as a duchy to the
eldeſt ſons of the Clos of
England, who ſhould be next
heirs to the ſaid Realm,
without being given elfe-
where. And thereupon K. Ed.
by his charter 17 Marti: then
next following, of common


Part VIII.


or enjoyed before this aQ,
Et totum hoc quod dictum fu.
erit, determinatum ef? et of
matum per authoritat Part
anno 22 Hen. 8. memorati in
breve de Scire facias. Une
determinat” fuit per Dominum
Cancellar” et didtos Juſtiei 2
arins, quod dicta charia in ſe
habet authoritat” et vim attns
Parliamentarii.

Quad ſecundum articulum
deter minat fuit, quod did
charta, in je habens auibori-
tat et vim Par! ſufficiens oft
ex ſeipſa ſine aliqus alis attu ;
et breve hoc de Sa” fac quod
Rex protulit, ſi materiam in
fe habeat ſufficient”, non cadet
ob redundantia” nulli momenti.
Vide 4 H. 6. ,. 16. 6. 45 E.
3. 6. a. & 40 Aff. pl. 20.
Vide actum antedictum de anno
9 Hen 5. ibidem enim afffr-
matur per totum Parliamen-
tum, quod ad Parliament
tent” apud Weftlm die Lune
proxim* peſt feſtum Sancti
Matthiæ Apaſtoli, an' regni
Regis Ed 3 11. inter alia,
accorulatum fuit, quod filit
ſeniores Regum Angle, ſcilictt,
illi qui eſſent proxim* haredes
Regni Angliæ, eſſet Duces
Cor nub : et quod com” Cor-
nubiæ imperpetuum moraretur
ut ducatus filiorum ſeniorum
Regum Angliæ qui efſent
proxim' hæredes dicli Regni,
abſque aliter donat' exijlen :
et ſuper boc Rex iden
Edwardus per chartam ſu-
am 17 die Marti tun
proxim” ſequent” de con
aſſenſu et conſilio Prælo-


torum,


2 fn... hs WO. ! nm wv XTOr-.-


«cs * n 2 ko.


part VIII. The Prrnce's Caſe,


trum, Comitum, Baronum,
at aliorum, de conjilic ſus in
diflo Parliam' exi ſentium,
dedit, © ce curia vero judicium


um fundarun' ſup?» chartam


N. cum author itat' „ af-
ſe e Parliament” : que de ſe
rpjd ſuffi.it |

Dad tertium articulum, de-
terminatum, furl guol Princeps
habet ſlat m de feodo ſimplici
in difto Jucatu 5 omnis enim
at berevitarins, eff aut feo-
au ſim , aut ferdum tal-
lietur. et flatus hic non efl
taliatit, mon enim limitatur
vel reſtringit', verb froe
expreſſis five eequipollentib*
he redilꝰ d carpore Principis,
donatis enim eft, Principi et
ib ius et hæredu' ſurrum Reg?
Angl fills primogenitis, ita
quod illum, qui hereditabit,
oportet efſe filium pr imogent-
tum hær d' Principis Negri,
heres fit ille lincalis ſive colla-
teralts talem vero hæredem o-
porter efſe Reg" Angl' qui
modus limitationis ſlatus fuit
brevis, excellens, et accuratus
ad creandum enim flatum hæ-
reditarium, hæc verb effen-
nalia ( ſcilicet, heredib” ſuis)
non omiſſa fuerunt, quanquam
ſulinde temperata fuerunt
& modificata, ut per ipſam
limitationem apparet et
quod hie flatus fuit hæredi-
tarius, per dictum recor-
dum anne 50 E. 3. proba-
tur, ex quo ' liquet uxtrem
Principis Nigri fuiſſe dotatam.
Et cinjlat ex libro de an-


% 21 Edw. J 41, quod


aſſent and counſel of the Pre-
lates, Earls, Barons, and others
being of his council in the ſaid
Parliament, gave, &c. but the
court relied on the King's
charter, with the authority and
aſſent of Parliament ; for that
of itſell is ſufficient.

As to third point it was re-
ſolved, that the Prince hath an
eſtate in fee-fimple in the ſaid
dukedom: for every eſtate of
inheritance is either fee- ſimple
or fee-tail, and this is not
an eſtate-tail, for it is not limit-
ed or reſtrained either by ex-
preſs words, or by any that tan-
tamount, to the heirs of the


body of the Prince; for the


gilt is to the ſaid Prince, et


ipſius et hare ſuorum Regum Co. Lit. 27. a. b.


Angliæ filiis primogenitis. So
that he who ought to inherit
ought to be the firft begotten
ſon of the heirs of the Black
Prince, be he heir lineal or
collateral ; but ſuch heir ou

to be King of England. Which
manner of limitation of the
eſtate was ſhort, excellent, and
curious; for to raiſe the eſtate
of inheritance theſe effential
words (his heirs) were not
omitted, although afterwards
they were qualified, as by the
limitation appears. And that
this was an eſtate of in-
heritance, is proved by the


ſaid record of 50 Edward 3.


by which it appears, that
the wife of the Black
Prince was endowed. And


it appears by the book of
21 Edward 3. 41. that the
Prince


La


15


MO


zd Point,


al.


a JW > <= —


— —
—


|
|
|


4th Point


Caſus PrRINCIPIS,


Prince, in the faid manor of
Berkhamſtead (parcel of the
ſaid duchy of Cornwall) had
fee. And the ſaid judgments
in 5 and 6 H 4. prove it; for
there judgment generally 1s
given, that the letters patent
ſhould be revoked and made
void, &c. which judgment could
not have been given, it any
eſtate or reverſion, or poſſibility


did remain in the patentee, for


then the letters patent ſhould
not be made void, but the judg-
ment ſhould be, that the Jetters
patent ſhould be made void and
annulled as to the eſtate of the
Prince. Allo it appears by the
livery in 33 Hen. 6. ex rot”
Pearl, and by act of Parliament
38 H. 6. ex eodem rot', that Ed-
ward, eldeſt ſon of Hen. 6. had
his livery as inherit. by deſcent
due to him by the bicth-right;
and ſo had Edward, the firſt
begotten ſon of Edward 4. and
Arthur, the firſt begotten ſon of
Hen. 7. to whom livery was
made of the ſaid duchy, which
belonged to them jure heredita-
tario. In anno 22 E. 4. ex rot
Parliament, in the ſaid long ex-
change between the King aud
the Earl of Huntingdon, there
the Prince is adjudged to be
ſeiſed of the dachy of Cornwall
in ſee-ſimple; and ſo it was
unanimouſly reſolved by the
Lord Chancellor and the ſaid
Juſtices, that the Prince hath a
ſee-ſimple by deſcent, in the
honour and poſſeſſions of the


_ ſaid duchy,


As to the 4th poiat it was


Part VIII.


Princeps in dicto maneriq di
Berkhamſlead (parcelP digi
ducatus Cornub') habuit fee.
dum. Et did UW judicia in
annis 5 & 6 H. 4. hoc pro-
bant ; ib' enim generaliter Ju-
dic redditur quad litere pa-
tentes revecentur et adnullen.
tur, Qc. quod judic reddi nm
potuerat, ſi aliquis 2 vel
e ver ſio, vel poſſibilitas, manet
illi cui fate fuerunt literg
patentes ; tunc enim literœille
putentes nen adnullarentur, ſed
judicium effet, quod literæ pa-
tentes vacue fmt et adnullate
quoad ſlatum Principis. Li.
quet etiam per liberationem in
anno 33 H. 6. ex rot. Parli.
ament', et per attum Parlia-
menti anno 38 H. 6. ex «-
dem ret, quod Edwardus ſe-
nior filius Regis H 6. had his
livery as inheritable by de-
ſcent, due to him by birth-
right. Et fic habuit Edu.
primogenitus filius Edw. 4. t
Arthur” filius primogenitus H.
7. quibus facta fuit liberatio
dicti ducatus, qui ad iis
ſpectabat jure hæreditario. In
anno 22 E 4. ex Not' Par-
liam' in ditto excambio pre-
longo inter Reg et Comitem de
Huntingd', Princeps adjudi-
catur fore ſeiſitus de dutait
Cornub in feodo ſimplici. Et
fic fuit unanimi aſſenſu deter-
minatum per Dominum Cat-
cellarium et dictos Juſlici-
r195, quod Princeps habe fe
dum ſimplix per deſcenſu' it
honore, et paſſeſſionibus ial
ducatus.


Quad articul 4. determi


natun


Part VI | I.


natum fuit, quod contra ge-
neralem actum Parliamꝰ vel
talem adtum, qualis notitiam
Judices ex officio debent habere,
pars altera non poteſ? placita-
re nullu tale recor dum, horum
enim aftuum Tudices debent
mtitiam habere : ſi vero male
recitatur, pars poteſi morari
in lege ſuper hoc. Et in hoc
caſu lex ſumma fun datur ra-
tione; abſit enim, ſi recordu
hujuſmodi flatuti perderet” vel
conſumeret' igne vel alto moda,
quod hoc tenderet in generale
reipublice prejudicium; immo
potius, quamwvis perdatur vel
emſumat”, Fudices, vel ex im-
preſione typographicd, vel ex re-
cord? in quo placitat” fuit, vel
alio modo, poſſint ſei pſos de
hi informare. Vide caſus de
Partridge & Croker, &c. in
Cammentar Plowd. fol. 78.
Et determinatum fuit, quod
hie ſlatutum de Rege, et de
Principe, qui eft filius prims-
genitus Reg” pro tempore ex-
iſlentis, & heres apparens co-
ronæ, perpetuis futuris tempo-
ribus eft hujuſmodi act, cu-
juſmadi Fudices et totum reg
debent habere noticiam : o-
ms enim ſubdit' intereſſe ha-
bet in Rege, et null” ſubdi-
torum (qui infra leges ej us
efl) dividitur ab illo, ſug
Capite et Domino ſuprems :
res ttaque, et negotia Re-
gis, ad totum ſpeftant reg-
num, & praciſue quando
aguntur de Principe, filio
primogentt” Reg, et bere-


The Prince's Caſe.


reſolved, * that againſt a gene-
ral act of Parliament, or ſuch
an act whereof the Judges ex
officio ought to take notice, the
other party cannot plead Nul
tiel record; for of ſuch acts the
Judges ought to take notice :
+ But if it be miſrecited, the
party ought to demur in law
upon it. And in that caſe the
law 1s grounded upon great
reaſon; for God forbid if the
record of ſuch acts ſhould be
loſt, or conſumed by fire, or
other means, that it ſhould tend
to the general prejudice of the
commonwealth, but rather altho”
it be loſt or conſumed, the
Judges, either by the printed co-
Py, or by the || record in which
it was pleaded, or by other


means, may inform themſelves


of it, See Partridge and Cro- .
ker's caſe, &c. Plowd, Com.
fol. 78.


t And it was reſolved that
this act, which concerns the
King, and the Prince who is


the firſt begotten ſon of the K.
and heir apparent to the crown


for the time being, perpetuis fu-
turis temporibus, is ſuch an act
whereof the Judges and all the
kingdom ought to take notice:
for every ſubjeCt hath an intereſt
in the King, and none of his
ſubjects, who is under his laws,
are divided from him, being
their head and ſovereign, fo
that the King's affaics and
concerns touch the whole
kingdom, and etpecially 5
when they regard the 3

| the


28
3 Inſt. gs.


Godb. 178.
4 Co. 76. a. b.


+ Co, Lit. 260,
a.


| Cr. Car. 355


14 Co. 77.4.

Hob. 226.

NoR. pla. 338.
Plow. 231. a.


5 Hot. 226.


|
|
|
|
|
|


Caſus PrInciPis,


the firſt begotten ſon of the K.
and heir apparent to the crown,
coruſcat enim Princeps radius Re-


- gis patris ſui, et cenſetur una per -


ſona cum ipſo Rege, as it is ſaid


in the act of Parliament of 48
H. 6 And therefore if any one
intends the death of the Prince,
and declares it by open act, it
is high treaſon, by the ancient
common laws of Fogtand; and
ſo declared by the ſtatute of 25
Edw. 3. 1 Hen. 5. 7. b. It the
Priace, as Prince of Wales,
hath judgment to recover, and
afterwards the crown deſcends
to him, he, as King, ſhall
ſue execution. And with the
reaſon of this reſolution in
this point agreeth the rule of
the court in Plowd, Com. in
the Lord Berkley's cafe, 231.
that the act of 35 Hen. 8.
which concerns the capacity of
the Queen, was ſuch an act
whereot the Judges ought to
take knowledge, becauſe it con-


cerns the King's wife; and by


Hob. 226.


+ Co, Lit 22 5.b.


the * ſame reaſon in this caſe
of the Prince. And it was a-


2 that if Nul tiel record


ould be admitted to be plead-
ed in this caſe, that the ſubſtance
and effect of the record ſuf-
ficient to maintain the ſaid
Scire facias appears in the re-
cord exemplified + under the
reat ſeal. It was alſo re-
| Fay that the act of 43 El. of
confirmation of lettcis pa-
tent pleaded by Hele Ser-
jeant, and War, Hele his ſon,
doth not extend to this cafe for
two manifeſt reaſons. I. Becauſe
the act ſupplics only certain


Part VIII.


de apparente corona, cri ſeat
enim Princeps 1adiis Regis
patris ſui, & cen, ung


perſona cum ipſo Nene, ut dit
eft in aftu Parliam de an, 38


H. 6. Et proinde, ſi aliquis
intendit mortem Princip et
hoc aperta declarat atone,
eſt crimen leaſe Maj:latis,
per antiquas communes AngP
leges, et fic declarat' per flatut'
de an. 25 E. 3. 1 H. 5. fil,
7. 6. Si Princeds, ut Princeps
Malliæ, judicum habet recu-
perandi, et poftea corona ill
deſcendit, ille, ut Rex, proſe
quetur executionem. Et cum
ratione hujus determinat in
hoc articulo concordat regula
cur* in Comment Plaud in
caſu Dom” Berkley, f. 231,
quod fiatut” de an. 35 H. 8.
de capacitate Reg*, tal eſt act,
qualis Fudices debent notitiam
habere, quia ad ux rem Regis
ſpettat : et eadem ratione inhic
caſu de Principe. Accordatum
etiam fuit, ft nullum tale re-
cordum admitteretur ut plaat'
in hoc caſu, quod ſulſtuntia et
Hebt“ recordi ſufficiens ad na-
nutenend' dif? breve de Sert


facias, apparet in records ex-


emplificeio ſub magno figills,
Deter minat” ctiam fuit, quod
actus de anno 43 Elix. de con-
firmatione literarum patent,
placitatus per FHele Servientem
ad Legem, et IVarwicum e—
jus filium, non je exter-
dit ad hunc caſum, dud
ob rationes manifeſlas, I.
Zo quid aft ille ſuppiet
tantum queſdam defect, pore

lieu d-


part VIII.


ticulares, ut male nominatio-
mem maneriorum, Sc. male
recitationem, vel non recitati-
nem dimiſſionum, c. et alias
imperfectiones ſpeciales in ill
au memoratas: 2. Ac i-
dem facit literas patent” in
lege validas tantum contra Re-
gem heredes et ſucceſſores ſuos,
cum exceptione omnibus aliis,
ideogue fine dubio jus Principis
in hoc caſu ligari per hunc non
pete. Et quod ſlatutum de
an 1 H. 7. quod Hele Servi-
ens ad Legem, et dic Warwi-
cus placitaverunt, ut amici cu-
ria, ad informandum curiam
de veritate, non eis ; i al:-
quod auxilii: per hoc enim
inactatum eſt, quod Rex H. 7.
haberit ſibi et hæredibus ſuis
diflum ducatum, c. in tam
amplo et largo modo prout II.
6. vel E. 4. babuit : que
verba relationts praeſervant
ducatum Cornub ſecund” limi-
tationem creationis per dit?
chartam de an 11 H. 3. Re-
vera autem Serviens ille ad
Legem et fil ej non functi
ſunt officio amici, vel probi re-
lator' ; pretermiſerunt enim
clauſulam in eodem ſlatuto ex-
preſſe ſpeftant” ad praſer vand
air ducat Cornub' fil pri-
mogenito Regis, Sc. & iſlo
mado moliti ſunt in cur” de-
epiend* et weritat” ſuppri-
mend. Deter minat' denigue
fuit, quod (in hujuſmodi brevi
de Scire facias per Regem lato
ad repellendas literas paten-
ws fatias de aliqud parcelld
dic j ducatus, ea nimirum
intontione ut Rex libe-


The Prince's Caſe,


particular defects, as miſnomer
of the manors, &c. miſrecital or
non-recital of leaſes, and other
ſpecial imperſections mention-
ed in the act. 2. The act
makes the letters patent good
only againſt the King, his
heirs and ſucceſſors, with a ſav-
ing to all others, and therefore
without queſtion, the right of


the Prince in this caſe cannot


be bound thereby: and that the
act of 1 H. 7. which Hele Ser-


jeant, and the ſaid Warwick


have pleaded, ut amici curiæ to
inſorm the court of the truth,
avails them not; for it is there-
by enacted, that King Hen. 7.
ſhall have to him and his heirs
the ſaid duchy, &c. in as am-
ple and large manner as H. 6.
or E. 4. had it; which words
of reference preſerve the duchy
of Cornwall according to the
limitation of creation by the ſaid
charter of 11 E. 3. But in


:
„
.


[


truth the Serjeant and his ſon |


have not pertormed the office
of a friend or of a good in-
former, for they have omitted
one clauſe in the ſame act which
expreſsly concerns the preſer-
vation of the ſaid duchy of
Cornwall to the firſt begotten
ſon of the King, &c. and have
thereby endeavoured to de-
ceive the court, and ſuppreſs
the truth. And laſtly, it
was reſolved, that (in ſuch
Hcire facias brought by the K.
to repeal letters patent
made of any parcel of the
ſaid duchy, to the end
that the King may make

livery


— — 2


ö
|
|


*

l *.

4 4
8
5
'
9

| *
|

tt

—

*

N i
] K


o
8


= — —
— — — — — — — 2 _
= — 18 % > . .
. . ? : ed
4 * — 2
2 FSFE —_ - » - = PAY _ > _ 4 =. - _—
Hes AO. ARES. EEE ES, ad 327 — 8 = md — -
I — — 1 — = he oy 0. 12 2 A — * w — 4 1 — *
r — 4 7 2 * =
5 _ - — 8 — # - _ —


—— OY
— —— W


—
a.


Caſus PR INI is.


livery to the Prince) the King
or the Prince may reply to any
bar pleaded by the defendants
and both ways are good in law:
but the better form is, that the
King's Attorney, till livery be
made, ſhould reply, as he did
in the caſe at bar. And as to
the clauſe of Non obſtante in the
letters patent of Q. Eliz. it was
reſolved, that it could not take
away the force of the ſaid acts of
Parliament, nor prejudice the
Prince that now is of his right


in the faid dukedom.


In this caſe divers things
were obſerved: 1. 'That the
eldeſt ſon of every King (ſince
the ſaid creation) has been Duke


of Cornwall, and ſo allowed to


be; as Henry of Monmouth,
firſt begotten ſon of Hen. 4.
and Henry of Windſor, firſt be-
gotten ſon of H. 5. and Ed. of
Weſtminſt', the firſt begotten
ſon of Hen. 6. and Edward of
Weſtminſter, the firſt begotten
fon of Edward 4. and Arthur
of Wincheſter, the firſt begot-
ten ſon of Hen. 7. and Edward
of Hampton, the firſt begotten
fon of Hen. 8. And all theſe
have enjoyed the ſtyle, ho-
nour, and poſſeſſions of the
ſaid duchy of Cornwall, fo
that the poſſeſſion hath been
always, without interruption,
with the firſt begotten ſons
of the Kings, ever ſince the
faid creation, in 11 Edw. 3.
which is about 300 years:
{o that after the ſaid creation
there has been never a firſt


Ratutor” ParP nec prejudiciun


Part VII.


liberationem faceret Princip; )
Rex vel Princeps poteſi replia
care ad barra* aliquam per
defendentes placitatam; et u.
traque genera ſunt in lege va.
lida; melior vero formula eff,
guod MAttornatus Reging,
quouſque liberatio facta ſit, re-
plicaret, ut in — 2 ad barram.
Et quoad clauſulam de Non
ob/lante in literis patent” Reg
El. determinatum fuit, quad
non poteſt vim tollere dict


e Prin' qui nunc eſt, dt
jure ſuo in dico ducatu.

In hoc caſu res diverſe ob-
ſervat' fuerunt. 1. Yud
filius primogenitus uniuſcujuſ»
gue Regis poſt dif?” creationen
fuit Dux Carnub', et ſic ap-
probatus, ut Henr' de Mon-
mouth, primogenitus filius H.
4. et Hen. de Il indſor primo-
genitus filius Reg* Hen. 5. et
Edw. de Meſim“ primogenitus
filius Reg* H. 6. et E. de
I eſim“' filius primogenit Reg
Z. 4. et Arthurus de I in-
cheſterprimogenitus filius Regis
H. 7. et Ed. de Hampton fil
primogenitus Reg Hen. 8. Et
bs omnes gaviſi ſunt titul,
honor, et poaſſeſſionibus aid
ducatus Cornubiæ; ita
quod poſſeſſis ſemper fuer,
ſine interruptione, primo-
genit' filiis Reg', omni tem port
poſt dictam creationem in an-
na undecimo Edward: 3 qui
circa annos eff trecenios,
ita quod poſt illam creativ-
nem non ungquam fuit fill


þ! *


part VIII.


primugenitus alicujus Reg”


quin Dux fern Cornub'. 2.
Juod Richardus de Burdeaux
quifilius fuit Principis Nigri,
non fuit Dux Cornub" vi
dia creationts * guanquam
enim poſt patris ſui obitum
heres corone fuit apparent,
o tamen quod non fuit filius
prinngenit alicujus Regis Au-
gliæ (ejus enim pater obiit vi-
vente Rege E. 3.) dict“ ille
Richardus non fuit infra li-
mitationem de 11 Edw. 3. &
bac de cauſa in ann. 50 E. 3.
charta ſpectali creat” fit
Dux Cornubiæ. Neque E-
lizabetha, filia primogenita
Regis Ed. 4. fuit Duciſſa
Cornubie, illa enim fuit filia
primougenita Reg & limita-
tio e, filio pri mogenito. Ne-
que Rex H. 8. vivente ſuo
paire poſt mortem Princip
Arthurt fratris ſui, non ſuit vi
ate creutionis Dux Cornu-
big : guanguam enim ill” fuit
folus filius et heres apparens
Regis Henrici 7. eo tamen
quod non fuit filius primoge-
nitus non fuit infra dictam
limitationem ; Princeps enim
Arthurus filius fuit primoge-
nitus, 3. Magna illa uni-
uſeujuſque Regis cura & re-
ſpectus (a tempore diclæ crea-
tionis) præſervandi dictum
ducatum filio ſuo primogenito.
Et poſt diverſas continuationes,
Judictum reddebatur, prout
ſeguitur.


Vol. IV.


The Prince's Caſe.


Q


30
begotten ſon of any King, but

he was Duke of Cornwall. 2.

That Richard de Bourdeaux,

who was ſon of the Black

Prince, was not Duke of Corn-

wall by force of the ſaid crea-

tion; for although after the

death of his father he was heir

apparent to the crown; yet be-

cauſe he was not the firſt be-

gotten ſon of any King of Eng-

land (for his father died in the

life-time of King Ed. 3.) the

ſaid Richard was not within

the limitation of 11 Ed. 3. and

therefore in an. 50 E. 3. he was

created Duke of Cornwall by a

ſpecial charter: nor was Kli-

zabeth, the eldeſt daughter of

King Ed. 4. Ducheſs of Corn-

wall, for ſhe was the firſt- be-

gotten daughter of the King,

and the limitation is to the

firſt begotten ſon. Neither

was King Hen. 8. in the life of

his father, after the death of

Prince Arthur his brother, by

force of the ſaid creation, Duke &- 2944 AL
of Cornwall; for although he 18-4: 9: A
was the ſole ſon and heir appa- 777 2
rent of Hen. 7. yet foraſmuch ZZ 4.5


Aa Curt -
as he was not the (a) fiſt be-FF F. N. B.
gotten ſon, he was not within 32. g. Ss FR
the faid limitation; for Prince 744 e Me 424 4 x 11

Arthur was his firſt begotten S _—
ſon. X 3. The great care and 7;* 2 — EM

regard of every King, from the 2 eee 266”
time of the ſaid creation, to e 4,
preſerve the ſaid dukedom to 4 c< Q . .. e e,


his firſt begotten ſon. And after A Ae, 4


divers continuances the judg- 2-4 & ,


ment was given as followcss. = Ac , ca
| J Bee Publ 1 499
R Whereupon — fora CHE |


. AC . 7 J
bi: Co Co £0404. WAR
e, beer. | T;


: \

J 1

\
5
v |

: v1
j ,
1 t
*


Caſus Pnincyrs,


Whereupon all and ſingular
the premiſes being ſeen, and
fully underſtood by the well-
beloved and faithful connſcllor
of the ſaid lord the now King,
Tho. Ld Elleſmere, Chancellor of
England, and by the ſaid court
here, and mature and diligent
deliberation and adviſement be-
ing thereupon had by the ſame
Ld; Chanc. and the ſaid court
here (together) with J. Popham
Kt. C. J. of the ſaid lord the
now King. aſſigned for pleas to
be held before the lord the King
himſelf, Edw. Coke, Kt. C. J. of
the ſame lord the K. of the (court
of) Com. Pleas, Tho. Flemming,
Kt. Ch. Baron of the Exchequer
of the ſame lord the King, and
David Williams, Kt. one of the
Juſtices of the ſaid lord the King,
aſſigned for pleas to be held be-
fore the K. himfelf, It ſeemeth
to the ſaid Ld. Chan. and to the
{aid court here, that the plea of
the aforeſ. J. Hele and War.
Hele, by them above pleaded in
bar, and the matter in the ſame
plea contained are not ſufficient
in law to maintain that theletters
patent of the ſaid late Q Eliz. of
the aſoreſ. manors of Weſt Taun-
ton, T1clowia,and Landalph with
their appurtenances made in the
form aforeſaid ought to be re-
voked and cancelled, nor that
thoſe manors with their appur-
tenances ought not to be taken
and ſeiſed into the hands of the
faid lord the now K. as the ſaid
H. Hobart, Att. Gen. of the ſaid
lordthe K.who ſues, &c hath for
the ſame lord the K. thereof (i. e.
touching the ſame) above al-


ledged, and that the aforel. plea


Part VIII.
Super quo viſis & plenius


inteliectis omnibus & ſingulis
premiſſis per predilef? et ft.
delem confiliar” difti domini
Regis nunc Thomam Domi.
num Hleſinere Cancellar'
Anglia & per dictam eur
hic habitaque inde per eundem
Dom' Cancellar” & dich cur
hic matura & diligenti deli
berat' & adviſamento cum
Jehan Pepham milit' Capi-
tali Fuſtic'ꝰ dicli dom” Regis
nunc ad placita coram ipſt
dom” Rege tenend' aſſignat,
Edward” Coke mil” Capital
Fuſtic ipſius dom Regis dt
Com” Banco, Thom” Fleming
milite Capitali Barone at
Seaccario ejuſdem dem” Rag
& Dawvid' Williams mi lie,
uno Juli“ difti dom Regis
ad placita coram ipſo dim
Rege tenend* affignat', vidt-
tur eidem Dom Cancellar' ei
dictæ cur hic, quod placi-
tum præd' Johan Hel:, &
Marwici Hele, per ipſis ſu-
perins in barram placitut
ac materia in eodem placits
content” minus ſufficiens in
lege exiſ ad manutenend,
quod pred litere patente!
pred” nuper Reg Elizabe-
the, de prædict“ manerts
de Mei Taunton, Trelowid,
& Landulph pred”, cum per-
tinenꝰ in formd pred fall
revocars et cancellari, aut
quod maneria illa cum per.
tin” in manus dicti dom" Reg
nunc capi & ſeifiri non debt-
art, prout pred H. Hibart


Attor dicti dom' Reg General
ui, Ec, pro eod dom” Reg ſu-
per” inde alleg'. Bt quad pred

lacitum


part VIII.
placitum præd' Hen Hobart


Atternat' dicli domini Regis
nunc generalis, per ipſum
pro eodem dem” Reg' modo &
wma pred” (ad barram præd
Hen. Lindley) ſuperius re-
plicand placitat”, ac materia
in e:dem placito content”, ſuf=
ien in lege exiſtunt ad præ-
cludend præ fat Fen. Lind-
ly a dicendo, quod nen habe-
tur aliquod tale record” alicu-
jus talis actus Parliam' pred”
nuper Regis Edward: tertii
edit, nec aliguod tale record
præd charte per eundem nu-
Reg' Edwardum tertium
authoritate Parliam' prædidti
confet?', qual in predicts bre-
vi de Scire facias inde ſupe-
rius recitatur et ſpecificatur,
prout præd Henricus Hobart
Attornat difti dom* Regis
Generals, qui, Sc. pro eodem
dom” Rege ſuperius inde alle-
gavit. Idea conſideratum &
adjudicatum eſt per dictum
Daminum Cancellar', & per
lictam curiam hic, de adviſa-
mento prædicto, quod pred”
literæ patentes predic? nuper
Regin 9 495 Gellio M.-
rick & Hen. Lindley, ut
prefertur fac“ (quoad præ-
dict maner de Meſt Taunton,
Trelowia & Landulph pre-
dict, cum pertinen”) revo-
centur, evacuentur, adnul-
lentur, ac vacuæ & invalide
et pro nullo penitus habeantur
et teneantur. Ac etiam quod
irrotulament earundem (g uo-
ad eadem maneria) caſſetur
cancelletur, & adnihiletur.
Quodgue maneria illa cum per-
lmientus in manus difti dom”
Regis nunc capiantur et ſeiſi-
entur, ut ea pr fate nunc Duca


The PRINOE's Caſe,


of the ſaid Hen. Hobart, Attor.
gen. of the ſaid lord the now K.
by him ſor the fame lord the K.
in manner and form aforefaid,
(to the bar of the aforeſaid Hen.
Lindley)above by replying plead-
ed, and the matter in the ſame
plea contained are ſufficient in
the law to preclude the afore-
ſaid Hen. Lindley, from ſaying,
that there is not any ſuch record
of any ſuch act of Parliament
of the aforeſaid late King Ed. 3,
made, nor any ſuch record of
the aforeſaid charter by the
ſame late King Edw. 3. made
by authority of the aforeſaid
Parliament, as in the aforeſaid
writ of Scire facias is thereof re-
cited and ſpecified, as the a-
ſoreſaid Hen, Hobart Attorney
General of the ſaid lord the
King. who ſues, &c. ſor the
ſame lord the King, hath there-
of above alledged: Therefore it
is conſidered and adjudged by
the ſaid Lord Chancellor, and
by the ſaid court here, by the
adviſement aforeſaid, that the
aforeſaid letters patent of
the aforeſaid late Queen (Eli-
zabeth) to the aſoreſaid Gellio
Merick and Hen. Lindley, made
as aforeſaid (as to the faid
manors of Weſt Taunton, Tre-
lowia and Landalph aforeſaid,
with the appurtenances) be re-
voked, vacated, and annulled,
and had and held as void and
invalid, and for a (mere) nul-
lity ; and alſo that the enroþ-
ment thereof as to the ſame
manors, be quaſhed and anni-
hilated, and that thoſe manors
with the appurtenances be ta-
ken and ſeiſed into the hands
of the ſaid lord the now King,

R 2 that


Caſus PRMINOIISõò. Part VIII.


that the ſame to the aforeſaid
now Duke (of Cornwall) as a


member and parcel of his duchy


aforeſaid, to have and to hold,
according to the form and effect
of the gift, grant, and union
aforeſaid, may be by the ſaid
lord the now King delivered,
&c.


Cornub') tanguam membrum
& parcel ducatus ſui præ-
difti, ſecundum formam et
effeftum doni, conceſſion”, &
unionis prædict habendum et
tenendum, per diflum demi.
num Regem nunc liberentur,


Ec.


C ATL;


part VIII. 32


GC Y-ÞB 8- Gun


Paſch. 26 Elis.
In the King's Bench.


T was reſolved, per totam curiam this term, that if a (a) () f Rol. 1
man comes to a common inn, and delivers his horſe to 4 Leon. 96.
the hoſtler, and requires him to put him to paſture, which is 2 Browal. 255.
done accordingly, and the horſe is ſtolen, the innholder ſhall
not anſwer for it; for the words of the writ, which lieth
againſt the hoſtler are, Cum ſecundum legem & conſuetud regni
noftri Angliæ (b) hoſpitatores qui hoſpitia com' tenent ad hoſpitandos (4) plawd, 9. b.
homines, per partes ubi hujuſmadi haſpitia exiſlunt tranſeumes, the Regiſter 1
in eiſdem hoſpitantes, eorum bond et catalla infra hoſpitia illa exiſ- Om .
tentia abjque ſubtractiione ſeu am iſſiane cuſtodire die et nocte tenen- tone pro ſub-
tur, ita quod pro defeftu hujuſmod: hoſpitatorum ſeu ſervientium ſtractione.
ſuorum hoſpitibus hujuſmodi damnum non eveniat wllo modo, quidam 3 2
malefaftores quendam equum ipſius A pr ecii 40 s. infra hoſpitium Entries, tit.
ejuſdem B. Ic. inventum, pro defectu ipſius B. ceperunt, c. Hoſteler, f. 366

Jide Regiftr fot 105, inter Brevia de Tranſgr' and F. N. B. 2 22 2
94. a. b. by which original writ (which is in ſuch caſe the — 8
ground of the common law) all the caſes concerning hoſtlers
may be decided. For, 1. It ought to be a (c) common inn; (1, Roll. 2.4.7.
for if a man be lodged with another (who is not an innholder) Br. & Stud.
vpon requeſt, if he be robbed in his houſe by the ſervants of 237d. Hov.245,
him who lodged him, or any other, he ſhall not anſwer for
it; for the words are hoſpitatores qui com” hoſpitia tenent, Cc.

And fo are the books in (d) 22 H. 6. 21. b. (e) 38. (/) 2H. (% Fiz. Hote-
4. 7.b. (g) 11 H. 4. 45. a. b. (5) 42 Atl. pl. 17. (i) 42 E. 3. 11. ler 2. B.. Action
a. 10 El. (4) Dyer 266. 5 Mar. Dyer 158. (4) And the writ r 1
need uot mention that the defen. keeps commune hoſpitium, for Fita Hotels 1.


the Br. Action ſur


g a le Caſe 59.
(f) Fitz, Hoſteler 4. Br. Action ſur le Caſe 28. Br. ARtion ſur le Statute 39. (g) Br. Action ſur


le Caſe 41, Br. General Brief, 16. Fitz. Hoſteler 5, (5) Br. Action ſur je Caſe, 86. Palm. $23.
1 Roll. 3. (i) Fitz. Hoſteler, 6. Br. Action tur le Cale T5. Statham Action ſur le Caſe 6. (+)
21 266, pl. 9. Poſtea 33. a, 3 Keb, 73+ (/) Dyer 158. pl. 52. 1 And. 29, 30. 3 Reb. 73. 1
34.


(a) Antea 32. 2.
Fitz. Hoſtler. 2.
Br. Action ſur le


(% Antea 32. a.
1 Roll. 4 Br.
Aion lur le
Caſe, 41. Br.
Gen. Brief, 16.
Fitz. Hoſteler, 5.
(c) Antea 32. a.
Dyer 266. pl. 9.
Poſtea 33. a.


3 7
(4) 1 Roll. 3E. 4.
2 Brown. 254.


(e) x Roll. 4.


(f) Antea 32. a.
(z) Antea 32. 4.


(6b) x Roll. 3, 4.


2 Brownl. 255,
,Amea 32. a,


Qt) I Roll. 35 4.


2 Brown], 200,


CaLyYyE's Caſe. Part VIII.


the words of the writ in the Regiſter are, infra hoſpitium ejuſ.
dem B but it is to be ſo intended in the writ ; for the recit;]
of the writ is, hoſpitatores qui communia hoſpitia tenent, c. and
the one part ought to agree with the other, and the latter
words depend on the other, and the plaintiff ought to declare
that he keeps commune hoſpitium : and fo the ſaid books in (a)
22 H. 6. 21. (b) 11 H. 4. 45. a. b. 10 Eliz. Dyer (c) 266,
&c. are well reconciled.

2. The words are, ad hoſpitandos homines per pore bi hujuſ.
modi heſpitia exiſtunt tranſeuntes, et in eiſdem hoſpitantes ; by
which it appears that common inns are inſtituted for paſſen.

ers and wayfaring men ; ſor the Latin word for an inn is,
diverſorium, becauſe he who lodges there is, gua/? divertens |
a via; and ſo aiverſoriclam. And therefore it a (4) neigh,
bour, who is no traveller, as a friend, at the requeſt of the
innholder lodges there, and his goods be ſtoben, &c. he ſhall
not have an action; for the writ is, ad hoſpitandos hamines, Es.
tranſeuntes in eiſdem hoſpitantes, &c.

3- The words are, eorum bona et catalla infra hoſpitia illa ex
i/tentta, Ac. So that the innholder, by law, ſhall anſwer for
nothing that is out of his inn, but only for thoſe things which
are infra hoſpitium. And becauſe the horſe, which at the
requeſt of the owner is put to paſture, is not infra hoſpitium,
for this reaſon the innholder is not bound by law to anſwer
for him, if he be ſtolen out of the paſture ; for the thing with

which the hoſtler ſhall be charged ought to be infra hoſputum,
and therewith agrees the books in (e) 11 Hen. 4. 45. a. b. (f)
22 Hen. 6. 21 b. (g) 42 E. 3. 11. a. b. 42 AL. pl. 17.
where Knivet C. J. ſaith, that the innholder is bound to an-
ſwer for himſelf, and ſor his family, of the chambers and
ſtables, for they are infra hoſpitizn : and with this reſolution
in this point agreed the opinion of the Juſlices of Aſſiſe (uiz.
the two Chiet Juſtices, Wray and Anderſon) in the county
of Suffolk in Lent vacation, 26 El. that it an (Y) innholder ,
lodges a man and his horſe, and the owner requires the horle
to be put to paſture, and there he is flolen, the innholder
ſhall not anſwer for him. (i) But it was held by them, that
if the owner doth not require it, but the innholver of his own
head puts his gueſt's horſe to graſs, he ſhall anſwer for bim if
he be ſtolen, &c. And it is to be obſerved, that this word
bojlier is derived ab he/tle; and hsſpitator, which is uſed in
writs for an innholder, is derived ab hoſpitro, and hopes 7
4 /i hoſpitium peteu t. 1


4+ The


part VIII. CALVYE's Caſe. 33
4. The words are, ita gucd pro defeftu hoſpitator', ſeu ſer-


dientium ſuorum, &c. hoſpitibus hujuſmadi damn non eveniat, &c.
by which it appears that the innholder ſhall not be charged,
un'eſs there be a default in him or his ſervants, in the well
and ſafe keeping and cuſtody of their gueſt's goods and chat-
tels within his common inn; for the innkeeper is bound in
law to keep them ſafe without any ſtealing or purloining; and
it is no excuſe for the innkeeper to fay, that he delivered the
(a) gueſt the key of the chamber in which he is lodged, (a) Moor 58. pl.
and that he left the chamber door open ; but. he ought to 207: |
keep the goods and chattels of his gueſt there in ſafety ; and - Ss g.
therewith agrees 22 H. 6. 21. b. 11 H. 4. 45 a. b. 42 Edw.
3. 11. a. And although the gueſt doth not deliver his goods
to the innholder to keep, nor acquaints him with them, yet
if they be carried away, or ſtolen, the innkeeper ſhall be
charged, and therewith agrees 42 Edw. 3. 11. a. And altho”
they who ſtole or carried away the goods be unknown, yet the
innkeeper ſhall be charged, 22 H. 6. 38. 8 R. 2. Holtler 7.
Vide 22 H. 6. 21. But if the gueſt's ſervant, or he who (65) ()_Cro. El.285.
comes with him, or he whom he deſires to be lodged with
him, ſteals or carries away his goods, the innkeeper ſhall not
be charged; ſor there the fauit is in the gueſt to have ſuch
companion or ſervant ;z and the words of the writ are, pro
defeftu hoſpitator? ſeu ſervientium ſuorum. Vide 22 Hf. 6. 21. b.
But if the innkeeper appoints one to lodge with him, he ſhall
anſwer for him, as it there appears. | he innkeeper (c) re- (c) Moor 158,
| quires his gueſt that he will put his goods in ſuch a chamber
under lock and key, and then he will warrant them, otherwiſe
not, the gueſt lets them lie in an outer court, where they are
taken away, the innkeeper ſhall not“ be charged, for the fault « vige Salk. 18.
is in the gueſt, as it is held 10 Eliz. (4) Dyer 266. 4) Antea 33. as
5. The words are, hoſpitibus damnum non eveniat : theſe b.
words are general, and yet foraſmuch as they depend on
the precedent words they will produce two effects, viz.
1. They illuſtrate the firſt words. 2. They are reſtrained
by them: for the firſt words are, earum bana et catal” infra
hpitia illa exiſtentia abſque ſubtraftione cuſtadire, &c. which
words (bona et catalla) by the ſaid words, ita quad, Oc.
h jpitibus damnum non eveniat, although they do not of their
proper nature extend to (e ) charters and evidences concern- {e) 2 Roll. 52.
ing trecho'd or inheritance, or (/) obligations, or other 22 E. 4. 12. a. b.
decils or ſpecialties, being things in action, yet in this Aa. Ir
calc it is expounded by the latter words to extend to them; Yelve 68.
lor by them great damages happen to the gueſt : and there- |
lore, if one brings a bag or cheſt, &c. of evidences into the
mn, or obligations, aceds, or other ſpecialties, and by
default of the innkeeper they are taken away, the inn-
keeper ſhall anſwer for them, and the writ tha!l be bona
et catalla generally; and the declaration ſhall be ſpecial.
2, Theſe words, bona et catalla, reſtrain the lat er
R 4 words


(a) 3 Li. 109.
10 E. 4. 14. a.

Fiz. Endict. 19.
Br. Coron. 155.


CaLye's Caſe. Part. VIII.


words to extend only to moveables: and therefore by the latter
words, if the gueſt be beaten in the inn, the innkeeper ſhall
not anſwer for it; for the injury ought to be done to his
moveables which he brings with him; and by the words of
the writ, the innholder ought to keep the goods and chattels
of his gueſt, and not his perſon ; and yet in ſuch caſe of bat-
tery, hoſpiti damnum evenit, but that is reſtrained by the former
words, as hath been ſaid. And theſe words aforeſaid, abſque


ſubtraflione ſeu amiſſione, extend to all moveable goods, altho'


of them felony cannot be committed; for the words are not
abſque felonica captione, &c, but abſque 8 which may
extend to any moveables, although of them (a) felony cannot
be committed, as of charters, evidences, obligations, deeds,
ſpecialties, &c,


If a horſe is at livery, and eats more than he is worth, an
action lies againſt the owner; but the horſe cannot be uſed or
ſold, Moor 876, 877.—but by the cuſtom of London and
Exeter the horſe may be ſold ; but ſee Popham 127. Robinſon
v. Waller.] | „


PAINES


Part VIII. 34


|
|
|


P AI N E's Caſe.


93
2 ; "EY * 247. Ei PL... / He <
* —


8


Trin. 29 Eliz., Rot. 721.


In the Common Pleas.


1 (a) Paine, plaintiff in treſpaſs, and Sammes (%) anger. 184,
and Tanner, defendaats, for treſpaſs done in lands in B. 185. 1 Leon.
in the county of Eſſex; on not guilty pleaded, the jurors 207, 20% _
gave a ſpecial verdict to this effect: a man hath iſſue two .
daughters, the ſaid lands in which, &c. were given to the

elder daughter, and to the heirs of her body begotten, the

remainder to the younger daughter, and to the heirs of

her body, &c. The elder daughter took to huſband the

{ad Sammes one of the defendants, who had ifſue, which

was heard cry, and died, and afterwards the elder daughter

died without iſſue 3 after whoſe death the ſaid Sammes held

himſelf in, claiming to be tenant by the curteſy, upon

whom the younger daughter entered, and the ſaid Sammes

and Tanner as ſervant to him, re- entered; upon which re-

entry the younger ſiſter brought the ſaid action of treſpals :

and it was objected for the plaintiff, that the huſband in

this caſe ſhould not be tenant by the curteſy, becauſe the

eſtate of the wife was determined, and the eſtate of the

buſband, which was derived out of the eſtate of the wife,

could not continue longer than the primitive eſtate endured ;

lor cgſante flatu primitivo ceſſat derivativus; and therefore if

(V) tenant in tail makes a leaſe for lives, according to the (3) co. Lit. 60
lrat, of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. and afterwards dies without iſſue, 184. a. 351. a.
this leaſe being derived out of the eſtate tail, ſhall nor 219. by
continue longer than the eſtate tail, againſt the opinion 1n 2 Roll. Rey 4055
33 Hl. 8. 48. a. Dyer, quod fuit conceſſum per totam curiam. Dyer 49. pl. 6.
And when the wife dies without iſſue, he in remainder ſhall Bro. Accept. 19.
enter by force of an immediate giſt to him, and his iſſue ſhall BN. C. 370.
we a Formedon in the deſcender upon an immediate giſt;

and


(a) Co. Lit. 30.
2. 31. a. 358. b.
F. N. B. 149. d.
Perk. ſect. 304.
Dr. & Stud. 84. a.
(% Co, Lit. 29.


4
Perk. ſect. 457.
(c) Co, Lit. 30. a.


(4) Co. Lit. 30
2.
Perk. ſect. 466.


(e Co. Lit. 40. a.
Lit. ſect. 52.


(%% Lit. ſect. 3. 8
Co, Lit. 29 „ ſhall not be tenant by the curteſy unleſs the child which he


Painr's Caſe. Part VIII.


and it is not like the cafe of dower ; ſor the wife ſhall be en.
dowed altho' ſhe hath no iflue ; and therefore altho' the eftate
determines or not, for want of iſſue, yet the wife by the law
ſhall be endowed ; but a man ſhall not be tenant by the curteſy
unleſs he hath iſſue, nor if he hath iſſue, unleſs the ſame iſſue,
or ſome other, ſupport the eſtate which he ſhall hold by the
curteſy ; and dower is more favoured than the eſtate of a te.
nant by the curteſy; for a woman ſhall be endowed of lands
where the huſband had but a ſeiſin in (a) law; but a man ſhall
not be tenant by the curteſy of land unleſs the wiſe was (4)
actually ſeiſed in deed. To which it was anſwered and te-
ſolved by the whole court, that at the com. law, if (c) lands
had been given to a woman, and the heirs of her body, and ſhe
had taken a huſhand and had iſſue, and the iſſue died, and the
wife alſo without iſſue, whereby the inheri:ance of the land
did revert to the donor, in that caſe the eſtate of the wiſe is de-
termined, and yet the huſband ſhall be tenant by the curteſy,
for that is ?a:17e implied in the gift. It is adjudged in 21 Hl. 3.
(4) Dower 198. that if a man hath ifſue by a woman inheri-
trix, which is dead, which iſſue might inherit the land, he
ſhall be tenant by the curteſy, altho' the wife, by a former hul-
band, have iſſue inheritable, and altho' that iſſue be dead. And
therewith Litt. agrees, lib. 1. cap. Dower, fol. 10. b. (oh in
every Caſe, where a man takes a wife ſeiſed of ſuch eſtate in
a tenement, io that the iſſue which he hath by his wife
might, by poſſibility inherit the ſame tenement of ſuch eſtate
as the wile hath, as heir to the wife, in ſuch caſe, after the
death of the wite, he ſhall have the fame lands by the curtely
of England, otherwiſe not. By which maxim it appears, that
the ſeiſin of the wiſe ought to be of ſuch inheritance which
ought to have this incident amongſt others, that the iſſue which
the huſband ſhall have by her, may, by poſſibility, inherit; and
that may fail, either in reſpeCt of the iſſue, or in reſpect of the
manner of inheritance In reſpect of the iſſue, if it be born dead.
And therefore Glanvil, I. 7. c. 18. Si ex uxore ſud hard hab
eit filium vel ſilium clumantem et auditum infra quatuor fi iets
Sc. Er Bradl. I. 5. De except”, c. 30. f. 437, 438. Si quis uni
duxerit halentim heredit' vel maritagium, vel aliquam terram cauſa
donationis, fi lleres int” fe habuerit ex juſtis nuptiis procredt', ll
uxor” premoriat', remanebit viro heredit' et terra ſua teta vita ih.
Jus viri, five ſuperſt' fuerit liberi five mirtui, dum tamen feni!
aut vacem aut clamorem diſmiſeriut, quad andiatur int! quatuir ft
 1aetes, ft hoc probe” © et licet partus mor iat in ipſo par tu, vel Viv
raſeat*, vel forte ſemimortuus, licet vocem nin emiſerit, clit
ob/tetrices in fraud veri hæred' proteflari partum wioum naſa et
legttim” et idea neceſſe el vicem prolare; et licet natura'iter nu.
tus naſcatur et ſurdus, tamen clamorem emittere debet, ſive nd,
culus fit five fœmina (unde verſus) nam dicunt E. vi A.

vatquet naſcuntur ab Eva, And Fleta, lib. 6. cap 59- and
be agrees with Bracton, fere eiſdem verbis, Ho that Litt. lib. 1.
cap. 4. ſol. 7. b. might well ſay, (*) ſome have faid, that bs


hath


part VIII. PAIN E“'s Caſe: 35
hath by his wife be heard (a) to cry; for by the cry it is (a) 1 And. 35.


proved, that the child was alive; ideo guære. But he ſaith be- Perk. ſeck. 471.


fore in the ſame chapter, if the huſband have iſſue crying, or = _ —
alive, ſo that in his opinion the crying is not neceſſary; for Dyer 25. pl. 159.
it is true, if the iſſue be born alive, it ſufficeth, and the ory- = Ben. 25. pl.
ing of the child is but a proof that it is alive: and this is well

proved by the form of pleading (which is the ſtrongeſt proof

in law) for the pleading in ſuch cafe is, Quod præd A. G. (5) co. Lit. ag. b.
fuit ſeifit de tenement” pred in dominico uo ut de fend, et fic inde

ſeifit cepit in vir J. I. per quod idem J. & A. fuer' ſeifit' de te-

nement' fræd' cum pert” in dominico ſus ut de feodo in jure ipſius

A. ipfizue fic inde ſeiſiti exiftent” habuer* exitum inter cos, Sc,

puſteague pred A. ur pred” J. obiit, idemque F. ipſam ſuper-

vix', ct ſe ten' in tenem' præd' ac inde fuit ſeiſit” in dominico ſus,

ut de lib” tenem', ut tenens inde per leg Angl'. And if in that

caſe ilue be taken, guod non habuer' exitum, &c. the effect of

the iſſue ſhall be, whether they had ifſue born alive, guia mor-

tuns exitus non eft exitus; and the crying is but a proof of the

life. Vide 28 H. 8. (c) Dyer 25. But in the caſe at bar, to (e] Dy. P. pl.
remove all ſcruples, it was found that the ĩſſue was heard to cry. 359 O. Ben. ag.
And in this caſe it was well obſerved, that Glanvil, BraQon, * es 2
Britton, and Fleta, may be vouched for antiquity and orna-

ment in caſes where they concur witch the later authority of

law, and do not impugn the common experience and allow- (d) 10 Co. 73. a,
ance in judicial proceedings at this day. 2. If a wife be de- . .
livered of a (e) monſter, which hath not the ſhape of man- (e) Co. Lit. ag. b.
kind, it is no iſſue in the law; but although the iſſue have

ſome (/) deformity or defect in the hand or foot, and yet /) Co. Lit. 29.
hath human ſhape, it ſufficeth; and therewith agrees Brac- b.

ton ub! ſupra. Item, fi cum partum ediderit, tamen prius de-

cin ad monſP, & cum clam” emitt' deber', emitt” rugit', et hinc

videt” quad ten" non debet exceptio (i. e. ten non debet per leg?

Ang ) quia partus monſir' eft cum non naſcat” ut homo; ſed non

dico part” manſtr* licet natura memb* minuer' vel ampliaverit,


minuer”, ut in defect digitor” vel hujuſmodi, ampliaverit, ut


ft plur' digitos vel articul' ficut ſex vel plures, ubi non debet hab?
niſi quinque ſi inutilia natura redd* memb*, ut ft curvus fuer', vel
gibb:ſus, vel memb' tortuoſa habuer'. 3. In ſome caſe the time

of the birth is material, and in ſome not; and therefore
when the Lord Dyer was Serjeant, he was (as he himſelf ſaid

in the Common Pleas) of counſel with this cafe : one Reppes
of Norfolk, took to wife an inheritrix, who was great with
child by him, and died in her travail, and the ifſue was
2) ripped out of her belly alive, and by reference out of (g) Co, Lit. 29.
the Chancery to the Juſtice, they refolved. that he ſhould not Þ.
be tenant by the curteſy, ſor it ought to begin by the birth
of the iſſue, and be conſummated by the death of the wiſe,


and


—


*
*
. 11
1 .
,
*
| 11
4 [a
ry
U
x C *
1
* *
— *
. == 4
*
; 1
a
7
i
*
. *
4 ,
1 \


2 OE RI ene eo 4 *


> == — 1 e
Ls - hs. , : FE x
mw—_—__{ = w.T

v2 229 *


(a) Co. Lit. 2 f. b.


(5) Co. Lit. 29. b.


(c) Perk. ſect.
465.


® Poſlea 36. a.


1 Roll. 840.
2 Inſt. 334.


(e Co. Lit. 19.4.


7 Co. 35.


(co. Lit. 15. a.


(g) 2 Inſt. 336.


PAIN E's Cale. Part VIII.


and the eſtate of tenant by the curteſy ought to take away the
immediate deſcent. But ifa (2) man hath iſſue by his wife,
and atterwards land deſcends to the wife, be the iſſue alive
or dead at the time of the deſcent, he ſhall be tenant by the
curteſy, for the time of the birth of the iſſue is not material, if
it bein the life of the wife. 4. In reſpect of the manner of
inheritancez as if (6) lands be given to a woman, and the
heirs males of her body, and ſhe takes a huſband, and hath
iſſue a daughter, the huſband ſhall not be tenant by the curteſy;
for the iſſue cannot by any poſlibility inherit the ſame lands;
and ſo out of the rule of Littleton and of the judgment in 21
H. 3. And at the common Jaw, (c) if lands had been given
to huſband and wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies be»
gotten, and they had iſſue, and the huſband died, and ſhe
took another huſband, and had iffue, the ſecond huſband
ſhould be tenant by the curteſy ; and fo is it adjudged in * 30
E. 1. Form. 66. which proves that the iſſue by the ſecond
huſband might poſſibly inherit; for at the common law after


(d) Co. Li. 19.8. iſſue, it was taken to (4) three purpoſes, that the tenant in


tail had a full fee ſimple. 1. To alien. 2. Jo forfeit it by
attainder of felony, as the book is in 7 E. 3. 6, & 7. b. ſo that
although the tenant in tail afterwards died without iſſue, the
land ſhould not revert to the donor. 3. That the tenant in
ſpecia! tail, by having iſſue, had a full fee ſimple to make the
lands deſcendable to her iſſues by any other huſband : for as
by her (e) alienation ſhe might make ſtrangers to the blood
to be abſolutely inheritable ; ſo by conſtruction of law, after
iſſue had. all lineal heirs of her body, by what huſband ſo-
ever they were begotten, ſhould inherit to her, as a beneſit and
incident tacitè annexed to her eſtate by the law; for it was
ſaid, that by the having of iſſue, it was a gift and diſpoſition
in law to the huſband for his life; which diſpoſition and altera-
tion of the eſtate, although it be for life, tacitè as an incident
to it, makes the iſſue of the ſecond huſband inheritable. As
if a (/) man hath iſſue a ſon and a daughter by one venter, and
a ſon by another venter, and dies, if the elder ſon makes a leaſe
for life, againſt whom the wife of the father recc vers dower,
and afterwards the elder ſon dies, the fiſter ſhall have the rever-
ſion in fee, becauſe the elder ſon hath altered the reverſion by
his leaſe for life, and the tenant in dower leaves the reverſion
in the leſſee for life, vide 7 H. 5. 4. but that the iſſue of the
ſecond huſband ſhall inherit in ſuch caſe, is directly proved by
the ſtatute de Donis conditionalibus, (g) nec habeat de cetero ſecun-
dus vir hujujmodi mulieris aliquid in tenemento fic dato per candi-
tionem poſt mortem uxor is ſue per legem Angliæ, nec exitus de ſe-
cundo viro et muliere ſucceſſionem hæred': for it the iſſue of the ſe-
cond huſband ſhould not inherit, the ſecond huſband ſhall not
be tenant by the curteſy; as it was adjudged in the ſaid caſe in
21 H. 3. And Feta, bi ſupra, ſaith, lex tamen iſia ad _

| a5


part VIII. PAIN E's Caſe. | 36


tns virot non extenditur, eo quod palam inhibetur per ſatutum:
but after iſſue had, the tenant in tail at the common law had
not ſuch a fee ſimple, that his (a) collateral heir which is not (ci co. Lit. 19. a.
heir of his body, ſhould inherit. And if land were given be-
fore the ſtatute to huſband and wife, and the heirs of their
two bodies, and they have iſſue, and the wife dies, and the
huſband takes another wife, ſhe ſhall be endowed as it is
held in 12 H. 4. 2. Markham's caſe ; and by conſequence the
iſſue, which ſhe by poſſibility might have, ſhall inherit the
land. And vide Fitz tit. Tail 2. and mark the agreement of
the law in both the ſaid caſes. And where Littleton ſaith, (5) (4) co. Lit. 30. 2.
as heir to the wife, theſe words are very material; for that is
the true reaſon, that a man ſhall not be tenant by the curteſy
of a ſeiſin in law, for in ſuch caſe the iſſue ought to make
himſelf heir to him who was laſt actually ſeiſed, &c. vide 11H.
4. 11. 40 E 3. 9, &. And the tenant by the curteſy ſhall be
attendant to the lord paramount, which he cannot be, becauſe
the wife died before ſhe was actually ſeiſed: but tenant in
dower ſhall not be (c) attendant to lord paramount, but to the (c 9 co. 145. b.
heir, and therefore ſhe ſhall be endowed of a ſeiſin in law, 1 Roll. 685.
And the caſe at bar is directly within the ſaid maxim, for the
iſſue of the huſband which he had by his wife, might by poſ-
ſibility have inherited the wife. 2. It appears, that at the
common law the huſband ſhall be tenant by the curteſy, if he
hath iſſue, although afterwards the wife dies without iflue, as
it is adjudged in (4) 30 E. 1. ubi ſupra, and this caſe is not (%) Antea 35. b.
reſtrained by the ſtatute aforeſaid. 3dly. Lit. 6, 1. cap. 4. fol. 7, |
agrees with this judgment, for he ſaith, that (e) tenant by (+) Co. Lit. 29.3.
the curteſy of England is, where a man takes a wife ſeiſed in Lit. {&. 35.
fee ſimple, or in fee-tail general, or as heir of the ſpecial tail,
and hath iſſue by the ſame woman, male or female, heard or
alive, be the iſſue afterwards dead (note that) or alive, if the
wife dies, the huſband ſhall hold the land during his life, by
the curteſy of England. 80 chat it appears by him that it is
not material whether the eſtate-tail continues or not. 4. It
appears that the true reaſon of dower, and the reaſon of this
caſe, (ſcilicet) the poſſibility of the iſſue to inherit, &c. are
alone. And if (f) tenant in tail takes a huſband, and hath {/) co. Lit. 30. a.
iſſue and dies, now the huſband is tenant by the curteſy; and
although afterwards the iſſue dies without iſſue, ſo that the eſ-
tate tail is determined, yet his eſtate ſhall continue, for it is
not derived merely out of the eſtate of the wife, but is created


0 per law, by privilege and benefit of law zacite annexed to
the gift.


0
*
|
5
1
s
' '
yy
*
Y
'$S
\ l
| *
5 *
: *
N 3
* 9
' ,
4
| 1
4
* a 7
, %
4
. =
= 1
”
4
i
.
3 \
3 [1
. q f
8 C
*
4
1 *
»4


+:
1
TY
C
iT
;

|
5


It a


(a) Co. Lit. 368.
2. 3 Inſt. 175.


(3) Co. Lit.
368. 8. b.


(e) 2 Iaſt. 225.


(d) Fitz. Decies
tantum 8.

Br. Decies tan-
tum 3.


(e) 3 Inſt. 175.


Part VIII.


The Caſe of BARRETRV.


Paſche 30 Elis.


NT A, on evidence upon a traverſe of an indictment of

barretry, it was held per curiam, that a common (a) bar-
retor is a common mover or ſtirrer up, or maintainer of ſuits,
quarrels, or parties, either in courts or in the country: in
courts of record, and in the county, hundred, and other infe-
rior courts: in the country in (5) three manners. 1. I
diſturbance of the peace. 2. In taking or detaining of the
poſſeſſion of houſes, lands, or goods, & c. which are in quel-
tion or controverſy, not only by force, but alſo by ſubtilty and
deceit, and for the moſt part in ſuppreſſion of truth and right.
3. By falſe invention, and ſowing of calumny, rumours, and
reports, whereby diſcord and diſquiet ariſe between neigh:
bours. And all the ſaid qualities of a common barretor are
proved by the indictment of one for barretry, and by our
books: for firſt it is ſaid in the ind ictment, guod eff communis
barrefator, within which word is included a quarreller in his
own cauſe, and a mover or maintainer of quarrels between
others, for the moſt part in ſuppreſſion of truth and right:
and this appears by the ſtatute of Weſtm. 1. (c) cap. 33. l
is provided, that no ſheriff ſuffer any barretors or main:
tainers of quarrels in their county-courts, &c. In 40 Ed. 3.
33. b. the (4) plaintiff counted in a decies tantum, that tht
recognitors in an aſſiſe took of certain people who vert
barretors and embracers of the ſaid ſuit, ſcilicet, of ever!
one 208. which was in a cauſe depending in a cout
of record. The ftatute of (e) Ragman the King wills and en-


Joins che Juſtices, that none in complaining nor in anſiweting
c


Part VIII. The Caſe of BARRET RV. 37


be not ſurpriſed nor incompaſſed by (a) hockettors or batre- (4) 3 Iaſt. 75. b.
tors; that the truth be not followed, and the treſpaſſes re-
main unpuniſhed. - And the ſtatute of Weſt. 1. c. b. (5) 18. (4) Poſtea 39. b.
Foraſmuch as the common fine and amerciament of the whole 2 Iaft. 196, 197,
county in Eyte of the juſtices for falſe judgments, and other
treſpaſſes, is unjuſlly aſſeſſed by ſheriffs and barretors of the
counties, ſo that the ſum is many times increaſed, and the
parcels otherwiſe aſſeſſed than they ought to be, to the damage

of the people. And that will be ſufficient to excite or main-
tain quarrels in courts : and for moving or maintaining quar-
rels in the country, Littleton, lib. 3. cap. Warranty, ſol.

158, If (c) A. de B. be ſeiſed of a houſe, and F. de G. (e) Lit. 158. b.
who hath no right, enters in the ſame houſe, claiming the 159: a.
houſe to him and his heirs ; but the ſaid A. continually co. Lit. 368.a.b,
dwells in the ſaid houſe; in that caſe the poſſeffion of the free- ;
hold ſhall be continually adjudged in A. &c. But if the ſaid
F. G. makes a feoftment to certain barretors in the country,
to have maintenance of them in the ſame houſe, by a deed of
feoffment with warranty, by force whereof A. de B. dares not
ſtay in the ſaid houſe, but goes out of it, &c. this warranty
commences by diſſeiſin. By all which, and by many other
authorities which might be cited, it appears, that a common
barretor is a common mover or maintainer of quarrels, either
in courts or in the country. If it be aſked why this buſy- body
is called barretor? Some derive a (d) barretor from the (4) co. Lit.
French word (barrateur) which ſignifies a deceiver: others 368. b.
from the Latin word (baratro) which ſignifies a vile knave,
or unthrift : others becauſe they maintain pleas at bars in
courts, or ſtir cauſes of ſuits, derive this word (barretor )
from two legal words; (barra) which fignifies the bar in courts,
where cauſes are debated, &c. and (rettum) which, as appears
in the writ De homine replegiands, in the Regiſter, ſigniſies a
crime or offence; and becauſe a common barretor is princi-
pally an offender in moving or maintaining of quarrels at bars,
ſcil. in courts, or in the country, which are cauſes of ſuits in

courts, he is called a barretor, or bar offender. In the civil

law, barrataria dicitur quando judex petit aliquid indebitum ut i

titiam faciat, But in the law of England, this word (barret)

doth ſignify a quarrel, whence he who moves or maintains

quarrels is called a barretor, and it is fo expounded by the

whole Parliament, in 33 E. 1. in Stat' de Confpir' where the

act ſaith, ſtewards and bailiffs of great lords, who by

their ſeigniory, office, or power, take upon them to
maintain or ſuſtain pleas or barrets, for other parties than

| thoſe


— Sw . d > " 2 F — — | ”
— ge — 2 Woe” 400 et Xo” 2555 —
_ 5 - 4 1 — * "_ x
Y "=. A ” - _ *
. _ % Ph 2 * . - — . | s > > a % -
* by . _ 3 n 4th 1
= 6 —— Y ˙—— WR, ee — —— — —V PLL
- - - . ©, a b - \
- = - = - E12 .- =


—— ne” —4-


Cr >» ” ”.


a) 9 Co. 66. a.
oftea 127. a,


(5) s Co. 73. a.
6 Co. 7. a.
2 79. b.

oſtea 98. b.
Co. Lit. 103. a.
2 Inft. 411.


The Caſe of BA RRE TRV. Part VIII..


thoſe which touch their lords or themſelves. Where it is ma-
nifeſt, that barrets ſignifies quarrels ; but he ought to be cn
munis barrectator, ſcil. not in one or two, but in many cauſes,
ſo that he may be proved a common barretor. 2. The words
of the indictment are, pacis domini Regis perturbator, ſcil. 1
common mover or maintainer of brawls and frays, by which
the peace is broken. The other words of the indictment are,
communis male factor, calumniator, & ſeminator litium & diſcor-
diarum inter vicinos ſuos : malefaCtor, becauſe he willingly and
maliciouſly doth wrong to his neighbours, either openly after
warning, or ſecretly, as in the night, &c. qua (a) qui mal:
agit odit lucem : calumniator, ſo called, becauſe by falſe and
malicious ſcandals, he endeavours to rob his neighbour of his
good name, which 1s a great motive of diſcords and quarrels,
and is againſt the law of God, Levit. 19. non factas calumniam
proximo tuo : ſeminator litium & diſcordiarum inter vicinos ; and
from ſuch ſeeds preſently grow up many ill herbs, inimicus he
mo ſuper ſeminavit zizania. And that is againſt the common-
wealth; for (b) expedit reipublice, ut fit fints litium. And this
barretor is ſeminator litium, &c, and that is likewiſe againſt


the law of God, Levit. 19. non eris ſuſurro in pepulo. In an-


cient indictments, after theſe words, pacts domini Regis per-
turbator, theſe words are added, & oppreſſor vicinorum ſucrum,
and that is either by force, as in the caſe of Littleton, in tak-
ing or keeping of poſſeſhon, or by fraud and malice, under
colour of law, as by multiplicity of unjuſt and feigned ſuits,
or by information on penal laws, either in his own caſe, or in
malicious bringing of a ſpecial Supplicavit, or Latitat, of the
peace ; and all this by fraud and malice, to enforce the poor
party ad redimendam vexationem, to give him money, or to
make other compoſition z and this is the moſt dangerous op-
preſſor, for he oppreſſes the innocent by colour and counte-


. nance of the law, which was inſtituted to protect the inno-


cent from all oppreſſion and wrong: and therefore the faid
words in the old indictments (if the truth of the caſe be ſuch)
are material to be inſerted in the indictment of bartetry.


[ Obſerve, for the form of an indictment of'a common bar-
retor. The indictment was communis barrefator litium, et
diſcordiarum inter vicinos ſeminator et pacis Regis perturbatsr :
exception, that it does not ſnhew in particular in what he was
a common barretor; and it was held, it need not; 2d, it does
not ſay contra pacem, and ſor this exception the indictment
was quaſhed, Cro. Jac, 527. Palfrey's caſe. ]


Part VIII. 3


|


GRIES LE 's Caſe.


Trin. 30 Eliz. Rot. 101 2.


In the Common Pleas.


Na replevin brought by Thomas Kingſton againſt Richard co. Fat. 52.


Baily the elder, and Richard Baily the younger, in a place pl. 2.
called Stockings in Kingſton, in the county of Stafford; the v. 33» 94+


defendants, as Bailiffs to Thomas Grieſley, Eſq. did ac-
knowledge the taking of the faid cattle in the ſaid place,
where, &c. For they ſaid, that the ſaid place, where, &c,
contained fix acres ; and that the ſaid Thomas Grieſley was


ſeiſed of the manor of Kingſton, within which manor, the


ſaid place where, &c. is, in his demeſne as of fee, and
preſcribed to have curiam viſus ſranc* pleg* coram ſeneſchalls
ſus infra manerium illud tenend” bis per annum, viz. ſemel in-
fra menſem proximum poſt feſlum Paſchæ, & iterum infra men-
ſem proximum poſt feſtum Sancti Michaelis Archangel: de om-
nibus inhabitantibus & reſidentibus infra manerium pr edict” tan=


quam ad manerium illud pertin' : quodgue infra manerium pred”.


babetur, & a tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum nen ex-
it, habebatur talis conſuetudo, quod inhabitantes & reſidentes in-
fra manerium præd' ad inquirendum & praeſentandum ea que ad
viſum franc plegii pertinent onerati & jurati, annuatim ad cu-
nam vi franc plegii illius apud manerium illud, infra menſem
proxim” poſt feflum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli tent', elegerunt
& eligere conſueverunt unum idoneum hominem de inhabitantibus
fra manerium predic? ad eſſendum Confl ubularium de King/ton
þ'2 ann” tunc proximo ſequen'sy qui] quidem homa fic electus o fie

Vol. IV. 8 | cium


GRrIESLEY's Caſe.” Part VIII.


cium illud pro uno anno exercere per totum tempus præd' conſur-

vit, & fi preſens fuerit hujuſmodi electioni tunc per totum tem-

pus præd jurari conſuevit per ſeneſchallum curiæ præd“ in aper.

ta curia ad officium illud exercendum, And that at the court

of view of trankpledge held at the ſaid manor, 5th of Octo-

ber, 28 Eliz. before John Newport, then Steward of the ſaid

Thomas Grieſley of the ſaid court, the ſaid Thomas Kingſton

being an inhabitant within the ſaid manor, was, according

to the ſaid cuſtom, choſen to be Conſtable of Kingſton, pred

ro uno an tunc proxim' ſeguen by the jurors and preſenters

of the ſaid Court, and he being preſent in Court, was

charged by the ſaid Steward to take the faid oath, which

he utterly refuſed to do, and departed in contempt of the

Court, eb guod pred” Johannes Newport, adtunc ſ:neſchallus

ejuſdem curiæ finem centum folidorum ſuper pred” I hom' King-

on adturic in eddem curid impeſuit. And becauſe the ſaid fne

of 51. was not paid to the ſaid Thomas Grieſley, the defen-

dants made conuſans, as bailiffs of the ſaid Thomas Grieſley,

of the diſtreſs of the plaintiff's cattle, in the place where,

&c. upon which the plaintiff did demur in law; and in this

caſe thele queitions were moved and debated. 1. Whether

the ſteward might impoſe a fine in this caſe. 2. Whether

11 Co. 43. 45. this fine ought to be affeered or not. 3. Whether the lord
of the lect might diſtrain for ſuch fine, without a cuſtom

enabling him ſo to do. As to the firſt it was reſolved, pe

totam curiam, that if any contempt or diſturbance to the

court be committed in any court of record, that the Judges

9 5 might ſet upon che render a reaſonab!e fine, and a leet
ibid. is a Court of record, and the Steward is Judge there; and
Fitzzid. 192. therefore, if any contempt (a) or diſturbance to the court


1 be made before him, he may let a reaſonable fine upon


I 4s 322. the offenders; as if the Bailiff of a leet refules in court to
Owen 113. execute his office, the Steward may ſet a reaſonable fine
Moor 470,


1 Roll, Rep, 33, upon him; and therewith agrees the book in (0) 7 H. 6. 12.0.
74. | So if a Iithingman refuſes to make a preſentment in 3
6 oy Nas 3+ leet, the Steward ſhall ſet a reaſonable fine upon him, 3
8 it is held in (c) 10 H. 6. 7. a. So if one of the jurors in
6% 11 Co. 43. b. a leet departs without giving his verdict, he ſhall be finel
2 Roll. Rep. 3. by the Steward, as appears in the book of Entries, title
Br. Det- Bs. ,, Amerciament in Debt, fol. 149. Et fic de ſimilib. But
Br. Leet 14, 26. ; , f

(c) Br. Leet 36. Coufts which are not of record, cannot impoſe a fine,
Br, Ley £ager gg- or commit any to priſon. As to the ſecond, it was ob-


2 Roll. Rep. 1 0 he
IT Co. 43. K jected, that the fine in the caſe at bar ought to


{d) 11 Co. 43.2, affeered 5 and to prove that, the ſtatute of Magna Charta,


44+ a. 13 Co. 3. cap. 14. Liber hamo non amercietur pro parvs deliclo nj
| 1 (d) ſecundum modum illius delicti, & pro mag no delicto ſecundun
F. N. B. 25. a, mag nitudinem delicti, ſalvo, &c. & nuila pred” in,


FEàÿV ß fp


Part VIII. GRTESL E x's Caſe,


rum ponatur niſi per ſacramentum probor & legal hom” de vicineto:
Comites autem & Barones non amercientur niſi per pares ſuos c.
And by the ſtatute of Weſtminſter 1. (a) cap. 6. it is provid-
ed, no city, borough, or town, nor any man, ſhall be amerced
without a reaſonable cauſe, and according to the quantity
of the treſpaſs; a freeman, ſaving his contenement ; a
merchant, ſaving his merchandize ; and a villian, faving his
wainage ; and that by their equals. And (6) 10 E. 3. 9,
and 10. was cited, and ſtrongly urged, where the caſe was
that William Freeman brougnt a replevin againſt the Abbot
of Ramſey, and others, that they had wrongfully taken his
cattle, &c. The Abbot avowed the taking, by reaſon he is
lord of the hundred of F. within which hundred he hath
a leet in the town of M. (where the plaintiff is reſiant)
to hold once a year, ſcil. every year after the feaſt of
Saint Michael, when he will warn it, &c. and at the leet
warned and held there at ſuch a day, &c. twelve were
ſworn to preſent things preſentable, which belonged to their
oath, and that the ſaid William was one of them; and af-
ter they had received the articles, they were commanded
to anſwer to the articles, and to preſent, &c. and they re-
fuſed; for which cauſe the ſaid William, and the others,
were amerced, and the amercement of him was affcered to half
a mark; and for the ſaid half mark he did avow : and there
exception is taken by Aſhton to the avowry, becauſe the
amercement was upon them all in common, and the af-
ferance of the amercement was ſeveral, ſcil. upon William
half a mark, &c. Parning : It ſhould be thus, according to
law ; for becauſe all refuted, all ſhall be amerced, but every
one ſhall be affeered by himſelf, ſecunaum quantitatem delicti;
as in aſſize of novel diſſeiſin all the diſſeiſors ſhall be amerced,
and each affeered by himſelf. Aſhton: If a decenary of
a town is amerced in Eyre, the afferement ſhall be in com-
mon, &c. Parning : Is it not like the cafe, for when a
decenary or town is amerced, there is no certain perſons
named, as there is in this caſe ; and the avowry was awarded
to be good: by which it appears, that a fine impoſed for a
contempt in court ought to be atfeered. To which it was
anſwered and reſolved, that in the caſe at bar, the fine
impoſed by the Steward was well enough without any affer-
ance, and therefore a (c) difference between a fine and an
amercement; for a fine is always impoſed and aſſeſſed by
the court, but an amercement, which is called in Latin


(erer) is as much as to lay, ponere in certitudinem, ſeu
are, Gil. to aſſeſs or tax, and the afferance'is as much as to
ul alleſſment, or taxation. And afferors are aſleſtors, or
* ers, and are derived from this ancient French word (affe-
7) which ſignifies taxare, 1 And chis appears by the 2

| 2 O


miſericerdia, is aſſeſſed by the country. And this word K


Cart. 28.


39


4) 2 Inſt. 169,
170.


(5) 11 Co, 43. a.
Poſtea 40. b.
1 Roll. Rep. 73.


F itzgib. 46.


(c) 11 Co. 43. b.
Co. Lit. 126. b.
Br. Amercia-
ment 25, 65.
elw. a.
Palm. 7.
Cro. Car. 275. %


2 Inſt. 196,
10H. 6. 7 b.
Cro. El. 241.

1 Roll. Rep. 74.


— —
— — — —


GRIESLZ 's Caſe, Part VIII.


ta) Antes 37.2. of Weſtm. 1. cap. (a) 18. whereby it is enacted, that amerce.
1 ments before Juſtices in Eyre, &c. ſhall be aſſeſſed by the
. oOaths of Knights and of honeſt men; where this word aſſeſſ-
ed is as much as to tay affeered. And the ſtatutes of Magna
(5) 2 1nft. 29. Charta, and Weſtm. 1. (V) extend to amercements, and not
Fitzgib. 46. to fines; tor amercements ought to be affeered, or taxed, or
aſſeſſed per pares, as if the demandant or plaintiff be nonſuit,
or if judgment be given againſt the tenant or defendant, or
upon the bail becauſe the principal doth not appear, or upon
the plaintiff quia non eft proſecut', or pro falſo clamore, or the
like, &c. the Juſtices ſhall never aſſeſs any amercement, but
by the ſaid ſtatutes they ought to be aſſeſſed per pares. But
the Court in ſuch cafes ſaith, zdeo in miſericordia generally,
90 F. N. B. 76. a. without taxing or aſſeſſing any ſum certain; and the (c) Clerk
i ng hang of the Warrants in the Common Pleas makes eſtreats of theſe
cop. 8. amercements, and delivers them to the Clerk of the Aſſiſe
within every circuit, to deliver them to the Coroners in every
county to affere, i. e. to aſſeſs the amercements, which they
do accordingly ; and ſuch aſſeſſment by the Coroners in every
county hath been held a ſatisfaction of the ſaid ſtat, of Magna
Charta, by which it is enacted, guod null præd' miſericordia-
rum ponatur niſi per ſacram' probor” & legal” hom* de vicineto:
and the Coroners of the county were thought moſt indifferent,
becauſe they are choſen by the whole county : but if a man be
nonſuit after the jury be ready to give their verdict, the Court
may cauſe the amercement to be preſently affered in the
(2) 13 Co. 43. b. Court by the ſame jury, as it is held in (4) 18 Ed. 3. 13. %
And it ſeems the ſtatute of Magna Charta was but an aflirm-
ance of the common law, tor Glanvile, who wrote in the
time of Hen. 2, lib. 9. cap. 11. faith, autem miſcricordia
Domini Regis, qua quis per juramentum legalium hominum de
vicineto eatenus amerciandus ęſi, ne aliguid de ſus honorabili con-
tenemento amittat, And Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 48. recites the ſta-
ſtutes of Magna Charta, and Weſtm. 1, Liber homo nin
amercietur, &c. niſi per ſacram' parium ſuorum, viz. probor, &
legal” ham” de vicineto, qui 1 ſuarum noticiam habeant ple-
niorem. And Bratton 1ib. 3. cap. 1. fel. 116. b. ſays, de illi
gui ſunt in miſericordia Dom Regis, & non ſunt amerciati, ad hu
uidendum qualiter quis fit amerciand'. Et ſciendum eſt, quod Mile
& liber homo non amerciabitur niſi ſecundum modum delicti, ſecund
guod delictum fuit magnum vel paruum & ſaluo contenemento ſus ;
mercator vero non niſi ſaluo merchandiza ſua; et villan autem, uin
niſi ſalvo wainagio ſus : et hoc per judicium proborum hom” de vi
neto gui affidabunt ſimulcum ſerviente. Comites vera vel *
11


_ = as
-  —erwey.eme ns le eee OOO —
0 — — — — — ——


part VIII.


non ſunt americandi, niſi per pores ſuos, & ſecundum modum des

lift, & hoc per Barones de ſcaccario, vel cor am ipſo Rege. * Cle- „g. N. B 76. b
yicus vero non amerciabitur ſecundum beneficium ſuum eccleſia/ti- e
cum, ſed ſecundum quantitatem laici fendi ſui, & ſecundum mo-

dum delifti : et ad hoc fideliter faciendum affidabunt amerciatores

quod neminem gravabunt per odium, nec alicut deferent propter

amorem, & quod celabunt ea que audiverunt, Vide 38 Ed. 3.

31. a. (a) 9 Hei. 0. 2. b. 19 E. 4. 9. . 411 Ed. 4. 77. 5 (a) Br. Ametce-
An Earl, Baron, or Biſhop, ſhall be amerced 100s. and ment 2. 47.

19 Ed. 4. 9. A Duke to 101. Lide (6) 1 Hen. 6. 7. b. in = ——
the Earl of Northumberland's caſe. Note, that although the 48. 6 Co. 45. a.
ſtatute of Magna Charta, cap. 14. be in the negative, Co- 54: 2 Inf. 28.
mites & Barones non amercientur niſi per pares ſuos, & non niſi SEES .
ſecundum modum delicti, yet (c) uſage hath reduced it to a ann, > 6
certainty. But note, reader, as to amerciaments, this differ- (c) 2 Init. 28.
ence between amerciaments in actions real or perſonal, of the

demandant, or tenant, &c. or upon a preſentment or indict-

ment, as for not repairing a bridge, or a highway, &c. and

the like; for as it is afoteſaid, ſuch amercements, according

to the ſaid acts, ought to be affecred per pares; and amerce-

ments of any who hath adminiſtration of juſtice, or of any

officer or miniſter who hath the execution of the King's

writs, &c. for ſuch amercements ſnall be affeered (aſſeſſed) by

the Juſtices or Judges of the Court where the cauſe depends.

And there are two reaſons of this difference. 1, The later

ſorts of amercements are out of the ſaid ſtatutes of Aug na

Charta and Weſtm. 1. for two reaſons. 1. The words are

(4) liber homo non amercietur, &c. extend to private men, and (4) z Inſt, 278
not to thoſe who have adminiſtration of juſtice, nor to offi=

cers or miniſters who have execution of the King's writs, &c.

2, The words are, oY ſacram' proborum & legaiium hom” de vi-

cineto, which may have knowledge of the abilities of the par-

ties, as Fleta ſaith, but that doth not extend to the offences of

commiſhon or omiſſion done by thoſe who have adminiſtration

of juſtice, or by officers and miniſters who have execution of

writs, &c. which offences are done to the Couit itlelf, and

therefore by the Court ought to be affcered and aflefled. he

ſecond cauſe of the ſaid difference is, , eventus Judicio- 3 Selk. 33.
rum ſunt incerti, and the plaintiff or defendant may have

a probable' cauſe of ſuit or defence until he hears what

the adverſe party can alledge and prove to the contrary

and therefore it is great reaſon that ſuch amercements

which ariſe upon ſuch cauſes ſhould be affected per pores in

the country, according to the faid ſtatutes, 'and not by the

Court. But the offence of one who hath the admiuiſtra—

tion of juſlice, or of an oſhcer or miniſter who hath execution

of the King's writs, in point of his om̃ce, is malum in /e, and

hath not any probability or colour of excuſe; and yet both

the kinds of amercements are ſty'ed with this word, ſc. mi-

ſericordis, becauſe wholoever bath the affecritig of them, oupht

83 bw


GRIELLEV V Caſe. | 40


GRIESLE TI Ss Caſe: Part VIII.


to uſe great moderation: and this difference appears in our
books, and thereſore in 22 Ed. 3. 2. a. John of London's caſe,
in a falſe judgment, if the judgment be reverſed, the ſuiters,
who were the judges, ſhall be amerced, and this amercement
ſhall be affeered by the Juſtices, for the ſuiters had the admi.
niſtration of juſtice ; and therewith agrees the Book of Entries,
tituls Falſe Judgment, pl. 13. Et quod ſeclatores curiæ præ-
dictæ ſunt in miſericordia, que ; 4b per Curiam domini
Regis, hic ad, &c. And if the Sheriff returns, cepi corpus,
and hath not the body at the day, the entry is, ides idem Vice.
comes in miſericordia, & afferatur per Fuſticiarios hic ad, &c. And
therewith agrees the Book of Entries, Capias 19, 20. So if
a writ be delivered of record to the Sheriff to be executed, &
Vicecomes non miſit breve, the record faith, ides Vicecomes in
miſericordia, & afferatur per Fuſliciarios ad, &c. and this ap-
pears in the ſaid book, record 2. So if Fabeas Corpus be
dizected to a Sheriff, gaoler, or keeper of a priſon, &c. and
he brings not the body, &c. the entry is, ideo idem A. in mi-


ſericordia, & afferatur per Juſtic-' ad, &c. Et fic de fimili},


(a) Br. fine pour
Contempt 39.
Br. Amercement
45


(3) 10 E. 3. 9, 10.
Antea 39. a.
11 Co. 43. as
1 Roll. Rep. 72.


And in ib. 5. E. 4. 6. a. it is reſolved by the Juſtices, that
that which is aſſeſſed on an officer or miniſter of the Court, is
called an amercement, and not a fine; but on a ſtranger to
the Court for a (a) miſdemeanor it is called a fine, and not
an amercement. But upon a nonſuit in a real or perſonal ac-
tion, or bar to the demandant or plaintiff, or judgment againſt
the tenant or defendant, the entry is ides in miſericordia ge-
nerally, and that ought to be affeered per pares, F. N. B. 76.
So if A. be amerced on a preſentment, for not repairing a
bridge, or a highway in a leet; idee A. in miſericordia, &
amerciamentum inde afferatur per afferatores in eadem Curid ad-
tunc electos & juratos ad, &c, Vide the Book of Entries,
title Treſpaſs in Amercements 2. So if one be amerced for


default of ſuit at a leet, the amercement ought to be affeered


fer probos & legales homines, Book of Entries, Rep!” Amerce-
ment 2. And as to the ſaid book of (5) 10 E. 3. 9. it ap-
pears, that the amercement was affered, but it doth not ap-
pear by whom it was affered or aſſeſſed, and therefore it ſhall
be intended to be done by the Steward; for in truth it was a
fine; and it is to be known, that if a jury, or a leet, tax an
amercement, it is ſufficient without other afferement ; for
the amercement is the act of the Court and the aſſere-


ment of the jury, and therewith agrees 8 H. 7. 4. Vide 7


Edw. 3. 15. b. Aſtelie's caſe. 45 Edw. 3. 26. b. 27. a. But
if the Steward afferes ar amercement upon the preſent-
ment of the jury, it is void, and ſhall not bind, vide 45
Edward 3. 27. But the Court ſhall aſſeſs fines, and they
ſhall not be affecred by any others, unleſs it be in ſpecial
caſes ; and that not only upon contempts and miſdemeanors


done in Court, but upon writs of Capias pro fine, or upon
conſelſions, Nc. as appears Trin. 22 Henry 7. Rot. 510.
| 2


Part VIII. GRIIZSL E v's Caſe; 4t


in Crmmuni Banco, where he who was taken by Capias pro ſine
prayed that he might be admitted ad finem ſuum cum don Reg”
aciend', & admittitur pro 5 s. ſolut' hic in cur” ad manus F. R.
Cb Rob) Read capit juſtic” dom' Reg' hic in partem folut” pro
reparatione & emendatione ciſtarum pro record” de Banco hic in eiſ= Note.
dem euſtod* ordinat ex precepts curiæ. And I rin. 4 H. 8. Rot.
306. in the like caſe, & ſuper hoc finis eorundem J. & F. occa-
fime pred” afferatur per juſtice hic ad 2.5. Sc. But if a juror
appears, and is adjourned upon a pain, and makes default, in
that caſe, becauſe he ſhall be fined according to the yearly
value of his land, it ſhall be enquired of by the other of his
companions of the jury ; for in ſuch caſe the court cannot
know it, and therewith agrees 4 Ed. 4. 6. & 9 H. 4. 5. (a) (a) Br. Amerces
Vide 20 Aſſ. pl. 11. And (b) finis dicitur quia finem litibus RT, 55; 60.
imponit, and is not traverſable, as it held in 7 H. 6. 13. a. 109 3
i. e. the party redeems his offence for a ſum of money, and (5) Co. Lit. 120.
which makes an end of it, and of his impriſonment for it, eres *
and for that reaſon it is called alſo Redemption, as appears in Has. nes
the Judicial Regiſter 31. ad ſatisfac* nobis de redempiione ſud
pro quadam tranjgrefſ. c. And this writ is called Capias pro
fine, which fine is expreſſed in the writ by-this word Redemp-
tion; and the ſtat. of Marlebridge, cap. 3. (c) non ideo punia-
tur dominus per redemptionem, i. e. per ſinem. Another diſter-
ence is, if a man be convicted before the Sheriff in the county,
of a (a) recaption, he ſhall be only amerced, but if he be (4) 11 Co. 43. b.
convicted thereof in the Common Pleas, he ſhall be fined; doggy + x
and the reaſon of this difference is, becauſe the county court 33. 6.
is not a court of (e) record, and therefore cannot impoſe a (% Poſtea 60. b.
fine; for no court can fine but ſuch court which is a court of“ ©
record, Vide F. N. B. 73. d. And by theſe differences you
will the better underſtand your books, which are plentiful in
theſe matters. As to the third point it was objected, that
for an amercement of things preſentable in the leet, the lord
may (/) diſtrain, but not for a fine impoſed by the Steward; (f) Cr. Jae. 382.
but of that an action of debt lies. To that it was anſwered and 8 Nep. 201.
reſolved, that there are two manner of offences, ſome done 1 Roll, 683
» U 5.
out of court and ſome done in court; of thoſe which are
done out of court, the jurors of the leet have conuſance, and
therefore power to == them, and to aſſeſs an amercement 4 Sts
for them ; but for contempts (g) and mitdemeanours in court 21 tals 8
before the Steward himſelt, he hath conuſance of them, and 3. Moor 470.
therefore may impoſe a ſine for them, and thereof need not RD 5 3.
make inquiry; ſo that thoſe who have conuſance of the thing Cr. Car. 569.
are fit to impoſe a fine or amercement for the ſame thing; and ! Rol. Rep. 33,
if for the leſs, ſcil. for an amercement of offences out of (4) 12 Co. 46.4.
court, a (+) diſtreſs ſhall be incident of common right, @ 1 Roll. 665.
fortiari, for fines impoſed for offences done in the very court 33
8 4 a diſtreſs Cr. Jae. it. ”
Black. Com,
* 14.


(e] 2 Iaſt. 10g.
8 Co. 60. b. 20.


— —— 9


_ . —_— ooo mm rms
—— —


GAIESs L E y's Caſe. Part vin


a diſtreſs ſhall be incident, quia quod licitum eſt pro minore, &.
pro majore licitum eſt ; and a fine is more than an amercement,
and both impoſed by authority of the leet : and as nothing iz
more naturally to be puniſhed by the court leet than offences
committed in the court itſelf ; ſo for no ſum impoſed for any
offence, by authority of the leet, a diſtreſs is more incident
than for ſuch as is impoſed for offences done in the leet
itſelf. Vide 8 Rich. 2. Avowry 194. 41 Ed. 3. 26. 45 E. z.
8. 47 E. 3. 12. 2 H. 4. 24. 11 H. 4. 89. 7 H. 6. 12. 10
H. 6.7. 12 Hf. 7. 15. 3H. 7. 3. 21 Hf. 7. 40. F. N. B. 100.
23 H. 8. Br. Leet. 37. And it would be hard to drive the
lord to his action of debt for every ſmall ſine or pain, but the
lord may diſtrain and ſell them, or diſtrain and put them in
the pound, at his pleaſure.

Note, reader, the ſaid cuſtom, &c. eligere unum idoneum
hominem de inhabilantibus infra manerium ad eſſendum conſtabu-
larium, Qc. well agrees with the law; for the common law
requires, that every conſtable ſhould be idoneus homo; i. e.
apt and fit to execute the ſaid office; and he is ſaid in law to
be idoneus who has theſe three things, honeſty, knowledge,
and ability; honeſty, to execute his office truly without ma-
lice, affection, or partiality ; knowledge, to know what he
ought duly to do; and ability, as well in eſtate as in body,
that he may intend and execute his office, when need is, di-
ligently; and not for impotency or poverty to neglect it; for
if poor men ſhould be choſen to this office, who live by the
labour of their hands, they would rather ſuffer felons and
other malefactors to eſcape, and neglect the execution of their
oſſice in other points, than leave their labour, by which they,
their wives and children live: and the commonwealth con-
fiſts in the well ordering of particular towns, and order will
not be well obſerved in them but where the officers are done,

(a) 5 Co. 57. b. i. e. honeſt, knowing, and of ability. And this word (a)
z Inſt. 631. 632. ;Joneus is oftentimes in law attributed to thoſe who have any
(5) 5 Co. 57. b. office or function; and therefore if a () Coroner, who is
(% F. N. B. alſo an ancient officer, be (c) minus idoneus ad officium illud
hae exequendum, it is a good cauſe to remove him. F. N. B. 163,
(k. N. B. 164. Regiſter 177. i. e. if the Coroner be (d) ſenio confraciu,
os Ho aut morbo paralyſis percuſſus, aut terras & tenementa in eoden
comitatu non habet, aut electus eſt in officio Vicecomitis, &.

for he ought to be choſen Coroner, gui melius ſciat, &

poſſit officium illud intendere, as appears by the words of

the writ De corenatore eli gende, F. N. B. 163. Regiſt. 177-

And ſo he who is Conſtable ought to be 7doneus, i. e.

qui melius ſciat, & poffit officium illud intendere. And in

letters patent of incorporating of inhabitants of a 17

in


part VIII. 112812 18 Caſe.


into Mayor, or Bailiff and Burgeſſes; the words are, uod
io de ſerpfis eligere poſſunt unum hominem idoneum, or, duos ho-
mines 1dmeos, Ic. and the law requires, that he whom the

tron preſents to a benefice be perſona idonea, for the words
of the writ of Quare impedit are, Preſentare idoneam perſonam ad
eccleſiam de, Cc. & proprie dicuntur idonei, qui poſſunt et volunt
in eccleſiis deſervire, ſcil. qui moribus, honeſtate et literarum
fſeientia ſunt decorati. And if one be elected Conſtable who is
not idoneus, he by the law may be diſcharged of his office,
and another man who is :doneus appointed in his place.


WHIT-


42


_ ERAS LED x &S E Dont -


= 2
7222 < l


(a) Dyer 10. pl.
38. 4 Co. 12 f. a,
7 Co. 7. b. Poſt.
45. a. aInſt. 483.
49 E. 3. 13. a.
39 H. 6. 42. b.
7 H. 5. 9. b.
3 Bulſtr. 272.
(5) Co. Lit. 271.
a, 1 Jones 32.
3 Co. 23. a.

4 Co. 123. b.
124. a. 3 Inſt.


516, 517.


(c) 3 Bulſtr. 272.
2 Inſt, 483.

1 Roll Rep. 401.
Palm. 234. 254.


WHITTINGHAMsõ Cafe.


Hil. 45 Eliz.


HE caſe in the Star- chamber, Hil. 45 Eliz. was, that

Richard Whittingham was ſeiſed of three meſſuages,
&c. in Cray ford, in the county of Kent, held of the Queen in
ſocage, as of the manor of Newbery in Crayford in fee; and
by his will in writing deviſed them to Prudence, his baſtard
daughter, and her heirs, and died. Prudence, being within
age of 21 years, by deed, as was pretended, did enfeoff Ste-
phens and others of the ſaid tenements in fee, and died within
age without iſſue, and whether this feoffment ſhould pre-
vent the Queen of her eſcheat was the queſtion ; and on con-
ſideration had with the two Chief Juſtices, it was reſolved,
that if there be lord and (a) infant-tenant, and the infant
makes a ſeoffment in fee, and executes it by livery of ſeiſin by
his own hands, and afterwards dies without heir, that the
lord ſhould not take benefit of any eſcheat in that caſe. And
as to that, it is to be known, that there are three manner of
(5) privities ; /c/. privity, in blood; privity in eſtate; and
privity in law, Privies in blood are meant of privies in blood
inheritable, and that is in three manners, /c. inheritable as
general heir; inheritable as ſpecial heir, and inheritable, as
general and ſpecial heir. Privies in eſtate are, as joint-
tenants, huſband and wife, donor and donee, leſſor and
leſſee, &c. Privies in law are, when the law without blood,
or privity of eſtate, caſts the land upon one, or makes his
entry lawful; as the lord by eſcheat, the lord who enters
for mortmain, the lord of a villain, &c. And firſt, pri-
vies (c) inheritable, as general heir, ſhall take bene-
fit of infancy; and therefore if an infant, tenant in


fee-ſimple, makes a ſeoffment and dies, his heir ſhall ow
. | .


part VIII. WutTTiNGHaM's Caſe. 43


The ſame law of him who is heir general and ſpecial. As if

2 man gives land to one and the heirs male of his body, and

the donee within age makes a feoffment in fee, his ſon, who

is heir general and ſpecial, ſhall enter: the ſame Jaw of him

who his ſpecial heir, and not general; as if in the ſame caſe 6 Mod. 122.
the donee had ifſue two ſons, and the elder had iſſue a

daughter, and the donee died, and the elder ſon, within age,

made a feoffment, and died without iſſue male, the younger

is ſpecial heir per formam doni, and ſhall avoid his brother's

feoffment, although he be not general heir, becauſe he is

privy in blood, and has the land by deſcent : fo if lands be

given to one, and the heirs (a) females of his body, and the (4) Co. Lit. 337. b
donee having iſſue a ſon and daughter, makes a feoffment

within age and dies, the daughter being heir ſpecial, (to

whom the right of entry deſcends) ſhall enter, and not the

ſon, who has nothing by deſcent : ſo of the heir in (%) Bo- (C.- t. 337. b.
rough Engliſh 3 for in all caſes, when any claims by deſcent,
as ſpecial heir, he ſhall take benefit of a right of entry, which
deſcends to him, for the infancy of his anceſtor : the ſame law
if his anceſtor were non compos mentts at the time when he made
the feoffment, becauſe in theſe and the like caſes the heir
general cannot enter, becauſe no right or title deſcends to
him, but the right deſcends to the ſpecial heir. So if tenant
in tail, within age, makes a feoffment in fee, and is (c) at- (e) Co. Lit. 337. a.
tainted of felony, in that caſe the iſſue ſhall enter for the in- Fl. 254
fancy, yet he is not general heir, for the blood is corrupted.

Alſo privies in (d) eſtate (unleſs it be in ſome ſpecial cafes) (4) 4 Co. 124.8.
ſhall not take advantage of the infancy of the other. And Roll Rep.qor,
therefore, if donee in tail within age makes a feoffment in f - "ns
fee, and dies without iſſue, the donor ſhall not enter, becauſe Contra 6 H. 4.
there was privity betwixt them only in eſtate, and no right 3:
accrued to the donor by the death of the donee. So if (e) (+) Co. Lit. 337.
two joint-tenants be in fee, within age, and one makes a 1
feolfment in fee of his moiety, and dies, the ſurvivor cannot MIT [2
enter by reaſon of the infancy of his companion, for by his
feoffment the jointure was ſevercd ſo long as the feoftment
remains in force; and therefore in ſuch caſe the heir of the
feoffor ſhall have dum fuit infra ætatem, or ſhall enter into the
moiety: but if (/) two joint-tenants be within age, and they (/i Ro!! Rep.
join in a feoffment, in ſuch caſe a joint - right remains in them; 401. Lit. fegt.
and therefore if one dies, the right ſhall ſurvive, and the ſurvivor 933) 634- C.
ſhall have the right of the land as from the firſt feoffor : and 8
thereof, I conceive with Littl. cap. (g) Diſcont. 44. that the ſur- 21 E. 3. 50. 8. b.
or may enter in reſpect of the right accrued to him, other- 2 1 31
vile this miſchief will follow, that the heir of that feoffor who 142. 8
died cannot enter, becauſe the right doth ſurvive, nor ſhall Lit. 327. a


the


Co. Lit. 357. b.


Co. Lit. 634.


(a) 1 Roll. 676,
677.


(5 Co. Lit. 336.
b.


(e) Lit. ſect 633.
Co. Lit. 336. b.
337. a. Lit. 142.
a. Palm. 254


(4) Co. Lit. 336.
b. 337. a.


(e) Co. Lit. 336.
b. 202. a.

4 H. 6. 2. 3. b.
Fiz. Entie con-
geable 1.

Br. Entre con-
ge- ble 38.

Br. Condit. 71.
Br. D.iſcontinu-
ance 8.


(f) Co. Lit. 2 32.
4.


Walrr nin Caſe. Part VIII.


the ſurvivor enter, becauſe he ſhall not take benefit of the
infancy of his companion ; but that the ſurvivor ſhall be driven
to his writ of right, which without doubt he may have, be.
cauſe, after the feoffment, the joint- tenants might have Joined
in it, And if the huſband within age makes a feoffment in
fee and dies, the heir of the huſband cannot enter to avoid this
feoftment, becauſe nothing deſcended to him from the huf.
band: for the law doth not reſpect what eſtate the anceſtor
gives, but what eſtate he had before the gift, and what right
and title the anceſtor leaves to deſcend to his heir: and there-
fore if an infant be tenant in tail, and makes a feoffment in
fee, and dies without iſſue ; his (a) collateral heir cannot enter
to avoid this ſeoffment; for although by his feoffment he
gave fee ſimple, yet when he died without iſſue, nothing de-
ſcended to the heir, in reſpect of which he could enter: ſo if
lands be given to one and the heirs females of his body, and
he has iſſue a ſon, and makes a feoffment in fee, and dies
within age without iſſue female, the ſon ſhall not enter in
this caſe for the ſaid infancy, becauſe no right deſcended to
him. So if an infant be tenant pur (bj auter vie, and makes a
feoffment in fee, and Ce/luy gue vie dies, the infant or his
heir ſhall never enter upon the feoffee, but he in reverſion or
remainder : but foraſmuch as the infant himſelf, during his
life, might have entered upon the feoffee in the right of his
wife only, and not in reſpect of any right which he himſelf had,
it ſeems reaſonable with Littleton, fol. 43. that the wife in
the ſaid caſe, when the (c) huſband within age makes a ſeoff-
ment in fee, may enter in her own right, in which right her
huſband might have entered; and es potius, becauſe the hul-
band's heir cannot enter: but if the huſband within age
takes a wife tenant in general tail, and makes a gift in tail
to another, by which he gains a new reverſion in fee,
there the entry is given to the wife for the caule aforeſaid,
i. e. that the huſband might have entered in her (d) right;
alſo the heir of tne huſband who has the new reverſion de-
feats the eſtate tail given by the infant, preſently the new
reverſion by act in law vaniſhes from the one, and veſts in
the other, (e) and the wife by operation in law ſhall be
preſently ſeiſed of her ancient eſtate; ſor when the eſtate tail
is defeated, which was the cauſe of gaining the new reverſion,
the heir cannot have the eſtate which his anceſtor had before
the gift; for his anceſtor before the gift had nothing, but in
the right of his wife, which determined by his death, as t
is held in * 4 H. 6. 2. where the caſe was, that a man ſeiſed of
certain lands in the (/) right of his wife, made a ſeoffment


thereof by deed indented to certain perſons, upon GR
| l


part VIII. WuHITTINGHAM's Caſe,


that they ſhould leaſe the lands again to the huſband and wife
for their lives, with divers remainders over in tail, the re-
mainder to the right heirs of the huſband, and afterwards the
huſband dide, the feoffees leaſed the land to the wife for life,
with temainders over in tail, the remainder to the right heirs
of the wife, where it ſhould be to the right heirs of the huſ-
band: and in that caſe it is reſolved, that for the condition
broken, the (a) huſband's heir might enter; for altho' no
right deſcended to him from the huſband, whoſe eſtate deter-


44


(a) Co. Lit. 336.
b. 202. a. Fitz.


mined by his death, yet the title of condition, which he him- „
ſelf created on his feoffment, and reſerved to him and his congeable 38.


Br. Condit. 71.
Br. Diſcontinu-
ance 8.


heirs, ſhould deſcend after his death to his heir; and fo a
difference between a title of entry by reaſon of a condition,
and a right of entry by reaſon of infancy ; for none ſhall
take benefit of the infancy of his anceſtor, but he who has a
right deſcended to him from the ſame anceſtor ; but the heir
may take benefit of a condition, altho* no right deſcends to
him from the ſame anceſtor. Three other points are in a man-
ner reſolved in the ſaid caſe of (6) 4 H. 6. 1. that when the (4) 4 H. 6. 2. b.
huſband's heir enters for the condition broken, thereby the 3: 4. b.
fcoffment which made the (c) diſcontinuance is defeated, and (-) Br. Diſcon-
by conſequence, the diſcontinuance itſelf is defeated : 2. That 42vance 8,


aſter the heir of the huſband hath entered for the condition
broken, the eſtate of the heir vaniſhes, and the eſtate is (d)
immediately reveſted in the wife, without entry or claim
made by her ; for the heir enters by force of the condition, and
not in reſpect of any right, and there two caſes are put to
prove it: 1. If tenant for life makes a feoffment in fee upon
condition, who enters for the condition broken, now the feoff-
ment is avoided, and by conſequence the reverſion preſently
by the entry reveſted, 2. If the huſband himſelf had entered
for the condition broken, it had reveſted the eſtate in the wife.
The third point obſervable in the ſaid caſe of (e) 4 H. 6. is,
that although the wife had accepted an eſtate for life, and fo
concluded herſelf by acceptance to have any Cui in vita, yet
when the eſtate which ſhe had taken is defeated by the con-
dition, the concluſion by the acceptance is alſo avoided.
Vide Littleton, cap. Diſcontinuance 43. Privies ( in law,
as lord by eicheat, &c. ſhall never take benefit of the pri-
vity of infancy, becauſe he is a ſtranger to him; and when
the infant dies without heir, the feoffment is unavoidable,
The ſame law of (g) coverture, and Non ſauæ memoriæ,
and ſo you will better underſtand your books in 14 Ed. 3. Dum
uit infra ætatem 6. F. N. B. 192. 22 E. 3. 50. Dum fut infra
@tatem 2. 18 E. 2. (V) Brev. 831. 39 E. 3. 29. 45 wow: I
49 Ed.


(d) Co. | TAY
a. 336. b.


(e) 4 H. 6. 2. b.


3A. b.


Palm. 284.
7 Co. 7. b. 4 Co.
124. a. 1 Roll.
Rep. 401. 442.
22 Hf. 6. 27. a.
Br. Entry conge-
able 129. Palm.
234. 3 Bulſtr.
272. 2 Iaſt. 483.
(g) 1 Roll Rep,
401 3 Bulſt. 272.
(b) Palm. 254.


(a) 3 Bulſt. 59.


(0 Hard. 11.
1 Roll. Rep. 198.


(c) Hard. 11.


WarTTINGHAM'S Caſe. Part VIII.


49 Ed. 3. 13. 39 H. 6. 42. 34 H. 6. 31. 6 H. 4. 3. 9 H. 6.
85 7 H. 4. 5. 2 H. 4. 1 3 32 H. 6. 27. The NA
the Book of Aſſiſes, 87. b. 7 H. 5. 9.

It was alſo reſolved, that if the eſtate of the (a) infant had
been upon condition to be performed by the infant, and the
condition had been broken during his minority, that the land
had been loſt for ever. Note, reader, as to that, it is to be
known, that there are (5) two manner of conditions, feil, a
condition in fact, that is, exprefſed, as to pay money, or to
do, or not to do ſome other act, &c. and condition in lay,
that is implied: alſo conditions in law are of two natures,
ſcil. (c) by the common law and by the ſtatute : and conditions


Co. Lit. 233. b. in law by the common law are in two ſorts, one of which is


(d) Co. Lit.


**
Hard. 11. 32.
. Car. 555.
Co. Lit. 3 b.


(e) 1 Roll. 151.
Co. Lit. 233. b.
Godd. 345, 365,


(f) Plow.364.b.
Co, Lit. 233. b.
Co. Lit. 54. a.
F. N. B. 59. J.


(C Ploawl. 364.
b. 2 lait, 401.


(5 2 Inft, 382.
Co. Lit. 233. b.


See Cro. Car. 7.
Savern. v. Smith.


founded upon a confidence and ſkill, and the other without
confidence or ſkill ; conditions in law by ſtatute law are alſo
of two qualities, ſcil. when the ſtatute for execution of the
condition in law gives recovery, and when the ſtatute gives
an entry and no recovery ; as to the condition in law, which
is founded upon (4) ſkill and confidence, as the offices of par-
kerſhip, ſtewardſhip, &c. in fee, which deſcend to an infant,
or a feme-covert, if the condition in law annexed to the ſaid
offices be broken, it ſhall bar the infant and feme-covert for
ever; the ſame law of liberties and franchiſes: but if the
infant or feme-covert be leſſee (e) for life, or tenant by the
curteſy, or tenant in dower, and the infant, or the huſhand of
the wife makes a feoffment in fee, and the leſſor enters for the
forfeiture, as he may, yet it ſhall not bar the infant or ſeme-
covert, but that the infant or feme-covert, after the death of
the huſband, may enter, for that is by force of a mere condi-
tion in law, without any {kill and confidence annexed to the
eſtate. If an infant, or a feme-covert, leſſee for life, com-
mits waſte, and the leſſor recovers in an action of (/) waſte,
it ſhall bind the infant and feme- covert ; for the ſtatute gives
the action to recover the land. The ſame law of (g) Ce/ſavit,
and of other like caſes: as if an infant be Gaoler, and ſuffers
an eſcape, there an aCtion lies. But if the condition in law
be by force of a ſtat. law, which gives an entry, and no action;
as (Y) if an infant, or the huſband ſeiſed in the right of his
wife, aliens in mortmain, there, altho' the lord, of whom the
land is held, enters; yet the right of the infant or feme covert
is not barred, no more than in the caſe of a condition in law
by the common law, which is grounded upon the alienation
of the infant tenant for life, or of the huſband, &c. where en-
try to the leſſor is given by the common law. And ſo you will
better underſtand your books in 5 Aſſ. pl. 17. Br. Covert. 71.
Plow. Com. Stowell's caſe 355. Doctor and Student, lib. 2
fol. 113. Vide 13 (31) Edw. 3. Age 54. 14 Edw. 3. 88. 28
Edw, 3. 99. 2 Edw. 2. Age 132. 9 Ed v. 3. N
Ote,


part VIII. WutrTTINGHAM's Caſe, 15


Note reader, that a condition in law by force (a) of a ſta- (e) Co. Lit. 233.
tute which gives a recovery, is ſtronger than a condition in i
Jaw without a recovery; for (6) if lefſee for life makes a leaſe Lütt. **
for years, and afterwards enters into the land and commits (%) Co. Lit,233.
waſte, and the leſſor recovers in an action of waſte againſt the 1
leflee for life, he ſhall avoid the leaſe for years, made before
the waſte committed: (c) but if leſſee for life makes a leaſe (c) co. Lit. 33 f. b.
for years, and afterwards enters and makes a feoffment in fee,
the leſſor ſhall not avoid the leaſe for years. So if the tenant
makes a leaſe for years, and afterwards is attainted of felony,
or dies without heir, the lord by eſcheat, although he recovers
by writ of eſcheat, ſhall not avoid the term. But afterwards
it appeared in the principal caſe, that the ſaid ſuppoſed ſeoff-
ment of the ſaid Prudence was executed by letter (d) of at- (4) Antea 42, b.
torney made by the ſaid Prudence; wherefore it was reſolved, * op 4
that it was void, and that the land did eſcheat to the Queen.

dee I Salk. 386, Poſt, 99. Carthew 43.


JEHU


[ U
|
5
\
|
= |
1
1 0
" .
1
4 + &Y
10
Lu
:
.
| id
.
4
:
i | .
1 .
KA
.
I
» | .
4 N
' |
4 =Y
q al
N


Part VIII.


Jenu WEBIS Caſe.
Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


In the Common Pleas.


EHU WEBB brought an aſſiſe againſt Sir Thomas Knyret,
Knt. Lord Knyvet, John Freeburne, and Roger Rolles,

de libero tenemento ſuo in Weſtminſter, and made his plaint +
officio magiſtr. ludorum pilarum palmarium ( Anglice, the office
of the Maſter of the Tennis-plays) domini Regis nunc in Weſt⸗
minſter ; and for his title ſaid, Quod officium pred” eſt antiquum
efficium in Weſim* pred”, quodgue dominus Rex nunc 27 Nov. an-
no F. by his letters patent, &c, ex certd ſcientia et mero mtu
dedit et conceſſit eidem Jehu pred” officium Magiſt. ludorum pila-
rum palmarium tam infra palatium de Weſt præd', quam alibi
dicti dom Regis nunc Anglia, habend* et gaudend pred” officium
eidem Jebu, &c. durante tempore vitæ ipſius Jehu, c. by force
whereof the ſaid Jehu was ſeiſed of the ſaid office, with
the appurtenances, for his life, and that he took and received
the profits thereof to his own uſe, until the defendants wrong-
fully, and without judgment, diſſeiſed him, &c. and the
defendant pleaded, no wrong, no diſſeiſin. And upon the
evidence to the recognitors of the aſſiſe in this term, it was
held per totam curiam, that where the grant was in Engliſh,
of the office of the King's Tennis- plays in Weſtminſter, &c.
that this grant ſhould be taken in a reaſonable ſenſe; that
is to ſay, the tennis-plays for the King's houſhold, and not
only for the tennis-play when the King himſelf plays in
his royal perſon ; for the King is the head of his houſhold,
and therefore a digniori parte, the tennis-plays for his
houſhold, may well be called, the King's tennis- plays: ſo
where a commiſſion is made to take boys ſinging in ca-
thedral churches, &c. or other places where children are
taught to ſing, to furniſh the King's chapel, theſe gina
words


pat: VIII. Jen Wesz's Cafe.


words by conſtruction of law, bave a reaſonable intendment,

i], that ſuch boys as are brought up and taught to ſing, to
ſeek and get their living by it, may be taken for the King's ſer-
vice, and it will be a good preferment ſor them to ſerve the
King in his chapel ; but the ſon of a gentleman, or any other,
who is taught to ſing for his ornament, delight, or recreation,


will, or the conſent of his parents or friends; and fo it was
reſolved by the two Chief Juſtices, and the whole court of
Star-chamber, anno 43 Eliz. in the cafe of one Evans, who had
by colour of ſuch letters patent taken the ſon of Clifton (a
Gentleman of quality of Norfolk) who was taught to fing for
his recreation; which Evans, for the faid offence, was grievouſ-
Jy puniſhed. And in the caſe at bar, divers queſtions were
moved, in what caſes an (a) aſſiſe lay by the common law,
and in what by the ſtat. of Weſtm. 2. cap. (5) 25. It is to
be obſerved, that at the common law there was but two forms
of writs of aſſiſe of Novel diſſeiſin, ſcil. Mie de libero tene-
ments, and Aſſiſe de communid poſture for his catt'e, &c. which
was ſo (4) neceſſary, that without it his freehoid could not
be manured, and therefore it appears in 35 AT. pl. 11. 4 Ed.
2. Aſſ. 451. 11 Hen. 6 22. a. and other books; that A/ji/e de
libero tenemento lay of land, rent, and all other things whereof
a (e) Præcipe quod reddat lay at the common law. But of
(f) profits apprender in certo loco, the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2.
cap. 25. gave an aſſiſe of Novel diſtiſin, in lieu of a Quod
permittat, which was the remedy for them at the common
law, before the ſaid ſtatute, as is to be ſeen in 4 Ed. 2. Aft.
449. 8 Ed. 2. Aſſ. 385. 16 Ed. 2. Aſſ. 370. 31 Ed. 1. Aſſ.
440. &, And in ſome caſe the ſtat. gives an aſſiſe in caſe
where there was not any clear and certain remedy at the com.
law; for if one had not ſuch proſits apprender but for term
of his life, it was held, that he ſhould. not have a DPuzd
permittat for them, hecauſe ſuch writ was in the nature
of a writ of right, as appears in 30 Ed. 1. Puod permittat q.
where in a Quad permittat battle was waged. Vide 4 Ed.
3- 38. 32 Ed. 1. Juris utrum 14. F. N. B. 124. B. C. And
therefore the ſtat. faith, Quod breve aſſiſa nove diſjerſine Jocum
habeat (g) in pluribus caſibus quam prius habuit : and frit the
ſtatute begins, Cum proficuts capiendis, colligendis, aut-recipiendis
in alieno ſolo, Qc. ut in boſcis, ſcilicet, de ęſtoveriis bojer, et proficus
capiend in boſco. 2. De (%] nucib' et glandib' ct aliis fructib“
in aliens etiam ſolo colligendis, which are examples of profits
to be taken in woods. 3. De (i) corrodio, and of the parts
thereof, gue pertinent ad viclum & veſtitum, ſcilicet libe-
Vol, IV. T | ratione


and not thereby to get his living, cannot be taken againſt his


(2) Co. Lit.r59,


a,
(5% 2 Inſt. 409,


410, 411, 412,
&c.


(c) 2 Inſt. 411.
(4) 2 Inſt. 412%


(e) 2 Inſt. 411.
(J) 2 1nft. 411.


) 2 Inft. 417.


(5) 2 Inſt. 411.
F. N. B. 78. 1.


(i) 2 Inſt. 412,


n


an g
a” —— — ——


A 45
!


_— —


—


a: CT na


(a) 2 Inſt. 58.
219. 412.

Davis 13. As

12 Co. 33.

F. N. B. 178. g ·
(5) Moor 46.


® i. e. Poizage.


Jenv Wess's Caſe, Part vin.


ratione Pladi ac aliorum viftualium ac neceſſariorum, as apparel,
lodging, walhing, &c. in certo loco annuatim recipiend' which
is well explained by this word recipiend', for a corody is pro.
perly to be received, and eſtovers, and the other profits to he
taken, ſcil. capiend' & colligend'. So the firſt proßits are, pro-
ficua capiend” jeu colligend”, and the corody, &. is proficuum
reciprend”, |

4. De (a) tolneto, (et ut ſpecie” ejuſdem) tronagio, paſſagis,
pontagio, (b) pannagio et hits ſimil' in certis locis capiendis. Jol.
netum, i. e. iheolonium, TA. Grad, et Latine vecligal, quit
dicitur, a vehendo, quia præſlatur de rebus que vehuntur, a ve-
hendis mercibus, fic d1iflum, unde dicuntur vectores gui vehunt, at
Bratton, lib. 2. cap. 24. numero 3. Si cui concedatur talis libertas,
c. quod theolontum et conſuetudines capiat, (which is the word
that the ſtatute uſes, /cil, capiendis) infra libertatem ſuam di
ementibus et vendentibus, Sc. Vide Fleta, lib. x. cap. 47. E
nota, Bracton wrote in = end of Henry the third, father of
King Edward I. and Fleta wrote in the 'icign of King Ed-
ward I. who made the ſaid act. And in the goſpel of 8t.
Matthew, cap ix. ver. 9, Jeſus tranſiens vidit hominem ſodenten
ad telonium : Mark ii. 14. Luke v. 27. Vide 30 Edw. I. Af.
fiſe 401. No aſſiſe lies of ſuit to a mill, but a writ De fc
ad milendinum, but of the toll of a market an aſſiſe lies; and
ſo of the toll of a mill. Vide 23 H. 3. + 435. tit. Aſſiſe 427.
acc. So of toll thorough, toll traverſe, and toll turn, and
all theſe a man ſhall have in his own land; and yet he being
diſſeiſed of them, ſhall have an aſſiſe of them. Tronagiume/t
ſpecies tolneti et dicitur a trona, which ſignifies a beam with which
things are tobe weighed, et proprie tronagium exigi debet de pin-
deratione lanarum, et peſagium & exigi debet de mercibus, as ap-
pears by a record in the Treaſury, Hil. 5 Ed. 3. Lincoln' ru:
mer* 32. but the one is often taken for the other. And it ap-
pears by Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 12. which was written in the time
of E. 1. in which time the ſtat. was made, thot trona ſignifies
a beam. Paſſagium, that is properly a ferry for the paſlage of
men and cattle over a water, for which the owner has a toll;
for if a man has paſſage in the barge or veſſel of another, to
the church, or elſewhere, it is not any profit, but an ealt-


ment, v:hereof no alliſe lies, as it is adjudged in 31 E. 3. All.


Br. Aſſiſe
337. Br. Chi-
min S. Br.
Pleint in Af. 31.
Fitz. Aſijſe 317.


(4) Davis 13 4. b.


44. and 19 Ed. 2. Aff. 309. and 34 Aſſ. pl. 13. an Ajiſe «
Novel diſſeiſin doth not lie of a (c) way, becauſe it is but an
eaſement, and no profit to be taken, nullum proficuum recipiend',
as the ſtatute ſpeaketh. (4) Pontagium, pontage is a toll for
paſſage or carriage over a bridge, and thereupon it is called
pontape, as appears 3 Ed. 3. Af. 445. and F. N: B. 227. and
Regitter 259. Kex colizetoribus, Fc. pantag* in villa ds S. Ge.

; (a) panua-


(2) Pau um is properly a liberty ſer hogs to feed on acorns, &c.


Part VIII. Jenu Wers's Caſe,


(a) pannagium is a toll for the paving of a city, or a cauſey,
or a way, as appears in 3 Ed. 3. Aſſiſe 445. F. N. B. 227.
Reg. 259. and in old times it was written pavagium, or pau-
vagium, or pavigium, and by corruption pannagium, ſcil. nn for
uu, &c. The ſtatute goes farther, et his ſimilibus, as for (b)
murage, ſcil. toll for making of a wall for ſafeguard of men
in time of war or tumult, as appears in the ſaid books of 3 E.
3. and F. N. B. 227. Regiſter 259. (c) Cranage is a toll for
drawing of merchandize out of veſſels to the whart, &c. and
ſo cel, becauſe the inſtrument is in the form of a crane.


Vids Dyer 18 Eliz. 352. and the Book of Entries 3. So of


ſtallage, (4) picage, wharſage, anchorage, Pedagium, a pede
diftum, quod a tranſeuntibus ſoluitur.

5. De (e) sfficits, ſcil. cuſtodiis beſcorum, parcorum, foreſla-
rum, chacearum, warrennarum, portarum, et alits ball:vis et of=
fictis in feodn, jacet de cæters aſſiſa nove dijſeiſine ; which words
(de cetero) have perſuaded divers, that an aſſiſe of an office did
not lie at the common law, and fo are ſome opinions in 16
Ed. 2. Aſſ. 370. and that no alliſe by the ſtatute lay of any
ofhce, but of an office in (/ fee, becauſe the aſſiſe came in
lieu of a Duod permittat, which none could have at the time
of making the act, as hath been ſaid, but tenant in fee. /7% 4
Ed. 2. Aſſiſe 449. and 8 E. 2. ibid. 385. But it appears by
our books, that an aſſiſe lay of an office ut de (g) libero tene-
mento, at the common law, for of all that a Præcipe quid
reddat lay at the common law, an aſſiſe lay. 7 Ed. 3. 63. b.
in Henry de Parker's caſe a writ of entry in the per and cui,
de Balliva cuſtodiendi parcum de Charkell cum pertinentiis; and
8 Ed. 3. 55. b. 56. a. the Biſhop of Saliſbury's cafe, a writ of
Aiel de Bedelria hundredi de Cademinſter, et nota there dichum
Stouſe, 10 Edw. 3. 27. b. acc. and 19 Edw. 3. View 77. Ad
terminum qui præteriit brought de Bedelria de Soke of Win-
cheſter; and exception was taken, that it was a profit iſ-
tuing out of no freehold, et non all:catur. (bh) 18 Edw. 3.
27. a. A Formedan of the office of Serjeanty in the'cathe-
dral church of Nichol'. Vide (1) 27 H. 8. 12. a. 7 H. 6.8.
b. 7 (#) Aſſ. pl. 12. 10 (1) Aſſ. pl 11. the ſtature faith, office
in tee ; yet an aſſiſe lies of an office, altho' the diſſeiſee has
but an eſtate for (n] life; for the ſtatute was made as to that
in aſſirmance of the com. law, as in 30 All. p. 4. offrerum (u
meſforts, 22 li. 6. 9. b. the office ot (e) packing of cloths,
xc. and if the office of Sheriff is granted for lite, an affiſe
lies of it, 9 Ed. 4. 6. a. b. the office of one of the (Y) clerks
of the crown in the Chancery, 18 Ed. 2. Aſſiſe 377. Aſſiſc of
the office of the Bedel of the hundred (honour) of Weltm'
and Ylidd', and 4 Ed. 2. Aſſiſe 449 and ibid. 8 Ed. 2. 385.

| „ the


47
(a) Davis 13. 2.


(5) Dav. 13. a. b.


() Dyer 352.


27.


(d) Davis 13. b.


(e) F. N. B. 178. f.
Poſtea 5 5. a.
2 Inſt. 412.


FI 2 Inſt, 412.


(s) F. N. B. 173,
t. 2 Inſt, 412,


Y Co.Lit 20.4.
1 Roll. 838.

7 Co. 33. be
Nevil's caſe.

(i) Poftea 47. b.
49. b. Br. Præ-
cipe quod red-
dat 1. f

47 Rr. Aſſiſe 12 1.
Br. Plaint, &c. 9.
{1) Br. Præcipe
quod reddat 10.
( 2 Inſt. 42.
(n) Fitz. Allie
299. Br. Atiie
307. Br, Plaint,
&c. 16.

(o) Fitz. A ſſiſe
10. Br. Aſſiſe 76.
(p) Br. Ai e 95.
Fita. Alaie 29.


7
7% * 4 7 us P * .
- — Sens
— w_ hw 4


4 1
I - _ * hs
p — ?
. : o
v5 - 7 — A
- - —— + d $4


—— —


PG” — OO. —
—
- a wet 4. — A. 23 p , We


—


I Jenv Werrs's Cafe, Part VIII.
the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, by deed dedit Johanni Porter ian


cure ſue Cantuarienſis, which grant was but for life, and yet

(a) Fitz, Aſſiſe an aſſiſe lay. 8 Ed. 4. 16. b. an aſſiſe of an office (a) in the
2 Dy ot boy Common Pleas, 28 H. 8. Dyer 7. and 3 Mar. Dyer 114. an
114. pl. 63, aſſiſe lies of the office of a (5) philizer in the Common Pleas,
Godb. 48. and the poſt where he fits ſhall be put in view, 5 Mar. Dyer
* 9 153. Aſſiſe lies of the office of the (c) Regiſter of the Admi.
(%) 2 Inft. 412. ralty, which the plaintiff had for life. Note, although the
proceedings in that court be according to the civil law, yet

the oſhces are determinable by the common law: ſo of a Re.

giſter of the conſiſtory of a Biſhop, 31 H. 8. Br. Grants 134.

Aſſiſe licth of the office of Steward, Bailiff, or Receiver of a

(4) 2 Tnft. 412. manor ; and all this is meant of offices of (4) profit, and not
of an office of charge and no profit, as it is held in 27 Hen,

8. 12. and 31 Ed. 1. Aſſiſe 440. Yide21 Ed. 3, 4. b. And

where ſome ſay in the time of Ed. 2. as is aforeſaid, that an

aſſiſe was given by the ſaid ſtatute in lieu of a Quod permittat,

(*) laſt. 412, there is (e) no writ in the Regiſter of a Qued permittat of an
office; and yet I have a Regiſter of Hen. II. which was long

before the ſaid act; and I conceive, that no writ of Quod per-

mittat lay of an office, becauſe a Præcipe quod reddat lay of it,

as before is ſaid ; and therefore a man ſhall have an aſſiſe of an

office ut de libero tenemento, at the common law. And the ſla-

tute, as to offices, was but a declaration of the common lau,

as hath been faid, and to remove a doubt which then was,

And ſo the faid words (jacet de cætero, &c.) are to be intend-

ed, that jacet de c@tero abſque difficultate, And it appears by

the principal caſe at bar, and by the ſaid books of offices in

the Chancery, King's Bench, and Common Pleas, that al-

though the courts are removeable in which the offices are,

et if they be in a certain place at the time of the diſſeiſin,

it ſufficeth: for the words de proficuo in certo loco capiend,

extend to eſtovers, &c. and not to the clauſe of offices.

Vide 4 Ed. 4. 2. And the ſtatute faith, in omnibus ſupra-

eliftis caſibus modo conſueto fiat breve de libero tenemento: ſo that

FJ + Inf. now of all profits apprender in certo (/) loco, the writ ſhal
* 45. #17" be de libero tenemento: and the old writ is given in a new
'6 Mod 118. caſe; and therefore in 11 Aſſ. pl. 13. the writ was generi
de libero tenemento, and the plaint de quatuor acris ſaliceſi;

(e) Fitz. Pleint that is four acres of (g) willows, and to have reaſonable
14. eſtovers in 100 acres of wood, ſcil. houſebote and hay-
Br. Aſſiſe 167. bote, and the plaint was challenged, 1. Becauſe the plant
Br. Plaint, c. ought not to be de quatuor acris ſaliceti, but terre or prati
XY 2. Becauſe the plaintiff had joined in one plaint two free-
holds, one, ſcil. the four acres of willows at the common

law, and the other, {c!, the eſtovers by the ſtatute, jr


part VIII. Jznu WEII's Caſe. 48


the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. (a) cap. 25. et non allocatur. And (f 2 1,6. jos
there it is ſaid, Quod iſſo termin, a plaint of two rents ſervice 410, c.
was adjudged good, for liberum tenement”, although it be in the

fingular number, yet is amen collectivuum. Vide (b) 7 Al. 18. (5) fr. Afiſe
and the ſtatute further faith, er ficut prius jacuit, et locum habuit 126. Br. Plaint,
in com” paſture, ita de cætero locum habeat in com” turbarig, piſ- *

cariæ, et aliis com' hiis ſimilil', quas quis habet pertin' ad lilerum
tenemen', vel etiam fine tenemento per ſpeciale factum ad minus ad
terminum vitæ. And the reaſon wherefore an aſſiſe lay at the
com. law, of common of paſture, and not of other commons,
was, becauſe there was a ſpecial writ in the Regiſter for com-
mon of paſture, and not for any other common; and in dieb'
illi they held themſelves (c) ſtrictly to the form and order of (c) 2 Inſt. 407,
the Regiſter, which is mentioned in the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. 7
made 13 Ed. 1. cap. (4) 24. Vide temp R. 2, Grants 104. (4), 16. 405,
A man ſhall not have a writ of aſſiſe, quod diſſeiſivit eum de 406, &c.
libero e/loverio, and yet Bracton held, I 4. f. 231. 9 (e) lo- (4) 2 Inſt. 412.
cum habet aſſiſa de qualibet communia pertin ad liberum tenemen-

tum, ſe. communia paſture, tur bariæ, Fc. and 12 Hen. 3. Afſ-
ſiſe 417. that an aſſiſe lay of common of + piſcary, &c. And + 2 Inft. 412.
theſe opinions had great probability of reaſon, but becauſe

there wanted a writ for them in the Regiſter, for that cauſe

before this ſtatute an aſſiſe did not lie of them, but a Que

permittat; and it appears by Bracton, lib. 5. trat“ de exceptio-

nibus, Cap. 17. fol. 413. who wrote a little before the mak-

ing of the ſaid act, that original writs cannot be (f) /f) 2-Inft. 407.
changed, but by act of Parliament. For there he divides Co. Lit. 73. b.
writs into three branches. Sunt guedam brevia formata (id
el originalia) ſeu de curſu ; (which as appears there, were firſt
formed and made by authority of Parliament :) guedam ju-
dicialia ex eis (id eft, ex originalibus) ſeguentia, Sc. quadem
magiftralia, (que nec ſunt de curſu, nec /ormata, id eſt, de a-
liqud certa forma) et ſæpius variant, ſecundum wvarietatem caſuum
faclorum et querelarum : (as are actions on the caſe, actions
of deceit, prohibitions, - &c. which have not any certain
form, &c) And of writs or originals formed or of courſe,
Bracton wrote divers remarkable things, (2) Breve guidem
cum ſit formatum ad ſimilitudinem regule juris, quia breuter et
paucts verbis intentionem proſerentis exponit et expianat, ſicut |
regula juris rem que eft breviter enarrat, &c. Sunt (h) quedam (4) Co. Lit. 73. b.
brevia formata ſub certis caſibus de curſu, et de communi con- |
filio totius regni conceſſa & approbata, que quidem nullatenus

mutari poterint abſque conſenſu et voluntate eorum. By which

it appears, that writs formed, and of courſe, that is, ori-

ginals, were at firſt authorized by Parliament, and without

Parliament cannot be altered or (i) changed, and therewith agree (i) 2 Iaft. 40.
our Looks, for inaſmuch as the original writ of A % uitimg Co. Lit. 23. b.


1 3 pr eſen-


F — mn « X —


r


1
y
0
:
i,
$ »


(g) Co. Lit. 73. b.


(a) Dy. 8. pl. 16.
7 H 7. 2. a. Br.
General brief,
&c, 13 in medio.
Br. General
brief, &c. 8.
24 E. 3. 38. b.
F. N. B. 134. f.
2 And. 96.
(%) Br. Warran-
tia Chartz 18.


(e) Co. Lit. 73.
** 3 Co. 38. as


44) 2 Inſt. 4055
406, &c.
(c) 2 Inſt, 407.


Jznu WBB's Caſe, Part VIII.


fpreſentationis was formed in theſe words, quis adveeatus temyny
pacis præſentuvit ultimam perſonam que mortua i, this form
ſhall hold, and cannot be changed, although the incumbent
reſigns, as appears in 18 Ed. 2. {iſe de Darren preſentmunt
20. &c. and F. N. B. 31 H. 3. (6.) Alſo the writ of Mar.
rantia churtæ is framed in theſe words, gued juſtie, &c. war.
rantizet B. unum meſſuagium in D. &c. unde chartam habet, Et.
And yet if he be bound to warranty by force of an exchange,
or by (a) homage anceſtrel, the form of the writ ſhall not be
altered, 9 Ed. 4. 49. b. 21 (6) H. 6. 8. a. &c. Fitz. Nat. Br,
124. and many other caſes may be put upon the ſame ground.
Alfo Bracton further ſaith, communia brevia inter omnes pro jure
generaliter obſervari debent cum ſunt originalia, et attionibus origi
nem preftent : and therewith agrees Fitzherbert in his Preface
to his Nat. Brevinm : © In every art and ſcience there are
& certain rules and fundamentals, to which a man ought to
« givecredit and belief, and which he cannot deny: in like
manner there are divers rules and fundamentals in the
„ knowledge of the common law of the land, to which a
* man ought to give credit and belief, and not deny them,
&« which are very neceſſary for thoſe who will underſtand the
e faid Jaw, eſpecially at the beginning, for upon thoſe (e)
« foundations the whole law depends; for which cauſe in
* times paſt, a very profitable book was compoſed, called the
« Regiſter, which contains divers principles, by which he
« ſhall be well inſtructed who would underſtand the faid
& Jaws.”

And that was the reaſon, that foraſmuch as there was no
original writ formed of atliſe, of Nevel diſſeiſin, of com-
mon of turbary, piſcary, &c. but only of common of pal-
ture, for that reaſon no aſſiſe of Novel diſſeiſin lay of them
before the ſaid ſtatute of 13 Ed. 1. And with BraQtion a-
grees Fleta, which book was wrote a little after the ſaid act
of 13 Edw. 1. Dicuntur brevia cum ſint formata ad ſimilitudinen
regulæ juris que breviter et paucts verbis intent” proferent” exponit
et explanat' : ſicut regula juris rem que eft brev' enarrat, Et.
Et ſunt quadum brevia formata ſub certis caſibus, et quadan
de curſu, que conſilio totius regni ſunt approbata, que quidem nu-
tari non poterint abſque corundem contrarid voluntate. Sunt et


| brevia ex eis ſequentia, que dicuntur judicialia. And whereas


aſterwards, at the fame Parliament of Weſlm. 2. 13 Ed. 1.
(4) c. 24. it is enacted, et (e) guotieſcunque de cetero eventrit
in CancelP quod in uno caſu reperitur bre', et conſimili caſu cadentt


ſub eodem jure et ſimili indigente remedia non reperitur, concaraent


clerici de CancellP in FITS vel atterminent quarentes in


proxim” Parliament”, et ſcribantur taſus in quibus ä non
fp! Ant


part VIII. IJxùu WrI B's Caſe,


ofſunt & referant eos ad proxim Parliament” & de conſenſu
juriſperitorum frat breve ne contingat de cætero quod Curia do-
mini Regis deficiat conguerentibus in juſtitia perquirenda : and
the preamble of the ſaid 24th chapter was conſonant to the
concluſion de cetero nom (a) recedant querentes a Curia Regis
ne remedio, By force of which act the writ called the writ
de Ingreſſu in conſimili caſu, was formed by the Clerks of the
Chancery, as it is adjudged in 3 E. 2. Entry 8. which was
given in the ſame age that the ſaid act was made, and F. N.
B. 206. f. Vide 38 E. 3. 13. Note, reader, at the time of
the making of the ſaid act, as it appears in Fleta, ib. 2. cap.
13. The Clerks of the Chancery (which are meant in the
ſaid act) were grave, wiſe, and circumſpect men, ſworn to
the King, and of profound knowledge in the laws and cuſ-
toms of England; for the words of the book are, % inter
cetera gusddam officium dicitur Cancellaria quod viro provide &
diſcreto, Ec. magnæ dignitatis debet committi, Cc. cut aſſocien-
tur clerici honeſti & circumſpecti, Domino Regi jurati, qui in legibus
et conſuetudinibus Anglicants notitiam habeant pleniorem, &c. And
the writs which they form, are called (b) Brevia magi/tralia,
becauſe theſe Clerks, for their knowledge, were called Ma-
giftri Cancellariæ, as thoſe who wrote Brevia de curſu were,
and yet are called Curſitorii. And as the writs which the
Curſitors write are called Frevia de curſu; ſo the writs which
the Maſters draw in difficult cafes, are called Brevia magiſtra-
lia. But when ſuch clerks, ſo knowing of the law, failed,
then the Judges in many caſes, gave allowance to ancient
forms of writs, and drove the party to make a (c) ſpecial
count when the writ doth warrant the count in ſubſtance, al-
though there be variance in circumſtance, as in the ſaid caſes
of darrein preſentment, and (d) warrantia chartæ, and many
others, the ſubſtance of the one is the avoidance, and death
or reſignation, but the circumſtance; and in the other war-
ranty 1s the ſubſtance, and the manner of it but the cir-
cumſtance ; but when the caſe will not bear it, (as in aſſiſe
de communia paſture, he cannot make his plaint of common
of piſcary, turbary, &c.) then wilimum refugium is to refer it
ad proximum Parliamentum, as the ſtatute ſpeaks. Nota, rea-
der, in the ſaid ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 24. a little before
it is ſaid, et in regiſtro de Cancellaria non ęſi inventum aliquod
breve in iſto caſu ſpeciali- and therefore the ſtatute pro-
vides remedy in it, by which appears alſo the antiquity
of the (e) regiſter, which is as ancient as original writs, the
antiquity whereof ſee in the preface to the Third Part of
my Reports. And in the principal caſe, exception was


1 4 quod


(a) 2 Inft. 4063


(3) 2 Inſt, 407.


(e) F. N. B. 33
b. c.


(d) 2 And. 96.
F. N. B. 134. f.
24 E. 3. 35+ b.
Br. Gen. Brief,
&c. 8.

7 H. 7. 2. a.

9 E. 4. 49. b.
21 H. 6. 8. a.
Br. Gen. Brie
&c. 13. in Me-
dio.


(e) Co. Lit. 16. b,
73. b. 159. a.


taken to the plaint, becauſe in his title he faith,


() 27 H. 8. 12. a.
Antea 47. a.

Br. Præcipe quod
reddat I.


% Fitz, Ace
296. |
Antea 47. a.

Br. aſſiſe 307.
Br. Pleint, &c. 16.


(c) Cr. Car. 50,
Sts


(d) Fitz. Office
gel Court 6.
Fitz. Pleint 4s
Br. Pleint, &c.


19.


(e) Antea 47. a.
Fitz. Aſſiſe
Br. Aſſiſe 76,


Br. A ſſiſe 95.
gu Aſſiſe. *


Antea 47. 4.


Jenv Wesz's Caſe, Part VIII.
qu:d officium pradiftum ęſi antiguum officium in Weſtm? yr,


dif : quougque prædictus dominus Rex nunc, etc. per litera 2
patentes, etc. conceſſit eidem Jehu officium magiſiri ludorum bi
larum palmarium, etc. Habend idem efficium eidem Febu, du-
rante vita ſud, etc. And doth not ſhe that any profit belongs
to the ſaid office, and a man ſhall not maintain an aſſiſe of
an office without profit, as the book is in (a) 27 H. 8. But
it was anſwered and reſolved, that the plaint was well
enough: for true it is, that of an office of charge no aſſiſe
lies, as it is held in 30 Aſt. pl. 4 8 E. 4. 22. and 27H.8,
12. and 30 Aft. pl. 4. There aſſiſe was brought of the office
of Reaper of the manor of D. cum pertinen', and there Shard
took a difference between an ancient office and a new office;
ſor in an aſſiſe of a new office firſt erected and appointed,
there, the plaintiff ought to ſhew what fee or profit is granted
for the exerciſing of it, for it cannot have a (c) fee and pro-
fit belonging to it, as an ancient office may. And there
Burton faith, that their opinion was, that if a man makes
plaint of the office, and of the profit, the plaint bad abated;
for by the recovery of the office, the fee and profit, as par-
cel of it, ſhall be recovered ; and therewith agrees the book
in 8 E. 4. 22 b. where in an affiſe of an (4) office in the
Common Pleas, he made his plaint of the office and fee,
and wages and commodities ; and Choke excepted againſt i,
becauſe he complained of one thing twice, ſcil. of the &-
fice and of the fee: Jenny, who was of Counſel with the
plaintiff, We have amended our plaint ; for it is but of the
office, with the appurtenances. Pigot : 'Then the plaint is not
good: for a man ſhall not maintain an aſſiſe of an office
without profit: and the Court held the plaint good as to that
and therewith agree 5 Ed. 4 3. (e) 22 H. 6. 9. b. 9 Ed. 4.6.
a. b. And it is to be known, that if a man be diſſeiſed of
the whole office, he ſhall have an aſſiſe de «fficio cum pertiner-
tiis; but if he be diffeiſed of parcel of the profits, he may
have an aſſiſe of theſe parcels only, 22 H. 6. 11. b. 13 Edu.
3. Plaint 23. If a man gives me the keeping of his park,


taking two pence per diem, and a robe, the plaint ſhall not be


of the office or keeping, if I be not difſeiſed of the whole office:
but if I be diffeiſed of the robe or fee, the plaint ſhall be


only thereof. And 3 Edw. 3. Aſſiſe 175. An aſſiſe of no-


vel diſſeiſin was brought, and he made his plaint of a profit


apprender, for the keeping of the park and wood of Preſton,
every day of the year a penny half-penny for his Poul
Su | 1


Part VIII. Jan Werz's Caſe, 50


and a robe, and the aſſiſe was maintained: and there Scrope

held, that if I have a corrody to take four loaves, and four fla-

gons of ale in the week, although they are but one corrody and

one freehold, yet if 1 be diſſeiſed only of the bread, I ſhall

not complain of both, /cz/. of the ale and the breatl, but only

of the bread, otherwiſe my plaint ſhall abate ; but if I be

diſſeiſſed of two of the loaves only, I ſhall make my plaint of

all the four loaves, with which agree (a) 22 H. 6.9. b. and (a) Antea 47. a.
12 AMT. pl. 23. Aſſiſe was brought of meat and drink as ap- 49-Þ-
purtenant to an office. And in the principal caſe at bar, the a.
aſhſe found for the plaintiff againſt Roger Rolls, in duobus
Spheriſteriis, Anglice, tennis-courts, quorum unum vocatur, the

cloſe tennis-court, et alterumivcaatur, the Brake in Heſim' pred”

and aſſeſſed damages and coſts, and acquitted the Lord Kny-

vet and John Freeborn, of the diſſeiſin of the office aforeſaid, *

Ides conſideratum eft quod prædictus Fehu recuperet ſeiſinam ſuam

verſus præfatum Rogerum de officio prædicto in prædictis duobus

ſpbæriſleriis per viſum recognitorum af ſs prædidtæ, with da-

mages and coſts, et prædiclus Rogerus in miſericordia, et Þre- „ poges 66. 3
diftus Fehu in miſericordia pro fulſo clamore ſuo verſus prefat' 2 Inſt. 410.
Tho. Knyvet et Fohannem PFreeborn, eo quod ipſi de diſſeiſina (6) 1 Roll, 822,

predif? ſuperius acquietati exiſtunt, et prædic! Thomas et Fo- 48 5
hannes Freeborn eant inde fine die, etc. And it is to be known, 14 H. 6.22. b.
that at the common law, the aſſiſe was remedium maxime * 2 laſt. 410.

fejlinum, et maxime beneficiale : feſlinum, for therein the de- 6 ag

fendant ſhall not be (65) eſſoigned, nor caſt a (c) protection; L Inf, — my
alſo the defendant ſhall not pray in (4) aid of any but only Plowd. 3g.

of the King, neither ſhall he (e) vouch a ſtranger nor any => Cm 53.
party to the writ, unleſs he enters preſently into the war- (4) 2

ranty: the ſame law of (/ receipt : allo the (g) parol ſhall 9 H. 5. 14 a.

not demur for nonage, either of the plaianff or defendant; 85 = - 23. b.

and in many other teſpects the aſſiſe is remedium maxime feſti- F. N. 8. *

num : 1t is alſo maximè beneficiale ; for in no action at the com- 2 Rol. 245,748.

mon law, a man ſhall recover the land itſelf and damages, 8 — b.

but only in an aſſiſe againſt the diſſeiſor. Vide the ſta- 5

tute of Glouceſter, cap. 1. And in ſome caſe a man / loft. 40.

ſhall have an aſſiſe of novel diſſeiſin at the common law, (L) 2 Inſt. 410,

when he himſelf is ſeiſed of the freehold of the land: 2p

as where the lord, &c. doth often diſtrain, (5) that the 27 Aſſſſe gr.

terre-tenant cannot manure his land; in that caſe the terre- W nn ©7394

tenant may have an aſſiſe, and the writ thall be general; 2 A one,

but he ſhall make a ſpecial plaint, that the lord, Kc. 4 Co. 1. b.


did u. 44 3.


Jznuv Wens's Caſe. Part VIIT,
did often diſtrain, &c. and the judgment ſhall not be gud


querens recuperet ſeiſinam tenementorum prediftorum, for the


| plaintiff himſelf is ſeiſed of the freehold ; but the judgment


(a) 2 Inſt, 409,
410, 411, 412,
&c,


ſhall be, that he ſhall have and hold the land, ab/que multiplici
diſtrictione, etc. So in caſu quo quis paſcit ulterius ſeperale, the
terte-tenant ſhall have an aſſiſe by the common law. And the
ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. (a) cap. 25. is but an affirmance of the
common law; for in the ſame manner he ſhall have an aſſiſe
for fiſhing in his ſeveral piſcary or turbary, and the writ ſhall
be general, as appears by the ſtatute. But the plaintiff in
his plaint ought to ſhew, that the defendant claiming com-
mon of paſture in his ſeveral grounds, with his cattle, &c.
and the judgment ſhall not be, that he ſhall recover the
ſeiſin of the tenements, &c. but that he ſhall have and hold
them in ſeveralty ; for the plaintiff himſelf is in ſeiſin of the
freehold, and therefore he cannot make his plaint to be
diſſeiſed of his freehold, for it is not ſo; and then the judg-
ment would not purſue it. Vide F. N. B. 178. b. 27 Aſſ. pl.
30. & 51. 28 Aſſ. pl. 50. Weſtm. 2. cap. 25.


SYMS's


Part VIII.


5s Y M $'s Ca.
Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


Which began Hil. 5. Rot. 2541.


TT — |


AMES GAME brought a Formedon in the remainder a-

gainſt William Syms and Mary his wife, and demanded
a houſe, forty-five acres of land, fix acres of meadow, &c. in
Wethermonford, &c. in Eſſex, of a gift made by Henry
Winter to Stephen his ſon, and to the heirs males of his
body, &c. the remainder to John his ſon, and to the heirs
males of his body, &c. the remainder to Alice Winter, and
her heirs ; and that the demandant was ſon and heir to
Alice, and that Stephen and John were dead without iſſue,
&c. The tenant pleaded in bar a fine levied by the ſaid Ste-
phen to William Brown, of the tenements aforeſaid ; by
which he did grant, that he and his heirs warrant” tenementa
pred cum pertinen, etc. contra omnes homines ; after which fine
the faid John died without iſſue, and afterwards the ſaid
Stephen died without iſſue. Poſt cujus mortem warrantia ipſius
Stephani prædicta in fine pradift ſuperius ſpecificat deſcendebat
prefate Aliciæ ut ſorori et hærædi prædict Stephani, and aſter
the deſcent of the warranty the ſaid Alice died, po cujus mor-
tem warrantia predic?” dſcendebat prefat' Facobo ut filis et bærædi
pred” Aliciæ, et petit judicium fi præd Jacob adtionem ſuam
pred” contra warran' prad* habeat, etc. The demandant
confeſſed the fine aforeſaid, &c. and the death of John Win-
ter without iſſue, and the ſaid Stephen died prout, etc. ſed ul-
terius dicit quod predifta warrantia prædicti Stephani deſcende-
bat prefate Aliciæ ſui ut ſorori et uni hæredi prædicbi Stephani, ac
cuidam Thomiæ Rampton ut alteri cobæredi pred” 3 mw

ewe


Cro. Jac. 217,
218.


LY
- x44 4, + —


— * 8 * 9 4 2.43 St es v9 WA. ou oo»


(a) Fitz. Vouch.
73. |
Poſtea 52. a.

1Mod. Rep. 182.
® Poſtea 52. a. b.


(5) Cr. Jac, 218.


fc) Co. Lit.
373. b. 1 Mod,
Rep. 182.


(e) Fitz. Garan-


ty 6.


Br. Garranty 56.


Svus's Caſe.
ſhewed how, and after the death of the ſaid Alice, the aid


warranty guoad un medietat' tenement” pred” deſcendebat eidem
Facobo ut filio & hæredi pred” Alicie, &c., Upon which the
tenant did demur in law, whether the warranty which de-
ſcended on both the heirs, ſhould bar the ſaid Alice and her
heic for the whole, or but for the moiety, foraſmuch as the
warranty deſcended on both, and Alice only had right to the
ſaid land, was the queſtion, and it was objected, that it ſhould
be a bar but for one moiety, becauſe the warranty doth not
only deſcend on her, but on the other ſiſter: and the caſe in
(a) 45 Edw. 3. 23. a. b. was cited, which is abridged by Br,
* Garrantie 14. where he abridges the caſe to this effect: huſ.
band and wife, tenants in ſpecial tail, to them and the heirs
of their bodies, have iſſue a daughter, the huſband diſcon-
tinues the eſtate-tai] with warranty, and the wife dies; and
he took another wife, and had ifſue another daughter, the
huſband dies, the elder daughter took huſhand and they
brought a Formedon, and the tenant did rebut for one moiety
by reaſon of the warranty and aſſets, and recovered for the
other moiety, for he could not rebut for the other moiety, be-
cauſe the warranty did not deſcend only on ber. But it was
reſolved by Coke, C. J. & tot" cur”, that in the caſe at bar
Alice and her heir was barred for (5) the whole; for the war-
ranty is entire, and extends to the whole land, and is a bar to
every perſon on whom it deſcends, of all the right which ſhe
had in the land; and if each of them had right jointly or
ſeverally, each is barred ; and if one only had right, and the
other nothing, ſhe which had the only right ſhall be barred of
the whole, for as to that purpoſe the whole warranty deſcends
to each of them. And therewith agrees a caſe adjudged in
the point in 5 Ed. 2. War. (c) 78. where Sibil brought a Sur
cui in vita, of the ſeiſin of Margery her grandmother, the
tenant pleaded, that the ſaid Sibil is coheir with Ehn and
Maud, to one Walter their couſin, whoſe heirs they Me, and


that the ſaid Walter did enfeoff the tenant with warfnty,


judgment, &c. and there it is objected, that in the manner
as one ſhall vouch, he ought to rebut, but you cannot vouch
us, (quaſi diceret, that he ſhould not vouch one only, becauſe


the warranty deſcends on all, and in the like manner, that be


ſhould not rebut only againſt one, but it ought to be for a


third part, becauſe the demandant is not ſole heir to the war-


(4) 1 Mod. Rep.
182, 183.


ranty.) Jo which (4) Hervy, C. J. anſwered, you ate
three coheirs, and the tenant may bar you all, %, one
alone; and he ſhews the deed with warranty. of Walter,
whoſe heirs you are, which you do not deny; whereforc,
by judgment of the court, you ſhall take nothing, &c. And
therewith agrees 4 H. 7. 18. b. where it is held, that if three
(e) coparceners. alien in fee with warranty every War-
ranty ſhall be collateral to the other, and yet the War-
ranty of her who dies firſt, deſcends on both the othe!s-


The caſe in 6 Ed, 3. 50. a. b. was in effect, thi


A. ſeiſed


Part VIII.


Part vin. S yMs's Caſe, 52


A. ſeiſed of three acres made a feoffment of one to B. with

warranty, and died ſeiſed of the other two, having iſſue two

daughters, who made partition, and each had one acre, the

wife of A. purchaſed the part of one coparcener, and after-

wards brought a writ of dower againſt B. who vouched the

two daughters and heirs of A. The one (who had enfeoffed

the demandant of her part) entered into the warranty as one

who had nothing by deſcent, the other pleaded all the ſaid

ſpecial matter, pretending, that foraſmuch as the demandant

had purchaſed the part of one, that the ſhould not recover the

whole in value againſt the other, but for a moiety, becauſe

the warranty did deſcend on both : but it was adjudged, that

ſhe ſhould recover the whole value againſt her who had by

deſcent, for when two heirs are vouched, and the one hath

nothing, the other who hath ſhall render the whole in value,

and yet the warranty did not deſcend upon him alone. And it

was lawful for the woman demandant to purchaſe the part of

one, and therefore it ſhall not 4 her. Vide (a) 11H. (a) — Gerranty
20. a. b. 41 Ed. 3, 3. (5) 10 H. 7. 13. And it was ſaid, 1. Et. Neo

* the book in (c) = Ea 35 1 4 * 0h not warrant any 18 1

ſuch opinion as hath been collected, for the principal caſe in (6) Br. Garranty

the book at large (which is the fountain itſelf) is, that in a as 3

Præcipe quod reddat the tenant did vouch two as heirs, and 2 n

ſaid, that one was within age, and prayed that the parol Br, Gerranty 14.

might demur ; the demandant ſaid, that he was of full age, 1 Mod. Rep. 183.

and prayed that he might be inſpected in court; upon which

proceſs was awarded until ſequatzur ſub ſuo periculo, at which

day he came not, nor no writ was returned, and the deman-

dant prayed judgment for the moiety, becauſe one of them

who was vouched made default, and prayed Summons ad war”

againſt the other; to which tne demandant faid, that Su-

mons ad war he could not have, becauſe he who is vouched

„ demandant : to which the tenant ſaid, that the anceſtor of

thoſe who are vouched by deed which here is, did enfeolf one

R. with warranty, whoſe eſtate we have, judgment if againſt

the deed ; with averment that he had aſſets by deſcent. To

which the demandant ſaid, that he had nothing by deſcent.

And the court gave judgment for one moiety in reſpect of the

default of one of the vouchees, which the tenant had loſt by

his voucher, for which moiety he could plead nothing ; and

for the other moiety, although he had vouched the demandant

by a ſtrange name, and ſo in a manner pleaded in chief, yet

toraſmuch as the demandant had told him of this voucher as

to him, becauſe he is demandant himſelf, he might plead the

Warranty and aſſets in bar for the other motety : upon which

plea no judgment is given in the book, and therefore the court

regarded not the ſaid collection or inference of the Lord (4) (1) Br. Oirranty
rook, foraſmuch as the book is adjudged on another point, 14 Antea 51.8.

ſal. on default of one of the vouchees ; but it was aflirmed per to- Vos 52 b.

1am


— —


—— —


G44 LIPS: * —
er F * . — — — Ae. 6 —
uo OS « - R - = = —


N
— —ö——ů—3 ts AJ —


(a) co. Lit.
374. b.


(b) Plow. 440.
a. b. Poſtea 134.
b. Br. Warrantia
Chartæ 30. In
Medio.

* 2 Inſt. 293.


(e) Hetl. 53.
Lit. Rep. 67.
Co. Lit. 1 50. 2.


S YMS'“s Caſe. Part Vill.


tam curiam, that in the ſaid cafe of warranty and afets, the
lineal warranty is as entire as the collateral warianty; but in.
aſmuch as the (a) lineal warranty is not a bar to the iſſue in
tail without aſſets, and aſſets are to be adjudged according tg
the value, which may be more or leſs ; for this reaſon the
lineal warranty ought to follow the aſſets, becauſe without
aſſets the (lineal) warranty is no bar. As if. warranty and
aſſets be pleaded in a Formedin brought of four acres, each
of the yearly value of twelve pence, and iſſue is taken on the
aſſets, and it is ſound that but one acre of the value of twelve
pence deſcends, it 1s no bar but for one acre, as it is held
in 40 E. 3. 15. a. (b) 21 E. 3. 9. b. againſt the book in 21
Ed. 3. (28.) 38 b. But otherwiſe it is in debt or“ annuity
brought againſt the heir, becauſe lands of their nature are di-
viſible, and the demandant in Formedin may recover part,
and be barred of the reſidue; but debt and annuity in ſuch
cafe are entire, and not diviſible, as it is ſaid in 5 R. 2. An-
nuity 21. Annua nec debitum e judex non ſeparat ipſum. And
the opinion of the Lord Brook, although it was not well col-
lected out of the book, was affirmed tor good law, if the juſt


_ aſſets of the land in demand, and no more deſcends on the


(d) Antea 51. b.
. a,
85 Garranty 14.


(e) Co. Lit. 36 5.
a b. 366. a.

2 Inſt. 292,
293, 294-
Plowd. 110. a.
21H, 7. 11. a.
Wing. Max. 23.


(Ff) 11 E4. 2.
Statham Gar-


ranty 24
21 E. 3. 28. b.
29 .

(2 Co. Lis.
306. a. P. owd.
110. a.


demandant and the other daughter, for then the demandant
ought to recover the moiety, becauſe ſhe hath no aſſets but as
to one moiety, and the lineal warranty only, is no bar. But
if the moiety of the land, which deſcends on the demandant
be of equal value to the land in demand, ſhe ſhall be barred
of the whole, for a lineal warranty, when aſlets to the value
of the land in demand deſcend, is as entire and full a bar as
to the demandant as a collateral warranty, deſcend the war-
ranty in the one caſe or in the other on the demandant
only, or on her and any other. And the ſtatute of Glou-
ceſter, cap. 3. (e) enacts, that if the warranty of the tenant
by the curteſy be pleaded, the heir of the wife ſhall not be
barred by the deed of his father, from whom no inheritance


deſcends, &c. And if inheritance doth deſcend from the


art of the father, then he is barred of the value of the in-
ne which deſcends to him: by force of which ſtat. the
collatcral warranty, which without aſſets was a bar entirely to
the whole by the common law, is now but a proportionab'e
bar, having teſpect to the aſſets deſcended, and the lincal
warranty and ailets pleaded in Formedon in deſcender is taken
within the equity of the ſaid act; as it is reſolved in 11 Ed. 2.
) Statham Gar. 21 Ed. 3. 28. b. 38 Edw. 3.23. 2. b. &c.
Plowd. Com. in Fulmerſton's caſe, fol. 110. a. But where
in the ſaid Fulmerſton's caſe it is ſaid, if in the one calc
or the other, there be no aſſets deſcended at the time of the
aſſiſe of Mortdanceſter, or Formedon brought, but (s)
afterwards aſſets deſcend, and the tenant ſhall have a Sc?


facias in the caſe of warranty made by tenant by the cur-


teſy, to have the land which was of the ſcifin of his mo,


ther, aud not of the aſſets by the expreſs purview of the ſaid


ſtatuts


a
]
2
|
[
|


i; 2


Part VIII. Sym ss Caſe. 52


ſtatute of Glouceſter, and in the caſe of warranty made by

tenant in tail, which is taken within the equity of the ſaid

act, the iſſue in tail ſhall have a (a) Scre r to have the (a) Ce. Lit.
aſſets which afterwards deſcend, and not the land given in 368. Plowd.
tail; and equity is the reaſon that the caſe taken within the 1 *
equity of the former law, ſhall not follow the purview thereof,

but ſhall have another and divers conſtructions, for equity re-

quires that uncertainty ſhould be avoided as the author of

contention, and that there ſhould be an end of controverſies,

according to equity and right, the final end of all laws: and

thereſore the ſaid ſtatute of Glouceſter well provided an

abſolute and juſt end in the caſe of tenant by the curteſy of

Jand in fee-ſimple z for when the tenant in ſuch caſe after

aſſets deſcended, recovers the inheritance of the rpother which

he hath purchaſed, it makes an end of that controverſy, ſo

that the demandant or his heirs ſhall be by force of the act

barred for ever to claim the land. But if in the ſaid caſe of“ * 2 Ing. 294,
Formedon, the tenant, after aſſets deſcend, ſhall have a Scire Plowd: 110. a.

facias for the land igtailed, then if the aſſets ſhall be aliened, 8 366. a.
the iſſues inheritable to the eſtate- tail, may by writ of Forme-

din in deſcender recover the land in tail, which will be cauſe

of new ſuit and contention, and wiil not anſwer the final in-

tention of the purview of the ſaid act; and therefore accord-

ing to the rule of wiſdom (5) Sapiens incipit a fine, to make a (5) 10 Co. 25. b.
perpetual bar as well in that caſe as in the other, it was ad- oo _ 70- be
Judged reaſonable and conſonant to the final intent of the 18
makers of the ſaid act. I hat in that caſe of an eſtate - tail the

tenant ſhould have a Scire facias, to have the aſſets which de-

ſcend to the ifſue in tail in fee-fimple, which as to them ſhall

be a perpetual bar againſt him and his heirs, which in juſt and
proportionable equity, agrees with the other caſe. Fide (c) 43 ( Br. Scire
E. 3. 26. a. and (4) 40 E. 3. 39, &c. where it is held, that if facias 29. 17,
warranty and affets be pleadcd againſt the iſſue in tail, and if n

the demandant hath nothing by deſcent, and land deſcend Br. 3

to the iſſue afterwards, he ſhall have a Scire facias to have the 22ce de Poſſ. 30.

value. But it is in none of the ſaid books expreſſed, how the 23
tenant ſhall demean himſelf in pleading to take advantage of Br. Aſtets per

the aſſets which deſcend afterwards. And therefore if in a ſe) Piſcent 17.
Mortdanceſter, Coſinage, Aiel, Beſaiel, &c. the tenant pleads my Init. 293,

the warranty of the tenant by the curteſy with aſſets, or in a

Firmedon the tenant pleads a lineal warranty and aſſets, and the

demandant tak es iflue on the aſſets, and it is found by inqueſt

that nothing deſcends whereby the demandant recovers, and

after that recovery aſſets deſcend, the tenant ſhall never have a

V Scire facias to take the benefit of the ſaid act, for divers {/ Co. Lit,


reaſons, 1. Becauſe the ſaid trial is (g) as peremptory to him, 34% *% Cr. Gor,
as if aſſets had been found by the inqueſt it had been to the de- 3
mandant, 2. There is no record on which he can ground his Ney 1:9, *
Scire facias. 3. By the putting himſelf upon the trial of aſſets he
hath waved the advice which he might have taken upon the
laid act. 4. He who will take benefit of that act, ought not to

gin with a falſity. But if the tenant will take benefit of the

d act, he ovght to plead the warranty and acknowledge ihe


— —


(4) Cr. Car. 373.
Co. Lit. 366. a.
2 Inft. 293, 294.
(5) Plowd. 1 10. a.
2 Inſt. 294.

Co. Lit. 366. a.
365. d.


(co. Lat. 366. .


(4) Co, Lit.
365. b.


fe) Co. Lit. 365.
b. Fitz. Eſtop.
219


ſores 459.


We..


Co. Lu. 305 b.


S yMs's Caſe. Part VIII


demandant's title, and pray that the advantage of the ſtatute
when aſſets ſhall beſcend be ſaved to him, &c. and upon that
record, when aſſets deſcend he ſhall have (a) Scire facias and
that ſtands with the letter and intention of the ſaid act;
for the words are (by writ of (/) judgment which ſhall iſſue
out of the rolls of the Juſtice: ) So that the Scire facias ought
to be grounded on the rolls o. the Juſtices. Alſo the ſtatute
goes farther. To reſummon the warranty as it hath been done
in other caſes, ſcil. where the warrantee (or vouchee) comes into
court and faith, that nothing is deſcended to him trom him by
whoſe deed he is vouched, &c. which if the tenant doth not deny,
&c. he (hall have the benefit of the aſſets which ſhall afterwards
deſcend to the vouchee; but if he takes iſſue that aſſets de-
ſcend to him, and by inqueſt it be found againſt him, that
nothing deſcend, he ſhall never have any benefit of the aſſets
which ſhall afterwards deſcend to the vouchee. But it was
ſaid, if aſſets be found by inqueſt but not to the (c) value, there,
the demandant ſhall have benefit of the aſſets which afterwards
deſcend becauſe the vouchee's plea is falſe z and on the other
part, it would be hard to drive the demandant whois a ſtranger,
to know the preciſe value of the land which the vonchee hath
by deſcent, but he may well take knowledge, whether he hath
any land by deſcent from the ſame anceſtor or not. Andin
this caſe divers good (4) differences were obſerved which
do appear in our books. 1. Between a collateral warranty
and an eſtoppel ; for a collateral warranty binds the right of
him who claims not by him who makes the warranty, but an
eſtoppel ſhall bind only the heir who claims the right of him
to whom the eſtoppel was: as at the common law before the


ſaid ſtat. of Glouceſter, cap. 3. If the huſband had aliened the


land which he had in the right of his wife, with warranty and
the huſband and wiſe died, in that caſe the right deſeends from
the wiſe, and yet that warranty being collateral to thetitle of the
land, ſhould bar the wife's heir: but it is adjudged in 18 Ed,
3. 9. b. that where (e) lands were conveyed to the huſband and


wife, and to the heirs of the huſband, and the huſband gave


them in tail, and the huſband died, the wife ſhould recover
the land againſt the doneecby writ of Cui in vita, ſuppoling
that ſhe had the lands to her and her heirs in fee; the wile


aſter the recovery enſeoſſed another, and died, the donee in


tail died without iſſue, and the ifſue of the ſaid huſband and
wife brought a F:rmedon in the reverter againlt the teotlee of
the wife; and although the iſſue was heit to the wife who was
eſtopped by the ſaid recovery in the Cui in vita, to ſay that ſhe
had a lefler eſtate than a fee-Cmiple, yet the iſſue who claims
the reverſion of the land as heit to the huſband ſhall not be (f)
bound by that eſtoppel made by the wife, although be be beit
to her alſo, for then by her own act, the wife who had but an
eſtate for life, might bar the heir who had right, and who
claimed as heir to his father. But a collateral warranty cannot
take effect without the act of God, /cil, the death of him who
makes it, and in the mean time the eſtate to which, &c. may
be debated, But in this point the wairanty and the eſtoppel


— ay — *»


. mend © Mrs. ha r V.AuA_I ow o&©&@ =


part VIII. S8S8vvus's Caſe.


concur, both which ſhall deſcend on the general (a) heir, to (a) Co. Lit
him who made the warranty or eſloppel, and not on the par- 7575 b.
ticular heir, as on the younger ſon, and not on the ſiſter of yp


54


12.4.


for his diſadvantage. 80 in the ſame caſe he ſhall not be 3 fl. 4 5. b.
capable of advantage, unleſs it be in ſpecial cafes; and 34. ».
therefore it is adjudged in 38 Ed. 3. 10: a. b. That if a wo- Fitz. Eftop. 57.
man (e) meſne binds herſelf to acquittal to the tenant and his (.
heirs, and after the woman takes a huſvand, and the tenant a. b.
by his deed grants to the huſband, that he nor his hcirs ſhall TON Meſne 24,
be bound to the ſaid acquittal, and afterwards the huſband or ings —
and wife have iſſue and die, this iſſue, although he be heit to

the huſband, yet becauſe the line of acquittal deſcends to

him as heir to his mother, he ſhall not be capable of the ſaid

advantage of the faid diſcharge, ui, (4) heres dicitur ab (4) co. Lit 8. 4.
hereditate, et non hereditas ab hærede. But therein alſo there 3 Co. 89. a.

is a difference between advantages in groſs, as in the cafe of

(e) 38 E. 3. and advantages, which by the grant are made % 38 x. z. 16,
appurtenant or incident to another thing: as if a man be
ſeiſed of a houſe in the right of his wife, and another grants to
the huſband and his heirs, to have ſuſſicient eſtovers to burn in
the ſame houſe, in that caſe the eſtovers are appurtenant to
the houſe, and ſhall deſcend to the iſſue of the huſband and
wife. So if one hath a houſe of the part of his mother and one
grants to him, that he and his heirs ſhall have competent
houſebote to be burnt in the ſame houſe, this is appurtenant
to the houſe 3 and although it be a new purchaſe, yet it ſhall
go with the houſe to the heir of the part of the mother. The
lame law if a man hath a (/ rent ſeck by deſcent of the
part of his mother, and the terre-tenant grants to him and his
heirs, that they ſhall deſtrain for the rent, &c. this is as ap-
purtenant to the rent, and ſhall go with the rent to the heir of
the part of the mother; and fo it is held in (g) 5 E. 2. YT
Avowry 207, in Jordan's caſe. That where Alice was ſeiſed (e/ es 86.
of a manor in fee, and took to huſband one Jordan, and ha

ſue Sibil; and afterwards Jordan and his wife died, and,

Sibil was ſeiſed of the manor, as heir of the part of her

mother, who before the ſtatute of guia empiores terrarum,

did enfeoff P. of parcel of the manor by four ſhillings

rent, and afterwards Sibil died without iſſue: and there the

queſtion was, who ſhould have this feigniory and rent of

four ſhillings newly created, whether the heir of the part

ot the mother, or the heir of the part of Jordan, the

father ; and there Beresford, Chief Juſtice of the Bench,

laid, when Sibil enfeoffed P. of parce| of the manor which

deſcended to her from Alice, theſe ſervices were then appur-

tenant to the remainder of the manor, wherefore the death

of Sibil, without heir of her * could not defeat that ap-


Vor. IV. pendance-


) Co. Lit. 13.
b


a, b. {upra:


(f) Co. Lit.12:d.
I 3. 3.


* — ——
A OS — — ¼ æęaä ee i


8 9 ——— — — — — —


1 Co. 100. d.
Br. Diſcent 11.


0 2 Bulftr. 43.


Syms's Caſe, Part VIII.


| pendance. So it is held in 7 H. 6. 4. b. that if a man be
(a) Co. Lit. 22. b. ſeiſed of land of the part of his (a2) mother, and makety ,


gift in tail rendering rent, this new rent, which is inciden
to the reverſion, ſhall go with the reverſion to the heir of the
part of the mother. And it is to be known, that there is a(b)
difference between eſtoppels or concluſions which ſtand upon
recompence, and other eſtoppels which ſtand upon affirmance
or admittance of * matter, by matter of record: as if 23
abator marries with the right heir, and has ifſue by her, and
the abator makes a leaſe for life rendering rent, and he and
his wife die, in this caſe the iſſue has the mere right of the
part of his mother; and yet if he accepts the rent, and
makes acquittance, it ſhall eſtop him and his heirs to avoid
the ſaid leaſe, in reſpect of the acceptance of the recompence,
and therewith agrees 39 H. 6. 27. Vide (21) 28 H. 6. 24


(c) 13 E. 3. 9-b» But an eſtoppel which accrues by admittance, &c. of record,


Antea 53. b.
Co. Lit. 36 . b,


ſhall not conclude the heir who claims not the right by the


Fitz. Egop. 219. ſame anceſtor, as it is adjudged in (c) 18 E. 3. aforeſaid,


ROGER


|}


patt VIII. 55


& * *
— ea «


——


oath Earl of RUTLAND's
Caſe.


Mic. G Jacobi 1.


- P
— 2


*
*
[
1
2
Oo


: "I
o =y
mY
S
©
1
: J
4
Ki |
T7 4
©
T2
*
An
18


OG ER Earl of Rutland brought an aſſiſe of novel diſ- () 1 Bulft. 4, f.

ſeiſin againſt Gilbert Earl of Shrewſbury, and others, and 2 Brownl. 229,
complained he was diſſeiſed of his freehold in Clipſon, in the . Cent. 383.
county of Nottingham, and made his plaint to be diſſciſed de
( ) efficio cuſtodis parci, vocat Clipſon Park, ac de pannagio et (b) Antea 47. as
erbagio pred para de Clipſon pred” cum pertinen', et pro ti-
tuls liberi tenementi de officio prad* ac de pannagio et herhagio
præd', the plaintiff ſaid, that _— Elizabeth was ſeiſed of
the ſaid park in fee, in the right of her crown, and 19th
March, anno 10 by her letters patent granted to Thomas
Markham, ar” offictum cuſlodis parct ſuit, vocat' Clipſon Park,
(without ſaying predid?”) ac eundem Tho. Markbam pred” para
ſui vocat' Clipſon Park, fecit, ordinavit, et conſlituit per eaſ-
dm literas patentes, to have and to hold to him for term of
his life, with all fees due and accuſtomed : and further grant-
ed by the ſaid letters patent, to the ſaid Thomas Markham,
pannagium et herbagium predit? parc ſui de Clipſon, to have
and to hold the ſaid pannage and herbage to the ſaid Thomas
Markham for term of his life. And afterwards Queen Eliza-
beth, ſo ſeiſed of the ſaid park as is aforeſaid, died thereof
ſriled. After whoſe death the ſaid park deſcended to the King
that now is; ac pred” Tho. Markham de præd' officio et panna-
gio et herbagio pred” in forma pred” ſeifit” exiſten', idem domi-
nus Rex g die Junii an. regni ſuit primo, per literas ſuas pa-
tentes, etc. recitando præd flatum pred” Tho Markham de et in
bræmiſ. pred” fic, ut praefert', ſibi conceſſis, conceſſit eidem com”
Rutland præd offic cuſlodis prad* parci vo“ Clipſon Park,
w have and to hold to him for his life, quam ato officrum
fred” per mortem, ſurſum redditionem, forifucturam vel alig uo
alis modo quocungue vacaverit, with all fees, &c. and farther grant-
ed by the ſame letters patent, the ſaid herbage and pannage to
the ſaid E. of Rutland, for term of his life (without ſhewing le) a Bron. 229,
when the eſtate of the * and pannage (c) ſhould begin) 230, 234, 242.


enk. Cent. 283.
2 adio Brewl. 29. :


(a) 2 Brownl,
229, 240, 234,


242.
Jenk. Cent. 283.
1 Brownl. 27,


Poſtea 56. b.


(6) Br. Patent
2


.

Fitz. Grant 35.
(c) Br. Patent 54.
{4) Br. Patent
Fitz. Grant 42.
(e) Poſtea 57. a.
10 Co. 61. a.
Dyer 80. pl. 53,
11 Co. 4.2,
March. Rep. 41,
Cr. Car. 279.
Dyer 259. pl-18.
2 Roll. 154.
Co. Lit. 3 b.
Hob. 150, 151.
4 Inſt. 202.

11 E. 4. 1. b.
Cr. Jac. x7, 18.


Cf) 10 Co. 67. a.
Co. Lit. 3. b.
Bridg. 30.
IE 29. b.

r. Prerog. 125.
Br, Grant 35.
Fitz. Grant 3a.
11
10 H. 7. 18. b.


Earl of Rur LAN's Caſe. Part VII.


adeo plene & integre prout prad' Tho, Markhom, &c, habui
tenuit, ſeu gaviſus fuit, Sc. And afterwards the ſaid Tho.
mas Markham, 9 Aarti, anno quarto regis nunc died, after
whoſe death the plaintiſf was ſeiſed of the ſaid office, and of
the herbage and pannage, 'till diſſeiſed by the defendants. To
which the detendants pleaded the general ifſue, nul tort, ml
diſſeiin; and as to the ofhce, the recognitors of the aſſiſ
found for the plaintiff ; and as to the herbage and pannape,
they found the letters patent at large ut ſupra, and if the her-
bage and pannage paſſed by the ſaid letters patent to the plain.
titt, they, found for the plaintiff, &c. And the matter in lay
was ſuch. the King grants the herbage and pannage of the
park of C. to Markham for life, and afterwards the King re-
citing the grant to Markham, and that he is living, grants the
herbage and pannage of the ſaid park to R. Earl of Rutland
for his life, without ſhewing when it ſhall (2) begin. And
if the grant of the herbage and pannage to R. Earl of Rut
land were good or not, was the queſtion. And it was ch
jected, that the ſid grant to R. Earl of Rutland was void for
the uncertainty of the beginning thereof, for it cannot begin
preſently, becauſe Markham had it then for his life, and i
doth not appear whether the King intended it ſhould begin
after the death of Markham, or forfeiture, or ſurrender, ot
when it ſhould begin, and for ſuch uncertainty the grentin
the King's caſe (hall be void. And the caſes in () 3 H. .
caſu ult. (c) 6 H. 7. 14. a. and (4) 8 H. 7, 12. b. were ci-
ed, that the King cannot grant the (e) reverſion of an office
whieh one hath for the term of his life; but may recite that
fuch a one, habeat & teneat tale er pro termino vite ſic,
and grant ic pred tall, habend poſi mortem, c. but it the
King grants the office to another (without ſuch ſpecial recital)
for life, the ſecond grant is void. Vide 11 E. 4. 1. b. 32 E. 3.
Avowry 112. But it was reſolved by Coke, Chief Juſtice,
Walmfley, Warburton, Danie!, and Foſter, Juſtices, that
the ſaid grant of the herbage and pannage was good; and in
this caſe divers points were reſolved. 1. That the King has
divers manners of inheritance. 1. Some to give ouly in pol
ſeſſion, and not in reveriton, as a corody in a houſe ot religion,
or to preſent one to a church of his patronage, as it is agreed
in 39 H. 6. 48. for in theſe caſes, and other like, the King
has but a preſentation or commendation of a perſon, when ic
corody or church is void, and not before and cannot give the co
rody, or preſent to the church in reverſion. 2. The K. has
ſome inheritance which the King may grant as well in fe.
verſion as in polleſſion but he cannot uſe or exerciſc them
himſelf, as (/) ctices. Vide 1 H. 7. 29. b. a man grants all
office of ſervitude as ſoreſterſhip, &c. cum omnibus terris c.
dem efficia pertinentibus, the remainder to the King in fee; l
this caſe, although the King cannot be officer to any one, Jet
the K. is capable thereof, to grant the office to another which be
himſelf cannot uſe or exerciſe, alſo ſuch office may be forfeited
to the Kipg, and the King ſhall have an inheritance in it“


p1Y%


—


bop, wy — wn. py —2— a>


w—


I part VIII. Earl of RurrAup's Caſe,
i eise. &c. Vide (a) 3. 6. (b) and (c) 8 H. 7. before. 3. Other


10- jphetitances the King has, as well to uſe and enjoy himſelf,
ter as to giant to another, /ci/. the poſſeſſion, remainder, or rever-
of Gon; as houſes, lands, rents, commons, herbage, and pan-
I's nage, and the like, which are parcels of his inheritance. 2. lt


tl was reſolved, that the King was not (4) deceived in his grant,
ik bor be has recited the eſtate of Markham which he had in the
ge, herbage and pannage, for term ot his life, and that Markham
. was then living, ſo that the King well knew that he could not
grant that in poſſeſſion, which another then held for his life,
but it onght to take effect as it might by law. And the caſe
of the Lord Chandos, in the Sixth Part of my Reports, was
reſolved to be a ſtronger caſe, for there the King miſtoos the


19 eſtate tail was extinct, and that he thereupon was ſeiſed in
i6 fee, and therefore he granted the manor in poſſeſſion, and yet
t the (e) reverſion did pats without any word of reverſion, for
de the grant ought to take effect, ae by law it may; which caſe


of the Lord Chandos was affirmed to be good law, per totam
zuriam, But in the caſe at bar the King miſtook nothing, nor
took upon him to grant that which he could not grant, nor was
deceived in any part of his grant: and when the King's char-
ter may be taken (/) to two intents good, in many cafes it
ſhall be taken to ſuch intent as is moſt beneficial for the King;
but if it may be taken to one intent good, and to another in-
tent void, then for the King's honour, and for the benefit of
the ſubject, it ſnall be taken in ſuch manner as the King's
grant may take effect, for it was not the King's intent to make
void grant. And therewith agree the reaſon and rule of the
book of (g) 21 E. 4. 44. b. where King Richard 2d, granted
to the Abbot of Waltham, that he and his ſucceſſors ſhould not
be collectores decimarum, eic. Conceſſ. Regi per clerum Angliæ, nec
llicijjus inde parcell' in that caſe, if the grant be taken literally
per clerum Angliæ, that is, per tetum clerum Angliæ, the
rant is void; for all the clergy of England never met
at one convocation, but every province has a ſeveral convo-
ation, and therefore the King's grant ſhall not be taken in
ſuch ſente, for then the grant will be void; but it ſhall be
taken in ſuch ſenſe as it may ſtand with law, and that is by the
Clergy, as the clergy can grant tenths, an. that is in their ſeveral
provinces; and that is alto a ſtronger caſe than the cale at bar,
lor here the words of the grant may well fland with the King's
meaning, /cil. to grant the herbage and pannage in reverhon,
tor in poſſeſſion he cannot grant it; but in the caſe of 21 E. 4.
the words of the grant, and the King's intent varying, the
letter gives place to the King's intention. And the cafe
o dir (% John Molyns, in the Sixth Part of my Reports,

U 3 was


6477. as *


hw, thinking, that by the ſurrender of the letters patent, the 1


56


(a) 3 H. 7. caſu
ultim, Br. Pa-
tent 52. Fitz.
Grant 35.
Antes 55. b.
(5) 6H. 7. 14.4.
Br, Patents <4,
Antea 55 b.

(c) 8 H 7. 12.
Br. Patents 57.
Fitz. Grant, 42.

(4 1 Co, 46. a,

+ a. 52. 1

oor 4. 1

9 H. 6. 28. 1

Lane 110. 2 Co.

33 b. 5 Co. 904.4,

Co. 29. b.

5 5. b. 7 Co. 12.3.
10 Co. 112. b.
11 Co. 4. b. o. a
Hob. 223, 229.
Cr. Car. 198.
Yelv. 48.

2 Roll. 188.
Dyer 339.

v1. 47. 3 52. pl. 26.
Co. Ent. 384 a.

41 Af. 19. BT Pa-
tent 38. Br. A-
J:enar, 2 1. Plow,
132 a. Mod. Rep.
196. Kelw. 8. b.
12. b.

(e) 6 Co. 55. b.
56 a. 66. b. Co.
Lit. 324. b.

10 Co. 10. a. b.
Cr. Car. 400.

5 Co. 124. b.

4 Co. 36. a. Dyer
25. Pl. 45 233.
pl. 10. 11. Plow.
155. a. 159. a.
30 E. 1.

Grant, 86. 7 E.

4- 20. Fitz. Feof,
22. Fitz. Grant,

97. 35 H. 8. Br.

Grant 5.2 Roll.

Rep. 180, 277,

278. Hob. 224.

Lane 3, 7.

Br. N. C. 267.

Lit. Rep. 18.

2 Brow nl. 23

(f) 1 Co. 45. a,

8 Co. 167, a,

11 Co. 11. a, b.
1 Buift. 6.

10 Co. 67. b.

K. 175 2. 198.

a, 2 Sicerf, 141.
3 Leon. 243,


21 Js 4. a. h. 2.00, (S 3 Keb. 234. Per 269. pl. 19 Br. Patent 71, 90. 1 Co. 45 2.
E Exenption 9. S Cn. 167. Lat Od». ic fl low. 32. à. 126 2. 143. d. 331. b. Fitz. Gr. 29s
Troll. 28. Movs 165, Hard. 500, 2 Koll. Rep. 275. 2 Sidert. 82, (6) 6 Co. 6. a. Po-


n


*
4 ”
N Kh
q "5
1
RY
8 =
|
k |
Cw
}
4
4
=
1 N x *
4 *
.
: [
”
1 1
a 5
*


{a) 6 Co. 6, A.


( Antes 58. a. b.
2 Brownl. 229,
230, 234 242.
Jenk. Cent. 283.
1 Brownl, 47.


(c) 10 Co. 29. a.
Hob. 170. Mod
Rep. 190. Lit.
Rep. 111. Hard.
92. 1 Roll. Rep.


310.

2 Roll. Rep. 39 3.
Palm. 433.
437. Wing. Max.
235.4 Co. 73. b.
5 Co. 11. a.

8 Co. 145. a.

11 Co. 60. a.
Co. Lit. 191. a.
205. a. 2 Inſt,
365.

2 Jand. 351.

2 Bulft, 131.
Latch. 25.

(4) Wing. Max.


27. |
(e] Wing. Max.
26. 2 Co. 24. 8.
Poſtes 154. b.
3 Bulſt. 105,107,
108, 1 Roll. Rep.


319.

(f) Jenk. Cent.
283.

2 Roll, Rep. -
361.


(g 3 Bulſt. 3. 14.
1 Ca. 49. a.

1 H. 7. 13. 8.
(b) 2 Roll. Rep.


3 1.

6 Co. 65. a:

Co, Lit. 283.8. b.
304. b. Novy. 30.
10 Co. 126. a-


Earl of Ruri AN p's Caſe: Part Vll


was cited, in which caſe alſo the words were againſt the Kino;
intent, for at the time of the grant there was not any Chief
Lord, for then all ſeigniories were extinguiſhed ; but yet fo
(a) the King's honour, and to make his grant take effect. |
was adjudged, that the tenure was revived. 3. It was reſyly.
ed, that there was not any uncertainty in the ſaid grant of the
herbage and pannage to the plaintiti, when it ſhould take effeq
in poſſeſſion; for it ſhall (5) begin when the firſt grant ſhall be
ended or determined; and although it may determine by ſun.
dry ways, /cil. death, ſurrender or forfeiture, yet it can de.
termine but once, and which of them firſt happens, then the
grant to the plaintiff ſhall begin; ſo that there is not any un.
certainty in this grant, ſor it is implied in law, that the ſe.
cond grant ſhall begin aſter the determination of the firſt grant,
et (c) expreſſio eorum qua tacite inſunt nihil operatur, And
therefore, it the King reciting that ſuch a one holds the ma-
nor of D. for his lite, grants the faid manor to B. for his
life; in this cafe the law implies, that the ſecond grant ſhall
take effect aſter the determination of the firſt grant; the ſame
law of a gift in tail, or a grant in fee. And it was faidh
Coke, (4) Chief Juſtice, and affirmed by the other ſuſtices,
that of late times ſuch nice and ſtrict conſtruction hath been
ſtrained by ſome of letters patent, to ſubvert the force and
effect of them that many good letters patent are drawn in
queſtion, which is to the King's diſhonour, the diſheriſon of
the ſubject, and againſt the true reaſon and ancient rule ofthe
law, as appears in all our books, et talis certituds certitudinen
confundit, ſuch nice and captious pretence of certainty, con-
ſoynds true and legal certainty, et (e) maledicta expaſitis it
que corrumpit et confundit textum. And it was ſaid, that it
was reſolved in Auditor King's caſe, that where Queen Elz.
granted a manor to B. (/) and his heirs, (in the premiles of
the letters patent) to have and to hold the ſaid manor to B. and
his aſſigns (leaving out heirs in the Habendum) that the ſee ot
the manor did paſs by the premiſes of the letters patent, and
the Habendum was void ; for the premiſes were certain enough
to paſs the fee-ſimple, and the omiſſion of heirs in the Haber-
dum ſhould not overthrow that which was certain in the pre-
mites, Which caſe was affirmed for good law, per totam c-
riam, ſor the Queen's intent appeared to paſs the fee ſimple
by the premiſes, and her grant ought to be conſtrued (g) J.
cundum intentionem Regis, et non deceptionem Regis; and whena
literal and ſtrict conſtruction is made to make his grant void,
contra intentionem Regis, it ſounds in deceit of the King, and 18
a great indignity to him; propter apices juris to make his chat:
ter under the great ſeal, of things which he may lawfully grant
void and of none effect, quia (% apices juris non ſunt ju
1


"ith Ä ks. a aa Gs > — SD mQ


. 1 *


part VIII. Earl of RurLAxp's Caſe,


And as to the caſe of office, it was faid, that the ſaid books
which were cited, prove that the King cannot grant (a) rever-

nem officit, for he has no reverſion, but an inheritance grant-
able in reverſion. Alſo when one is officer for life, if the
King, without (5) reciting it, grants the office to another for
life, the ſecond grant is void for want of a recital : but no book
faith, that if the King recites the firſt grant of the office, &c.
and that the officer is living, and grants the office to another
for life, that this laſt grant ſhall be void for want of certainty
of the beginning, for the law, upon the matter which ap-
peareth, (hall. limit the beginning, to the end the King's
grant ſhall not be void. And exception was taken to the
paint, foraſmuch as in alledging the grant made to the ſaid
Tho. Markham, the plaint is, that Q. Eliz. did grant officium
(ſtr. ) parci ſui vocati Clipſon Park (without ſaying (c) præ-
di?) and therefore it was objected, it ſhall be intended another
park, But it was reſolved, that upon conſideration of all the
parts of the plaint, it appears, that it was the ſame park; for
the plaintiff begins his plaint, pro titulo liberi tenementi de of
ſeis prædicto, alſo he ſhews, that Queen Eliz. was ſeiſed, &c.
de parco prædicto, and ſo ſeiſed, granted officium para ſui de
Clipfon, which ought to be intended the ſame park whereof
the ſeiſin was alledged at the time of the grant, and es potius
in reſpect of this pronoun poſſeflory ( ſui) and in all other parts
of the plaint (predia') is added: fo that it is well faid in
Long's caſe, in the Fifth Part of my Reports, that there are
three manners of (4) certainties : 1. Certainty to a common
intent, and that ſufficeth in bars for thoſe who defend them-
ſelves: 2. Toa certain intent in general, and thatis ſufficient
in indictments, plaints, counts, replications, &c. 3. To a
certain intent to every particular intent, and that is rejected in
law, for there it is ſaid, Ouod talis certitudo certitudinem confun-
dit; and ſo it was adjudged in the point, in the aſſiſe brought
by the Lady (e) Ruſſel, againſt the Lord Admiral; and this
alliſe being (after a general verdict for the plaintiff for part,
and a ſpecial verdict for the reſidue) adjourned into the Com-
mon Pleas, judgment was there given: but aſſiſes ought to


be brought in * proprio comitatu, by the ſtatute of Magna Char- * 10 Co. ro. as


ta, (/ cap. 12.
And afterwards on this judgment, a writ of (g) error
was brought, and all that which was reſolved by the court
of Common Pleas,” was affirmed for good law, by Flem-
ing Chief Juſtice, Fenner, Yelverton, Williams, and Crook,
Jultices of the King's Bench. But for other errors not aſ-
 bgned nor moved in the Common Pleas, in which the Juſ-


57


(a) Antea 55, b.
10 Co. 61. a.
Dyer 80. pl. 58.
259. pl. 18.
11 Co. 4. a.


March. Rep. 4.


Cr. Car. 279.

2 Roll. 154. Co.
Lit. 3. b. Hob.
150, 151. 4 Inſt.
202. 11 E. 4. 1. b.
2H. 7, caſu ul-
timo. 6 H 7. 14.
a. of 7. 12. b.
Br. Pat. 52,

57. F is Doe
35, 42. Cr, Jac.
17, 18.

(2) 2 Roll. 190,
(e) Cro. El. 95.
2 Ventris 197.
Cr. Jac. 289.
Palm. 499.


(d) 5 Co. 121.2.
2 Bulſt. 77, 78.
Co. Lit. 303. a.


E Cr. - ,
2 Jac. 17


(JF) 2 Inſt. 24,
25

(g). 1 Bulſt. 45.
2 Brownl. 229,
230.


tices of the King's Bench were not unanimouſly agreed, the


judgment was reverſed. And fo this caſe, as to the


U4z4 points


F - rr WS. p
a>: 5 7 — r Sub...
* _— 4 at
mutt


— — — r r
A — ES — 5 —


— *


W — WIE ou
— _- N
—_ —


LIVES


enen n aj"
PTE \ 7 r


- - —— —— — — —
— * * — — — $44


— —
7 8 , : : *
—_— 1 - _ — —
. 2 - _- 9 — - _—
* 22 „ —— — =# - eawitucitifins a


X ET


Earl of RuTLanpd's Caſe. Part Vip, P:


points reported by me, was unanimouſly reſolved by hgh
courts: and afterwards. on a new aſliſe brought before War.
burton. and Foſter, Juſtices of aſſiſe in the county of Derby,
at the next aſſiſes, the plaintiff had a general verdict, according
to the opinion of all the Juſtices, and judgment alſo at the ſame
aſſiſes, and executiou awarded, & c. Et fic finita e iſia queſiin,


11


BEE CHER


B EE CHE R's Caſe.


Mich. 6 Fac. 1. a


EEC HER brought debt on two bonds, one of 3000 l. the cre. J. c. 211.
other of 20001. by Q minus in the Exchequer, againſt 3 Salk. 245.
Sir Thondas Shirley, Knight, who Trin. 41 Eliz. pleaded in in. 593.

bar, payment according to the conditions of the bonds, &c.

and the parties were at iſſue, and tried for the plaintiff ; but

for default of a good viſne, judgment was arreſted, and

afterwards, ſcil. Hil. 44 Eliz. the plaintiff per Fohannem

Ofbarne, attornatum ſuum, venit hic in curid, et fatetur

fe in curid hic ulterius nolle proſequi : upon which, judgment

was given, that the defendant eat fine Die, and no amerce-

ment upon the plaintiff. Upon which judgment the plain-

tiff brought a writ of error in the Exchequer chamber;

and upon ſundry arguments by the plaintiff's and defend-

ant's counſel, at ſeveral days, it was reſolved by the court,

and the two Chief Juſtices, that the judgment was errone-

ous, for divers reaſons. 1. It was reſolved, that a (a) (4 1 Roll.g84.
Retraxit cannot be, unleſs the plaintiff or defendant be in Co. Lit. 138. vs
court in proper perſon, for the entry is in divers manners, 739: 2: Cro, Jac.
as | g . Ts „ / 4 211. Jenk. Cent.
(as it appears after) as, Quod querens in proprid perſond ſud 183. 3 Selk. 50,
venit et dicit, quod ipſe placitum ſuum predier ulterius proſequt 1 Willon 89,90.
non dult, ſed abinde omnino ſe retraxit, &©c. or being preſent
in court and demanded, where the entry is (60 @ feed ſud (5) Co. Lit. 139.
precidtg in contemptum curiæ ſe retraxit, etc. or fatetur ſe ulterius 4. Poſtca 6a. 2.
nale proſegui, etc. and therewith agrees (c) 3 H. 6. 14. a. (c) Fitz. Re-
21 E. 4.3. 43. a. & 4 E. 3. 23. a. where the caſe was, that traxit 4.
three coparcene's were plaintiffs in a writ of Deceit, and
two of them did appear in perſon, and the third by attor-
ucy; and ſaid, that they would not tue further, and could
not,


—
—


— — — ws —— —_— r 2


— — —_—— TT IP +
3 4 — —— — — 2


2


rr eee.


r


2
— —


—. , ˙⅛ rt 0 ACE ry owe
-- 3 =


——
x — >
—  — — —— —


4 —


8 F. N. B. 2 5. C.
o. Lit. 128. a.

2 Inft. 249.

10 Co. 101. a. b.
Cawly 164.

2 Enſt. 377, 378.


CW. 2. c. 10.
2 Inſt. 376,377,
378.


c Fitz. Attor-


ney 20 Br. At-
forney 56. Br.
Error 98.


d, F. N. B. 2 5 C.


fe) 1 Roll. 287,
208, 796. tRoll.
Rep. 305, 380.


Cr. El. 379,378,


424, 541, 542»
551, 509. Cr. Jac.
420, 441, 442,
£31, Poph. 13c.
2 Sand. 2 12,212.
151d. 449. Mod.
Rep. 47, 72,296,
297. Styles 318.
3 Bulſtr. 180.
Bridgm, 73, 74,
75. Dyer 262.
pl. 63. 9 Co.
30. b. Cr. El.
551. Palm. 228,


2327 2333 245»


252.
#2 1 Roll. 584.
Poſtea 62. a.

. Jac. 21.


4.39. 4, (g) £10.


Part VII.


not, becauſe one was by attorney; whereſore they were non.
ſuit, Fide lib mtrat' ꝙz. title Attaint, Bre“ 5. and title Ap.
peal, 56, and title Treſp. 589. a. 13, 14, 15, 16. and title
Conſpiracy, 125. b. 6 Ed. 3. 30. b. and 31. a. John Fremd;
caſe, in a Formeden, the attorney of the tenant cannot depart
in deſpight of the court, but a Grand cape ſhall be awarded.
And it is to be known, that at the (a) common law, when any
one was, by the King's writ, commanded to appear, it wa
always taken that he ſhould appear in perſon, and could not
appear by attorney ; but after he had appeared, the court
of Chancery, King's Bench, and Common Pleas, and all
other Judges who held plea by writ, might, after appearance,
have admitted him by attorney: otherwiſe when plea waz
held without writ, unleſs the King granted a writ De at.
tornato faciende, and that appears by Britton, c. 126. f. 28).
But vide the ſtat. of Weſtm. 2. (b) c. 11. and pther ſtatutes,
which gave remedy in many caſes; but the ſaid caſe at
bar is not remedied by any ſtatute. But it was objected,
that it is, true, that de rigore juris, the plaintiff in the
caſe at bar ought to have appeared in proper perſon : but
yet it is not error; for if the court admits the plaintiff ot
defendant by attorney, where he ought to appear in perſon,
it is not error; as in 37 H. 6. 27. b. if the court admit one
upon a Capias, or Exigent, by attorney, where de r:gore juris
he ought to appear in perſon, it is not (c) error, (d) F. N. B.
25. acc. To that, it was anfwered and reſolved, that there
is a difference between caſes where the defendant or te-
nant cannot by the law appear by attorney, and caſes where
the defendant or tenant may appear by attorney; but upon
ſome procets, by reaſon of ſome deſault or contempt, he
ought to appear in perſon. In the firſt cafe, if the court
admit the defcndant or tenant by attorney, it is error;
but in the other not: (e) as if an infant is admitted to ap-
pear by attorney, it 1s error, &c. but when the defendant
may make an attorney, and the reaſon that compels him
to appear in perſon, is the contempt to the court ; there
the court may diſpenſe with the contempt, in their di-
cretion, and admit him by attorney, and that is no pre-
judice to the plaintiff: but in the caſe at bar, the law te-

uires him to appear in proper perſon to make the Retraxt,
becaule it ſhall be a perpetual (/) bar, and in a manner as4
(g) releaſe, and the admittance of the court cannot preju-
dice the plaintilF in ſo high a degree. But in —_—
matters, the admiſſion of the court may turn the planitl
or demandant to delay, but ſhall never bar the plaintiff or
demandant : as if the court grants proceſs againſt the


(J witnetſes, or grants view, ot aid, (:) where it 1s not
grantable,


BEEKCHER's Caſe.


March 95. Br. Departure in De pite, &c. : 3. Hob. 70. Parker v. Lawrence. 21 k.
Car, 551. March 95. (5) 5 He 9.9. 4. Fitz, P. oceis 111. (7) 21 E. 4. 65 .


Part VIII. BEECHER's Caſe,


grantable, it is not (a) error, as it js held in 5 H. 7. 8, b. and
8 H. 7. 9. b. and the reaſon is given there, becauſe the de-
mandant has not any prejudice of his right, but only a delay.
But if the court admit a (5) voucher, where it ought not to
be, it is error, as it is held 8 H. 7. 11. a. The fame law if
an * eſſoin be caſt and allowed where it is not allowable, it is
not error: but to deny any of theſe + dilatories, where, of
right the court ought to grant them, is error, as appears in
the ſaid books, and 21 E. 4. 65. b. 22 E. 4. 15, &c. Anda
(c) Retraxit is always on the plaintiff or demandant's part, and


a (4) departure in deſpight of the court, is always on the 0


defendant or tenant's part, and the entiy there is, Quad tenen:
receſſit in contemptum curiæ, and in one caſe the plaintiff or de-
mandant is barred, and in the other caſe the pl. or demand-
ant ſhall have judgment preſently; (e) Qui ſemel actionem re-
nunciavit amplius repetere non potei. Vide for theſe matters, 20
E. 2. Excommengement 28. 4 E. 85 23. in Formeden. 6 E. 3.
31, 32, 34. a. in Quare impedit. 8 E. 3. 3. b. and 68. 38 E. 3.
13. 16 R. 2. tit. * de remover Plea 12. 3 H. 4. 2. 11 H. 4.
94. 3 H. 6. 13. 9 H. 6. 58. 39 H. 6. 16, 33. Priſot. 7 H. 7.
39. Vide tit. Departure en Deſpite del court, Brooke.

2. It was reſolved, that the plaintiff in this caſe ought to
be (f) amerced, for it is a ſtronger cale than the caſe of a
nonſuit, which is but a default, or non-appearance ; but a
Retraxit is a voluntary acknowiedgment that he hath no
cauſe of action, and therefore he will no farther proceed,
&c. and therefore it is a bar for ever. And it was object-
ed, that the plaintiff ſhould not aſſign that for error, becauſe ir
was for his advantage that he was not amerced, and a man
ſhall never aſſign that for error which is for his (g) advan-
tage, 7 E. 3 25. b. by Herle, 8 H. 5. 2. b. 11 Hf. 4. 8. F.

. B, 21. as to ſay, that he was eſſoigned, where he ought
not to be eſſoigned; or that he had a longer day than the com-
mon day; or that aid was granted to him where it was not
grantable. To which it was anſwered and reſolved, that it is
true, that in proceſs, or delay, which is for the advantage
of the party, he ſhall not aſſign it for error ; but in the caſe
at bar the judgment is not perfect, for the amercement ought
to be parcel of the judgment; and it is alto for the King's
advantage, and therefore divers judgments have been re-
rerſed in the King's Bench, becauſe the judgment was, ides
in + miſericordia, where it ſhould be, capiatur; and yet it
was for the (Y) parties advantage; but becauſe the judg-
ment was erroneous, and the error of the court in giving
it; for this cauſe it hath been often adjudged, that it is
not amendable, but the whole judgment ſha!l be reverſed.
Vide 20 AM. pl. 26. 7 E. 6. Dyer (i) 89. 14 El. Dyer (4) 315.
Vide now the doubts there well expluined. And becauſe it is fo
material


59


(a) 5 H. 77 3. b.
9. a.


(5) Br, Error,


151.
Hob. 47.
+ 9 Co. 16. a,


(c) 1 Roll. 584.


4. 8. d.
Co. Lit. 139. a.

d) F. N. B. 8. F.

o. Lit. 239. a.
19 E. 2. Fitz.
Villenage, 31.
(e) Co. Lit. 139.
A.


(f) Cr. Jac. 211.
64. 1 Roll. 7 59.


Jenk. Cent. 283.


(gs) F. N. B. 2 1. f.
5 Co. 39. b.

7 Co. 4. b. Palm.
39, 40. 2 Sand.
46. 1 Roll. 757,


759, 260.
Fitz. Error 92.


Hob. 180.
] 1Roll, 769.


+ x Roll, 769.
(5) Cr. El. 84.

Cro. Jac. 211.

Cro. Car. 505,

2 Sand. 47.

1 Roll. 759,760,

Jenk. Cent. 283.

(1) Dyer 89.

pl. 111.

(k) Dyer 31 .
I. 99. 1 Roll.

769. Moor 768.


Berecne R's Caſe. Part VIII.


material in all judgments to know when the plaintiff or de.
mandant, and when the defendant or tenant ſhall be amerced
or fined, inaſmuch as the miſtaking thereof makes the judy.
ment erroneous, it is very neceſſary to underſtand the true
ſenſe of the law in theſe caſes.
(Co. Lit, And this word (a) ( finis) hath divers fignifications in the
1 law, quia aliguando ſignificat pretium, aliquands pœnam, & ali-
quando pacem. For 1. the price, or ſum, which 1s the cauſe
of obtaining a benefit, is called a fine, as fine in the hamper
for the King's writsy fine for alienation, fine for admiſſion to
a copyholdy fine for obtaining leaſes, and ſuch like. 2. That
which the offender gives in fatisfaftion of his oftence, is alſo
called a fine, and in that ſenſe, dicitur pena. And 3. The
aſſurance which makes men enjoy their lands and inberitances
in peace, is called finis, quia finem litibus ponit. And all theſe
are called fines, becauſe they are the end, or cauſes of the end
of all the ſaid buſineſſes,

- (3) co. Lit, (5) Amercement is in Latin called miſericordia, and the
126. b. cauſe thereof is, becauſe by the common law (which is a law
R mercy) no man ought to be amerced ſo much as he deſerves,

but leſs. Vide F N. B. 76.
To 1. In all actions Quare vi & armis, as Reſcous, Treſp. vi &
Force. armis, &c. if judgment be given againſt the defendant, he
(c) Co. Lit. ſhall be fined and impriſoned, for to every fine (c) impriſon-
NET ment is incident; and always when the judgment is, god de-
fendens cafiatur, it is as much as to fay, gud capiatur guouſque
finem fecerit, Vide 19 H. 6.8. b. 34 H. 6. 24. 11 H. 4. 25.
30 Aſſ. pl. 28. And if there be divers defendants, they
{hall be ſeverally fined. So in an Aſſiſe, if the diſſeiſin be
found with force, the defendant ſhall be fined and imprifoned;
ctherwile it is if the difieifin be found without force; tor there
he ſhall only be amerced. for the writ of Aſſiſe doth not men-
tion vi & armis, but, injuſte et fine judicis diſſiſivit, 33 H. b.

21. a.

2. 2. In a writ of Deceit upon a real action upon a recovery by
Fraud and deceit default, if it be found on examination, that the tenant was
to che cout. not lawfully ſummoned, the judgment ſhall be, Et reli

defend” pro falſitate et deceptione pra dict capiatur : and the wilt
of Deceit is, Of/ten/um ej? nobis ex parte A. qued B. in curid vo
ſtra falſe et in deceptione curiæ recuperavit ſeifinam, &c. and that
is the cauſe, ſcilicet, the deceit to the court in obtaining the
ſaid judgment, that he ſhall be fined and imprifoned ; but in
an action perſonal, the deceit between party and party, which
is in the nature of an action upon the caſe, there the deſen-
dant ſhall not be fined and impriſoned, but only amerced, ſot
there is no deceit done to the court, but to the party.


3. If


1 sg *r... ,


Part VIII. BI ZONE R“s Caſe. 60


3. If the deſendant, or tenant, pleads a falſe deed to him, ;

or (a) denies his own deed, and it is found againſt him, or if Fa!ſhood in de-
he (b) reliela verificatione cognoſcit actionem, he ſhall be fined 2 his own
for his falſity, guza certi debemus eſſe de proprio facto; and if he (a) £ Roll. 2195
denies his (c) anceſtor's deed, or pleads a deed to his anceſtor, 224. 33 H. 6.
and it is found againſt him, yet he ſhall not be fined, but 1. * *
amerced only, gui de aliens facto. And ſo you will better Contests 7
underſtand your books in 3 E. 6. Dy. 67. 26 Aſſ. p. 5. 33 H. Fine pur Con-
6. 54+ b. 34. H. 6. 20. a. b. But if he denies a recovery, or Pe 3: Fitz,
other record to which he 1s party, he ſhall not be fined, 10 4% u b. FR.
AM. p. 10. 16 All. p. 19. for it is not his act, but the act of Fines 25. Du. 67.
the court, and he doth not deny the record abſolutely, but, 5 19. Cco. El,
non habetur tale recordum, Ty 1


elw. 42. a,
(3) 1 Roll. 224. 33 H. 6. 54. b. 2 Roll. Rep. 45. Fitz. Fines 16. 9 E. 4. 24. a. b. Fitz. Fines
25. Dy. 67. pl. 19. Noy 4, 31. Cro. Jac. 64, 420. 2 Sand. 191. Raym. 195, 202. 1 Mod, 73- (c)
Br. Amercement 5. Cr. Jac. 255, 2 Sand, 192.
4. If thedefendant in a Replevin claims property falſly, and ;
itis ſo found m (4) proprietate probanda, he ſhall be fined and Falſe claim of
impriſoned, 11 H. 4. 4. prop-rty of cate


3 | te, &e. in vo-
Juntary delay of juſtice, ſo that he cannot have the uſe of the cattle of his plough, or other goods,


4) 11 H. 4. 4. b. f. a, Co. Lit. 145. b. Br. Fine pur Contempt 14. Br. Retorn de Brief 108.
Fitz, Proprietate probanda 1. Br. propr. prob. 14.

5. In (e) Appeal of death, robbery, or any other appeal of 6
felony or maihem, if the plaintiff be barred, or if he be“ For malicious
nonſuit, or if the writ abate by his own default, he ſhall be _ 15
fined and impriſoned, 8 H. 4. 17. a. 20. for the malice is the J man, 0eenn?


higheſt which concerns lite or member, (e) Fitz. Corone
73. Br, Appeal

25. Br. Fine pur Contempt 11. Br. Imprif 106. Co. Lit. 127. a,

6. So in Attaint 32 Aſſ. p. 9. 42 E. 3. 26. b. if the plaintiff 6.

be nonſuit, or barred, he {hall be fined and impriſoned. So Malicious fvit in

if the Attaint paſs againſt the defendant if he were party to the — eee

firſt record, he ſhall be fined and impriſoned but if he .

not party to the firſt record, as tenant by receit, or other terre-

tenant, he ſhall not be fined, 14 Aſl. p. 2. 42 E. 3. 26. b.

9 E 4. 33.

7. Where any uſes the countenance of the law, (which was .

inſtituted to make an end of controverſies and vexation) for For double vex-

double vexation, he ſhall be fined : as if a man (/) ſues in the #02 by colour

Common Pleas, and aftervrards, for the ſame cauſe, ſues him VF:

in London, or any ſuch court, the plaintiff ſhall be fined for tempt 24. 7 H.6.

this unjuſt vexation, 9 II. 6. 55. 14 H. 7. 7. a. and in a (g) 36. b.

Recaption the plaintiſf ſhall recover damages, and the defen— E OS 3d.

dant ſhall be fined and impriſoned for his double vexation. F. N. B. 74. 4.
8. For all contempts done to any court of record, againſt

the King's command by his writ under the great ſeal, the Contempts a-

offender ſhall be fined and impriſoned as in Yruare nan admiſit, —_ the Kin,“
ware incumbravit, Attachment upon Prohibition, &c. Vide :

19 E. 3. Quare non admiſit 7. 23 E. 3. 22. 26 E. 3. 75. 20 E.

2. Coron 233. Stanf. 132. The ſtat. of 25 E. 3. c. 6. &c. but

when the demandant, or plaintiff, or the tenant or defendant /

Telraxit, Or recelſit in cantemplum cin iæ, yer there is no contempt

again{t


a ſtatute.

(a) 2 Inft. 131.
Cro. Jac, 638.
Cro. Car. 560.
2 Bulſt. 328.

1 Sid. 233. 12
Co. 134. 2 Roll.
222.

(532 laſt. 131.


9.
Contemptagainſt the offender ſhall be fined and I N


10.

A court which
is not of record
ſhall never im-
pole a fine.

c it Co, 43. b.

oſtea 120. a,
F. N. B. 73. d.
Antea 41 a.
(4) Co. 10. 103.
a. Poſtea 120. 3.
Antea 41. a.
Salk, 200.
x Salk. 200,
Ante 38. b. i
8 Co. 41.


(e) 6 Co. 11. b.
Co Lit. 58. a.
Godb, 49- 1Roll.


543. 4 Co. 33-b.


'BrECHE R's Caſe.


Part VIII,


againſt the King's command by his writ. And by theſe gif.
ferences you will better underſtand your books in caſes of


fines and impriſonment, and learn the true reaſon and ſenſe


of the law.


9. In all caſes, where a thing is forbid by any (a) ſtatute,
35 H. 6. 6. b.


19 H. 6. 4. in Maintenance. Vide 9


4. 28. And that is the


reaſon, that where the ſtatute of Marlebridge, c. 15. forbids,
vod nulli de cœtero liceat ex qudcunque cauſa diſtrict“ facere extra


ferdum ſuum, nec in Regia vid, vel communi flrata ; that the


party who is diſtrained in the highway cannot plead it in bar
of the (5) avowry, for then the King ſhould Joſe his fine, but
ſhall be driven to an action on the ſtatute, in which the King
ſhall have his fine, and therewith agreeth 11 R. 2. Avowry
87. Vide 19 E. 2. Brief. 842. 21 E. 3. 11. 39 E. 3. 20. 43
E. 3. 30. F. N. B. go, & 173. Regiſter 97.

10. In ſome action the defendant ſhall be fined in one court,
and but amerced in another court, and yet the offence ſhall
be all one; as in a writ of (c) Recaption, if it be brought in
the Common Pleas, and judgment be there given, the defen-
dant ſhall be fined and impriſoned: as hath been ſaid, but
if the writ be brought in the county court, and the defendant
be convict before the Sheriff in the county, the judgment ſhall
not be, quod capiatur, quia nulla curia gue (d) recordum non ho-
bet, poteſi imponere ſinem, neque aliguem mandare carceri, quiaiſia


ſpectant tantummodo ad curias de recorde, and therefore in ſuch


caſe he ſhall be only amerced. And although the writ, ſel,
the Recaption is of record, yet foraſmuch as the Judges in


the court, ſcil. the ſuitors, are not judges of record, nor the


court is of (e) record, they cannot impoſe a fine, or commit


any to priſon,
73. d. 8 E. 4.5. 34 H. 6. 24.


And ſo in all the like caſes.


Vide F. N. B.


Cr. El. 792. Cr. Jac. 582. 4 Inſt. 266, 268. 21 E. 4. 66. b. 9 Co. 48. b. 49. a. 1 Mod. Rep. 7/5
12 H. 9. 16, 17. 7 E. 4. 23. 4.


Amercement.


1.
In all writs


of Præcipe
On nonſuit, bar,
or writ abated
for want of
matter or form,
the King ſhall
have amercia-
ment. Writ a-
bated by act of
God, &c. no
amerciament.
Fitz, Amercia-
ment 13. Br. A-
merciament 12.
Co Lit, 127. a.


ant ſhall be amerced.


And now concerning amercement.


1. In all writs of Præcipe quod reddat, 28


uod — * writ of 8
v 3 &c. writs o


Formedon, or writ of Aiel,
entry, &c. Præcipe de quod per.


mittat, as to have eſtovers, common, &c.
or, Præcipe quod faciat, as writ of cuſtoms and ſervices,
&c. if the demandant be barred, or if he be nonſuit, or it
his writ abate becauſe it is ill in matter or form, the demand-


But if there be two demandants, and


the writ abate for the death of one of them, the other ſhall not
tit. Accompt 40.


be amerced, 28 (48) E. 3: 23. a. 46 E
E. 3. 3. 22 Hl. 6. 7. 3. 31.7

80 in all the ſaid writs of P pe, 1

the-tenant, he ſhall be amerced,


H 6


36.


41 Af. 14+
reaper, if judgment be given again


2. In


TT. EEO EG: , ae BR. 9


Part VIII. BRECHER's Caſe. 61


2. In all perſonal actions, as debt, detinue, and the like 2.
actions, without force or deceit to the court, and alſo in ac- In perſ. actions.
tions which comprehend force or deceit to a court of record;
if the plaintiff be barred, nonſuit, or the writ abate becauſe
it is vicious in matter, or form, he ſhall be amerced only, Death or non-
and not fined ; but if the writ abate by the death of one _ —_ = x
plaintiff, or if one plaintiff appeareth, and the other be (a) .
nonſuit, (which in law in perſonal actions is a nonſuit of both) Br. Amercement
he who ſurviveth, or appeareth, ſhall not be amerced ; for no 7": Fitz. Amerc.
default is in him, but he only who appeareth not, 47 E. 3. 6.

b. & 43 AM. pl. 3. 7 H. 6. 36. 38 E. 3. 31. 41 Aſſ. 14. And
in the fame actions which are without force or fraud to the
court, the defendant ſhall be amerced.

3. If one demandant in a (6) real action. or one plaintiff in .

a perſonal action where (c) ſummons and ſeverance lieth, as One demandant
in debt by executors, if one demandant or plaintiff be nonſuit, ——
and the other ſueth forward, he who is nonſuit ſhall not be (% Br. Amer. z.
amerced, 28 H. 6. 11. b. 21 E. 4. 77. b. (e) Br. Amer 48.

4. In all judicial proceſs, if the plaintiff be barred, non-
ſuit, or if the writ abate, the plaintiff ſnall not be amerced, In judicial pro-
becauſe the proceſs is founded upon a judgment and record, . 3
11 H. 4. 55: b. in (d) Quid juris clamat, Scire facias, Sc. 21 ( 11 H. 4...
E. 3. 23. 9 E. 3. 32. in Per gue ſervicia, 18 Hen. 6. tit. br. Amerce-
Pledges 1. And in theſe actions the plaintiff ſhall not find (0 F ** *
(e) ſureties, becauſe he ſhall not be amerced. Ero. Jac. re :

5. In all actions real and perſonal, if part be found for the 5.
demandant or plaintiff, and part againſt him, or all or part Part found for
againſt one tenant or defendant, and nothing, or but part, on 1
againſt the other, the demandant or plaintiff ſhall be (F) 8
amerced; unleſs no default be in the demandant or plaintiff, againft one te-
and therefore in treſpaſs of battery againſt huſband and wife, 77 or det, &c.
ſuppoſing the battery to be done by them both, and the wife Roll. 789.
is only found guilty, &c. and the huſband acquitted, yet the Cro. Car. 138,
Plaintiff hall not be amerced, for the plaintiff could not have $53: py El.
another writ in ſuch caſe, and therefore no default in him. E. amend”


Vide 22 Aff. 8. 7 Aſſ. pl. 14. 31 Aſſ. pl. 31. Br. Amerce- 2, 7, 29. Br.


ment 42. 40 E. 3. 40. a. 21 H. 6. 41. a. ee 76.
6. In all actions real or perſonal, where there is but one 6


tenant or defendant, he ſhali not be twice amerced, but there, On ten. or def,

where there is but one demandant or plaintiff, and divers de- thall not be

fendants, the plaintiff may be divers times (g) amerced, 9 E. ice age

3. 6. 31 Aſſ. pl. 31. 21 H. 6. 41. a. 40 E. 3. 40. a. SEN
7. Upon diſcon. in a real or perſonal action, the demandant SY

or plaintiff ſhall not be amerced, for that is the act of the court, On diſcontinu-


2, ance, or when
38 L 3 the court is ou-
ſed of juriſdic-


tion, no amerc,


(F) Cr. ac. 630.


— _——_—
L - do


n EIFS r 5


rere *


.
1
.*_
= |
. *
0 1
*

,
EB
4
[3 $

N 1
:
*
* ſ
.
*
1
* »
* 1
=
*
49
IT
1
11
1
11
: i
41
Ti
$216
wo,
; ran
\ 5
\ 5
t &
35S
ä
+ 0
% 9 0
at
1
1
7 5
Fe.
2 *
2
> . *
We
*
"x
.. F
- .
:
5
*
ood
: 3


|
© 1
|


— — --
- * —


— —


— . —-„t.:Qę oe. rae * . 4 2 —


— — ID DS — ——


Tenant or de-
fendant comes
the fitſt day, &c,
ſhall not be 3
merced unleſs
the a&t.on im-

s force or
raud.
(a) Cr. Car. 564.
Co. Lit. 126. b.
1 Roll. 212.
$R, 2. Amerce-
ment 26, Cr. El.
65. 14 E. 3.
Amercement 16.
(6) Jenk. Cent.
258. Moor 394.


The judgment
when the writ
abates by matter
or form, or
when the de-
mandant is


The judgment
on a nonſuit,


(% Cr. Jak. 713.


(d) F. N. B. 76. a.
The judgment
in a Retraxit.


10.
Perſons who
ſhall not be a-
merced.

(e) Co. Lit. 127.
a. 133. a. Cr.
Car. 161. Cr,
Jac. 414.

3 Bulſt. 276.

1 Roll. 214.
Palm. 518, 519.


520.

(f) Co. Lit. 127.
Us 3 Bulſt. 276.
1 Roll. 215.
(g) Co. Lit. 126,
127. a. Cr. Car,
160, 410.


—


BRHEC HE R'Ss Caſe. Part Vin,


E. 3. 31+ a. The ſame law, and for the ſame cauſe, when
the court is ouſted of juriſdiction, 18 E. 3. 7,

8. In all actions real or perſonal (in which there is not con.
tained any certain force or deceit to the court) if the tenanty
defendant comes the firſt (a) day, and render the thing in de.
mand to the demandant or plaintiff, he ſhall not be amerceg;
for he doth what the King commands by his writ ; for where
the writ is, Præcipe gued reddat, &c. that in judgment of lay
is, that he render it at the return of the writ in court, and ng
in the country, as it is reſolved in (5) Vaughan's caſe, in the
Fifth Part of my Reports, fol. 49. and there the cauſe of the
amercement of the tenant or defendant is well explained. But
in aCtions in which the offence is ſuppoſed with force, or in
deceit of the court, if the defendant at the firſt day confeſſes
the action, yet he ſhall be fined and impriſoned, tor his ap-
pearance and confeſſion are a manifeſtation of, and no ſatis
faction for his offence, |

9. In all caſes when a real or perſonal writ doth abate for


want of form or matter, or the demandant or plaintiff be


barred, the judgment is, 219d petens, five querens nihil cab ju
breve ſuum præd ſed fit in Miſericord' pro falſo clamore ſus indy
& pred” ten ſeu def” cat inde ſine die. And in all ſuch caſes
the eſtreat out of the Common Pleas into the Exchequer;
which the Clerk of the Warrants makes in ſuch caſes is, D:
A. pro falſa clamore ſuo verſus S. in placito, &c, Vide F. N.;.
76. A. But if the demandant or plaintiff be“ nonſuit in
any action (certain ſpecial caſes excepted) the judgment i,
Ideo conſiderat 7 quod pred” (c) querens & plegii ſui de priſe
quendo ſint inde in miſericordid, c. & pred def. cat inde fin
die; and there the eſtreat is, De Johanne N. pro ſe & pleg' ſui,
quia non proſeguutus breve ſuum verſus B. in placito, &c. Vide (ij
F. N. B. 76. + But in caſe of Retraxit the judgment is, Yui
nibil cap) per breve ſuum pred”, ſed fit in miſericor* pro fall,
clam”, &c. |

10. There are ſome perſons who ſhall not be amerced, and
therefore they ſhall not find (e) ſureties; ſome for the dignity
of their perſons, as the King (f), and ſo the Queen, for 3
to that ſhe partakes of the King's prerogative. Vide F. N. B.
31. f. 47. C. 101. A. 18 E. 3. 2. Br. tit. Amercement 53


Some for imbecility of age, as (g) infants, and therefore the


ſnall not find ſureties; but the entry is, Ides in miſericord“ ſe

fardonatur quia infans. Vide 43 Al. 45. 44 E. 3. tit. Amerce

ment 10. 3 E. 3. Infant 14. 14 Aſt. pl. 17. 41 Aſſ. p. 14
17 E. 3. 75. Bract. folio 254. F. N. B. 195. b. ;

. True it is, if the ten. (/) diſcla. he ſhall not have a writ of

error againſt his own diſclai. becauſe by his diſclaimer ” by
ar


2 Bulſt. 276. h. Reg. Orig. 224. a. 1 Roll. 214, 215. Palm. 518, 519, 520. Mo. 204. Mod.
Rep 47. 296. Dyer 338. pl. 41. 2 Keb. 698. 1 Bulſtr. 172. 5 Co. 49. a (+) Cr. J. 545 2
Roll, Rep. 128, Fitz. Err, 78. Poſtea 62, a, Jenk, Cent. 283. F. N. B. 27, (.


7
p
p
[
0
0
1
c
7
{
|


Part VIII. BEECHER's Caſe. 62


barred himſelf of the right of the land, for the words of dif-

claimer of the tenant are, hl habet, nec habere clamat, in

zerrd illi, nec die impetrationis brevis originalis pred, &c, ha-

buit, ſeve clamat, Jed aliguid in terra il! habere deadvocat et dif-

dame; and againſt that he cannot have a writ of (a) error to («) Cr. Jac, 548.

have reſtitution of the land againſt this diſclaimer. Vide 6 3

Edw. 3. 7. & F. N. B. 22. C. And if the Retraxit in the Antea 61. b.,

eaſe at bar had been duly made, it was objected, that againſt Jenk. Cent. 283.

it no writ of error lay; but here the Retraxit itſelf was erro—

neous ; becauſe the attorney did it where it ought to be done

in (5) proper perſon. Alſo the plea was diſcontinued, as ap- (9) 2 .

pears by the record. And ſoraſmuch as the tenant or defend- 17. 134.8139.

ant after departure in deſpight of the court might have a writ Oro. Jac, 211.

or error, or if he had an eſtate for life or in tail, quod ei de- Jenk. Cent. 283.

farceat, F. N. B. 155. I. and the defendant or tenant againſt

his own (c) confeſſion may have a writ of error; it was re- (e) F. N. B. 1. K.

ſolved, that although the plaintiff in proper perſon had made

a Retraxit, yet he might have a writ of (4) error, either in the (4) Antes 59. 2.

judgment or in the proceeding: for no imperfection is ſaved

in ſuch caſe by any ſtatute when judgment is given upon Re-

traxit, and it is no more than confeſſion on the part of the de-

fendant ; for the effect of the entry of a Retraxit is, Lud idem

e) querens fatetur (ſeu cognovit) ſe ulter ius nalle proſequt verſus (*) Co. Lit. 138.

df. de placito pred”, which confeſſion is (f) a bar in all actions, 4) man

although the words are de placito ſuo prædicto, and thereſore 1 Roll. . Co.

it is not like a diſclaimer, by which the tenant diſclaims and Lit. 139. a. Cro.

bars himſelf abſolutely of all his right in the land. ogy mag mag
4. lt was reſolved, that the entry of the ſaid Retraxit was ture in Deſripht,

inſufficient; for it appears by the precedents that there are &e. 13. 21 E. 4,

ſundry manners of entries of a Retraxit : aſter both parties 3% ©

have appeared in court, the entry is, Et (g) poftea eodem die (g] Co. Lit. 139.

revenit hic ad barram præd tenens per attirn' ſuum pred” & **

pred” petens tunc ſolemniter exactus non venit, ſed a ſetla ſua

pred in contempt” cur” ſe retraxit, ideo conſideratum eft quod

petens nihil capiat per breve ſuum pred” ſed fit in las did

pro falſo clamore jus inde, et quod prædictus tenens eat inde fine

die. And that appears, Trin 5 H. 6. Rot. 320. in Com' Ban-

. Another form of a Retraxit is, et ſuper hoc idem quer dicit, () Antes 88

70d (/) ipſe non vult ulterius placitum ſuum pred” proſegui, ſed Co. Lit. 1 —_

abinde amni no ſe retraxit, c. Iaeo, &fc. Another form is,

qued idem (1) guerens fatetur ſe (ſeu cognovit je) ulterius nalle

proſegui verſus pred” defendent', &c. de placito pred'. And

the entry ot departure in deſpight of the court on the part

of the tenant is, (&) et predictus A. licet ſolemniter exactus non Y Co.Lit. 139»

revenit, ſed in contempt cur” receſſit & default fecit. And that is 3 E. 3. 13. b.

when in judgment of law he is preſent in court, and being

Vol. IV. X demanded


(i) Co. Lit. 139. a.


—
. 3


.
KR
; *
i
1
a
[i


"ws


(4) Poſtea 69. a,
Lit. ſect. 201.
Co, Lit. 134. b.


BEECHE nr's Caſe. Part VIII.


demanded, departs in deſpight of the court, that amounts tg
a bar in reſpect of the deſpight and contempt of the court;
and yet the judgment is there given upon his default, as ay.
pears before. Otherwiſe where he imparles to a certain day,
for there he is not, in judgment of law, preſent in court; and {
the difference. Vide 20 Ed 2. Excom. 28, and all the books
aforeſaid, And if the writ abates for falſe Latin, or other
matter of form, upon plea to the writ, the judgment is, Ju
pred” tenens, or defendens eat inde fine die. And alſo if the de.
mandant, or plaintiff, be upon a bar pleaded, &c. by judg.
ment to be barred, the words of the judgment are all one,
ſcilicet, quad pred” tenens, or defendens eat inde fine die; and
always the judgment ſhall have relation to the plea, . if
upon a plea in bar, then the judgment ſhall be applied to it;
if to the writ, then the judgment ſhall be applied to the writ
only, and not in bar; and therewith agree the books in 3 H.
4. 1. and 3 H. 4. 11. Vide upon plea of excommunication,
which doth not (a) abate the writ, 11 R. 2. Excom. 25. the
entry is, remaneat loquela fine die quouſque, Sc.


SW AYN E*'s Caſe.


Mich. 6 Jac. 1.


ICHARD SWAYNE, Eſq. brought an action of treſ-
paſs againſt Walter Becket, quare clauſum fregit, at Han-
nington in the county of Wilts, and Jopped, &c. 10 oaks and
15 aſhes, &c. And upon not guilty, the caſe, as it was ſpe-
cially found, was ſuch ; Queen Elizabeth was ſeiſed of the
manor of Hannington in the county of Wilts, in fee, in the
right of her duchy of Lancaſter ; and that the ſaid oaks and
aſhes ſo lopped were growing upon a yard and half of land,
parcel of the ſame manor and copyhold land, &c. and de-
miſeable for one, two, or three lives; and afterwards the Q.
by indenture under the ſeal of the duchy of Lancaſter, anno
29 regni ſur, demiſed the fame manor to John Wolly, Eſq,
exceptis omnibus boſcis, ſubboſcis, arboribus, & marem', Sc. to
have and to hold to him (except before excepted) for 21
years; who, 25 Eliz. aſſigned all his intereſt to John Plumer
and others; and afterwards the Queen died; and afterwards
the K ing that now is, by his letters patent under the duchy
feal, granted to Alexander, Lord Fivy, Richard Swayne,
and Peter Whetcombe, rever/tonem predic? ac permiſſa fic, ut
prefertur, excepi', to them and their heirs, to whom the
leſſces attorned; and afterwards the Lord Fivy, and Whet-
combe, by their deed releaſed to Richard Swayne, and his
heirs ; and at a court held by the leſſces, 17 Oct. 3 Fac. Regis,
their ſteward granted by copy of court-roll, to the {aid Walter
Becket, now defendant, &c. a houſe and the ſaid yard and
a half of land upon which the ſaid oaks and aſhes were
growing, for term of lite, ſecundum couſuetudinem manern ;
and that within the ſaid manor there has been ſuch a cuſtom,
that every copyhold-tenant for life hath uſed to take all
trees growing upon his copyhold lands, to be employed
lor fewel in his copyhold houſe, and for bounds and
ſences, and other neceilary reparations to be in and
3 upon


In C. Banco.


Moor 811, 811.
1 Brownl, 231.
2 Brownl. 208,
1 Roll. Rep. 96.
2 Roll. Rep. 179.
11 Co. 50. b.


;
.
dy 2, [
5

4
9
1

＋
Ty
Gy

7
1
}
:
4
*
„
E
%


62) 4 Co. 24. b.
5 Co. ** a.

6 Co. 57. b. 68. b.
Co. Lit, 309. b.


(3) Moor $12.
I Browol. 231.
11 Co. 50. b.


(7) 4 Co. 23. b.
27. b. Co. Lit.


31. b. 59. b.

1 Roll. 503. Cro.
El. 361. Bridgm.
81. Moor 112.


(4) x Roll. 499.
4 Co. 23. b. 31. b.
Co. Lit. «8. b.


Cr, Jac. 98, 99.


(e) Mo. 7 58, 8 12.
2 Brownl. 208.
Bridgm. 51.
1 Leon. 16.


2 Siderf. 82.


4 Doct. pl. $1,


( ) I Brown),
231.


SWAYNE's Caie. Part VIII.


upon the cuſtomary lands and tenements; and that the de.
fendant did Jop the ſaid trees upon his copyhold, and em.
ployed them for bounds and fences in and upon his copyhold
lands and tenements, &c. And the doubt was, that foraf.
much as the ſaid lefſees held the court by virtue of the faid
Jeaſe of the manor (out of which leaſe the ſaid trees were
excepted) if the detendant to whom they, by their ſteward,
granted the ſaid tenement by copy, might lop the ſaid trees,
which, by the ſaid exception, were divided from the faid
leaſe. And in this caſe divers points were reſolved by Coke
C. J. Walmfley, Warburton, Daniel, and Foſter, as after
appears. But hirſt it was objeQed, guod (a) nemo poteſ? plus ju-
ris in alum transferre quam ipſe habet; and the lords pro ten-
pore who held the court, and made the grant to the defendant,
had nothing in the trees, for they were excepted out of their
leaſe; ergo, the copyholder who claims by grant of the
leſſees could not meddle with the trees. But it was anſwered
and reſolved per totam curiam, that notwithſtanding the ſeve-
rance by the (6) exception, and notwithſtanding the deſend-
ant came in by a voluntary grant of the lords for liſe, and
not by ſurrender, yet ſuch grantee by copy, ſhould have e-
ſtovers; for the eftate of the copyholder. (who comes in by
voluntary grant.) is not derived out of the eftate or intereſt
of the lord of the manor, for the lord of the manor is but
as an (c) inſtrument to make the grant: but the cuſtom of
the manor (after the grant made) eſtabliſhes and makes it
firm to the grantee : ſo that aitho' the grant be new, yet the
title of the copyholder is ancient, and ſo ancient, that by
force of cuſtom it exceeds the memory of man. And there
fore neither for infancy nx ſane memory, coverture, not
other ſuch diſabilities, neither in reſpect of exility, baſeneſs,
or (4) uncertainty of the intereſts or eſtates of the lords (as
at will, or upon condition, &c.) the grants by copy ſhall
not be avoided, becauſe they claim in, by force of a good
and ancient cuſtom, which hath no diſability of perſon, - at
defect of a perfect intereſt. And Paſch. 26 El in Banco Regis
it was adjudged, that if the lord takes a wife, and aſter—
wards grants the Jand by copy, according to the cuſtom,
and dies, his wife being (e) endowed of the ſaid land a-
mongſt other, ſhall not avoid the eſtate by copy, for altho
her title of dower was before the grant, yet the title of
the copybolder, which is the cuſtom, is ancienter than the
title of dower ; and ſo the copyholder, who comes in by
voluntary grant, ſhall not be ſubject to the charges or in.
cumbrances of the lord before the grant. And all that, in
this caſe was affirmed for good law, per totam curiam. 2. It
was reſolved, that when the copyholders + for life, accord-
ing to the cuſtom, have uſed to have common in the (/
waſtes of the lord of the manor, or eſtovers in his woods,
or any other profit apprender in any part of the manor, and at-
terwards the lord alicus the waltes, or woods, to another in *.
all


part VIII. SWAVVNVE's Cafe. 64


and aſter wards grants certain copyhold houſes and lands for

lives, ſuch grantees ſhall have common of paſture, or com-

mon of eſtovers, &c. notwithſtanding the ſeverance, for the

title of the copyholder is paramount the ſeverance ; and the

euſtom unites the common, or eſtovers, which are but acceſs

ſaries, or incidents, as long as the houſe and lands, being

principal, is maintained by the cuſtom, which cuſtomary ap-

purtenances are not appertaining to the eſtate of the lord, for

he is the owner of the freehold and inheritance of all the ma-

nor, but they are appertaining to the cuſtomary eſtate of the

copyholder, after the grant made unto him; which profit

apprender being due by cuſtom to the copyhold tenement,

(notwithſtanding the feoffment or fine, &c. of the waſte or

woods, made by the lord) remains and is preſerved by the

cuſtom, which is, as hath been ſaid, the title of the copy-

holder, and is paramount the ſeverance : but if the copyholder

had derived his intereſt from the eſtate of the lori, then

clearly by the ſeoffment or fine, &c. of the lord, all thoſe

who after claim by him, ſhall be barred of any profit appren-

der in the ſame waſtes or woods: vide (a) Murret's caſe, in (a) 4 Co. 21. b.

the Fourth Part of my Reports, that after the cuſtom hath Cu El. 282.

fixed a cuſtomary intereſt, no ſeverance of the iuheritance ſhall 2 Lea. 209.

overthrow the copyhold : and vide (% Brown's cafe, . And 2 Co. 21, as

if a man grants arent to another out of his land, on condi- , *

tion, and afterwards makes a feoffment of the land, yet the Plow. 2. 197.

condition to determine the rent remains, and is not extinct

by the feoffment, for it is collateral to the title of the land.

And nota the difference between (e) preſcription which is made (e) 6 Co. 60. b.

in the perſon of any, as he and all his anceſtors, &c. or all 2 bo

thoſe whoſe eſtate he hath, &c. and cam which lies upon

the land, as infra manerium talis habetur conſuetudo, Fc. and

this cuſtom binds the land, as Gavelkind, Borough-Engliſh,

and the like. (4) But after ſuch ſeverance of the waste, or (4) oct. pl 81.

woods, &c. the copyholder, when he entitles himſelf to com-

mon, or eſtovers, &c. in pleading, ſhall not plead generally,

quod infra manerium predic” talis habetur, c. conſuetudo, Oc.

for after the ſeverance, the waſte or wood, &c. is not within

the manor, but abſolutely divided from it; but (e) hall plead C) oct. pl. 82.

that until ſuch a time, /e:l. before the ſeverance, tauis habeba-

tur, & tota tempore, c. conſuetuds, &c. and then ſhew the

leverance, as he ought in the ſaid caſe of Murrell, where the

lord of the manor aliened the freehold and inheritance of the

copyho'd. Vide 2 H. 6. 9. 11 H. 6. 23. 39 H. 6. 13, 14.

7 E. 4 32. 20 E. 4. C. b. 22 E. 4 44 And Coke C. J. |

ſaid that the ſaid caſe at bar was a general caſe, for in all () (f "1 Co.g0.b,

raſes ot manors made by Q. Eliz. or the King that now is,

luch exception of trees and timber, &c. is. And judgment

Was given for the (g) defendant. 0 E) Moor $13,
X 3 Sir


Sir WILLIAM FosTER's Caſe


Mich. 6 Tac. 1.


1 Brownl, 169, LN a Replevin between Barnard Cowper, plaintiff, and dit
SEO William Foſter, defendant, for taking his cattle, m
die Auguſti, anno quarto Jacobi Regis, apud Stratfield, in am

Berks, in quodam loco vocat the Rye-piddle, the ſaid Sir Wil

liam avowed the taking, as bailiff of Ed. Gregory Efq. and

Mary his wife, adminiſtratrix of the goods and chattels which

were Tho. Foſter's Gent. and ſaid, that the place where, con-

tained three acres of land, parcel of the manor of Bechilwick,

in the ſaid county, whereof Charles Foſter, Eſq. was ſeiſed

in fee, and 30 Jan. anno 4 Ed. 6. by his deed indented, en-

feoffed of the ſaid manor Richard Pattenham, to him and hi

heirs, yielding therefore yearly to the ſaid Charles, his heirs

and aſſigns, 61. 13 8. 4 d. at the feaſt of St. Michael, andthe
Annunciation of our Lady, by equal portions, with clauſe d

diſtreſs; and afterwards the faid Charles Foſter died ſeiſcd ul

the ſaid rent, after whoſe death it deſcended to the ſaid T he-

mas Foſter, as to his ſon and heir; and afterwards, /cl. 10

Fulii, anno 25. he died inteſtate, and becauſe 100 l. of th:

rent aforeſaid was behind, for 15 years, ended 10 Ul. be

avowed the taking, as bailiff to the ſaid huſband and wife, 2.

| miniſtratrix of the ſajd Thomas Foſter. The plaintiff in bat
(a) x Brown), Of this avowry, pleaded, Sued (a) nec predifius Tho. Foſter i
170. anteceſſores ſui, nec aligui alii quorum flatum pred” The. Fel
babuit in reddit” præd unguam fuerunt ſeiſni de eodem redlin

infra 40 annos jam ultimos elapſos ante prædictum tempus quo, &.

Upon which the avowant demurred in law. And this avo

is grounded on the ſtatute of 32 H. 8. 37. which gives dil.

trels to an executor or adminiſtrator, © in like manner and


form as the teſtator, &c, might or oughtto have done.” *
malle,


part VIII. Sir W. Fosrtr's Caſe,


matter in law was founded on another act made at the ſame
arliament, (a) cap. 2. (3.) of limitations, for by the fame
act it is enacted, ** That no perſon or perfons ſhall hereafter
& make any avowry, or conuſans for any rent, ſuit, or ſer-
te vice, and alledge any ſeiſin of any rent, ſuit, of ſervice
« jn the ſame avowry or conuſans, in the poſſeſſion of his or
« their anceſtor or predeceſſor, &c. above forty years next be-
« fore the making of the ſaid avowry or conuſans.“ And it
was reſolved per totam curiam, that theſe words ought to be
intended where the avowant was driven to alledge any ſeiſin
by force of any old ſtatute of limitation ; and that was when
the (5) ſeiſin was material, and of ſuch force that it ſhould not
be avoided in avowry, although it were by encroachment; as
of rent between the lord and tenant t but in the caſe of * reſer-
vation or grant of a rent, there the deed is the title, and the
beginning thereof appears, no encroachments in that caſe ſhall
hurt, nor is any ſeiſin material: the ſame law of a giſt in tail,
after the ſtatute De donis conditionalihus rendering rent; there
no encroachment ſhall be prejudicial, or feifin requiſite, for
the reſervation is the title, and the beginning thereof appears
within time of memory: and this conſtruction ſtands with
the words of the ſaid act, for the words are, „No man ſhall
% make avowry, and alledge any ſeilin, &c.” By which it
appears, that tat branch extends only where the avowant
ought to alledge ſeiſin; but when no ſciſin is requiſite, it is
out of the words and intent of the act, for it intends to limit
a time for the ſeiſin when ſeiſin is required by the law to be
alledged, and not to compel any one to alledge ſeiſin where
ſeiin was not neceſſary before. Vide Plow. Com. 94. in
Woodland's cafe, acc. And fo you will better underſtand

our books in 22 Aſi, 68. 22 Ed. 3. 18. 30 H. 6. 5. b.

d. 4. 12 Ed. 4. 7. 20 Ed. 4. 17. II H. 7. 11. b. 10 Ed.
3. 25. 20 Ed. 3. Avow. 131. 10 H. 6. 3. 4 Ed. 2. Avow.
204. F. N. B. 10. & 163. Vide 8 Ed. 3. 18. b. 1 Ma. Br.
Avow. 107. & 14 El. Dyer (c) 315. & 10 Eliz in (4) War-
ring's caſe, in the Common Pleas adjudged, that the avowant
need not in his avowry ſhew ſeiftin within 40 years, but the
lame ſhall come on the other part, /ci/. not ſeiſed of the ſervices
atter the limitation. Note, reader, leflee for life, or donee
in tail, ſhall not have (e) Ne inju/te vexes againſt the donor,
for inaſmuch as the relervation is the title, no encroachment
upon them ſhall hurt them, but they ſhall avoid it in avowry;
and the flat. of Magna charta, cap. 10. on which the writ of


Ne injuſte vexes is (/) grounded, ſeil. quod nullus diſtringatur ad (H 2 Inft. 21.


factend" majus ſervitium de libera tenemento quam inde debetur, doth
not extend to donee in tail, leſſee for life, or grantee of a
rent charge, which appears by theſe words, majus ſeruitium,
vhich is meant between very lord and very tenaut,


X 4 LOVE-·


65


(a) Dyer 315.

pl 101, 330.
pl. 19.

32 H. 8. cap. 3.
9 Co. 36. a.

I Roll. Rep. 50,


(5)1Brownl. 170.
10 Co. 108. a.
Cr. Car. 81.

1 Anderſ. 16.
Het], 41.

1 Jones 237,

* Doct. pl. 317,
318. 3 E. 4. 24.
a. 17 E. 3. 31,
32. Co. Lit. 15.


(e) 9 Co, 36. a,
Cr. Car, 83.
Hetl. 41. Dyer
315, pl. 101.

7 E. 4+ 29. 2s
(d) Cr. Car. 83s
Hetl. 41.

(e) F. N. B. 11. d.


9 Co. 33. b.
Plowd, 243- b»


Cr. Jac. 210,217.
Jenk. Cent. 283.
Co. Ent. 393.
nu. 17.

1 Lev. 310.

(a) Bridg. 112,
113.

— caſe of
Oldfield and Ly-
cett in C. B.
Mich. 16 Geo.
3. where the
plaintiff being
nonſuit bronght
error, aſter a
caſe made at
Niſi Prius for
the opinion of
the court, which
wasfordefendant,
ſo judgment of
nonſuit entered
by order of Niſi
prius.


(5) Cr. Jac, 210.
11.


Part VIII.


LEO RD Ys Cas
Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


N an information in the Exchequer upon the ſtatute of

uſury, by C. qui tam, &c. againſt Loveday, the defend-
ant pleaded to iſſue, and a jury was returned who gave an im.
perfect verdict, for they found an acceptance, &c. and no
(a) loan, &c. wherefore the court awarded a Venire facias at
novo, and thereupon another jnry was returned and appeared;
and when they were ready to give their verdict, the plaintif
was nonſuit, upon which judgment was given : and now the
plaintiff brought a writ of error in the Exchequer-chamder,
and aſſigned for error, that the court of Exchequer in the ſaid
caſe did err in granting a Venire facias de nous; but ought to
have granted a new Ni/; prius; for an imperfect verdict is as
no verdict, as anno 20 Ed. 4. 6. a. an inſufficient indictment
is as no indictment. And at the common law, if the recog:
nitors of an aſſiſe give a verdict which is not well examined
by the Juſtices who take the aſſiſe, but is imperfect, for want
of good examination, in that caſe the plaintiff ſhall have 2
certificate of aſſiſe, and the firſt imperfeCtion ſhall be enquired
by the ſirſt jurors; and that appears in F. N. B. 181. b. 78.
4. 45. a. 43 Aſſiſe, pl. 5. 12 H. 4. 9. and the words of the
writ are, Quia ſuper quibuſdam articulis contingent aſſiſam nous
diſſeiſinæ, Ic. guædam ſubſunt dubitationes, Ic. But it was reſolved
by the court, and the two Chief Juſtices, that the Venire factai
de novo was well awarded: for when a (þ) jury returned by
force of any Venire facias totry an iſſue, has given a verdict which
is accepted and recorded by the court; be it perfect or imper-
fect, the jurors are diſcharged thereof for ever, and ſhall never
be called back in the ſame cauſe to try the ſame iſſue; but i
the verdict be ſo imperfect that judgment cannot be giv”
| upon


part VIII. LovrpAr's Caſe.


upon it, then the court ſhall! award a Venire facias de novo, to
try the ſaid iſſue by others; and therewith agreeth the book
in 18 Ed. 3. 48. b. where it is reſolved, that in a Ceſavit,
becauſe the inqueſt found part to be held of the demandant,
and ſound not by what ſervices it was held, nor what arrear-
ages were bebind, and for that reaſon was not fully taken,
that a Venire facias de neue ſhould be awarded to return a new
jury, and not a new Niſi prius to try the ſame iſſue again by
the ſame jury. So in (a) 27 H. 6. 4. a. b. in conſpiracy
againſt divers, all plead not guilty, and one Venire facias was
awarded againſt all, and the Sheriff returned not the writ z
and the Sheriff prayed ſeveral Venire facias againſt the defen-
dants, and had it, and it was found for the plaintiff, and all
the Juſtices adjudged it a jeofail, ſo that the plaintiff could
not have judgment upon the ſaid verdict, which was fully
found, ſoraſmuch as the firſt award was of one joint Venire,
the plaintiff could not vary, (to have ſeveral writs de Venire
facias) from the firſt award; and therefore the court did
award Venire facias de novo, 21 Hen. 6. 21. 21 (b) Edw. 4.
26. b. 27. a. And as to the caſe of (c) aſſiſe, the recognitors
are not returned to try any certain iſſue, for there is a jury the
firſt day before any plaint, plea, or iſſue. 2. There, no new
proceſs can be awarded; for the recognitors who are once re-
turned, ſhall ſtand ; but when a jury is returned on a Venire
facias, which is a judicial proceſs for the trial of a certain
ie, there the court, if the verdict be imperfect, may award
a new judicial proceſs, 5 Venire 2 de novo; but the
court cannot do ſo in caſe of aſſiſe, for they are returned on
the original; and becauſe the writ of aſſiſe De nova difſeiſina
is (4) feſtinum remedium, the plaintiff ſhall have a writ of Cer-
tificate of Aſſiſe, to ſupply the firſt imperfections (which
happen for default of good examination) according to the
truth of the matter. And judgment was affirmed,


EDWARD


66


(a) Fitz. Procefy
94+ Br, Replead,
30. Br. Venire


facias 2, 35.


(5) Br. Eng. 47.


(c) Cr. Jas
210, 211.


3 Salk. 371.


(d) Ant. 50. 2.


Doct. pl 114.
See 2 Salk. 628.
1 Ld. Raym,
700. 12 Mod.
580. Comyns
582, 583. pl.
254. 2 Lutw.
1347 1 350.
7 Viner 503.
2 Saund. 295.
Lev. 65.
ard. 6. and ſee
GE. 4: 6. a.


EDwWARD CRoGATE's Caſe,


Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


againſt Robert Marys, for driving his cattle in Town-
rningham in Norfolk, &c. The defendant pleaded, that
houſe and two acres in Baſingham in the ſaid county, were
parcel of the manor of Thurgarton in the ſame county, and
demiſed, and demiſable, &c. by copy, &c. in fee- ſimple, &,
according to the cuſtom of the manor, of which manor Wil
liam late Biſhop of Norwich was ſeiſed in fee in the right of
his biſhoprick, and preſcribed to have common of palture for
him and his cuſtomary tenants of the ſaid houſe and two actes
of land in magna pecia paſture vicar? Baſſingham common. pri
omnibus averits, Sc. omni tempore anni, and the ſaid Biſhop at
fuch a court, &c. granted the ſaid houſe and two acres by
copy to one William Marys, to him and his heirs, &c. And
that the plaintiff put his ſaid cattle in the ſaid great piece of
paſture, wherefore the defendant, as ſervant to the ſaid Wk
liam, and by his commandment, molliter drove the ſaid cattle
out of the ſaid place, where the ſaid William had common
in pred” villam de Town-Barningham, adjoining to the fail
common of Baſſingham, &c. The plaintitt replied, de uri
ſua propria abſque tali cauſa: Upon which the defendant
demurred in Jaw. And it was objected on the plaintifi's
part, that the ſaid replication was good, becauſe the deſen ·
dant doth not claim any intereſt, but juſtiſieth by force of 2
commandment; to which de injurid ſud proprid abſque tali cauſa,
may be fitly applied: and this plea, De injurid ſud prop


E aten CROGATE brought an action of treſpah
a


part VIII. EDWARD CROGATE“s Caſe, 67


ſhall refer only to the commandment, and to no other part of
the plea, and they cited the books in 10 H. 6. 3. a. b. 9. a,

16 H. 7. 3. a. b. &c. 3H. 6. 35. a. 19 H. 6. 7. a. b. Kc.

But it was adjudged, that the replication was inſufficient.

And in this caſe divers points were reſolved. 1. That ab/que

tali cauſa, doth refer to the (a) whole plea, and not only to (a) Cr. Jac. 599.
the commandment, for all maketh but one cauſe, and any 2 Leon: 81.

of them, without the other, is no plea by itſelf. And 333.8255
therefore in (5) falſe impriſonment, if the defendant juſti- 125 285.
fies by a Capias to the Sheriff, and a warrant to him there, Cr. Car. 148,
de in urid ſud propria generally is no good replication, for (5) Do@:ph. 234:
then the matter of record will be parcel of the cauſe (for all 1
makes but one cauſe) and matter of (c) record ought not to (e) 4 Co. 72. b.
be put in iſſue to the common people, but in ſuch caſe he ? 6; By th
may reply, de injurid ſud propria, and traverſe the warrant, enn,
which is matter in fact. (4) But upon ſuch a juſtification by (4) Do. pl. 1
force of any proceeding in the Admiral Court, hundred or TE
county, &c. or any other which is not a court of record, there

de injurid ſud proprid generally is good, for all is matter of fact,

and all makes but one cauſe. And by theſe differences you

will agree your books in 2 H. 7. 3. b. 5 H. 7. 6. a. b. 16H.

7. 3. a. 21 Hf. 7. 22. a. (33.) 19 H. 6. 7. a. b. 41 E. 3.

29. b. 17 E. 3. 44. 18 E. 3. 10. b. 2 E. 4. 6. b. 12 E. 4.

10. b. 14 H. 6. 16. 21 H. C. 5. a. b. 13 R. 2. Iſſue 163.

2. It was reſolved, that when the deſendant in his own

right, or as a ſervant to another, claims any (e) intereſt in (e) Do. pl. 114.
the land, or any common, or rent going out of the land; or Cr- Eliz. 539.
any (f) way or paſſage upon the land, &c. there de injurid
ſua propria generally is no plea. (g) But if the defendant yelv. r57.
juſtifies as ſervant, there de injurid ſua proprid in ſome of the 1 Brownl. 215.
faid caſes, with a traverſe of the commandment, that being A Sd. 92.
made material is good ; and fo you will agree all your books, 4 as >
ik 14 H.:4-- 33. 33 H. 6. 5. 44 E. 3. 18. 2H: 5; .
10 H. 6. 3. 9. 39H. 6.32. 9 E. 4. 22. 16E. 4. 4. 21
E. 4.6. 28 E. 3. 98. 28 H. 6. 9. 21 E. 3. 41. 22 Af. 42.
44 E. 3. 13. 45 E. 3. 7. 24 E. 3.72. 22 Aſſ. 85. 33 H. 6. 29.
42 E. 3. 2. For the general plea de juria ſud propria, &c.

is properly when the defendant's plea doth conſiſt merely upon
matter of (+) excuſe, and of no matter of intereſt whatſoever ; (% Dog. pl. 116.
& dicitur de injurid ſud proprid, &c. becauſe the injury properly |
in this ſenſe is to the perſon, or to (i) the reputation; as battery (i) Dock. pl. 11
or imptiſonment to the perſon; or ſcandal to the reputation; Cr. Elis. 607. 4
MY the 3 excuſe himſelf upon his own aſſault, or

upon hue and cry levied, there, properly (4) de injurid ſud pro- (4

5 8 is a good A= . the ela (PAY

ea conſiſts only upon matter of excuſe, 3. It was

relolved, that 2" wha by the cefendant's 1 any au- S.
purity or power is mediately or immediately derived
tom the plaintiff, there although no intereſt be claimed,
the


EDpWARD CroGaTE's Caſe. Part vil


the plaintiff ought to anſwer it, and ſhall not reply general

(s) Doc. pl. 1715. de injuria ſua propria. The ſame law of an (a) authority given
by the law; as to view waſte, &c. Vide 12 E. 4. 10. 9 Hl,
4. 31. 20 Ed. 4. 4. 42 Edw. 3. 2. 16H. 7. 3.

Lattly, it was reſolved, that in the caſe at bar, the iſſue
would be full of multiplicity of matter, where an iſſue ought
to be full and ſingle for parcel of the manor, demiſeable by
copy, grant by copy, preſcription of common, &c. and com-
mandment would be all parcel of the iſſue. And ſo by the


rule of the whole court, judgment was given againſt the plain:
tiff,


Part


part VIII. 68


JOHN TROLLOP's Caſe.
Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


Ancelot Richeſon brought debt on a bond of 341. by c., Jac. 212.
Duo minus in the Exchequer, againſt John Trollop, Eſq. See Carth. 132.
and upon iſſue and verdict had judgment againſt Trollop, up-

on which '{ rollop brought a writ of error againſt the faid

Richeſon, who pleaded an excommunication, & profert hic

in curid literas Clementis Colnor, Legum Doctoris, reverendi in

Chriſto patris, Tobiæ nuper Dunelm“' E piſcapi vic in ſpiritualibus

gencralis, & efficialts principalis legitime fulciti, fagitlo conſiſt

Dunelm', ſig nat, viz Clemens Colnor, Cc. univerjis & fingulis

dericis & literatis guibujſcungue per totam diœceſin Dunelm” ubi-

libet conflitut” ſalutꝰ : and recited that he did proceed againſt

him for recuſancy, and that propter ipſius contumaciam in non

cemparendo, &c. being lawfully cited and forewarned, he was
excommunicated, vb1s igitur tenore prejentium mandamus qua-

tenus pr efat” fa Trollop' fic ut præmittitur per nos excommunt-

catum furſſe et efſe, in eccleſia veſtra parochial” diebus Domint-

as, et alus feſtivis, etc. publice denuncietis, et cum effettu de-

claretis, etc, and demanded judgment if he ſhould be anſwer-

ed, The plaintiff ſaid, that after the ſaid excommengement,

the King by his general pardon in his Parliament, anno 3, did

pardon all contempts, &c. and all that he might pardon ; and

averred that neither the offence nor the perſon, &c. is except-

ed, &, Upon which the defendant in the writ of error did

demur in law, And it was reſolved by the Court, and the two

Chief Juſtices, that the ſaid plea of excommunication was in-

ſufficient for two cauſes. 1. Becauſe the excommengement is

certified by the official or commiſſary of the Biſhop, where it

ought to be certified by the (a) Biſhop, who is the immediate (a)2Brown. 301.
ollicer to the Court, for none thall certify an excommuni- Co. Lit. 134. a.
cation whereby any ſhall be diſabled, but he to whom the 7 E. 4. 14.
Court may write to abſolve him who was excommunicated,

a the Biſhop, guardian of the (Y) ſpiritualties, &c. and (4) F. N. B. 6a. n.
therewith agree the books in the point in 44 E. 3. Ex-
commengement 23. 20 Ed. 3, Excommengement 24. 41

All: p. 29. (c) 20 H 6. 1. a. (4) 8 H. 6. 3. (e) 7 E. 4. (e) Fitz. Excom.
14.2. 14 (/) H. 4. 14. a. b. Vide 11 fi. n 8
, Hank. That it was ſo ordained by the (g) Parliament, Br. Certificate


0) 12 Ed. 4. 15. b. 16. a. F. N. B. 64. c. 65. a. But NN

Is -
4 Br. Certificate del eveſque 26. (e) Br, Excomm. 14. Fitz, Excom. 16, (f) Fitz. Excom.
. Br. Excom. 5. (g) Fitz. Excom. 20. Co. Lit. 134. (+) Fitz. Excom, 17. Br, Ex-
ban. 25. Br. Nonability 33.


—


(a] Reg. Orig.
67. d.


20 H. 6. 26. 2.
Fitz. Excom. 12.
Br, Excomm. 3.


13.


(5) Fitz. Excom.


15.

Co. Lit. 13 t. 2.
2 E. 4. 4+ b.

(c) Br. Excom. 3.
Fitz. Excom. 12.
(4) Fitz, Excom.
15.

Br. Excom. 15.
Br. Excom. 13.


(e) Br. Excom. 12.
Swinb. 305.

3 H. 4. 3 b.
Co. Lit. 134. a.
Br. Nonabil. 55.
Cawly 217,


Fitz. Exc. 3.
28 E. 3. 97. a.
2 Bulſtr. 139.
Salk. 203, 204.
Farr. 57, 117.


a3 E. 3. 27. a.


(z) Fitz. Excom.
21.


(b) f N. B. 65.2.


Co, Lit. 134. 4.


Jonx TroLLop's Caſe. Part VIII


the (a) Chancellor of the univerſity of Cambridge or Oxfor
may certify an excommunication, for they do it by the King
charter, Reg. F. N. B. 64. c. 2. (2.) If the Biſhop himſelf hal
certified it, yet it had been inſufficient, for the direction ought
to be either to ® this Court in particular, or atleaſt, univerſſ
ſanctæ matris eccleſiæ filits : but in the caſe at bar it is direed,
univerſis & fingu” cler* et litera” quibuſeungue per tetam dic
Dunelm” ubiltbet conſtitut', by which particular direction this
Court is excluded, as a certificate of an excommunication in
the Chancery ſhall not ſerve in any other court; neither ſhall
a (6b) protection directed to one court, ſerve in another; for al.
ways a certificate directed to a particular court, and in a pat
ticular manner, ſhall not be extended farther; and therewih
agree (c) 20 H.6. 25. a. (4) 2 E. 4.4. And it was objetted,
that an excommunication is a ſpiritual judgment, and therefore
the temporal Judges ſhall not diſpute upon the manner of it. To
which it was anſwered and reſolved, that the Judges of the
common law ſhall adjudge upon the manner, and (in ſome
caſes) of the matter allo of the certificate in caſe of excommu-
nication, as if the Biſhop himſeif be ſued, and he pleads an ei-
communication (e) by himſelf or his commiſſary (who is as hi
deputy) ahh hough it be for another cauſe than is then in quel-
tion, it ſnall not ditable the plaintiff becauſe he himſelf is party
and therewith agree 16 E. 3. Excom. 5. 5 E. 2. Excom. 21,
5 E. 3. 8. 8 E. 3. 69. 18 E. 3. 58. 9 H. 7.21. b. 108.1,
Q. a. Alſo if a prohibition be brought againſt a Biſhop and he
thews forth the letters of the Archbiſhop that the plaintiff isew
communicated propter (f) diverſas contumacias, without ſhewing
any cauſe in ſpecial of the excommuaication, it ſhall not diſabe
the plaintiff. 'The fame law if any other be defendant in ay
action aud would diſable the plaintiff by excommunication,
ought to ſhew ihe Biſhop's certificate, containing the ſpecialty
of the principal cauſe for which the plaintiff is excommunicated
to the end that the Judges of the law may know whether the
Spiritual Court have conuſans of the original cauſe, and if the
excommunication be againſt law, the Court ought to write t0
them to abſolve the party ; which they cannot do if the certil
cate be general ; and if the Biſhop refuſes it, his temporalus
at the common law ſhall be ſciſed, 28 Ed. 3. 97 4. 22 Ed. &
20. b. 20 Ed. 3. Fxcom. 9 13H. 7. 16. b. and in 14 H.414
b. Hanks there faith, that a (g) Doctor of the Civil law told hin,
that no letter of certificate of excommunication, (altho' it bed
the Eiſhop) ſhould be allowed, if the principal cauſe be ut
contained in the writ; F. N. B. 64. f. The Biſhop ought to &
preſs the cauſe and ſuit againſt the plaintiff ſpecial in the cer
ficate. Vide 3 H. 4. 3. b. miſtaken in the rep. for the opiniol
there is reformed in 14 H. 4. 14. as appears before, vide Fi
lib. 6.26. Welt. 2. cap. 43. Alfo the Biſhop ought to cd,
tify that which hath been ſentenced in his own Court, ®

not in another Court. And therefore he cannot certity, tht
%%) another Biſhop. hath certified to him, or that he hab
lecn a ſentence of excommunication made by another d


» CY CTY tou CTY ww —— *Y%V


ne


CE...


Part VIII. Jonx TzoLLoe's Caſe; 69


but the Biſhop may certify an excommengement made by his
commiſſary or official, for that the Biſhop's Court and his
commiſſary doth is in his right, F. N. B. 65. a. 33 E. 3. Ex-
com. 29. 9 l. 7. 21. b. 10 H. 7. 8 b.

If the Biſhop makes a certificate, and (a) dies before it be (co. Lit. 134.4.
received, it is nothing worth, but his ſucceſſor ought to certi- Vide 38 E.3.9.a,
fyit, F. N. B. 65. 8 E. 2. Excom. 26. 14 E. 3. ibid. 8. But 51 4 46. b
note, reader, that in ſome caſe the Vicar general may certify 7
an excommengement; but that is when the Biſhop is in (5) (3) co. Lit, 134.
remotis agendis, which is as much as to lay, extra regnum in a.
the King's ſervice ; but the Court will be apprized of it by F. N. B. 62. n.
matter of record, ſcil. by writ out of the Chancery directed to
them, and not by the ſurmiſe of the party, and then for ne-
ceſſty (which is always the law of time, for neceſſitas eft lex
temports) the certificate of the Vicar general ſhall be allowed,
becauſe no other can make it. And therewith agree 31 (41.)

Ed. 3. 10. (b) F. N. B. 64. and after a Biſhop is elected, and

before he is (c) conſecrated, he may certiſy an excommenge- (c) 2 Roll. Rep,
ment, for the power of the guardian of the ſpiritualties “ 457.

ceaſes after he is elected by the King's Conge de eſſire and F. N. B. 62. n.
therefore ſor neceſſity he ought to certify it. F. N. B. 62. N. 8
and Regiſter. :

And it is to be known, that when a plea of excommenge-
ment is allowed, the writ ſhall not abate, but the entry is (4) (4) Lit.ſe&.201,

; | Antea 62. b.
4 wares 9 fine die quouſque, &c, 3 Hen. 6. 3. 3 Edw. 8 2 k

The point in law in the caſe at bar, if the certificate had
been good, was, if the general (e) pardon diſcharged a man () Cr. Car, 199.
excommunicated of the excommunication or not, and by the Cr. Jae. 159,212.
award of the Court the defendant was ruled to anſwer over.


[Note, it appears by F. N. B. the Regiſter, and many other

oks, that even after his election, &c. he is not to be named
Biſhop until the King has given him the temporalties of the
biſnoprick, for theſe only make him a Biſhop ; ſo that a Biſhop
here in England is a mere temporal magiſtrate by the com-
mon law. Vide 12 Co. 8, 9.]


WHIT.


—


4 = - CY * : _
— — — —


— — — - — = —


Part VIII.


WHITLOCK's Caſe.
Hil. 6 Fac. 1.


Which began Mich. 6 Jacobi 1. Rot. 1316,


In the Common Pleas.


Gl c. * a replevin between John Chappel, plaintiff, and Wil.


Numero 15.

x Brownl. 169.
2 Roll. Rep. 274.
2 Bulſtr. 273.


liam Whitlock, defendant, for taking of a gelding in
Rings- Aſh, in the county of Devon, in a place called Cunny-
Park; the defendant avoFed the taking in the place where,
&c. as in his freehold, for damage feaſant. The pl. in bar of
the avowry pleaded, that one Will. Whitlock the elder, was
ſeiſed of a meſſuage, 20 acres of land, 12 acres of wood, and
20 acres of heath, in Rings-Aſh aforeſaid in fee, whereof the
lace where 1s parcel, and demiſed the ſaid tenements to one
rom Bullhead for his life, by force whereof he was ſeiſed for
life, the reverſion expeCtant to the ſaid William Whitlock the
elder, and the faid William Whitlock the elder, 11 Marti,
18 Eliz. by his indenture tripartite, in conſideration ofa
marriage to be ſolemnized between William Whitlock the
yqunger, and Margaret, daughter of John Bolter, covenantel
and agreed by the faid indentures, that the ſaid William
Whitlock the elder, before the feaſt of the Birth of Chrilt
next enſuing, would aſſure and convey to Leonard Yeo, and
Anthony Whitlock, and their heirs, the tenements aforeſaid,
to the uſes, intents, and purpoſes expreſſed and declared in
in the ſaid indentures, and to no other uſes or intents, vis.
till the ſaid marriage, to the uſe of the ſaid Wm. Whitlock
the elder, and his heirs; and after the ſaid marriage, to the uſe
of Wm. Whitlock the elder, for his life, without impeachment
of waſte, and afterwards to the uſe of the ſaid William Whit
lock, the younger and the heirs of his body, and weren


"oy F £4 QOH DÞVcDocjoa Tu ee Eads . ¾˙ hl. wor am. ß on. oe Rs « © — ww oo wen #


part VIII. WurTLock's Caſe.
the uſe of J. Whitlock and his heirs: Et per eand' indenturam


ulterius proviſum, conceſſum & agreatum fuit, quod liceret & li-


eitum foret præd WP Whitlock, ſen. ad aliquod temp” extunc


facere dimiſſionem, ( Anglice leaſe) five dimiſſiones, conceſſionem ſtve
conceſſiones, tam in poſſeſſione quam in reverſione de tenementis
rad cum pertin', unde, Sc. inter alia, ſtve de aligud parte inde.
proviſo ſemper quod pred” dimiſſis ſiue di miſſiones. conceſſio ſiue
conceſſiones non excederent ſuper numerum trium vitarum ad majus
vel viginti & unius annerum, & ita quod ſuper quamlibet talem
demiſſunem & demiſſiones, canceſſionem & conceſſimes, maxime an-
ti et conſuet annual” reddit", heriot & ſervitia ſive plus redde=
rentur & reſervarentur, ſolubil' duran' die?” demiſſione five de-
niſſnibus, conceſſione ſive conceſſionibus : and that the ſaid
Leonard and Anthony, and their heirs, ſhould ſtand ſeiſed,
&c. to the uſe of every ſuch fermor, &c. and afterwards, 18
Maii, 18 Eliz. the ſaid William the younger, and Margaret,
intermarried ; and aſterwards, Irin. 18 Eliz. William Whit-
lock the elder, levied a fine of the tenements aforeſaid, ac-


70


2 Roll. Rep. 27. 0
2 Roll. 260, 1


Poſtea 71. 4.


cording to the ſame indentures, to the uies therein contained,


by force whereof, and of the ſtatute of Ules, the taid Wil-
liam Whitlock the elder was ſeiſed of the reverſion ot the ſaid
tenements, &c. for his life, the remainder over, according to
the ſaid indentures. And the faid William Whitlock the
elder ſo ſeiſed, 1 Sept. 31 Eliz. d:mifit eurdam Chriflian' Hearne
tenem' pred” cum pertin unde, &c, inter alia habend' et cecup?
eidem Chriſtiane et a/ſignat” ſuis pro term” 99 annor” plenarie com-
plend et finiend', ſi pred” Chriſtiana & quid Petr' Rattenbury,
tue carum alter, tam diu vivere continge et? the ſaid term to
commence after the death or determination of the eſtate
of the ſaid John Bullhead, reddendes ſalvende proinde
annuatim t oſt inceptionem dictæ dimiſſionis, prefato Hill' Whit-
lock, ſen. bered' & aſſign' ſuis & tali perſong & perſonis quib
bereditament” præmiſſorum poſt martem pred? Will Whitlock, ſen.
de jure ſpeftaret ſeu pertineret durante dicto terming 14 5. ad qua-
tuor maxime uſualia feſta annuatim ſolvendo, &c. And the plain-
tiff juſtificd under the ſaid leaſe, and averred the life of the
laid Petter Rattenbury, and that the moſt ancient and accuſ.
tomed yearly rents, heriot, and ſervices, &c. were reſerved,
Ke. upon which the avowant did demur in law. And in this
cale two queſtions were moved. 1. Whether Wiil. Whitlock
the elder had purſued his authority or not, in making the faid
leaſe for 99 years, determinable on the ſaid two lives? 2.
Whether the ſaid reſervation of the rent was according to the
ſaid Ja quod, &c, And as to the firlt it was objected, that
the authority was diſtinguiſhed, /c. either to make a leaſe not
exceeding the number of three lives, or for 21 years, by which


Vor. IV. Y


2 Roll. Rep. 1
2 Roll. 260. *


1 Co. 139. as
Poſtea 71.


(0 2 Roll. 260,
2 Roll. Rep.274-
2 Roll. 260.


Cre, Car. 289.


Wulrrock's Caſe. Part VIII


it appears that the intentien was either to make a leaſe foe
three lives, &c. or if he would make a leaſe for years, that it
ought to be for 21 years; but in the caſe at bar, the leaſe i;
not for three lives, &c. nor for 21 years, but for 99 years, if
two or either of them ſhall fo long live, and ſo his atthoriy
not purſued. And if (a) one hath power to make a leaſe for
three lives, he cannot make a leaſe for 99 years determinahle
upon three lives, &c. quod fuit conceſſum per totam curian,
But it was anſwered and reſolved by the court, that in the cas
at bar the leaſe was good, and the power which the leſſor had
was well purſued ; for the proviſo of creation of his power
to make leaſes, is in the beginning abſolute, affirmative, and
indefinite, ſcil. to make a leaſe or leaſes, grant or grants, &,
as well in poſſeſſion as in reverſion of the tenements, or any
parcel thereof, &c. which is without any limitation. Then
the proviſo of correction is added, ſcil. that ſuch leaſe or leaſes
grant or grants, ſhall not exceed the number of three lives at
moſt, or 21 years, which clauſe is negative, and qualifis
the generality of the firſt proviſo: ſo that the power by the
firſt is general, and by the ſecond the leaſe ought not to ex
ceed three lives, &c. And when the leaſe is made for 9
years determinable upon two lives, it doth not exceed the
number of three lives, although in truth it is not a leaſe for
lives. 2. The power is to make leaſes as well in poſſeſſion a
in reverſion, with the limitation aforeſaid z and a leaſe for
three lives cannot be made in reverfion, but a leaſe for yea
determinable upon lives may, and the leſſor himfelf had but:
reverſion expectant on an eſtate for life at the time of the eres
tion of the ſaid power: ſo that the intention of the parties ws
(not) to make a leaſe for years abſolutely for 21 years; but
any term of years determinable upon three lives, &c. which
is in cquipage with 21 years, he well might. And the di-
terence was taken and agreed between a particular power afir-
mative, and a general power reſtrained with a negative : {or
it is true, that if one hath power to make a leaſe for three
lives, or 21 years, he cannot make a leaſe for 9, if three
ſhall ſo long live, &c. but if he has power to make any leiſe
or grant, provided ſuch leaſe or grant ſhall not excced the
number of three lives, or 21 years, there he may make a lea
for 99 years, if three ſhall ſo long live, for that doth net
exceed the number of three lives, but in truth is leſs; 1
every term for years, which is but a chattel, is Jeſs in eſt
mation of law, than an eſtate (or life, which is a freehold.
As to the ſecond point, it was objected, that the ſaid refer
vation was ſuch, that it was not payable during the fad
leaſe, as it ought, but only during the life of the leſſor;
for he having but an eſtate for life, reſerved the rent !9
him and his heirs, and his heirs cannot have it, 15 1
a


patt VIII. Wulrrock's Cafe,


Jatter words, ſcil. to ſuch perſon and perſons who have the in-
heritance of the premiſes, &c. are merely void, for no rent
can be (a) reſerved but to the leſſor, donor, or feoffor, and
his heirs, who are privies in blood, and not to any who is
privy in eſtate, as to him in reverſion, remainder, &c, But
it was reſolved, that the“ reſervation in the caſe at bar is
30d, For the ſaid leaſe hath not its eſſence from the eſtate
of the leſſor, which he hath for life, but the leaſe hath its
eſſence out of the faid fine, and in conſtruction of law (5)
precedes the eſtate for life and all the remainders; for after
the leaſe made, it is as much as if the uſe had been limited
originally to the leflee for the ſaid term, and then the other
limitations in conſtruction of law follow it: and that is the
reaſon that the uſual clauſe in ſuch indentures is, that the
conuſees and (c) their heirs ſhall ſtand ſeiſed to the uſe of ſuch


leflees, &c. So that the leſſee, in the caſe at bar, derives his


eſtate out of the eſtate which paſſed by the fine. Then, when
the lefſor reſerves rent to him and his heirs, it is good, for
that by conſtruction of law precedes the limitations of the
uſes, and then it being well reſerved, it is well transferred to
every one to whom any uſe is limited. So if the reſervation
be to the leſſor, and to every perſon to whom the inheritance
or reverſion of the premiſes ſhall appertain during the term,
that is likewiſe good, for the jaw will diſtribute it to every one
to whom any limitation of the uſe ſhall be made. And in ſuch
cale no rent is reſerved to a ſtranger, for the reſervation pre-
ceeds the limitation of the uſes to ſtrangers. But it was
agreed, that the moſt clear and ſure way was to (4) reſerve
rent yearly during the term, and lcave the law to make the
diſtribution, without an expreſs reſervation to any perſon,
But it was reſolved, that all the ſaid three ſeveral ways were
good enough and effectual in law.


1 GRENELEY's


U— ——— wv —Ä——ů — N


71


(a) Hob. 130.

2 Roll. 447,4 50s
CoLit. 47. a.
143. b. 213. a.
Cro, Car. 289.
Antes 70. as

r Co. 130. a.
Plowd. 132.

(5) Moor 333,


(e) Antea 70. a,


4) r Inſt. 47. a.
Hardres go.

1 Jones zog.
Plowd. 171.

2 Sand. 369.
21H. 7. 25. b.
Goluſb. 148.


x Brownl, 137.


G RENE E L's Caſk,


Paſch. 7 Jacobi 1.


N an Efectione firms between Owen Greneley, plainif,
1 and Philip Greneley and others, defendants, on a demik
made by Stephen Greneley of three acres of land in St. Supe
Arrow in com” Hereford", and on not guilty pleaded, the jun
gave a ſpecial verdict to this effect: William Woodhouſe and
John Badland were ſeiſed of the ſaid three acrecs in fee, ant
20 Octob. 38 Hen. 8. did thereof enfeoff Philip Greneley th
elder, and Iſabel his wife, to have and to hold to the ſaid Phi.
lip and Iſabel, and to the heirs of their two bodies lawfully be.
gotten : the ſaid Phillip the elder, 1 Decemb. 17 Eliz. did e
feoff Philip Greneley the younger, of the ſaid three acresit


fee; and afterwards, 20 Eliz Philip the elder died, and


(a) 1 Roll. 644.
Co. Lit. 326. a. b.
Plowd. 112. b.


Iſabel ſurvived him; and afterwards the ſaid Iſabel (beſort
any entry made by her, viz. 26 Eliz. died; and the ſaid Ste
phen Greneley, the leſſor of the plaintiff, was heir of thei
two bodies begotten, &c. And the only queſtion in thi
caſe was, whether the ſaid feoffment of Philip the elder v
Philip the younger, had tolled the entry of the ſaid Stephen,
or that the entry of Stephen was lawful or not. 1. It was te-
ſolved, that at the common law this (@) feoffment was a dil
continuance to the iſſue, for the iſſue ought to claim as beit
of their two bodies individually, and as heir to one only be
cannot inherit, and by conſequence cannot enter; for hi
entry ought to enſue his title and his action, and the Formed
in the deſcender in ſuch caſe is, Qued C. dedit D. & E. uxin
ejus & heredibus de corporibus ipſorum D. & E. exeuntibus, &
guod peſt mortem prædict!“ D. & E. prmfato X. filis & herd
eorundem D. & H. deſcendere deber per firmam donations pie.
dit, Oc. Regiſt Orig' 238. b. By which it appears, "y in his
| arm


— 2 —


f e . . ]— ], ,,, A ⁰˙ö % . Ä. ! ]— Rt c VF: MF v7 5


Il


[


Part VIII. GRENELEY's Caſe.


Firmedin he ought to make himſelf heir to both, and not to
the ſurvivor : ſo if the ſaid donees had been diſſeiſed, and a
deſcent caſt, and afterwards the father died, and before entry
the mother died, the entry of the iſſue 1s not congeable, be-
cauſe he ought to claim as heir of both their bodies, and as
heir to the father he is bound by the deſcent, as his father
himſelf was, and as heir to his mother only he cannot enter,
for he hath not any ſuch title. Jide 35 Hen. 6. 45. b. in aſſiſe;
but if the mother in ſuch caſe had entered, and re-continued


the eftate-tail, then the diſcontinuance was purged, and ut-


terly removed, and the eſtate tail actually reveſted in the
wiſe; which after her death deſcends to the iſſue. 2. It was
reſolved, that although the huſband and wife had a (a) joint
and undivided eſtate-tail, and that the words of 32 Hen. 8.
cap. 28 are, That no fine, feoffment, or other act or acts
« hereafter to be made, ſuffered, or done by the huſband
« only, of any manors, lands, tenements, or hereditaments,
being the inheritance or freehold of his wife, during the
„ coverture between them, &c.” That this joint eſtate was
within theſe words, (the inheritahce (4) or freehold of his
wife) for ſhe hath a freehold and inheritance in the land.
although ſhe hath not the fole freehold or inheritance. So
bath it been always taken upon the {tat. of Weſtm. 2. (e) cap.
3. In caſu quando vir amiſerit per defalt” tant', quod fuit jus
urtris ſug, c. propter quod Rex ſlatuit, quod mulier poſt mor-
tem viri ſui habeat recuperare per breve de cui in vita, Sc. that
a joint eſtate to huſband and wife hath been always taken
within theſe words (jus uxor*) and yet nun fuit ſlum aut unicum
(4) jus uxæer'; and according to this reſolution in the principal
caſe was it adjudged in (e) Beaumont's cate, andtherewith agree
(f) 3 Eliz. Dyer 191. b. Hawtry's caſe. 3. It was reſolved,
that by the ſaid act the (2) entry of the iſſue in tail was lawful
in the caſe at bar; for the words of the act go farther, * ſhall
8 in any wiſe be or make any diſcontinuance, or be prejudi-—
clal or hurtful to the ſaid wife, or to her heits, or to ſuch as
thail have right, title, or intereſt to the ſame, by the death
of ſuch wiſe or wives: but that the ſame wife or her heirs,
and ſuch other to whom ſuch right ſhall appertain after her
deceaſe, ſhall or may then lawfully enter into all ſuch ma-
nors, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, according to
their lights and titles therein.” So that if the iſſue in tail
ſhall not be within theſe words (her heirs). becauſe he is heir
to both, Ic. to father and mother, yet, without queſtion, he
1s within theſe words, (or to ſuch as have right by the death of
ſuch wite.) And in this caſe a difference was taken and agreed
tween a diſcontinuance which implies a wrong, and a law-
ful bar, which implies a right: and therefore if lands are
even to huſband and wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies
egotten, and the (Y) huſband levies a fine with proclama—

W 3 tions


40


2 Inſt. 68 m. ,


72


(a)Co.Lit. 326. a.


(5) Cro. Car. 22


(e) 2 Inſt. 342,
42—


wo


(4) 2 Inft, .
Cro, Car. 5
(e) 9 Co. 138. b.
139.

Cro. Car. 476.

1 Jones 293.
Dyer 191.
pl. 22.

— 715 2555


256.
(g) Co. Lit.
326. a.

1 Brownl. 131.


(Co. 87. b.
9 Co. 139. a.
Dv-i 351. 1.24


Hob. 257, 333. Moor 147. 1 Brownl. 140. 1 Leon. $4, 157. Dall in Kelw, 205, pl.


7. Dall. in Ash Bendl. |
: pl. 7. Dall. 50. pl. 16. 1 And, 39. pl. 101. Godb. 312. N. Bendi. 225. pl. 257.
coal, in Ach. pl. 27. Bendl. in Kelw. 203. pl. 27. 1 Rol. Rep. 424. 2 Roll. Rep. 321. Moor


26. fl. go. 114. Pl. 259, Cr, Car, 478. 1 Jones 40. Lit. Rep. 291.


(a) Co. 139. a.
140. a. Dyer.
332. pl. 227.
Hob. 257, 346.
1And.39.pl.102-
Godb. 312.
Roym. 6, 7.

2 Roll. Rep 321.
Mo. 114. pl.2 56.
Moor 147-

1 Brownl. 139,
140.

Cro. Car, 478.

1 Jones 40.

(5) Dyer 122.
pl. 22.


(c) I Roll. Rep,
91, 92, 160,

9 Co. 140. b,
10 Co. 49. b.
Co. Lit. 226. 2.
Dyer 72. pl. 3.
Cro. Cir. 201.
(4) 2 Co. 93. a.
10C0,49.Þ. 99.3,
Dy. 224. pl. 28.
Palm. 235.
Goldſb. 148.

3 Leon. 221.
Moor 53.

2 Roll. Rep. 409.
3 Inſt. 216.
Cro. Jac. 333


fe) o Co. 140. 8.
Co. Lit. 19 4,


Cf) Moor 58.
Co. Lon. 326, as


GRENELIEV's Caſe. Part VIII


tions, and commits high (a) treaſon, and dies, and the wif.
before, or after entry, dies, there the iſſue is barred; and the
conuſee, or the King hath right to the land, becauſe the iy;
cannot claim as heir to both; and therewith agrees 18 Elz.
35 1. b. adjudged. Vide 5 Hen. 7. 32 () Colt's aſſize. And
it was reſolved, that the ſtat. of 32 Hen. 8. extends only ty
diſcontinuances, although the act hath general words, or he
* prejudicial or hurtful to the wife or her heirs, &c.” But the
concluſion is, “ ſhall lawfully enter, &c. according to their
rights and titles therein,” which they cannot do, when they
are barred, and have no right, title, or intereſt ; and this
ſtat. gives advantage to the wife, &c, ſo long as ſhe hath
right, but it doth not extend to take away a future bar, al.
though the ſtat. gives entry without limitation of any time, but
the entry ought to wait upon the right. And therefore if the
huſband levies a fine with proclamations to another, and dies,
now the wife (c) may enter by force of the ſtatute. For yet
the fine is not any bar to her, but her right remains, which
ſhe may te- continue by entry; but if ſhe ſurceaſes her time,
(4) and five years paſs without entry, &c. now by force of the
fine with proclamations, and five ycais paſſed after the death
of her huſband ſhe is barred of her right, and by conſequence
ſhe cannot enter ; and the ſtatute ſpeaks of fine only, and net
of fine with proclamations ; and therewith agrees the 6 E 6,
Dy. 72. b. And it was reſolv««!, that if the huſband be te-
nant in tail, the remainder to the wife in tail, that if the hul-
band makes a feoftment in fee, and dies without iſſue, the wiſe
may enter becauſe it was the inheritance of the wife; but it
the huſhand ſuſſers a common recovery, and dies without
iſſue, there the wife is barred, and cannot enter by force
of this ſtatute ; but this {latute was made to relieve him who
has right, and to ſuppreſs wrong, and to advance right with-
out any reſpect to the warranty of the diſcontinuee, it he hath
any. And if (e) before the ſtatute De donts conditionalibu,
lands had been given to huſband and wife, and the heirs df
their two bodies begotten, and they have iſſue, and the hu
band pot prolem ſuſcitatam aliens, and dies before the ſtatute,
and the wife ſurvives and dies aſter the ſtatute, the iſſue ſhall
have a Formedon: for notwithſtanding the ſaid alienation, a
right remains, foraſmuch as the hu{band only aliens, which
right is entailed by the ſtatute ; and before the ſtatute, ths
illue in ſuch caſe might have a Sur cui in vita, and claim #
heir of the body of both, for the teoffment was no bar, but?
diſcontinuance : and therewith agrces 21 Ed. 3. 45. a. b. 12


Hen. 4. 7. And in all cafes where the wife might have a (


in vitd at common law, ſhe ſhall enter by force of this ſtat. c
32 Hen. 8. and where the iſſue cannot have Sur cui in Vi
or Formedin, there he ſhall not enter within the remedy dl
this ſtatute. And therefore if the huſband has itlue, and
aliens, and the wife dies, the iſſue ſhall not enter (/ 9


part VIII. GRENELIEV's Caſe, 73


the life of the huſband, becauſe at the common law he had

no remedy to recover the land during the huſband's life, and .
the words of the act are, “ according to their right and title

« therein.” But if the huſband aliens, and afterwards the wife

(a) is divorced cauſa praecontratius, or any other divorce which (a) Co. Lit. 326,
diſſolves the marriage @ vinculo matrimonii, there the wife * Moor 58.
during the huſband's life may enter, for the words of the act

are, no fine, feoffment, &c. during the coverture between

them. And although afterwards the huſband and wife are

divorced, yet the feoffment was made during the coverture

between them. And although the ſtatute faith, “ but that the

© ſame wife, &c.“ that is to be intended of her who was his

wiſe at the time of the alienation ; for when the huſband dies,

ſhe is not then his wife, but ſhe is called wife to deſcribe the

perſon only who (hall enter; and it is not ſaid in the ſtatute

that the wife ſhall enter aſter the death of her huſhand, but

generally that ſhe ſhall enter “ according to their right and

« title;: be it in the life of the huſband aſter a divorce 4

yinculp inatrimonii, or after his death, |


— — — — Ä ii a oe. Le N


2
(4


Co. Ent. 77.
” / num. 6. S
« \ 2 Brown. 248,


(249:


The Lord STAFFORD's Caſe,


Trin y Jac. 1.


ETWEEN Thomas Malym, plaintiff, and Thomas
Tully defendant, in a replevin, which began in the
Common Pleas, Trin. 6 acebi, Rot. 2341. upon the pleading
the parties demurred in law, and upon the whole record the
caſe was ſuch : Queen Mary was ſeiſed of a park called Eft-
wood Park, within the manor of 'T hornbury, in the county of
Glouceſter, in fee; and by her letters patent, 10 Julii, ann
regni ſui 2. granted the ſaid park to Henry Lord Stafford,
and Urſula his wife, and to the heirs of the body of Henry
Lord Stafford, by force whereof the Lord Stafford and Urſula
his wife were ſeiſed thereof accordingly, the reverſion over ex-
Ctant to the ſaid Queen Mary, her heirs, and ſucceflors,
which reverſion of the ſee {imple by the death of Queen Mary,
deſcended to Queen Elizabeth. Hil. 3 Eliz. Tyndal levieda
fine to the Lord Stafford, and Urſula his wife, come ceo, and
to the heirs of the Lord Stafford, of the ſaid park, by which
fine the Lord Stafford and his wife rendered it to T yndal
for 25 years: and afterwards Henry Lord Stafford, lim
Jun. 7 Eliz. died, and Urſula ſurvived him, and held in
by ſurvivorſhip, and the remainder of the ſaid eſtate tail
deſcended to Henry Lord Stafford the ſon : and afterwards
Queen Eliz. by her letters patent, 10 Jul, 7 Eliz. rect.
ing the former eſtate, the reverſion and reverſions thereof
to the ſaid Queen Eliz. her heirs and ſucceſſors expectant,
the ſaid Queen Eliz. by the ſaid letters patent, and for the
ſum of 531. 18s. paid by Thomas Tyndal, Gent. did grant to
the ſaid Thom. Tyndal rever/ionem pred” parci, &c. halend ©


tenend ſibi ct hæred de cor pore ſuo legitime procreatis : et ulterius 2
5 4044


. Ss *


- —_ n» a2 8 .


Part VIII. The Lord STarronp's Caſe,


fila nuper Regina Elizabetha voluit & declaravit per eaſdem li-
teras patentes, quod ft prefat' Thomas Tyndal heredes & afſignati


nuper Reginæ hered* vel ſucceſſor” ſuor* ad uſum ipſius nuper Reg inæ
hered vel ſucceſſor* ſuor, ſummam viginti ſolidor' legalis monetæ
Anglia pro præ miſſis, ultra pred” ſummam 53 l. 18s. tunc eadem
nuper Regina Elizabetha de ampliori gratid ſug ſpeciali, ac ex


urth ſcientid & mero motu ſuis voluit & per eaſdem literas ſuas


patentes pro ſe haredibus & ſucceſſoribus ſuis conceſſit & declaravit
quod extunc idem T ho. Tyndal & haredes ſui haberent & tenerent,
ac habere, tenere, et gaudere valerent et poſſent, ſibi & hered” ſuis
imberpetuum virtute earundem literarum patentium ſuar* pred” re-
verſimem pred” parci cum pertinent” inter alia: habend' tenend”
& gaudend', ea omnia & ſingula premiſſa cum pertinent prefat*
The. Tyndal hæredibus & aſſignat” ſuis: by force whereof the
ſaid Tho. Tyndal was ſeiſed of the ſaid reverſion in tail, and


he being thereof ſo ſeiſed, the reverſion over to the Queen as,
aforeſaid, the ſaid I ho. Tyndal, 23 Feb. 8. Eliz. at the re-
ceipt of the Exchequer at Weſtminſter, paid to J ho. Gardi-
ner, then one of the Tellers of the Exchequer, to the uſe of


—


ſui ad alipuod tempus impoſterum ſolverent ſeu ſolui faceret, aut
rum aliquis ſolveret ſeu ſolui faceret, ad receptum Scaccar* pred.


the ſaid Queen, the ſum of 20s. for the ſaid park, above the


faid ſum of 531. 18s which 208. were then received, prout
per record” receptionis inde in curid Scaccarii dmini Regis nunc
apud Meſim' pred” remanen' plene liquet & apparet, by force


whereof he was ſeiſed of the ſaid reverſion in fee expectant


on his eſtate-tail: and afterwards Henry Lord Stafford, 8 Eliz.
died; aſter whoſe death the ſaid remainder deſcended to Ed-


ward Lord Stafford his fon, who, Paſch. 8 Elix. levied a-


74


He c - 4 Ya
Lea 15/7


fine to Clark, and others, of the ſaid park, with proclamations, *<©z 2


and afterwards the ſaid Urſula, 10 Eliz. died, and afterwards


now 18, his ſon and heir, pretending that the ſaid reverſion in


s A *
Al, 7 4


made (a) 18 Eliz was pleaded ; which was not pertinent to


* . . * © L
this caſe; but the principal point of this caſe was, whether by -;


2 42


S Yr ee


Laar,
p NAT .


SAME / 73%


2s 4 en 7

* *. ä . 22

patent of Q. Eliz. the ſtatute of confirmation of letters Patent ef
a
a


Temes
22
is


.


the payment of the ſaid 208. the ſaid Tho. T'yndal had gained 47 e.


the reverſion of the fee-ſimple, out of Q. Eliz. For if no A=; , 1
1 0 : £4 [he 19 aun,
Teverſion remained in the Queen, then the (5) fine with pro- iz 7 74"


clamations b ) is, W aimed 34 * 35  * $rbf tte
arred the Lord Stafford that now is, who claimed 2


as ilſue in tail; and if the reverſion remained in her at the
ume of the fine, then the fine levied/by Edward Lord Stafford
the ſather did not bat him.

And


Cap. 20.


i R Lo


*


T, K.
. 3


(a) Plow. 15 . b.
156. a. 197. a.
Cro. El. 152.

1 Leon. 171.


The Lord STarrony's Caſe, Part Vill


And this cafe was very well argued by the Serjeaats, 2
Hutton, Nichols, Harris the younger, and Houghton, and
aſterwards this term the caſe was argued by all the Juſtices gf
the Bench, /c:/. Coke Chief Juſtice, Walmeſley, Warburton
Daniel, and Forſter. And two objection were made apainſ
the ſubſtance of the grant; and two againſt the form of the
grant. The objections againſt the ſubſtance were, 1, That
ſuch condition cannot be annexed to a thing which lies in
grant, but to a thing which lies in livery ; and therefore
it was ſaid, that rents, commons, advowſons, reverſions, &c.
cannot be granted for life or years, with condition to have
tee, but only land which lies in livery, for the increaſe
ſuch future eſtate rather takes effect by livery, than by grant;
for without livery ſuch ſuture eſtate will not paſs in caſe of
land, and it ought to paſs ab :nitio by the firſt livery ; anda
man cannot | ce a rent in e//e, or a common, or advyowſon,
or (a) a reverſion, or any thing which lies in grant to begin
in futuro, as from Michaelmas next following, or after ſuch
an act done, &c, And all the books in the law which ſpeak
of ſuch condition for increaſe of an eſtate, put the caſe always
of land, to which livery is requiſite, 31 Edw. 1. Voucher


285. 31 E. 1. Feoffments & Faits, 119. 2 E. 2. Quid ju


clamat 38. 12 E. 2. Voucher 265. 7 E. 3. 10. 10 E. 3. 40.
15 10 Aſſ. p. 15 & 19. 12 All. p. 5. 32 E. 3. Garr. 30. 43

. 3. 35. 43 Aſſ. p. 41. 44 E. 3. Attaint 22. 50 E. 3. 2
6 R. 2. Quid juris damat 20. 27 H. 6. 7. Plow. Com. Saye's
caſe, 272. Plow. Com. the Lord Lovel's caſe, 487. Ihe ſe.
cond objection was, that ſuch condition which increaſes an
eſtate, ought always to merge the firſt eſtate upon the increaſe,
and make all but as one eſtate and- one grant, and therefore
it ought to be annexed to an eſtate for years or life, which ſo
may merge on the performance of the condition, that all ſhall


be but one eſtate by one grant, and not ſeveral and divided


(b) 2 Co. 61. a.


eſtates; and therefore in all the ſaid books ſuch condition 1s
always annexed to an eſtate which may merge; but in the
caſe at bar the condition is annexed to an eſtate-tail, which
cannot merge (6) by the acceſs of the fee-ſimple to it; and
ſuch condition was never annexed to an eſtate tail, in allf
book or precedent which can be ſhewed. As to the ob-
jections to the form of the grant, the firſt was, that af
the Queen had granted the reverſion to Thomas 'Iynda,
and to the heirs of his body, ſhe now upon the Cent:
git grants to him prædictam reverſiomem to him aud big
heirs: in which it was ſaid, the Queen was deceived in
her grant, for predidta reverſio, is that which the Que#"
bad granted beiore to Thomas Tyndal in tail, which nes
ſhe cannot grant in ſee-fimple, for intentio Regina nm cd


; . wwe
venit cum lege, tor that which the bath granted firſt in 2
5


Part VIII. The Lord SrAToRb's Caſe. 75


ſhe cannot afterwards grant in fee, and the eſtate-tail was
granted abſolutely, and cannot be merged or deſtroyed by
the ſaid grant upon the faid contingency. The ſecond ob-
jection, as to the form of the grant, was, that the ſaid grant
ſounded only in covenant, which in the caſe of inheritance
ſhall not transfer it in the King's caſe, as it may in caſe of a
chattel, and for that the words are, that the Queen wills and
declares, that if the ſaid Tho. Tyndal ſhall pay 20s. then the
ſaid Queen grants, that the ſaid Thomas Tyndal and his heirs
ſhall have the ſaid reverſion ; ſo that the reverſion itſelf is not
granted, but is a grant which ſounds in covenant, that he
ſhall have the ſaid reverſion. But it was reſolved by the
whole court upon ſolemn argument, that the ſaid grant was
good. (+) And as to the two firſt objections, it was refolved, () Co. Lit.
that ſuch grant with a condition precedent may be made, as 27: b.
well of things which lie in grant, as of land which lies in
livery, and may be (r) annexed as well to an eſtate tail, which (t) 2 Co. 61. a.
cannot be merged, as to an eſtate for life, or years, which
may be merged by the acceſs of a greater eſtate; but ſuch 8
increaſe of an eſtate by force of a condition precedent, ought i
to have four incidents: 1. (“) It ought to have a particular (0 2 Brownl. |
eſtate, as a foundation upon which the increaſe of the greater 25**
eſtate ſhall be built. 2. That ſuch particular eſtate ought to |
continue in the leſſee or grantee, till the increaſe happens.
(J) 3. It ought to veſt at the time the contingency happens, () Plowd. 485.
or otherwite it ſhall never veſt. 4. The particular eſtate and * 4 _
the increaſe ought to take effect by one and the ſame inſtru. * 7
ment or deed, or by ſeveral deeds delivered at one and the
lame time, and not by ſeveral deeds delivered at ſeveral
times. As to the firſt, it is proved by all the ſaid books, that Co. Lit. 217, b.
there ought to be a precedent eſtate, upon which the eſtate,
as upon a foundation, may increaſe : but Coke Chief Juſ-
tice ſaid, that ſuch foundation ought to be permanent and
not revocable at the will of the grantor or leſſor; and
therefore if a man grants an advowſon to another at will,
upon condition that if he do ſuch a thing that he ſhall
have fee, in that caſe the eſtate at will is not any ſuch
foundation as the law requires to ſupport an increaſe of an
eltate of freehold or inheritance, for the grantor may deter-
mine the will, before the condition performed, and ſo avoid
his own grant, and a leaſe at will cannot ſupport a remainder
over. And if a man grants an advowſon, or a rent, &c. for C Jac- 461.
Jears upon condition that if the leſſee pays 108. within one 2
year, that he ſhall have for life, and if after the year he pays 1 Roll. Nep. 321.
208. that he ſhall have fee ; the leſſee pays the 108. within the Co. Lit. 25: b.
year, and aſter the year he pays the 205. according to the con- 1 © = 1
dition, yet he ſhall have but for life, for the eſtate for life :
at the time of the grant, was but in contingency, which
is not a foundation upon which a greater can increaſe, for
a poſſibility cannot incicaſe upon a poſſibility and the eſtate of
{(ce-


an ay, Dp yr i F oo


- cy OS MY wa” aw ww


SS Bon


_—


— *


© Sh Fo. % „ ww @t


PR = o


R 7 —=


_—
—


(a) 35 H. 8. Br.
Expoht, de pa-


1 Co. 54. b.
8 Co 145. b.
Plowd 483. b.
Cr. Car. 3 59.


=> : . - — —
- =
—


— —ﬀ —_ — — ﬀ
— — - 4 —
—_ — — p


— a
8


.


- = —
K


- — 2 bd
_
— p 05 -
— - SA 2 a;
1 — — _— —_ — —— ——
8 —
by -
— — — — — m
— — A — — * —


a ———


-


= OI


(5) Br. Aid. 46.
1 Roll. 182,183.
Br Perempt. 10.
Br. Coparcen. 5.
Br, Counterplea.
ce Aid 24. Fitz,
Counterplea. de


(e) Lu. ſect. 147.
Co. Lit, 103. a.


o
CS
— —


2 -


— _ — _


——


r 2


(4) 2 Brownl,


Ray mond 4 I 4.


:

„ ”
-
:
f

l


(e) 2 Prownl.


The Lord STarrorD's Caſe, Part VIII


ſee · ſimple cannot increaſe upon the eſtate for years, for that
is merged by the acceſs of the eſtate for life, as ſhall be aſter.
wards faid. As to the ſecond, the privity of eſtate ought to (a)
continue; and that is proved by the ſaid caſe of the Lord Lo.
vell : and therefore if the leſſee for life, or years, or the do.
nee in tail who has ſuch a condition annexed to his eſtate,
aliens before the condition performed; or if leſſee for life, or
years, ſurrenders to the leſſor, he ſhall never take benefit ofthe
condition afterwards, for the privity of eſtate in ſuch caſe
ought to continue, for the increaſe of the eſtate ought to enure
upon the particular eſtate, as upon a foundation; and there.
fore if in ſuch caſe the leſſee for life or years, or the donee
aliens all his eſtate, and takes back an eſtate, and afterwards
performs the condition; yet nothing ſhall thereby accrue to
him, becauſe by the abſolute alienation, the privity was once
abſolutely deſtroyed, which cannot by any repriſal of an eſtate
be revived : as if one coparcener after partition makes a feoff-
ment in fee, and takes back an eſtate to herſelf again, and her
heirs, yet the privity of the eſtate to have (5) aid to deraign
the warranty paramount is deſtroyed, 11 H. 4. 22. b. Vi
38 E. 3. 20. b. So if tenant by homage (c) anceſtrel makes
a feoffment in fee, and takes back an eltate to him in fee, he
ſhall not hold by homage anceſtrel, Lit. 32. {ib. 2. 33. b. But
if leſſee for life, &c. grants his eſtate upon condition, and
enters for the condition broken, and afterwards performs the
condition, there peradventure the fee ſhall accrue to him; tor
the poſſibility was not abſolutely deſtroyed ; and when he en-
ters for the condition broken, he is in his old eſtate ; and that
the particular eſtate ſhould continue to all reſpects is not ne-
ceſſary; but if ſach a privity of eſtate continues as is capable
of an increaſe, it is ſuſſicient. And therefore, if ſuch !cflee
for life makes a leaſe for years, or if leſſre for years
makes a leaſe for a lefler term; or if ſuch donee makes a
Jeafe for his own life, or for years, yet for the privity af
eſtate which continues in them, they ate capable of an in-
creaſe of an eſtate: but if ſuch tenant in tail makes 2
leaſe for the life of another, there he is not capable of any
increaſe, becauſe he has gained a new reverſion in ſee, and
the firſt privity doth not remain; and yet in fuch caſe if the
leſſee for life dies, there the firſt privity of eſtate is ret
ed. So if a (4) man makes a gift to one, to have and '0
hold to him, and his heirs of the body of his wife begot-
ten, with ſuch condition wt ſupra, and afterwards the wie
dies without iſſue, ſo that now he is become tenant in tail
after poſſibility; in that caſe, although the eſtate be changed,
yet ſoraſmuch as the privity remains, he mey by the perivim
ance of the condition have fee after. So it a (e) leale

made to two, with condition to have fee, and one dies, the fuf.


vivor may perform the coudition and have fee. But if the on
joint.


part VIII. The Lord Srarrokp's Caſe,


joint-tenants have made partition of the term, the condition is
deſtroyed 3 for the eſtate in fee ought to increaſe to them
jointly, and not in ſeveralty. And in the caſe at bar, although
T. Tyndal had died before the performance of the condition,
his heir of his body might have performed it, for although the
perſons were altered, yet the ſame eſtate continued; and this
power to perform the condition deſcended (a) to his heir, as
an inheritance annexed to the foundation which deſcended to
him, and he, after the condition performed, ſhould have the
reverſion in fee quodam modo by deſcent, as in Shelley's caſe,
in the Firſt Part of my Reports. And although it is requi-
ſite that privity of eſtate ſhould continue; yet it is not requiſite
that the increaſe ſhould merge the particular eſtate; for if a
man makes a leaſe for life, the remainder for life, or in tail,
on condition that if the firſt leſſee doth ſuch a thing, that he
ſhall have fee ; in that caſe by the performance of the condi-
tion he ſhall have fee ; and yet it ſhall not merge the eſtate for
life, quod fuit conceſſum per curiam. And if a man makes a
leaſe tor years, on condition, that if the leſſor (Y) ouſts him
within the term, that he ſhall have fee; in that caſe, if the
leſſor ouſts him, now the intereſt of the term 1s turned into a
right; and yet the leſſee in ſuch caſe ſhall have fee, for two
reaſons. 1. Becauſe it is the act and wrong of the leſſor him-
ſelf, whereof he ſhall not take advantage. 2. Eo n/tante that
the leſſor ouſts him, es inſlante the leſſee hath fee, and the title
of che leſſee is by force of the condition, which is paramount
the ouſter: and therewith agrees 6 R. 2. (c) Aid juris clamat.
20. And that a poſſeſſion in an inſtant is ſufficient to ſupport
the inceaſe of the fee, appears in 12 E. 2. Voucher 265. A
man (4) makes a leaſe ſor years on condition that if the leſſor
doth not pay to the leſſee 100 marks at the end of the term,
that he ſhall have fee, there the end of the term conſiſts on an
inſtant of time. And if the eſtate-tail of the Lord Stafford
had determined for want of iſſue, and Urſula had died, fo that
the reverſion of T. Tyndal had come in poſſeſſion, yet
foraſmuch as the privity of the eſtate continueth, although
the quality of the reverſion is altered to a poſſeſſion, the
condition remaineth. But there is a difference between the
continuance of the privity of the eſtate of the (e) leſſor or
grantor, and the privity of the eſtate of the leſſce or gran-
tee; for the privity of the eſtate on the part of the letlor
needs not be continued; for altho' the leffor or grantor aliens
his reverſion, or is attainted, &c. yet the condition remains;
for by no act that he can do can he fruſtrate or derogate from
his grant; and therewith agree 31 Edw. 1. Feoffments &
Faits, * 119. 6 R. 2. Quid juris clamat (f) 20. and Plow-
den's Com. in the ſaid caſe of the Lord Lovel. But if leſſee
tor years, with condition to have fee, accepts a releaſe from
the leſſor to him for his life, or in tail, and afterwards the


condition is performed, he ſhall never have fee, Rey


(a) 2 Roll. Rep.
484.


J Co. Lit.


217. 8.


1 Co. 84. b.


(e) Co. Lit 2 17. a.
378. b. Plowd.

26. a. 34 · b. 487. a.
Dyer 209. pl. 21.
Perk. ſect. 729.
1 And. 316.


Cr. Jac. 698.


x Jones 58, <9.


Godb. 105.


1 Roll Rep.


2 Brownl, 227,
294.

(4) Co. Lit. 2 17.
a,

de) Plowd. 486. b.


487. A.


* Co. Lit 216. b.
(f) Plowd. 487.
as


}
1
:
J


— my — —


|
|
i


"

|

[
1


2 „ + - »
* 7
>; r —


— — —


— —


— — —


—


(a) Dy. 10. pl. 37.
11 Co 83. b.


1 Bulſt. 136.

6. 23. a. Poph.
194. Latch. 269.
® 1x Co, 83. 2.


9
(5) 2 Brownl,


— m —


— 7 * _—
* x *
hs —_— OT.


Plow. 489. a.
2 Co. 53 b.


(d) 2 Brownl,


5
2 Co. 53. a. b.
Lit. Rep. 123.
Godb. 443. Cr.
El. 640. Br. Eſ-
cheat 32. Br.


Fitz. Deviſe 8.
Plowd. 2 59. a.
4 Co. 58. a.
Raym. 8 3. 29 Aſſ.
1. Hard. 13,14.


2 Roll. Rep. 351,


The Lord STarrorD's Caſe. Part VII.


the eſtate for years, which is the foundation upon which the
fee ſhould increaſe, is, by his own acceptance of a greater ef.
tate, merged, and has no continuance: as if leſſee for year,
without impeachment of waſte (a) takes confirmation for life,
the privilege, which was annexed to the eſtate for years, is
loſt, 5 H. 5.9. a. 3 Ed. 3. 44. a. b. in Mary de la * Idle
caſe, 28 H. 8. Dyer 10. b. &c. And it was reſolved, that
if Queen Elizabeth had died before the condition performed,
that yet Tyndal might have performed the condition; andif0,
Eliz. under her great ſeal had refuſed to take the ſaid money
(5) yet if Tyndal had tendered it at the receipt of the Exche.
quer, that he had gained the fee-ſimple, for the Queen by no
means could countermand or hinder the increaſe of the eſtate
in ſuch caſe.

As to the third, it was reſolved, that if the condition had
been that when Tyndal thould pay to I. S. 208. that he ſhould
have fee, that preſently by the payment by operation of law,
the fee would be (c) diveſted out of the Queen, and veſted in
Tyndal, and that for neceſſity, for if it ſhould not veſt at the
time of the condition performed, it ſhould never veſt ; and
therefore if oſſice, or petition, Monſtrans de droit, or other thing
ſhould be requiſite, it would make the Queen's grant void, and
diſable the Queen to make ſuch grant, and therewith agrees
Plowd. Com. in the ſaid caſc of the Lord Lovel; for there it
is ſaid, when the condition is performed, the fee-ſimple ſhall
be immediately out of the King without petition or Monſtram
de droit, or other circumſtances, for if he ought to ſtay to
uſe ſuch circumſtances, then it will not veſt preſently ; and
if it will not veſt preſently, ergo it will never veſt ; for if an
eſtate cannot be enlarged at the time of the enlargement ap-
pointed, it ſhall never be enlarged ; and theſe are the words
of the book; and therefore for neceſſity the fee-ſimple (hall
paſs in the caſe at bar out of the Queen without any circum-
ſtance; for the law will never require circumſtance when it
will ſubvert ſubſtance. And theretore there is a notable caſe
in 49 E. 3. 16. a. b. where the caſe was, that Ifabel (4
Goodcheap was ſeiſed in fee of a certain houſe in London, and
by her will in writing and enrolled, deviſed the ſaid houte
held of the King, to Richard Goodcheap, to him, and to the
heirs of his. body: ſo that if he died without iſſue, that the
ſaid lands ſhould be ſold by her executors, or executors of ext-
cutors, &c. and made W. D. and W. W. and I. del.
her executors, and died without heir; Richard Goodcheap
died without iſſue, by which the houſe eſcheated to the
King, and afterwards I. one of the executors died, W. W.
refuſed and W. D. ſold, &c. And there it is made a queſtion
whether the ſale by one executor be good, or not? But it
agreed by all, that if the ſale be good, it ſhall diveſt ths
land out of the King, and the reaſon is for neceſſity of la,
for if the ſale doth not diveſt the land at the time


the ſale, no ſale ſhall be made at all, and the _—_
tol


ſi
(
d
d
ſ
U
]
]


—— Py — om” X;X] —ͤ


— ——_— — aim 0 a4


. —B AA. eh


— RF _— — —y— mand — —_— — LA —_— — NE” — ”» ww


Part VIII. The Lord Srarronp's Caſe, | 77


tors, who have but a power, cannot have a petition, Menſtrant
}+ droit, or other remedy, _ :
As to the fourth incident, it was reſolved, that it ought to
be by one and the ſame deed or grant, or by two deeds deliver-
ed at (a) one time, which is all one in effect; for, (% gue in- (io, thin
antinenti fiunt inefſe videntur; and the reaſon thereof is, be- a.


cauſe the foundation, /cil, the particular eſtate, and the in- 2 Brownl. 252.


. 6 B g 6
creaſe of the eſtate thereupon, is but one grant to take effect * „


out of one and the ſame root, although it veſts at ſeveral Co. Lit. 272. a.
times, yet when it is veſted, it has its vigour and force of one
and the ſame grant; and therefore it is well ſaid in 27 H. 6.
7.2. ( that when he has performed the condition he has fee /.p. Relation.
from the time of the commencement of the leaſe, as by one 1.
and the ſame grant, and as one and the ſame eſtate,
As to the firſt objection againſt the form of the grant, ſcil.
prædictum reverſianem, to conſtrue it to extend to the eſtate-
tail granted before to Tyndal, (which the Queen cannot grant
again) and not to the reverſion of the fee; (which the Queen
may grant, and which is mentioned before) will be a (4) (i) 11 Co, 11. b.
conſtruction tending in great diſhonour to the Queen, and in |
great damage and diſenheriſon of the ſubject: in diſhonour
to the Queen for three cauſes. 1. To have her grant under
the great ſeal by captious and nice conſtructions avoided,
2, To preſume ſuch ignorance in the Queen (who was a wile,
learned, and moſt excellent Princeſs, and the phoenix of her
ſex) that ſhe intended to grant that which ſhe could not grant,
and not that which ſhe could. 3. That the Queen (as it was
objefted) could not make ſuch a grant in futuro, when a
ſubject might do it without queſtion ; therefore a fortzori, the
Queen might do it in ſuch caſe. Alſo it would tend to the
damage of the ſubject who ſhall have the King's charter un-
der the great ſeal, but by a nice and captious conſtruction he
ſhall loſe the land contained therein; which will ſometimes
tend to the ruin of him and his poſterity ; and the caſes of Sir
John /e) Molyns, the Lord (/) Chandos, and the Earl of (0% 6 Co.e.b.6.a
Rutland, were affirmed for good law. But, note, the Queen 11 Co. 1 2 8
grants not only pred” reverſion but alſo amn & ſingul præmiſſa, (s Co. 55. a. b.
Cc. which words make this point clear. And as to the laſt of Dee
the ſaid two objections, it was reſolved per tot cur”, that the 25 Co. ples :
words were ſufficient to paſs the inheritance of the land, for
to pals a future eſtate upon a contingent, words in futuro are
apt and ſufficient enough, as in all charters and letters patent
of lands, the clauſe of grant of liberties and franchiſes
by all with ſuch words in effect, as theſe be becauſe
they are contingent and de futuro. And the (Y) invention
of this grant 0 1 yndal was 8 by 4 J0 ſtices, for 925 8
when the Lord Stafford was tenant in tail the (i) reverſion (i) 34 & 35 H,8.
to Queen Mary, if the Queen had granted the whole fee-ſim- cap. 20.


le to Tyndal, then by a common recovery or fine 8
Ore 4


|
»


=
uu _—__ —


” -
—

———ä——. mw, — 2 -
- »


-


> » * Y ˙
— 4 4
2 W pa.s - 4 .
———UR—C——— — — —


— — —


*
— cw _


2- ——
—
22
— ——
_ — — —


— *
22 2 — —
6 — . »— — —


4 £ —
2 1 —
— —
_— 5 —


-


a ax


——
— =>


omen ——
a Be hat


i
f


|
|
|
|
1
Ly
:
=.


_—


r


(a) Co. Lit. 372. b.


2 Co. 15. b. 16.
34 & 35 H. 8. c.
20.

10 Co. 37 a.

1 Andert. 46. 141.
2 Co. 52. a. 6 Co.
55. a, Hob. 299.
2 Roll. Rep. 417.
Moor 115, 195.
1 Anderſ. 46,47,
142, 143, 171.
Cr. Car. 430.
Plowd. 555. a.
Yelv. 149.

Noy 132.

Co. Lit. 335. 2.
1 Leon. 85.

3 Leon. 57.

4 Leon. 40.
Benl. in Kelw.
213. a. b. O. Ben.
32. Ben. in Aſh.
26. N. Ben. 223.
pl. 254. 2 Roll.
Rep. 108.
Raym. 349.
Cr. Eliz. 595.


(Co. Lit. 372. b.
2 Roll. Rep. 68.


The Lord SrArTohDs Caſe. Part VIll


Lord Stafford might have barred his iſſues, and by a con.
mon recovery the reverſion to 'Tyndal in fee, which was n6.
ther the Queen's nor Tyndal's intention; but the purpoſe wx
that it ſhould be in the power of Tyndal, and the heirs of bi
body, to hold and reſtrain the Lord ien and the heirs
his body, that they ſhould not alien or bar his reverſion in tail
by taking the fee-fimple out of the crown by the performance
of the condition to enable them to alien. But Coke, Chief
Juſtice in his argument moved a queſtion on the ſtatute of (4
34 H. 8. c. 20. That if the Lord Stafford and his wife had ſuffered
a common recovery with voucher, if that ſhould not bar the reve.
hon which Tyndal had in tail, the reverſion in fee being in the
crown: andthereupon he conſidered the words of the faidaQ,the
preambleof which ſeems to provide for the heirs of the bodiesof the
King's donees. And the queſtion mentioned in the preamble
is, „whether ſuch feigned and untrue recoveries againſt ſuck
«© tenant in tail, &c. ſhould, after the death of the tenant in
&© tail, bind the heirs in tail, or not :” and the body of the
act is, for the plain declaration whereof, and to avoid and
«© extinct from henceforth diverſity of opinions in ſuch caſe,
* be it ordained and enacted, that no ſuch feigned recovery
«© hereafter to be had by aſſent of parties, againſt any ſuchte-
nant 1n tail of any lands, &c. whereof the reverſion or re-
% mainder at the time of ſuch recovery had, {hail be in the
King, ſhall bind or conclude the heirs in tail, whether any
common voucher be had in any ſuch feigned recovery d
not, but that after the death of every ſuch tenant in tail, &.
the heirs in tail may enter,” &c. So that by the letter df
the act no remedy is provided for him in reverſion or remait-
der in tail, although the reverſion of the fee be in the King
But yet the Chief Juſtice held, that by neceſſary conſequence
(b) ſuch reverſions and remainders in tail are preſerved by the
ſaid act: for when there is tenant in tail, the remainder it
fee, and tenant in tail ſuffers a common recovery, the real
of the bar of the eſtate of him in the remainder who 14
ſtranger to the recovery is, by conſequence, becauſe the com.
mon recovery bars the eſtate of the tenant in tail who is party d
the recovery, and by conſequence, all reverſions and tema.
ders of common perſons expectant thereupon : but when the
act of 34 H. 8. provides, that no common recovery had 2:
gainſt tenant in tail, who is party to the recovery, ſhall bar bu
iſſues when the King has the reverſion, &c. thereby inclufic
the act preſerves the reverſions and remainders in tail of tht
King's grant, for they cannot be barred, but when the eliate-
tail, upon which they depend, is barred ; and that is the
reafon that when tenant in tail is in of another eſtate, and


ſuffers a common recovery as tenant, it ſhall not bet
any


6ðII WIE Og Re OY, Fe * * mi AA „„ AM as


Part VIII. The Lord Srarroxp's Caſe, 7


any reverſion or remainder, becauſe the ſame ſhould bar the

eſtate of the tenant in tail, who is party to the recovery; for

a) quod non valet in principalt in acceſſorio ſeu conſequenti non (a\ 2 Brown,
valebit, et quod non valet in magis propinguo, non valebit in magis 253:

remato, And if the Lord Stafford might have barred the rever-

fion in tail of Tho. Tyndal before the condition performed,

the invention of the ſaid grant had failed of its final purpoſe :

for which cauſe it ſeemed to the Lord Chief Juſtice, that the

ſaid act preſerves the ſaid reverſion of the ſaid Tho. Tyndal ;

quod fuit conceſſum. per totam curiam. Laſtly, it was reſolved

er totam curiam, that if the (5) reverſion in fee had remained (5) Mo.11 5,467.
in the crown, that the fine Jevied by the ſaid Edward Lord Ben. inKel. 213.
Stafford, the ſather, had not barred the Lord Stafford that now = Ge 59516126
is, but that he might enter according to the reſolution in (c) + Lens an.”
Notley's caſe, Paſch. 31 Elia in Communi Banco, et pracipue 7 Anderl. 46.
by reaſon of theſe words in the ſaid act of 34 H. 8. „ The 8 — 333,
« ſaid recovery, or any other thing or things hereafter to be Raym. 6.
„ had, done, or ſuffered, by or againſt the ſuch tenant in . 103.


tail, to the contrary notwithſtanding.”


Vol. IV. 8 WV AT


en ben  W.YAT Wird!


2 Brownl, 180.


Trin. 7 Jacobi 1.


Na replevin between William Wood, plaintiff, and Wi.
liam Norton, Eſq. defendant, upon taking of his ſheep x


Croydon in the county of Surry, in a place called Norwood:


the defendant ſaid, that the place where, &c. doth contain
200 acres, part of the manor of Croydon, and intitled him.
ſelf to have common there, and avowed for damage-feafant,
The plaintiff, in bar of the avowry, ſaid, that before and it
the time of the taking, he h:mſelf was, and yet is ſeiſed at
five acres of land in Croydon aforeſaid in fee, and that he
and all thoſe whoſe eſtate he has in the ſaid five acres a fn
pore cujus, Ic. have uſed to have common of paſture in the
ſaid 200 acres for all his commonable cattle, levant and
couchant upon the ſaid five acres of land, at all times of the
year, as to the ſaid ftve acres of land appertaining; for which
cauſe he put in his ſheep, &c. To which the defendant
ſaid, that before the ſaid William Wood had any thing in the
ſaid five acres of land, one Wyat Wild was ſeiſed of a mei-
ſuage and 40 acres of land in Croydon aforeſaid, whereoi
the ſaid five acres were parcel, in fee, and that the fail
Wyat, and all thoſe whoſe eſtate he had in the ſaid meſſuage,
and 40 acres of land, whereof, &c. a tempore cujus, &c. had
common of paſture in the faid 200 acres for all his com-
monable cattle, levant and couchant upon the ſaid meſſuaęe,
and 40 acres of land, whereof, &c. as to the ſaid meſſuage
and 40 acres of land appertaining, and the faid Wyat being
ſo ſeiſed of the ſaid five acres, enfeoffed one John Wood in
fee, whole eſtate the ſaid William Wood before the time ot
the taking, &c. had, idemque Millielmus Mood. colore inde dun
commun paſtur* in the ſaid 200 acres, &c. pro omnibus aver ſu


communic' ſup” pred” quing' aer ter* levant and couchant, ”
| | h T


Part VII. Wrar WiIp's Caſe; 79


put in his cattle, and he took them as damage ſeaſant, &c,
upon which the plaintiff demurred in law. And the laſt term
and this term this caſe was argued by the Serjeants at the bar,


and now at this term it was argued at the Bench by all the


Juſtices, ſc. Coke Chief Juſtice, Walmeſley, Warburton, Da—

niel, and Foſter : and in this caſe two points were reſolved,

1. That (be the ſaid (a) common appendant or appurtenant} (a) Hob. 235.

the common in the caſe at bar is apportionable. 2 That the Ney 30-

pleading thereof was ſufficient. As to the firſt it was well a- 2

greed that common appendant was of common right, and

ſeverable, and although the commoner in ſuch caſe purchaſes

parcel of the land in which, &c. yet the common ſhall be ap-

portioned, but in ſuch caſe common appurtenant, and not

appendant, by (b) purchaſe of parcel of the land in which, (4) Winch. 45.

&c. is extinct for the cauſes and reaſons given in Terring- Hob. 235:

ham's caſe, all which was affirmed for good law by the whole £05.35 *

court, Andit was ſtrongly urged, that common appurtenant

ſhall not be ſeverable in the caſe at bar for divers reaſons.

1. Becauſe this common appurtenant wholly belonged to a

houſe and 40 acres of land by preſcription z and he by his

own act cannot make this entire thing ſeveral. 2. The ſeoffee

of parcel ſhall not have common, becauſe the preſcription

fails, for no common was ever appurtenant to that parcel, but

to the meſſuage and all the land. 3. Common appurtenant is

a thing againſt common right, and therefore by the act of

the party ſhall be no more ſevered or divided, than a con-

dition or nomine pare, or any other thing againſt com-

mon right. As to that it was anſwered and reſolved, that

it appears by the preſcription, that the ſaid common is ſe—

verable, for the preſcription 1s to have common in the

land, in which, &c. to be taken by the mouths of his |

beaſts which are (e) levant and couchant on the land, to (g Cr. Car. 482.

which, &c. and that extends to the whole, and to every Noy 30-

parcel, and it can be no more damage or charge to the te- e

nant of the land in which, &c. aſter the ſeverance, than it

was before, for no other beaſts can paſture there, but thoſe

which are levant and couchant on the land, to which, &c.

But if he who has common appurtenant (4) purchaſes parcel (4) x Anderf.

of the land in which, &c. all the common is extin&t : or, if Ws FR 43»

he takes a (e) leaſe of parcel of the land, all is ſuſpended, Winch. 45. Noy

becauſe it is the folly of the commoner to intermeddle with 30. Co. Lit.122,

part of the land in which, &c. which belongs not to him : 40S 33. 5

but when the commoner intermeddles but only with his own A d.

land, by alienation thereof, that ſhall not in ſuch caſe turn 1 Roll. 938.

to his prejudice, for that is not againſt any rule of the law,

as the other caſe, when he purchaſes part of the land, in

which, &c. becauſe his com mon appuncuant was againtt
＋ 2 com-


War Wir p's Caſe: Part VIII.
eommon right; and he cannot common in his own land
which he has purchaſed. And it will be a great inconveni—

Co, Lit. 122. 2+ ence, if by the alienation of parcel the alienee ſhall loſe the
common which belongs to him, for then the alienor ſhall loſe
his common alſo, for by the reaſon which has been made,
Wyat Wild cannot preſcribe to have common to the houſe
and 35 acres, becauſe the common was entirely appurtenant
to the meſſuage and 40 acres, and if the law ſhould be ſuch,

* 9 all common appurtenant in England would be (a) deſtroyed

Hob. pA (which would be againſt the commonwealth) for no land con-

| tinues in ſo entire a manner, every acre together with another,
as it has been ab initio, but for preferment of younger ſons,
advancement of daughters, payment of debts, or other neceſ-
fary conſiderations, part has been ſevered ; and therefore this
caſe is not like a condition, or nomine pœnæ, which are en-
tire, and not ſeverable by the act of the parties, but is like a
rent relerved on a leaſe for years: and therefore if a man
makes a leaſe of three acres, each of equal yearly value, ren-
mx dering 3s. rent, and the leſſor grants the reverſion of one
1 acre, and the tenant attorns, the grantee ſhall have 12 d. rent,
for although it was one leaſe, one reverſion, and one rent,
yet that was incident to the reverſion, which was ſeverable,
and the rent ſhall wait upon the reverſion, and upon every
part of it. So in the caſe at bar, although at the beginning
there was but one common attendant upon one tenancy ; yet
foraſmuch as it is attendant upon the tenancy which is ſever-
able, and upon every part of it, the alienee of part of the te-
nancy ſhall have common. So if he who has ſuch common
appurtenant to land, leaſes part of the land to another, the
leſſee ſhall have common for the beafts levant and couchant;

Moor 463. and if an advowſon be appendant to a manor which deſcends

| to divers coparceners, and the coparceners make partition of
the manor to which, &c. without ſpeaking of the advowſon,
the advowſon, notwithſtanding the divifion and ſeverance of
the manor to which, &c. remains appendant, 13 E. 3. Qua-
re imp. 58. 19 Ed, 3. ibid. 59. 17 E. 38. 43 Ed. 3. 35. 13 E
2. Quare imp. 170. 2 H. 7. 5. Vide 4 Eliz. Dy. 213.


VINYOR's


VVYVNIO RCV Cafe.


Trin. 7 Jac. 1. Rot. 2629.


ILLIAM WILDE, late of Themil-

thorp in the county aforeſaid, yeoman,
otherwiſe called William Wilde of Themilthorp in the county
aforeſaid, yeoman, was ſummoned to anſwer to Robert Vy-
nior of a plea, that he render to him 201. which to him he
oweth, and unjuſtly detaineth, &c. And whereupon the
ſaid Robert, by Thomas Vynior his attorney, faith, that
whereas the ſaid William, on the 15th day of July, in the 6th

ear of the reign of the lord the. now King of England,
Foe, and Ireland, at 'Themilthorp, by his certain writing
obligatory, rr himſelf to be bound unto the ſaid Robert
in the aforeſaid 201. to be paid to the ſaid Robert when he
ſhculd be thereunto required; yet the aforeſaid William, al-
tho' often required, the aforeſaid 201. to the ſaid Robert hath
not yet rendered, but to render the ſame to him hath hitherto
denied, and as yet doth deny, whereupon he ſaith that he is
injured, and hath damage to the value of 101. and thereof he
bringeth ſuit; and he brings here into court the writing a—
foreſaid, which doth teſtify the debt aforefaid in form afore-
ſaid, whoſe date is the day and year aboveſaid, &c. And the
aforeſaid William, by John Ruſſel his attorney, comes and
defends the force and injury when, &c. and prays oyer of the
writing aforeſaid, and it is read unto him; he alſo prays oyer
of the condition of the ſame writing, and it is read unto him


Norfolk, fl.


in theſe words: © The condition of this obligation is ſuch,


ee that if the abovebounden William Wilde, do and ſhall
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, ſtand to,
« abide, obſerve, perform, fulfil, and keep, the rule,
« order, judgmeat, arbitrament, fentence, and final de-
«© termination of William Rugge, Eſq. arbitrator indif-
« terently named, elected, and choſen, as well of the
« part and behalf of the ſaid W. Wilde, as of the part
and behalf of the abovenamed Robert Vynior, to rule,

Z. 3 order,


80


— —


5 ..... SS NELfT. 25... -- —
— = D © a. = — — — — — =
- — 4 8 N \


— —ͤ—ñ— —
* r


*


Vrx1on's Caſe. Part VIII.


order, adjudge, arbitrate, and finally determine, all mat-
ters, ſuits, controverſies, debates, griefs, and contentions
heretofore moved and ſtirred, or now depending between
the ſaid parties, touching or concerning the ſum of two
and twenty pence, heretofore taxed upon the ſaid W.
« Wilde, for divers kind of pariſh buſineſs within the ſaid
% pariſh of Themilthorpe ; fo as the {aid award be made and
e ſet down in writing, under the hand and ſeal of the ſaid
« William Rugge, at or before the feaſt of St. Michael the
„ Archangel next enſuing after the date of theſe preſents,
* that then this preſent obligation to be void and of no effect,
« or elſe the fame to ſtand, abide, remain, and be in full
force, power, ſtrength, and virtue.” Which being read
and heard, the ſaid William Wilde faith, that the aforeſaid
Robert ought not to have his action aforeſaid againſt him, be-
cauſe he ſaith, that the arbitrator aforeſaid, after the makin

of the writing, and before the aforeſaid feaſt of St. Michael
the Archangel, in the condition aforeſaid above ſpecified, did
not make any award in writing, under the hand and ſeal of the
ſame arbitrator, between him the ſaid William and the afore-
ſaid Robert, of and upon the premiſes aforeſaid, in the con-
dition aforeiaid above ſpecified, according to the form and
effect of that condition; and this he is ready to verify, where-
upon he prayeth judgment if the aforeſaid Robert ought to
have his action aforeſaid againſt him, &c. And the aforeſaid
R faith, that he by any thing before alledged ought not to be
barred from having his action aforeſaid, becauſe he ſaith that
the ſaid William Wilde after the making of the writing afore-
ſaid, and before the aforeſaid fealt of St. Michael the Arch-
angel, then next following, that is to ſay, on the 22d day of
Auguit, in the 6th year of the reign of the Lord the now King
of England, &c. aforeſaid, at 'Themilthorpe aforeſaid, by his
certain writing, which the ſaid Robert ſealed with the
ſea) of the ſaid William, brings here into Court, whoſe date is
the ſame day and year, reciting, that whereas he the ſaid Wil-
liam then ſtood bounden to the aforeſaid Robert, by the name
of Robert Vynior, in one writing obligatory in the ſum of
201. with condition in the ſaid writing for the performance
and fulfilling of the arbitrament, rule, order, judgment,
ſentence, and final determination of William Rugge, Eſq.
arbitrator, choſen as well on the part of the faid William
Wilde, as on the part of the abovenamed Robert Vynior,
as in the ſaid writing obligatory more ſuily it appeared, or
might appear, then the ſaid William intending the revoca-
tion thereof, by the ſaid writing of revocation, revoked and
did call back all the authority whatſoever which the ſaid Wil-
lam Wide, by the ſaid writing obligatory had given and _

| | mitte


cc
60


part VIII. Vynior's Caſe. 81


mitted to the aforeſaid William Rugge, his arbitrator, and
then altogether diſallowed and held void, and all and whatſo-
ever the aforeſaid William Rugge, after the delivery of the
ſame writings of revocation, ſhould do to (for) him in and
about the ſaid arbitrament, rule, order, judgment, arbitra-
ment, ſentence, and determination of all matters, ſuits, con-
troverſfies, debates, griefs, and contentions, then before mov-
ed and ſtirred, or then after depending between the ſaid par-
ties, touching or concerning the ſum of 22 d. taxed upon the
faid William Wilde, according to the aforeſaid writing obli-
gatoryy as it was in the ſame writing mentioned and declared,
as by the ſaid writing of revocation more fully appeareth, and
this he 18 ready to verify ; whereupon, inaſmuch as the afore-
aid William Wilde, after the making of the writing afore-
faid, before the ſaid feaſt of St. Michael the Archangel, then
next following, in form aforeſaid, diſcharged and dyjallowed -
the arbitrator aforeſaid, of all authority of arbitrating of and
upon the premiſes in the condition aforeſaid above ſpecified,
contrary to the form and effect of the condition and ſubmiſ-
fon in the ſame mentioned, the ſaid Robert prayeth judg-
ment and his debt aforeſaid, together with his damages, by
occaſion of detaining of the ſame debt to be adjudged unto
bim, &c. with this, that the ſaid Robert will verify that the
atorelaid writing obligatory here into Court brought, and the
atorelaid writing in the aforeſaid writing of revocation ſpeci-
hed, is one and the ſame writing, and not other, nor divers,
Ke. And the faid William Wilde faith, that the plea of the
ſaid Robert above, by replication pleaded, is not ſufficient in
law for him the ſaid Robert to have and maintain his action
atoreſaid, againſt the ſaid William, and that he to that plea,
in manner and form aforeſaid pleaded, needeth not, nor by
the law of the land is bounden to anſwer, and this he 1s
ready to verify; whereupon, for want of a ſufficient replica-
tion in this behalf, the ſaid William prayeth judgment, and
that the ſaid Robert may be barred from having his action
aloreſaid againſt him, &c. and the ſaid Robert, inaſmuch as he
in above replying bathalledged ſufficient matter in law for him
the ſaid Robert to have and maintain his action aforeſaid
apanft the ſaid William, which he is ready to verify, which
matter the aforeſaid William doth not deny, nor to the fame
in any ways anſwereth, but the averment atorefaid to admit
loth altogether refuſe, as before prayeth judgment, and his
debt aforeſaid, together with his damages, by occaſion of de-
lining his debt, to be adjudged unto him, &c. And becauſe
the Juſtices here will adviſe themſelves of and upon the pre-
miles before they give their judgment thereot, day 1s given to
the parties aſoreſaid here until in eight days of St. Michael, to
hear their judgment thereof, becaule the Jultices here there-
Uare not yet, &c.


by — — 2 . = -_ ——
1 * 2 — = 2 — 2 8 4 a * —
2 = 1 — 22
— * — bo
2 — : - — 5 2
= oa — 2 *. — * _
: — 5 5 — — N "+ Eu Tos PF =P . 8
A 2 e * 2 f a _— — — — == — * — _
* — — . — — — — 5 -
1 — —
. _— -
mn — - — - — — SE


— —
HAS AST |


*
wi
|
*
;
1
wo
15
q
a


1
1


* - — "hs
* 3 WET +


.


— - — 2 — —
* = — — — . — * 7 g —
— — - w_y * 22 = = a
1 - — : P
2 — * —— - 7 9 2 :
— "> «S * * T r 12 = — I — =
— 2 — 2 8 —M —
* 2 — — * - _ —
+ : - 4 * 4 « 7 — — 2 — — —ꝛ—e—ͤ— —
— rn" iS ——
— — —— — — — — — 2
5 — — — 2 Z


=% 2 —— — —— .


- + > 4 .
— — — — —
- ——


* 7
—ͤ— w—
—


2 4 VYNIOR's


1 Brownl. 62.


2 Brownl. 290, -


See Rep. Q. A.
170.


(NAarch. Abit. Themilthorpe præd præ dict“ MWillibelm Wilde per quodd ſcript
ſuum cujus datus ef eiſdem die & anno (4) revocauit & abt-


167.


St. Michael the Archangel next enſuing, after the date oi


VYNIOR' Caf.


Trin. 7 Jacobi 1.


7 Rin' 7 Jacobi, Rot. 2629, Robert Vynior brought an ac.

tion of debt againſt William Wilde, on a bond of 201,
15 Julii, anno b regis nunc. The defendant demanded oper
of the bond, and of the condition thereon indorſed, which
was, „ that if the above bounden William Wilde do, and
„ ſhall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, ſtand to,
0 abide, obſerve, perform, fulfil, and keep, the rule, order,
« judgment, arbitrament, ſentence, and final determina-
„tion of Wm. Rugge, Eiq. arbitrator indifferently named,
« elected, and choſen, as well on the part of the ſaid Wi-
* ham Wilde, as on the part of the ſaid Robert V ynior, to
* rule, order, adjudge, arbitrate, and finally determine all
% matters, ſuits, controverſies, debates, griefs, and conten-
„tions heretoſore moved and ſtirred, and now depending be-
„ tween the ſaid parties, touching or concerning the ſum of
« two and twenty pence heretofore taxed upon the ſaid Wm,
« Wilde, for divers kinds of pariſh buſineſs, within the p-
„ riſh of Themilthorpe in the county of Norfolk, ſo as the
* ſaid award be made and ſet down in writing under the hand
e and ſeal of the ſaid Wm. Rugge, at or before the feaſt of


La


« theſe preſents, that then,” &c. And the defendant
pleaded, that the ſaid William Rugge, nullum fecit arbitriun
de & ſuper premiſſis, c. The plaintiff replied, that after
the making of the ſaid writing obligatory, and before the
ſaid feaſt of St, Michael, ci. 22 Aug. anno b, ſupraditto, apud


gavit,


part VIII. Vyni1or's Caſe.


gavit, Anglict, did call back, omnem authoritatem quamcungue
quam idem Willielmns Milde per præd ſcriptum obligatorium de-
ict, & commiſiſſet prefat' Willielmo Rugge arbitratori ſuo, &
adtunc totaliter deadvocavit, & vacuum tenuit totum et quicquid
dia Willielmus Rugge poſt deliberationem ejuſdem ſcripti ſibi face-
ret in et circa diff” arbitrium regulam, etc. unde ex quo pred Wil-
mus Wilde poſt confectionem pred” ſcripti, et ante pred” feſtum
Sancti Michaelis tunc prox” ſeguen' in forma pred' exoneravit, &
abrogavit arbitratorem pred” de omni authoritate arbitrandi de et
ſuper præmiſſis in conditione pred” ſuperius ſpeafic' contra formam
& effetum condittonts illius, et ſubmiſſions in ead* mention” idem
Robertus petit judicium, etc. pon which the defendant de-
murred in law. And in this caſe three points were reſolved.
1. That although William Wilde the defendant was bound in
a bond to ſtand to, abide, obſerve, &c. the rule, &c. arbi-
trament, &c. yet he might (a) countermand it; for a man eve 19
cannot by his act make ſuch authority, power, or warrant not 1 Brownl. 62. y
countermandable, which is by the law and of its own nature 2 Brownl. 290,
countermandable; as if I make a (6) letter of attorney to  aotcorgery
make livery, or to ſue an action, &c. in my name; or if I Br. Arbit. 49.
aſſign auditors to take an account; or if I make one my fac- Doct. pl. 40.
tor; or if I ſubmit myſelf to an arbitrament ; although theſe (3) = _
are made by expreſs words irrevocable, or that I grant or am

bound that all theſe ſhall ſtand irrevocably, yet they may be

revoked : ſo if I make my teſtament and laſt will (c) irrevo- ( March Ar-
cable, yet I may revoke it, for my act or my words cannot al- bit. 165,

ter the judgment of the law to make that irrevocable, which = Max, Reg.
is of its own nature revocable. And therefore (where it is

faid in 5 Ed. 4. 3. b. (d) if I am bound to ſtand to the award /4) Mar, Arbit.
which I. S. ſhall make, I could not diſcharge that abitrament, 164.

becauſe I am bound to ſtand to his award, but if it be without n
obligation it is otherwiſe) it was there reſolved, that in both See 8 E. .
caſes the authority of the arbitrator may be revoked; but then per Cateſby.

in the one caſe he ſhall forfeit his bond, and in the other he

ſhall loſe nothing; for, ex (e) nudd ſubmiſſione non oritur ac- (% mga ab,
to : and therewith agrees Brooke in abridging the ſaid book 164.

of 5 Ed. 4. 3. b. and fo the book of 5 Ed. 4. is well explain-

ed. Vide (f) 21H. 6. 30. a. 28, 29. (g.) H. 6. 6. b. 49 E. (H podes 82. b.
3. 9. a. 18 E. 4.9. 8 Ed. 4. 10. 2. It was refolved, that Br. Arbit. 49.
the plaintiff need not aver, that the faid William f Arlt. .
Rugge had (h) notice of the countermand, for that is (+4) 1 Brown. 62.
implied in theſe words, revacavit et abrogauit omnem au- 2 Brownl. 290,
thoritatem, etc. for without notice it is no (i) revoca- 1 Ardit. 167.
tion or abrogation of the authority: and therefore if there () 1 Roll, 331.


was no notice, then the defendant might take (4) iſſue, guod (+) March. Arb.
non 167, 168.


.
"
*
1
!
5 |
.
”

1 \
I » 1
p 9

ö ;
- :
4 U
"ID
u - 7
$$ FE
| 11
1 1
Ll
41.7 1 þ
13 7
1 1 NY
”
* i=
4 l
-
,
;
4
T |


<a —


Pa 1 — Wa, „


(a) Cro. El. 401.
Cr, Jac 411,637.
Cr. Car. 101, 170.
Kelw. 7. a. Nov.
118. Doct. pl. 48,
405 239+ Yelv.
T35.

Br, Pleacings
145.

in Fine. 22 E. z.
15. b. per Tre-
meil.

Plowd. 149. b.
Co. Lit. 303. b.


(% Antea 82. a,
P.. Arbitr. 49.


(c) Antea $2. 8.
Fitz. Arbit. 12.
Br. Arbit. 4.
(4) 1 Brown.62,
2 Brownl. 290.
March Arb. 165,
166.


Vyni1or's Caſe. Part VII.


non revotavit, etc. aud if there was no notice, it ſhould be
found for the defendant; as if a man pleads, gued. (a) ferf-


favit, dedit, or demiſit pro termine vite, it implies livery, for


without livery it is no feoffment, gift, or demiſe ; but there is
a difterence when two things are requiſite to the performance
of an act, and both things are to be done by one and the fame
party, as in the caſe of feoffment, gift, demiſe, revocation,
countermand, &c. And when two things are requiſite to be
performed by ſeveral perſons; as of a grant of a reverſion, at-
tornment is not implied in it, and yet without attornment the
2 hath not perfection, but foraſmuch as the grant is made

y one, and the attornment is to be made by another, it is
not implied in the pleading of the grant of one ; but in the
other caſe both things are to be done by one and the ſame per-
ſon, and that makes the difference. And therewith agrees (þ)
21 H. 6. 30. a. where W. Bridges brought an action of debt
for 2001, on an arbitrament againſt William Bentley ; the de-
fendant pleaded, that beiore any judgment or award made
by the arbitrators, the ſaid Wiiliam Bentley diſcharged the
ſaid arbitrators at Coventry, in the county of Warwick; and
it was held a good bar, and yet he did not aver any notice to
be given. So it is adjudged in (c) 28 H. 6. 6. b. 6 H 7.10,
&c. 3. It was reſolved, that by this (4) countermand or te-
vocation of the power of the arbitrator, the obligee ſhall take
benefit of the bond, and that for two reaſons. I. Becauſe he
has broken the words»of the condition, which are, “ that he
„ ſhould ſtand to, and abide, &c. the rule, order,” &c. and
when he countermands the authority of the arbitrator, * he
& doth not ſtand to and abide,” &c. which words were put in
ſuch conditions, tothe intent that there ſhould be no counter-
mand, but that an end ſhould be made, by the arbitrator, of
the controverſy, and that the power of the arbitrator ſhould


continue till he had made an award; and when the award is


made, then there are words to compel the parties to perform
it, ſcil, obſerve, perform, fulfil, and keep the rule, order,


ccc. and this ſorm was invented by prudent antiquity ; and it


(-) Antea $2. 8.
Mich Arb. 164.
1 Koll. 331.
Pr. Albit. 35.


(f) M-rch Arb.
105, 166.


is good to follow in ſuch caſes the ancient forms and prece-
dents, which are ſull of knowledge and wiſdom ; and with
this reſolution agrees the ſaid book of (e) 5 Ed. 4. 3. b.
which is to be intended wut /upra, that the obligor cannot
diſcharge the arbitrament, but that he ſhall forfeit his bond,
and the book gives the reaſon, which is the cauſe of this rel0-
lution, ſeilicet, (f} becauſe I am bound to ſtand to his
award, /cilicet, ** to ſtand to his award,” which 1 do not
when I diſcharge the arbitrator. The other reafon is, becauſe


now the obligor has by his own ack made the condition ot


the bond (which was endorſed for the beneſit of the obligor,


to fave him from the penaliy of the bond) ire


carry
yet if
forfeit


hint


part VIII. VVyN Io n's Caſe: 2


o be performed. and by conſequence his bond is become (a) (-a Brownl. 290.
ſngle, and without the benefit or help of any condition, be-
cuſe he has diſabled himfelf to perform the condition. Vide
})21 Ed. 4. 55. a. per Choke, (c) 18 Ed. 4.18. b. & 20. a. (3) 5 Co. 21, a,
fone be bound in a bond, with condition that the obligor % 1 Brownl.62,
ſhall give leave to the obligee for the ſpace of ſeven years to —
amy wood, &c. in that caſe, although he gives him leave,
jet if he countermands it, or diſturbs the obligee, the bond is
rfeited, And afterwards judgment was given for the


qhinti ff.


Sic


r os
——
=_ l — — —


|
|
|


PPP A i Ee.
1 . #1 TAS > a 7 — ==
EF 2 — ; 4 r
2 — < — — 0 == — —
—
—— \ .
4 1 I * C 2 8 =_ _— \ \ |


*
* 2


. =


+ — 4
i


EF ww " 52 dv * 4 a * 2 — 1 —
. ES — a ae et 4
—. . \ ® > hk OT 4 m 4 > y \ * * ”
— — > Races - ws an . — — 5
A 1 E "> — K — *
_ 4 a
FY
5 "= *
— 4 - 7


_ - -
- ma = —
2 2 ®


—
Ex EE,


. T ne Ent na


— —

ä —
= - A —p —
— — 1 —
— — — —

* * —
— x _
— * N. 5 4 4
—
—


Co. Ent. 585.


Sir RICHARD PEXHALL's Caſe.


Trin. 7 Jac. 1. Rot. 3649.


I N a ſecond deliverance brought by Euſtace Barton againſt
Nicholas Moore, for taking of his cattle the 15th of April,
anno 5 Facobi regis, at Broxhead in the county of Southamp-
ton, in a place called Gate. The defendant avowed the
taking, becauſe Sir Richard Pexhall, Knt. was ſeiſed of the
manor of Broxhead in the ſaid county, (whereof the place in
which, &c. was parcel) in fee; and held it of the Biſhop of
Wincheſter in ſocage, as of his manor of Sutton, and was
alſo ſeiſed of the manors of Beauraper, Cranes, Chinham,
Steventon, and divers other manors, lands, and tenements,
and of a houſe in London deviſable by cuſtom in fee, and
held the ſaid manor of Steventon of the Queen by knights
ſervice in capite, and being ſo ſeiſed, made his will in writing,
and thereby deviſed to Eleanor his wife, the ſaid houſe in
London, and two parts of the other manors, lands, and
tenements, for thirteen years, and added a proviſo that the
ſaid deviſe ſhould not be prejudicial to any eſtate, title, or
intereſt for year or years, life or lives, which ſhould be after
deviſed in the ſame will; and after in the ſame will, dedit
et legavit eidem Nicholas Moore conſanguineo ſuo 101. exeun
et folubiP de et ex prad' meſſuag* et de et ex pred duabus
partibus maneriorum et caterorum tenementorum præd quer.
terly, ad maxime uſualia fefia, et pro non ſolutione inde, ad dj:
tring* et diſtrictiones detinend' quouſque, &c. And that the {aid
Sir Richard being ſo ſeiſed, died ſeiſed, &c. and for 201. for
two years ended anno 16 Eliz. he avowed, and averred the
value of the ſaid manors and tenements aforeſaid, at the
time of the will, &c. to be 2001, per ann. above all repriſals,


and it appears by the bar to the avowry that the wore


0


rn ww C & * — bots © *


art VIII. Sir, Rick PeExnati's Caſe,


if the will were, © I will and bequeath to dame Eleanor my
« wife, all my manors, lands, tenements, &c. for the term
u of thirteen years next after my geceaſe : 3 that this
« gift, deviſe, and bequeft, made to the ſaid Eleanor, ſhall
u not be prejudicial to any of the eſtate or eſtates, titles, or
« jntereſts, for year or years, life or lives, that ſhall be here-
« aſter in this preſent will given or bequeathed.” And further
in the fame will deviſed, * Item, I give and bequeath to my
« couſin Nicholas Moore a hundred ſheep and ten bullocks,
« and 101. iſſuing and payable out of my lands and tenements
« quarterly, at the moſt uſual feaſts, and for non-payment to
« diſtrain, and the diſtreſs to detain, until he be ſatisfied of
« the arrearages, and to keep the court and courts of all m
« manors, upon lawful requeſt to the ſaid Nicholas, by him
« or his deputy, during his life, and when the ſaid Nicho-
& Jas ſhall think it moſt convenient and mete, to keep.” And
upon the whole record, the queſtions which arofe out of this
part of the will, were two: 1. If Sir Richard Pexhall had
power, by the act of 34 Hen. 8. cap. 5. to deviſe this rent of
101. to Nicholas Moore, out of all his lands? 2. What eſtate
Nicholas Moore had in rent ?


As to the firſt it was objected, that Sir Richard Pexhall co, Lit. 171. b.


had not purſued the power which the ſaid act of 34 Hen. 8.
gave him; for the words of the act are, That every one,
*« &. may deviſe any rent, common, or other profit, out of
the ſame two parts, (viz. out of his manors, lands, tene-
ments, and hereditaments in three parts to be divided) or


out of any part thereof, or as much thereof as ſhall amount


* to the full clear yearly value of two parts thereof :”” and the
ſole queſtion depends upon the ſaid clauſe of 34 H. 8. for the
ſtatute of 32 H. 8. gives no power to the owner of the land,
todeviſe rent, common, or other profit out of it: and in this
caſe, where Sir Richard had a power to deviſe a rent, &c.
out of two parts, by that act, he has deviſed a rent out of all


dis lands, and fo has not purſued the authority which the act


gave him, and the clauſe of 34 Hen. 8. which follows next
after the ſaid branch of the act, by which it is enacted,
“ That by the authority aforeſaid, the ſaid will fo declared
* ſhall be good and effectual for two parts of the ſaid manors,
© lands, tenements, or hereditaments, although the will de-
« clared be made of the whole, or of more than of two parts,”
extends only to a deviſe of the land itſelf, and not to any
rent, common, or profit out of it, as appears by the letter
thereof, and by all the ſubſequent branches concerning the
diviſion ; and this clauſe is an explanation of the act of 32 H.


8. when all is deviſed, but, as hath been ſaid, the power to


deviſe a rent, &c. out of the land, is only given by the ſta-
tute of 34 Hen. 8. And the opinion in Butler and Baker's


Ge, in the Third Part of my Reports, 33. a. was cited, where
1


8 —


— —


F „ R
— be 4, 4 he Mac .n_- > —
— #5 \ — — =
: *
— _


—


—
5


rr 4
*


— ——
FR


—


r
- mY - &
- bu * — —
— — —
—
1
— — <


(a) 3 Co. 33-4 it is ſaid, that if a man (a) ſeiſed of three acres, (held h


e Hob. 80.
Co. Lit. 111. b.


„ divided at his own free will and pleaſure.” The third


Sir Ricnand Pexnals's Caſe. Part VIy


knights ſervice) each of the yearly value of 12 d. and he de
viſes a rent of 38. out of theſe three acres, this deviſe is void
for the whole, becauſe he doth not purſue the power which
the ſtatute preſcribes ; but in ſuch caſe, if he deviſes a rent o

8. which is the value of all, out of two parts, it is good,
e in that caſe, the value extends to the land, and not
to the rent, for the words are, any rent, without any reſtraint,
As to that it was anſwered and reſolved by the court, that it
is true, that the ſtatute of 32 Hen. 8. doth not extend to a
deviſe of any rent, &c. out of the land, but the power as to
that, is given by the ſtatute of 34 H. 8. which has four dif.
tinct branches as to this point, 1. That every one having a
ſole eſtate in fee-ſimple, &c. of and in any manors, &c,
* and having no manors, &c. holden of the King, or of any
„ other perſon by knights ſervice, ſhall have full and ſree
<« liberty, power, and authority to give, diſpoſe, will, or
« deviſe, &c. all his manors, &c. or any rent, common, or
« other profit, out of or to be perceived of the ſame, or out
e of any parcel thereof, at his own free will and pleaſure,


any clauſe in the faid former act notwithſtanding.“ By this s
branch it appears, that he who has no lands held by knights hy
ſervice, may deviſe any rent, common, or profit, out of his \
lands whereof he is ſeiſed in fee, to what value he will, -
although the rent, common, or profit, exceeds the value of |
the land; for the words are, at his own free will and pleaſure, ö
The ſecond branch is, when any is ſole ſeiſed of any manors, f
&c. held of the King in capite by knight ſervice, ſhall have F
* full and free liberty to deviſe, &c. by his laſt will in writ- I
& ing, &c. two parts of all his manors, &c. or any rent, N
« common, or profit, out of, or to be perceived of the ſame R
« two parts, or out of any parcel thereof in three parts to be 0


« divided, or as much thereof as ſhall amount to the full and
& clear yearly value of two parts thereof, in three parts to be


branch is, That all and fingular perſon and perſons having
« a ſole eſtate in fee- ſimple, &c. of and in any manors, &c.
&* holden of the King by knights ſervice, and not in chief, or
&* holden of any other perſon by knights ſervice, ſhall have
« full and free liberty to deviſe, &c. by his laſt will and tel-
« tament in writing, &c. two parts of the ſaid manors, &C. or
& any rent, common, or other profit out of, or to be perceived
of the ſame two parts, or out of any parcel thereof in three
4e parts to be divided, or as much thereof as ſhall amount to the
“% full and clear yearly value of two parts thereof in three parts,
eto be divided at his free will and pleaſure.” The 4th branch
is, And that the ſaid will ſo declared ſhall be good for two


parts of the ſaid manors, &c. altho! it be declared of *
c 1


on


Part VIII. Sir RicHarD Pirnart z Caſe.


« And alſo for the whole of all other ſuch manors, & c. not
« holden by knights ſervice, and of any rent, common, or
« other profit, out of, or to be perceived of the ſame, or out
« of any parcel thereof, at his free will and pleaſure.” By all
which branches it appears, that it is chiefly for the benefit of
the King or lord (of whom the land is held by knights ſervice,


&c.) that the owner of the land has power by his will to charge


but two parts, and by conſequence it tends to the benefit of
the heir; for in caſe when there is not any tenure to draw
ward{hip, &c. there the owner may, at his free will and plea-
fure charge the whole. Then in the caſe at bar where the
manor of Steventon was held of the King in chief by knights
ſervice, Sir Richard had ( power to charge but two parts;
yet when he charged the whole, he charged two parts and
more, and therefore it ſhall be good, for ſo much as the ſta-
tutes enables him, and void for the reſidue, . (a) quando
plus fit quam fieri debet, videtur etiam ipſum fileri quod faciendum
%; but foraſmuch as Sir Richard had power by his will to
charge bur two parts, the charge of the whole is void for the
third part, not only as to the King, or other lord, but as to
the heir alſo, becauſe, as to the third part, the will remains
at the common law, which was utterly void; and according
to this judgment, and for the fame reaſon it was adjudged,
M. 3 & 4 Ph. & Mar, in Com' Banco, Rot. 126. in (b) Ump-
ton and Hide's caſe, that a will in writing after the ſtatute of
32 H. 8. and before the ſtatute of 34 H. 8. declared of the
whole land, whereof part was held of the King by knights
ſervice in capite, was good for two parts: and fo it had been
if the ſtatute of 34 H. 8. had never been made, which is all
one in reaſon with the caſe at bar ; and by this conſtruction
the true intention, as well of the teſtator in his will, as of the
fad acts of parliament, without prejudice to any, is well ob-
ſetred: and there is a difference between the common caſe
of licence, and the caſe at bar. For if the King (e) licences
one to alien two parts of his manor of D. which is held of him
in capite, and he aliens the whole manor, he has not purſued
the licence, for by his alienation the whole manor paſſes;
which is not according to his licence: but when an ac of Par-
liament authorizes the owner of land held in capite to charge
two parts thezeof, which he could not do by the common law,
in this caſe, if he charges his whole land. it is merely void for
the third part, and therefore he has well purſued the authority
which the ſtatute has given to him, to charge two parts. So
fa man has the moiety of the manor of D. known by the name
of the manor of D. and the King licences him to alien the
motety of the manor and he aliens the manor, he has well pur-
ſued the licence, for in truth nothing paſſed but the moiety,
and ſo you will better underſtand the law, amongſt the vari-
ous opinions. Ob;ter in Flow, Comm. 68. b. and in Butler
and Baker's caſe.


And


(*) Co. Lit,
111. b.


(a) 5 Co. 115. a


(5) And. 3, 4.
Plowd. 564. a.
B. N. C. 486.

3 Co. 33 a. b.
Br. Tettam. 26.
N. Bendl. 49750.
pl. 88.

Dy. 150. pl. 86.
1 Leon. 76.

3 Leon. 29.
Jenk. Cent. 115.
Dyer 126.


(c) Plowd, 68. b.


() 7 Aff. pl. 1.
1 Roll. 84 5.
Plowd. 1 52. b.
Cr. El. 330.
Br, Eſtate 30.
Perk. ſect. 104.
Co, Lit. 42. a.
3 Bulſt. 194.


(5) 3 Bulſt. 194.


(e) Wing. Max.


12.
Lit. Rep. 66,67.
(d) Lit. Rep. 63.


Fitz. Arbit. 16.


March Arb. 172.


le) Lit, ſect. 66,


67.


Sir Ricn ARD PrxnaL “s Caſe. Part VIII.


And as to the ſecond point, it was agreed per totam cu
that he had an eſtate for life in the ſaid rent of 101. per ann.
1. Becauſe if it had been in a grant, the grantee ſhould have
it for life: for if a man by his deed grants a rent of x01. iſſu-
ing and payable out of all his lands quarterly at the uſual feaſts,
and for non-payment to diſtrain for the rent, and all the arrear.
ages, in that caſe the grantee ſhall have the rent (a) for life:
alſo in reſpect thereof, he ought to hold the (b) courts of all
his manors for his life, et officium et feodum ſunt concomitantia,
and he ſhall have the like eſtate in fee, as he has in the office,
But it was objeCted, that then the deviſee ſhould have alſo
100 ſheep and bullocks yearly for his life, as well as the rent:
quod fuit negat per tot” cur*, and that for two caufes : 1. The
ſecond (c) (Et) in the ſaid ſentence, disjoins and ſevers the
rent from the ſheep and bullocks ; as in the caſe ꝙ Ed. 4. 43.
b. where two were bound to ſtand to the arbitrament of I. S. 4
(d) omnib atttontb* perſonalibus et ſectis et querelis, this word
(perſonalibus) ſhall be referred to all: but if the words were,
de omnibus actionibus et ſectis et querelis, it ſhall be otherwiſe;
for there the laſt (et) disjoins guerelis from the whole firſt part
of the ſentence, and ſhall be taken generally, without any
reference to per/onalibus. So in the caſe at bar, when Sir
Richard deviſed 100 ſheep and 10 bullocks, and 101. the laſt
(4) disjoins the rent from the ſheep and 10 bullocks: 2.

heſe words (payable (e) quarterly) at the uſual feaſts, ought
to have reference to the rent, for 10 bullocks per ann. cannot
be delivered quarterly. And judgment was given for Ni-
cholas Moore the avowant.


BUCK:-


Part VIII. 86


BUCKMERE's Cale.


Mich. 7 Jacobi 1.


N a Formedon in remainder, brought by George Buckmere, 2 Brow:l. 274,
Oliver Fowler, William Buckmere, Chriſtopher Buck- 275: |
mere, and Nicholas Buckmere, againſt Robert Sayer, and
Urſula his wife, of a houſe in the county of Kent, of the na-
ture of gavelkind, the caſe was ſuch ; I homas Bole had ifſue
three daughters, Marion, Johan, and Catharine, and gave the
faid houſe to Marion, and the heirs of her body begotten ;
the remainder of one moiety of the ſaid houſe to Johan, and
to the heirs of her body begotten, and the remainder of
the other moiety to Catharine, and to the heirs of her body ;
and if the ſaid Johan ſhould die without iſſue, the re-
mainder of her moiety to Catharine, and to the heirs of
her body, with the like remainder for want of iſſue of
Catharine to Johan: and afterwards Marion diſcontinued,
and died without iſſue, & de eadem Mariond eo quod obiit
fe harede de corpore ſus exeunte remanſit jus (which proves
lhe diſcontinued, for otherwiſe it ſhould be rencmenta pre”
remanſ”) unius medietatis tenementorum præd' cum pertin' per
firmam, &c. pred? Fohanne Bile; et remanſit jus alterius
nedietatis eorundem tenementorum cum pertinentiis, per for
nam, &c. prefat” Catharing Bele, and afterwards Johan
died without ifſue, by which the right of her moiety
remained to the ſaid Catharine, and after the death of
Catharine, deſcendit jus integrorum tenementerum iſtis Geor«
bia, &c. and the tenants demurred in law on this ac-
count, becauſe the demandants demanded by one writ of
Firmedon ſeveral remainders where the demandants ought
Vol. IV, A A to


— ef


3
— 2 —— - —— —


AN :
1

4 oy

- -

£1
.

— k

4
1.14808
N k

1's


— ey — — —
. A 0 — — * —— = *
— - D "= EASE ED . — =
— — — * — 2 | = INN — — *
— — _ = 7 — — - —ä— — 2 4 *
. p .
*


ER <,
— b 8 A
— dts HE Cotes. wo — —ꝓEü— 2 — 4
2 — —
51 2 Pu f x" = — —


—


1 —
oy


= OED
— — 3 * 2 —
— 2


BuckMEeRE's Caſe. Part VIII.


to have demanded the ſeveral remainders by ſeveral writs,

And becauſe we muſt ſhew in what caſes the demandant or

plaintiff ſhall join divers cauſes of action in one and the

ſame writ againſt the tenant or defendant, it muſt be obſery.

ed, that there is a difference between actions real, and actions

perſonal, and between actions real which are founded on 2

title in the writ, and actions real merely founded upon a tort

or deforcement. Real actions, which are founded upon title

(a) P. N. B. 144. are, as ina writ of (a) eſcheat. Præcipe A. quod reddat B. 10
IIa Org. acras terre, &c, quas C. de es tenuit, & gue ad ipſum B. reverti
debent tanquam eſcaeta ſua, to quod pred” C. obiit fine pred.

(3) F.N, B. 208. So (b) the Ceſſavit, Præcipe A. quod reddat B. unum meſſuaginm
5 quod idem A. de eo ten” per certa ſervitia, & quod ad ipſum B. re-
verti debet, &c. eo quod idem A. in factend® ſervitid per biennium
jam ceſſavit. So the writ of ward, and the writ of meſne, and
the writs of Formedon in deſcender, remainder, and reverter,
(c) 2 Inſt, $00, Then ſuppoſe, that B. before the ſtatute of (c) Quia emptores
$01, K. terrarum, had by one deed enſeoffed A. of Black Acre, to
hold by fealty and 3d. and by another deed had enfeoffed him

of White Acre, to hold of him by fealty and 6d. and after-

wards A. had died without heir, B. ſhould not have one writ

(4) Br. Eſcheat of (ad) eſcheat of theſe two acres; for the writ ſhall ſay, Pre-
LS ell 2 cipe C. quod reddat B. duas acras, &c. quas A. de eso tenut,
Which ſhall be intended one entire tenure; and therefore in

ſuch caſe the demandant is driven to ſeveral writs upon the
two ſeveral tenures; and therewith agrees 21 H. 7. 39. b.
So, and for the ſame reaſon, upon a ceffer in ſuch cale the
lord ought to have (e) ſeveral writs of Ceſſavit; and there-
po with agrees 3 E. 3. 47. a. b. * 18 E. 3. Ceſſavit 20. () 10
* 18 E. 3. 48.b. Ed. 4. 1. b. & 2. a. (g) 10 Hen. 7. 24. a. So upon ſeveral
pomp aging . tenures the tenant ſhall have ſeveral writs of meſne againſtthe
22 „ Celwie melne, and ſhall not join them in one writ; and there with a-
Fitz, Ceſſavit 3. grees (/) 2 H. 5. 2. b. And one ſhall not have one writ of
G Br. Ceſſavit ward of the body and land upon ſeveral tenures, as it is held in
T)Fite.Meſn,6+ 6 E. 3. 48. a. b. 3 H. 6.53. 17 H. 6. Gard. 117. But a writ
of ward of land was founded upon two ſeveral tenures in 46

E. 3. tit. Brief 619. but there it is held, that if he had de-

manded the body, the writ ſhould have abated. Then ſuppoſe

B. by one deed gives the manor of D. to A. and to the heirs

(i) 2x H.7.39-b. of his body, and afterwards B. by another deed gives 50
Br. Eſcheat 13- acres of land to A. and to the heirs of his body, and al-


. . b. . * -
4 — gh terwards A. dies without iſſue, the donor upon theſe two


2 Inſt, 401, 402.


(e) F. N. B. 209.
d. Fitz. Ceſlavit


action 46. diſtinct gifts, ſhall not have one writ of Hermedon in re-
(SE. 3. 47. · b. verter, ſuppoſing Qued idem B. dedit prædict“ manerium e
10 E. 4. I. b. 2. a- a . . 3 /
10 H. J. 24. a. guinquaginia acras lerre cum pertinentiis eidem A. et quæ 4
Br. Ceſlav. 24, 42. pr fat” B. reverti debent, &c. no more than upon ſeveral feoti-
e RY ments, ut ſupra, and tenures reſerved, he ſhall have one
Cegvib 26. writ of (i) eſcheat, or one writ of (4) Cefſavit; both which
writs


> 9 £©A> A £@ oo oo eT © et aas as a> / a£#i os; a an as... A ̃²̃ .. a_sr ococoocoÞus car _.Ca. oc c-_


— —_
5 WY


LY g—__ BF 0


part VIII. Buckwekes's Caſe,


writs ſuppoſe, quod tenementa prædidta reverti debent. So of
two ſeveral diſtinct gifts to one, with ſeveral remainders over
to one, he ſhall not have one writ of Formedon in remainder,
nor the iſſue of ſuch a donee one writ of Formedon in de—
ſcender, for the foundation of theſe writs is the gift which is
diſtinct and ſeveral; and therefore in ſuch cafes, upon the
ſeveral foundations, there ought to be ſeveral writs founded,
But if land be given to a man, and to his ſiſter, and to the
heirs of their bodies iſſuing, in that caſe they are joint-tenants
for life, and have (a) ſeveral inheritances, /c. the brother one
moiety to him and to the heirs of his body, and the bþtter the
other moiety to her and to the heirs of her body; in that caſe,
altho' the inheritances were ſeveral, yet becauſe the founda-
tion was one, and at one time, and as out of one root, for
that reaſon the donor ſhall! have one writ of Fe, medon in the
reverter, and therein ſhali ſhew the gift as it was to the bro-
ther and ſiſter, &c. and conclude in the cloſe of the writ,
quia utergue eorum obiit ſine herede de corpore, &c. which words
rove that each of them had a ſeveral right; and fo is the book
adjudged in Roger Dardene's caſe, in“ 17 Ed. 3. 51.a. & 78.
a. b. & 18 E. 3. 39. a. b. which is all one caſe. So, if lands
be given to (5) father and ſon, and to the heirs of their two
bodies begotten, the remainder over in fee, and afterwards
the father dies without any iſſue but the fon, and afterwards
the ſon dies without iſſue, and a ftranger abates, he in the
remainder ſhall have one For medon in the remainder, although
the eſlates tail were ſeveral ; yet foraſmuch as well the ſeveral
eſtates in tail, and the remainder alſo depend upon one joint-
eltate in the father and ſon for their lives, and all begin at
one time, for this reaſon one Formedon in the remainder lies.
So in the ſaid caſe of (c) 17 E. 3. if land had been given
to brother and ſiſter, and to the heirs of their two bodies be-
gotten, the remainder over in fee, if the brother dies without
iſſue, now the ſiſter has an eſtate for life in one moiety, the
remainder over in fee, and for the other moiety an eſtate- tail,
the remainder in fee, and afterwards the filter has iſſue and
dies, and a ſtranger abates, now for one moiety the remainder
begins, and after the iſſue dies without ifſue, although the


(a) Co. Lit. 184.
a. 18 E. 3. 39.
a. b. 7 H. 720.
b. Br. Tail 9,
Br. Eftate 11.
Br. Deraianm. 13.
5 Co. 8. a.

1 Leon. 213.


* 2 Leon, 213.


(% Dyer 145.
pl. 64.
1 Leon. 213.


(c) 17 E. 3. 51.


a. 78. a. b.


remainder falls at ſeveral times, yet he in remainder ſhall


have one Formedon for both remainders, which depend upon
one and the ſame eſtate, come to one and the ſame perſon.


And fo is the book to be intended in (4) 31 Hen. 6. 14. b. (4) Fitz. Brief


where it is ſaid, a man may have one Formedon of divers gifts.
Vide 44 Ed. 3. tit. Tail 13. a good caſe, and 50 Ed. 3. tit.
Feoffments & Faits, 97. & 7 Hen. 4. 88.

A a 2 So


11 Js
Pourea 65. b.


eee 1 2
2 -
= Sa A — — "Ok ”


LS — —- — —
D —
—


— —


1 - —
Bs rr
my . —

3c —
8 ä „ |


_ * X -_
— rngren nes onthe — .


(a) 2 Brownl.


BuckMErE's Cafe, Part VIII.


90 it was (a) reſolved in the caſe at bar, that when the
whole is deviſed to Marion in tail, although the deviſor di.
vides the remainders by moieties, yet, when the whole hand
remains to Catharine, and all the remainders depend upon
one eſtate, and begin by deviſe at one time, the heirs of the
body of Catharine ſhall have one Fermedon in the remainder,
in the ſame manner as if the remainder had been limited to
Catharine and Johan, and to the heirs of their two bodies,
the remainder for default of iſſue of Johan to Catharine, and
to her heirs for ever.

& Carthew 454. But ſuch actions real, wnich are founded upon a tort or
deforcement, and do not comprehend any title in them, there,
the demandant may demand in one writ divers lands and te-
nements, which come to him by ſeveral titles : as if divers
manors deſcend to me from ſeveral anceſtors, and I am dis-
ſeiſed or deforced of them, I may have a writ of right, or a
writ of entry in the nature of an aſſiſe, or a writ of aſſiſe, and
comprehend all theſe rights in one and the ſame writ, becauſe
in theſe caſes no title is made in the writ. Vide L. 5 Ed. 4,
80. 12 Ed. 4. I. a. 17 Ed. 3. 52. 17 Aff. 10. 12 Ed. 3. Aff.
112. 22 Aſi. p. 52. 66. 7 Afl. p. 18. 7 Ed. 3. Afkile 138.
15 Ed. 3. Charge 9. 15 Aff. pl. 11. But if 1 bring a writ of
entry on a diſſeiſin done to my mother or aunt, coparceners
in fee- ſimple, the writ ſhall abate, for here title is made in
the writ, and it appears that there were feveral cauſes of
action, becauſe the title is by ſeveral anceſtors, and therewith

(3) Antea $7. a. agrees the book in (5) 31 Hen. 6. 14. b. and 43 Ed. 3. 17. a.

Vita, Brief 113. So if an eſtate-tail deſcends to two daughters eopatcenets,
and one enters into the whole, and the other has iſſue, and
ſhe who enters dies without iſſue, in that caſe the iſſue ſhall
have ſeveral writs of Formedon in the deſcender of one moiety
of the poſſeſſion of his mother, quam inſimul tenuit, and of
the other molety ot the poſſeſſion of his grandmother 3 and

ce] Fitz:Formed. therewith agrees (c) 43 E 3. 16. & 17,

24- And in perſonal actions the plaintiff may comprehend

5 n ſeveral wrongs, and ſeveral cauſes of actions, as one

2 E. 4. 23. action of treſpaſs for ſeveral treſpaſſes committed at ſe-

(% Fitz. Brief veral days, and in ſeveral places. Vide (ad) 31. H. b. 14.

(7) Fits. Treſp, b. (+) 8 Ed. 4. 5. a. & 44 Ed. 3. 24. 14 Hen. 8. 12. b. F.

116. N. B. 60. An action (f) of waſte upon ſeveral leaſes, ſor


F. N. B. 60. in the prohibition of waſte at the common law againſt
1. Cro. Jac. 330.


Popham 23. tenant in dower, &c. damages were only recovered, oy


275


— —


nn 1 — - 1 — - —


part VIII. Bock MER E's Caſe. 98


was in the perſonalty: ſo of debt (a) upon ſeveral (4) 31 H. 6. 14.
leaſes, d. Velv. 63.

Note, reader, as to the bringing of writs of Formedon, 42 Br. _
theſe differences: 1. If a remainder be executed in a writ Mo. 4 5
of For medon in the (b) deſcender, he ſhall never ſpeak of this Fitz. 1reſv. 116.
remainder, but the general writ of Formedon in the deſcender * Jac. 68.
ſhall ferve in that caſe, and he ſhall count of an immediate Brownl.86,87,
gift; for he cannot have a Formedon in the remainder, when (5) 1 Mod. Rep.
the remainder is once executed. But if a leaſe for life be Is 220.
made, the temainder in tail to A. the remainder in tail to F. N. 6, 219. a.
B. if A. dies without iſſue in the life of the tenant for life; b. d. Reg. Orig.
if B. be driven to his Fi:rmedon in the remainder, in his For- 244: 4.
nedon he ought to mention the remainder to A. although it
was determined and ſpent, as 1s aforeſaid. For the demand- |
ant in the F:rmedon in the remainder ought to make (c) men- 8 p
tion ot all the precedent remainders in tail, 8 E. 3. 19. a. b. LFy 8
38 E. 3. 26. a. b. +44 E. 3. 8. a. 30 E. 3. I. b. 11 H. 4. 39. Br. Formed. 14.
a. 18 H. 8. 4. F. N. B. 219. ide Regiſter 239. b. & 243.
b. & 244. a. brevia nunguam factunt mentionem de remanere
quando breve % 1n the deſcender. 2. If a man brings a :
Firmedin in (d) reverter or remainder as heir, the omiſſion of (% F. N. B. ac.
the eldeſt ſon who ſurvived the father, or the like in the pe- Fies, Ferthad oh,
digree, on the part of the donor, of him in the remainder,
ſhall abate the writ z but of the part of the donee, although the 2 *
donee had many iſſues in lineal deſcent inheritable to the eſtate 3.
tail, and who held the eſtate, the demandant need not name
any of the iſſues in the clauſe & gue poſt mortem; but ſhall
lay, & gue poſt mortem of the donee ad ipſum revert: debet,
e quad the donee died without iſſue ; and that for two rea-
ſons: 1. Becauſe the demandant is a ſtranger to the pedigree 9 Co. 6:
of the donee. 2. Becauſe if the iſſue ſhall be ſuppoſed by
the writ to die without iſſue, yet it may be that the eſtate-
tail is not ſpent, for the iſſue may have brothers, or cou-
ſins, inheritable to the donee, and the land ought not to re-
vert to the donor ſo long as the cſtate-tail continues. And
in ſome old written Regiſters the clauſe is, eo quod the
iſue died without iſſue. But the printed Regiſter, which
imitates the moſt ancient and moſt true precedents; &
quod poſt mortem cf the donee reverts debet, eo quod the
donee died without iſſue, and therewith agree 22 Hen. 6.
39. by the Juſtices, 4 Eliz. * Dyer 216. by the Juſtices, p.216 1236.
* 28 Hen. 8. Dyer 14, 16. Vide 18 Edw. 3. 42. 26
Ed. 3. 75. 25 Ed. 3. 44+ 42 Edw. 3. 20. 44 Edw. 3. 40.

| Aa 3 | 10 Ed,


.
* 3 4 2
27 <> - 64 — OE * *


" © LH +
——


N
—
2


n
- — -
PIR OTIS

4 2 * 1
— —


ET, Ei Ee.
« A 7 —


S o -— —
* 9 2 - r
* ws Baton - wb” Hat
OT IE


— A . 2 * 2 ;

py LD <4 „„ _ EY

pt —" — 2 3 mon” 22 a =
-S” HEEL — Tas


(a) — El. 842.
Ce. Car. 4358.
Cr. Jac. 412.
Hob. 5,52, 282.
F. N. B. 220. d.


( Hob. 51. 5 2.
F. N. B. 212. b.


o F. N. B. 2 12. f.


(c) Br. Form 37.


Bu cKMuERE's Caſe. Part VIII.


10 Ed. 3. 35 Ed. 3. dreit 30,47. 11 Ed. 2. Formedon 88, 50.
Regiſter 239. a. b. 3. In a Formedon in the (a) deſcender,
the demandant (becauſe he is privy, and ought to know his
pedigree and deſcent) ought to make mention of every one to
whom any right did deſcend; as after a diſcontinuance made h
the father, it the elder fon ſurvived his father, and died wich—
out iſſue, yet the younger brother ought to make mention of
him in a Formedon in the deſcent, otherwiſe, if the elder bro-
ther died without iffue in the life of the father: a fortiori he
ought to make mention of every heir in tail who held the eſ-
tate; that is, who was ſeiſed by force of the tail: but obſerve
alſo therein a difference; for if any of the heirs in tail ſurvive
their {athcr, and hold the eſtate tail, he ought to be named in
the writ fon and heir; but if he ſurvives, and dies before he
was ſeiſed, he need not name him heir, but may name him
ſon only, et quod poſt mortem pred” D et E. filit quſdem D. et
E. filit et heredis prada” D. etc. So is the writ when the el-
der ſon doth not enter, and when the younger fon enters and
is ſeiſed. Jide Regiſter 238. b. F N. B. 212. f. 10 E. 3.
49, 50. 44 E. 3. 21, 40. 4 E. 2. Formedon 48. 11 E. 2. ibid.
56. 46 E. 3. 9. 6 E. 3. 261. 8 E. 3. 379. 11 H. 4. 72. b.
4. In a Formedon in the d-ſcender, the demandant (b)
ought always to make himſelf fon and heir, or couſin and
heir to him who was laſt ſciſed by force of the tail, for a later
ſeiſin of any heir in tail after ſhall abate the writ. 2. Ile who
was laſt fei:ed ought to be made heir in tail to the donee, or
otherwiſe the writ is vicious, and it is not ſufficient that he be
yamed fon, for he may be fon and not heir. But the ſureſt
way for the demandant, is to make every one he names in the
writ to be ſon and heir in the writ, although they were never
ſeiſed by force ot the tail; and it is not material, although he
names them heirs, whether they were ſeiſed or not, and there-
by the demandant will be certain to make himſelf heir as well
to the donee per formam dont, as to him who was laſt ſeiſed.
And therewith agree (c) 22 H. 6 36. a. 8 Hen. 6. Formedon 4.
11 H. 6 20. 8 Ed. 3. 11. 10 Ed. 3. 49 27 Ed. 3 81. 31 Ed.
3. 29. 48 Ed. 3. 7. 49 Ed. 3. 21. Reg 238. F. N. B. 212.
And note, in the Formeden in deſcender there is the clauſe,
et quod peſt mortem, etc. and then the deſcent, and no clauſe,
de ea quid, etc. for that ſerves moſt convenient when
the eſtate tail is ſpent, which ſerves well in a Formeden
in the reverter and remainder, but not in deſcender, up leſs
in ſpecial cales, And fo by theſe diflerences, and the res-
| | 3 lon


part VIII. BuckuzRE's Caſe,


ſon of them, you will better underſtand your books. Note
in the caſe at bar, although the heirs of the body of Catharine
claim the remainder by deſcent, yet foraſmuch as Catharine
was never ſciſed in poſſeſſion of the eſtate tail, but only
of the remainder ; for this cauſe the writ ſhould ſay, remanerę
d:bet, and not, deſcendere debet ; for the writ ſhall never ſay,
that the thing ought to deſcend to one as ſon and heir,
if the anceſtor was not ſeiſed, by the rule in the Regiſter,
241. a. & b.


ꝙaa 4 FRAUN-


7 4 - "WIGS.
— is" et
. 1 7


. ©—_—
— 7


n
"IEEE Ae


N
1
5
|


2 Brownl. 277.
3 Bulſtr. 327.
Cart. 172.


1 Roll. 430,431.


s 6 Mod. 158.


Hardr, 133.


Part VIII.


FRAU NG E SS Caf


Mich. 7 Jacobi 1.


N a replevin between Richard Milner plaintiff, and Tho,
Fraunces defendant, which began Mich. 6 Facrbi, Ret.
2220, of his cattle taken at Bloxwich in the county of Stai-
ford, in a place called Newland, the defendant did avow the
taking of the cattle in the place where, which contained fix
acres, &c. becauſe it was his freehold, and ſo did avow for
damage feaſant“. The plaintiff in bar to the avowry plead-
ed, that one Richard Fraunces was ſeiſed of the ſaid 11x acres
in fee, and held them in ſocage, and 7 December 45 Elis.
by his will in writing (whereot he made Richard, Edward,
and James his ſons, his executors) deviſed them to John
Fraunces his eldeſt ſon tor the term of ſixty years, if the ſaid
John ſhould ſo long live, the remainder thereof to the ſaid
T. Fraunces for his lite, the remainder to the heirs males of the
body of the ſfaidJohn Fraunces, the remainder to the heirs males
of the body of the faid Tho. with divers remainders in tail to his
other ſons, the remainder to the right heirs of the deviſor: and
afterwards, 30 Jan next follow. the deviſor died, by which John
Fraunces entered into the ſaid 6acres, and was thereof poſſeſſed,
and 25 Mar. 5 Fac. demiſed the ſaid ſix acres to the plaintiff for
one year next enſuing, wherefore he put in his ſaid cattle, &e.
In anſwer to the bar of the avowry the ſaid T. Fraunces fait
| ng 3 tuat


part VIII. FrAunces's Caſe.


that the ſaid Richard Fraunces, the father was ſo ſeiſed, &e,
and made his will, as in the bar to the avowry is alledged.
And further, that the faid Richard Fraunces the father was
ſeiſed in fee of twenty acres of paſture in T'ibbington, and
of a houſe and five acres of land in Dorlaſton in the ſaid
county, and alſo of the ſaid fix acres, in which, &c. And
the laid Richard the father, after the making the ſaid will,
$ jan. 4.5 Eliz, by his deed of all the ſaid lands, did enfeoff
Richard Fraunces his ſon, and John Alport, and their heirs,
to the uſes and intents following, /c:/. to the uſe of Richard
Fraunces the father for his life; and after his death, of the
lands in '11bbington, to the uſe of the ſaid Thomas Fraunces
and his heirs 3 and of the lands in Dorlaſton, to the uſe of the
fad James Fraunces, his heirs and aſhgns ; and of the ſaid
lands in Bloxwich, in which, &c. to the uſe of the ſaid John
Fraunces for ſixty years after the death of the ſaid deviſor, if
the (aid John ſo long ſhould live; and after to the uſe of the
ſaid | homas for liſe; and after to the heirs males of the body
o: the laid John; and afterwards to the heirs males of the
bo of the ſaid Thomas, with divers other remainders in tail
to is other ſons ; the remainder to the right heirs of the feof-
for, with this provito in the deed : et ulterius per ſcript” pred”
(a) pr oviſum fuit, quod fi pred Johan Frauntys diſiurbaret
eund” Thumam Fraunces, vel pred' Facobum Fraunces vel hered'
vel aſſign” eorum, vel alicuj eorum, fc. Sic quad non poterint
quiete habere, tenere & gaudere talia terras, tenementa & herædi-
tamenta, qualia ipſe idem Richardus Fraunces pater conveiaſſet eis
& cuilibet vel alicui eorum, vel aliguam partem et parcellum hujuſ-
modi terrarum tenementorum & hereditamentorum, vel ft pred?
Jaban' Fraunces, executores adminiſtratores ſiue aſſign? ſui, &c.
non permitter* executores ipſius Rich Fraunces vel eorum aſſign?
quiete habere, removere, capere & aſportare emma & quælibet
bona & catalla ipſius Rich Fraunces patris que eſſent et remanerent
in tunc ſua domo manſionali, etc. vel facerent aliquam rem ad im-
pedendum vel deteriorandum intentionem ipſius Richard: Fraunces
patris concernen eadem in ejus ultima voluntate et teſlamento ex-
preſſa, quod tunc præd' uſus limitar” prefato Fohanni Fraunces et
beredib” ſuis ceſſarent et penitus vacui eſſent ad omnes intentiones 2
and afterwards, 30 Jan. 45 Eliz. Richard the father died, and
the ſaid John entered into the faid fix acres, and was thereof
poſleſſed, the remainder over as aforetaid ; and that the ſaid R.
the father, at the time of the ſaid feoff ment, did dwell in a houſe
in Bloxwich aforeſaid which is the mefluage mentioned in the
fad proviſo. And that the ſaid Richard the father was poſſeſ-
ſed of a bedſtead, a table-board, and a cup- board, as of his
proper goods, and died thereof poſſeſſed in the ſaid houſe ;


after


90


(a) Co. Lit.
203. b.

2 Brownl. 277,
Cart. 172.

Cr. Car. 129.

1 Roll. 430, 43ts


. —


o
"4
U
4
*


*
:
:
1 id 5
FB
1
{1 [
+ 4 1
q 1
' i | \
4 Y
1
vl 1
43 N
7
'%
1 8 [
[ -
FA
14 -
4 1
=
1 A
ha \
1 *
.
7 4
1
1
{ 4
+
3 \
v1 l
> 4 *
+ j
i ö
80 \ *
3
*
4
9
434
1
*
5
4
©, ”
mg
7 4
( n
- , \
18 ;
Lo |
*
1.
av
5
1
=
Y = ©
x Ul
17
_
*
* .


—̃ —


— — * —
1


1
2


= — 2
— *


2 - f -
DTD CEOS .


(a) Co. Lit.


218. a.


(>) Lit. 82. 2. b.
Co. Lit. 218. b.
219. a b.

Lit. ſect. 352.


(c) 11 Co. 82 b.
$3.2, 2 Co. 2 3. a.
72. a. V2. a.

4 Co 63. a.

1 Roll. Rp. 182.
Moor 18, 327.
2 Inf.146. Hub.
132. Pop". 193,
194,195. Latch.
269, 270. Bridg.
192. Dyer 47.
pl. 11. Plowd.
132. b. Cr, ac.
216. Co. Lit,
219 b. 220. a.
b. 2 Co. $1. a.b.
a. Co. Lit. 222.


FRAUNcEs's Caſe. Part VIII.
after whoſe death the ſaid John entered into the ſaid houſe


where the ſaid goods were, and took then, and was thereof


poſſeſſed; and the ſaid executors, 12 Feb 45 El. came to the
ſaid houſe, and there then would have taken and carried awa
the ſaid goods, and requeſted the faid John, ad permittendum
ipſos bona et catalla pred” capere et aſportare, predif' Jabum
raunces adtunc et 16" non permiſit ipſos execut” capere et aſpor-
tare bona et catalla pred” ſecund for mam et effettum pred jerip.
ti feo/Jamenti, ſed idem Fohin' ne ipſi bona et catalla præd' in ed
meſſuagio, ut prefertur exiſtent” caperent vel aſportarent fenitus
prohibuit et impedivit; by which the faid term of ſixty years
limited to the {aid John ceaſed z whereupon the ſaid I homas,
as in his remainder, entered, and was thereof ſeiſed for life,
&c. upon which the plaintiff demurred in law. And it was
objected on the plaintiff's part, that the ſaid proviſo was utterly
void to ceaſe the uſe limited by the faid deed to the ſaid John,
for nothing by the ſame deed is limited to him but for 60 years,
for inaſmuch as he took but a leaſe for years, the remainder
limited to his heirs males of his body, after the death of Tho-
mas did not velt in him, but remained in contingency : other-
wiſe if John had taken an eſtate for life, and the proviſo made
void the uſe and uſes limited to the taid John Fraunces and
his heirs, where no ſuch uſe was limited to him; and there-
fore the proviſo void: and proviſoes and conditions which go
in deſtruction and defeaſance of eſtates are odious in law, and
ſhall be taken ſtrictly, and ſhall not be conſtrued to make
void any other uſe or eſtate, which is not within the words
of the proviſo ; for, (a) conditio beneficialis que ſiatum conſtruit,
benigne ſecund verbot intentionem eſt interpretanda, odioſa autem
gue flatum deſtruit, ſlritte ſecund* verbor' proprietatem eſi acci-
prenda : as if a feoſtment be made on ſuch (5) condition that
the feoffce ſhall give the land to the feoffor, and to the wife of
the feoffor, and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten, the
remainder to the right heirs of the feoffor, if the huſband dies,
living the wiſe, the feoffee by the law ought to make the eſtate
to the wife, &c. as near the condition and alſo as near the in-
tent of the condition as he can make it (as Littleton holds, I.
3. cap. Condition, fol. 82.) /c1. to demiſe to the wife for term
of her life, without (c) impeachment of waſte, and after her
deceaſe to the right heirs of her huſband and her begotten, the
remainder to the right heirs of her huſband : fo Littleton faith
there, if the huſband and wife die before the deed made, &c.
And therewith agrees the book in (d) 2 H. 4. 5. by all the Jul-
tices, altho' it was ſaid, (e) 18 Aſſ. pl. u't. & 19 E. 3. Entry con-
geable 39. are contrary: but when conditions enure in deſtruc-
tion of eſtates, then they ſhall be taken ſtrict; as If a man


makes a feoffment in tee of certain lands, upon ani
that


(4) x Co.137. b. Br. Conlition 33. 2 H. 4. 5. b. Fitz. Condition 5. 11 Co. 83.
1 Jones 18 1. (e) 18 Aff, 18 2 Co. $0, a. 81. a. Br. Condition 105. Poltea 91.
a, b. 6 Co. 74. a. 1 Roll. 438.


part VIII. FRAUN C Es's Caſe. 91


that the feoffee ſhall not give the land to huſband and wife,

and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten, if the huſband

dies without ifine, and the feoffee makes a leaſe for lite to

the wife, without impeachment of waſte, &c. ut ſupra, it is

no breach of the condition, for it is taken ſtrict, becauſe it

extends to the deſtruction of the feoffment. So in the caſe at

bar, foraſmuch as the ſaid proviſo extends to the deſtruction

of a former uſe and eſtate, it ſhall be taken ſtrictly, and ſhall

not deſtroy another uſe by conſtruction, than that only to

which in words it extends. 'To which it was anſwered and

reſolved by the whole court, that it is true, that conditions

or proviſoes which will deſtroy former eſtates, ſhall be taken

(a) ſtrictly ; but in this caſe the words of the proviſo were (a) Co. Lit.
ſuſhcient to ceaſe the uſe limited to John for years, and the 275. x BIO, &
uſe limited to the heirs males of his body: for the words of oF

the proviſo are guod tunc pred” uſus limitati prefats Fohan'

Fraunces et hæredib' furs ceſſarent, and therefore if it be aſked

what uſes ſhall ceaſe ? the proviſo will anſwer, prædidti uſus :

if it be further aſked, to whom are predicti uſus limited? the

proviſo will anſwer, to the faid John, and to his heirs. And

if it be further aſked, what uſe expreſſed before in the inden-

ture is limited to John? the deed will anſwer, to John for ſixty

years. And what uſe beforementioned in the indenture to

his heirs? the deed will anſwer, a remainder to the heirs

males of his body: ſo theſe words (predicti uſus) by reference

to the uſes before expreſſed in the fame deed, make the words

of the proviſo to be ſufficient to ceaſe the uſe before limited

to the ſaid John, and the ſaid uſe before limited to his heirs

to ceaſe: and it is all one to ſay prædicti uſus before limited „

to his heirs, and to ſay the uſes before limited prædidtis here- (23.56 —
dibus : in both which caſes this word (prædicti) has as ſtrong 2 Co. 80. a.

a reference, as if the uſes before limited had been particularly 51: 2- 6 Co. 74.
recited in the proviſo; and verba accipienda ſunt cum effettu. . gy og deery
But note, reader, the ſaid books in (6) 18 Aſſ. pl. alt. & 19 tion 205.

E. 3. Entr. Cong. 39, are not contrary to Littleton, & (c) 2 1 Roll. 438.
H. 4. in the caſe aforeſaid, but are ruled upon another rea- 1 75 of 4 d.
fon, et hæc ſunt divarſa, et non adverſa, as it appears in the Br. 5 33.
Second Part of my Reports, in the Lord Cromwell's caſe, fol. Fitz. Condit. 5.
80. a. where the ſaid caſes are very well and at large explained; 8 >
and therefore the out ward ſemblance of diſcord between our 1 Jones 181.
books, in this and other caſes, doth ariſe from the ignorance of Antea go. b.
the inward underſtanding of the ſaid caſes, and of the true 8
reaſon and rule of them: for, for the moſt part, every 1 Ppt, 51 :
particular caſe is adjudged upon a particular reaſon, 2. It 16 E. 4. 10. b.
was reſolved, that denial by parol is not (4) any breach of the 1.0 OY
condition, but there ought to be ſome act done; as after re- Cr. El. .
queſt made by the executor to (e) ſhut the door againſt them, Jac. 679. Cr. El.


or to lay his hands upon them, and to have reſiſted them, or ſuch (3% Rel. 28.


like 431. Cr. Jac. 679.


(a) 2 Ventr. 139.


6 Mod. 150.

See Cro. Jac,

$67: Garret and
aylor.


(4) Co. Lit.
217. 8. Plowd.
34. 8. 135 2. b.
Fitz. Af. 161.
Br. Condit. 101.
10 All, 15.
Plowd. 482. b.
10 E. 3. 39. b.
40. 4. Hob. 35.


(c) 2 Brounl.
277. Goub, 70.
Moor 404.
Owen 66.

Co. Lit. 206. b.
1 Roll. 454.
Orig. (6 <1 de-
murr, la.)


Orig. (que il ne
Ju: ſu fer a de-
mu. 14.)


FRAUNCE8S˙s Caſe, Part VIII.


like acts, ſo that by reaſon of ſome ſuch act, he would not
ſuffer them to take or carry away the ſaid goods, according to
the faid proviſo. And Coke C J. held, that in ſuch cafe it
is not ſufficient to ſay, quod pred” fohan' non (a) permiſit pred
executores, Fc, quiete habere, remov' et cap” pred” bona, or that
pred” Fohan' imped illos, Sc. but he ought to alledge a ſpe-
cial breach, by reaſon of ſome ſpecial diſturbance or interrup-
tion in ſuch caſe by ſome act, to which the other party may
have a certain anſwer, and upon which a certain iſſue may be
taken, of which the jury may inquire, and the court may
judge if it be a ſufficient breach of the proviſo, or not; and
he cited the book in 10 E. 3. 40. Roger Fannell's caſe, in an
aſſiſe brought by John againtt Rog. Fannell of 20 acres of
land, and upon nul tort pleaded, the aſſiſe found this ſpecial
matter, that Rog. Fannell leaſed by deed to John the plaintiff
a houſe and the 20 acres ot land tor 12 years, and in ſuret

ol his term made him a charter of feoffment (5) upon ſuch
condition, that if the leflee was diſturbed within the term,
that he could not have the tenements till the. end of the term,
that he ſhould hold the tenements to him and his heirs tor
ever: and further ſaid, that John was diſturbed of the tene-
ments by which he was ſeiſed by the manner, and prayed the
opinion of the court, and this finding was infuſlicient for
three cauſes. 1. Becauſe the recognitors have found a dif-
turbance, and have not found by whom the diſturbance was
made; for if the diſturbance was made by a ſtranger, without
the aſſent or procurement ot the leſſor, the leſſor ſhall not loſe
his inheritance. 2. They have not ſound how the diſturb-
ance was made, but generally, that the leſſee was diſturbed;
ſo that the cou:t cannot judge that it was a diſturbance to
make the leilor Jole his inheritance, 3. Whether and
how livery and ſeiſin were made, &c. and therefore it appears
in the book, that Shard aſked the recognitors, I. By whom
he was diſturbed ? 2. How he was diſturbed ? 3. If livery
was made on both charters? 'T'o the firſt they anſwered by
the leſſor. Jo the ſecond by the ſale, /c. by feoffment in
fee. To the third, on both. And thereupon John recovered
quod nota, a very good caſe to this purpoſe. And he cited allo
the caſe in 35 H. 6. Barr. 162, (c) the maſter of St. Catha-
rines leaſed three houſes to one by indenture, on condition


\ thathe ſhould not permit or harbour any lewd woman within


the ſaid houſes, if he be warned thereot by the maſter, or his
ſervant, and if he did not turn her aut within fix weeks alter
warning by the maſter or his ſervant that then the maſter and
his ſucceſſors ſhould re-enter; and it was ſhewed, that the
leſſee did ſuffer ſuch a lewd woman to dwell there, wheretore
ſuch a ſervant of the maſter gave warning to him, (that he
ſhould turn her out); and he would not, but ſuffered the ſaid
woman to continue there by the ſpace of fix weeks, where-
{ore the ſaid maſter ouſted him, &c. To which the _

105


mm fy 5 R©&


2c wXww 43% — — = —


FRAU Nc Ezs's Caſe,


part VIII.


ſuid, that after the ſaid warning given, the maſter commanded
the ſaid le wd woman to be in one of the ſaid houſes, and to
continue there for fix weeks after; without that, that ſhe was
continued there by the ſaid plaintiff: and it was held by the
whole court, that that replication was not good, becauſe the
indenture is, quod non permittat any lewd woman to continue
there: as if I am (a) bound to you, to enfeoff you of one acre
of land before ſuch a day, within which time you diſſeiſe me,
that is not to the purpoſe, for you had no colour to enter upon
me, and I may re-enter and make the feoſfment. So in the
fame caſe, that maſter had no colour to put the Jewd woman
into poſſeſſion ; for which cauſe the leſſee might well put her
out. So it is no plea, without (5) ſpecial matter ſhewed :
wherefore the leſſee ſaid, that the matter ouſted him and with
force, and againſt the will of the leſſee, put her in poſſeſſion,
and made her continue there with force, againſt the leſſee's
will, for fix weeks, &c. and that was held a good.plea. And fo
it is in the caſe of the feoffment before, ſuch ſpecial pleading
is good, /c. that he diſſeiſed him, and kept it with force, ſo
that he could not enter : and theſe are the words, word for
word of the ſaid caſe : a fortiori in the caſe at bar, the ſaid
prohibition by words, without an act done by which the ex-
ecutors cannot take the goods, is no breach of the proviſo. 3.
I was reſolved, that although the defendant in the caſe at bar
had particularly ſhewed a ſpecial act of diſturbance againſt the
words of the proviſo, that yet the faid John ſhould not loſe
his term; for none ſhall loſe any eſtate, or intereſt which he
lawfully has, without ſome act or default in himſelf; and
therefore in this caſe, foraſmuch as John the eldeſt ſon was a
ſtranger to this feoſfment he ſhall not loſe his eſtate, without
(c) notice given him of the proviſo, and of the will of his
father. (4) Quad noflrum oft fine facto ſive defetiu noflro amitti
ſeu ad aitum i ansferri non poteſl, And the opinion of (e) Pop-
ham, C. J. in (/) Mallorie's caſe, in the Fifth Part of my
Reports, f. 11 3. that the (g) feoffee of land, or (%) bargainee
of a reverſion by decd indented and inrolled, thall not take
advantage of a condition for non-payment ot rent reſerved
on a leaſe, on demand by them, without (i) notice thereof
given to the lefſee; nor ſhall the leſſor by acceptance of
rent, diſpenſe with a collateral condition, broke by the leſ—
ſee, without notice given to the leſſor, as it is adjudged
in Pennant's caſe in the Third Part of my Reports, 64. a. b.
and the judgment Hil. x Jac. in treſpaſs between Beconſhaw
Plaintiff and dou hcote and others defendants, in this court,
that if the eſtate ot the lord of the manor ceaſes by limitation
of an uſe, and the ute and eſtate thereof are transferred to
another, who demands the rent of a copylolder, who de-
mes to pay it him, it is no forfeiture, without notice given
to the copyholder of the alteration of the uic and eſtate; and

another


92


(a) Cr. El. 694,
374 Moor 404.
Owen 65, 66.
Co, Lit. 406. b.
1 Roll. 453.


(b) Cr. Jae. 679.
Cro. El, 374.


(c) 1 Mod. Rep
87. Palm. 164.
2 Bulſt. 144,277.
1 Jones 390.
Cart. 93, 172.
Winch. 116,118.
3 Keb. 19. Matt.
Par. f. 246.

3 Med. 28, 29.
(4) Cro. Argu-
ment. 19.

(5) . Jac, 193.
(Heart. 93.
172. Cr. Jac. 617.
Mod. Rep 87.
Palm. 207, 210.
Godb. 162.
Bridgman 130.

5 Co. 113. a. b.
g) Co. Lit.
215. b. Cr, Jac,
392. 5 Co. 113.
2, b.

(] Co. Lit.
215. b. Cr. *
292,476. 2 Roll.
Rep. 143. 5 Co.
113. b. Poph.
165 Latch: 15.
Palm. 434-

3 Keb. 19.

(i) Mod. Rep.
58. Polm. 434
Moor 426. 450.
Cr, El. 553•572,
528. 2 And. 90,
91. Hard. 48.
Dock. pl. 189.
(+) Co. Lit. 594.


(a) Co. Lit. 59. a.


(5) 3 Bulſtr.
326. 1 Mod.
Rep. 88. Cart.
93. Palm. 434.
Dyer 354. pl.
32. Cr. El. 299.
13 Co. 2.

2 Keb. 316.

2 Bulſtr. 143.
1 Roll. 449.

3 Keb. 19.

Cr. El. 298.
Co, Lit, 211. .


(c) Cr. Car. 133.
4 Co. 82. b.

2 Bulſtr. 144.
Cr. El. 97.
Owen 7,

Cr. Jac. 391.
(4) Br. Condit,
124. 4 Co. $2.b.
March. Arbitr.
191,


(e) Br. Det. 169,
Br. Notice 13.
Cr. Jac. 391.
March. Arbitr.
191.


(Cf) Cr, Jac. 146.


Br. Notice. 12.
18. Fitz. Arbit.
15. Br. Arb. 15.
Br. Arb. 37.
March. Arb. 190.
4 Co. 82. b.
Hutt. 81.


FRAUN CIS s's Caſe. Part. VIII.


another judgment in this court, that the bargainee of a mangr
by deed indented and inrolled, ſhall not take advantage of 2
forfeiture of (a) a copyholder for denial of payment of rent to
him, without notice given to him of the. bargain and ale, were
all affirmed for good law by the whole court. And this agrees
with the reaſon of Barrough's caſe, Mich. 18 & 19 El. Dy.
(5) 354. a. where uſes were limited by fine under this proviſo,
" That if B. at any time during his life, &c. do pay, ot
© cauſe to be paid to the ſaid A. 201. at the ſont- ſtone within
* the cathedral church of Sarum, that then, &c. the conuſees
« in the ſaid fine, and their heirs, ſhould ſtand ſeiſed to the
© uſe of B. and his heirs.” And it was reſolved by Wray,
Dyer, and Manwood, that tender of the 201. at the place, ac-
cording to the proviſo, in the abſence of A. and no notice of
the time of the tender before given by B. to A. is not good in
law to make the firſt uſes ceaſe, for the uncertainty of time
during the life of B. and therefore in ſuch caſe notice of the
time of the tender ought to be given, although he to whom
the payment ſhould be made was party to the conveyance;
but in ſuch caſe, when B. will make a tender, he ought to
give notice to A. that he will at ſuch time make the tender to
him, and require him to be there to receive it; and then if
he, at the time appointed makes a tender, although A. abſents
himſelf, it is a good performance of the proviſo to make the
uſes ceaſe. But if a man binds himſelf in a bond to perform
the award of J. S. and J. S. makes an award, the obligor
ought to take (c) notice thereof at his peril, for he has bound
himſelf thercto : and in ſuch caſe no notice is requiſite to be
given to him, as itis held in (4) 1 H. 7. f. 5. a. b. A man was
bound in a bond, on condition that if he ſhould account
before an auditor by the obligee to be aſſigned, when he ſhould
be by him required, of certain receipts of the manor of D.
and ſhould pay him the arrearages that ſhould be found on
his account before the ſaid auditor ; that then the obligation
ſhould be void: in debt on that bond, the defendant pleaded,
that the plaintiff did aſſign him ſuch an auditor, before whom
he accounted, and that he has been always ready to pay the
arrearages found before the auditor, if the ſaid auditor had
given him notice; and it was held by the whole court, in (e)
18 E. 4. 18 a. & 24 a. that the plea was inſufficient, for inat-
much as he has bound himſelf thereto, he has taken upon him
to take notice at his peril; and there Brian, Vavaſor, and
Cateſby Juſtices agreed, that in the faid caſe of arbitrament,
the obligor ought to take notice at his peril, and ſo they ſaid
it was adjudged in the ſame King's time in the King's Bench;
and ſo is the law without queſtion, againſt a ſudden opinion in
f)8E.4. 1. a. Sontaa good difference, when a man binds
himſelf to do or perform any thing to be awarded, &c. by a ſtran-

| ger,


part VIII. FRAUNCES's Caſe,


ger, he thereby takes upon himſelf to take notice at his peril
of all things incident thereunto for the ſaving of his own
bond: but, as appears in the principal caſe, and in the other
caſe beforeſaid, the law will not compel one to take (a) notice
of acts done between ſtrangers, or of any uncertainty on
pain of forfeiture of his eſtate, or intereſt; but in ſuch caſe
notice ought to be given to them who are to have the loſs. 4.
It was reſolved, that although now it (5) appears, that the title
by which the plaintiff claims in his bar to the avowry was
utterly deſtroyed, (for the plaintiff claims by the will of Rich-
ard Fraunces the father, which will as appears was after-
wards countermanded by the ſaid feoffment, which the avowant
after pleads, and which the plaintiff confeſſes by his demurrer)
yet the plaintiff ſhall have judgment becauſe his count 1s good,
and the avowant in the replication to the bar of his avowry
has done two things ; one, he has deſtroyed the title which
the plaintiff made by the will; the other, he has given the
laintiff another title, /c:/. to have the land for ſixty years, &c.
y force of the uſes declared on the feoffment. So that upon
the (c) whole record it appears (upon which the court ought
to judge) that the plaintiff has a lawful term in the land; and
that the defendant has taken his cattle wrongfully, and there-
fore judgment ought to be given againſt the avowant, and for
the plaintiff, although the title which he made for himſelf


was deſtroyed. And judgment was entered - accordingly.
[See Skinner 181. ] | |


 FDWARD


93


(a) Cr. Jac,
146. Cr. Car.
577. Winch. 118.
1 Mod. Rep. 87.


(%) Wing. Max.
238. 7 Co. 25. a.
Poſtea 120. b.

3 Co. 52. b.

11 Co. 85. b.
Hob. 14.


(c) Winch, 7 Jo


Part VIII.


EDWARD FOXs Caſe


on
Hil. . # an

iS .

la

ne

2 Brownl. 291. JN a writ of Second deliverance by Eliz. Smalman widow, b)
. 5 and Tho. Powys defendant, which began in Commun ar
e 266. anco 7 Fac. Rot. 1546. the defendant demurred on the bar ()
to the avowry ; and on the record the caſe was ſuch, Edward al

Fox ſeiſed of four acres of meadow, fifty acres of paſture, and V

ten acres of underwood, in Snitton in the county of Salop, ſi

anno 21 Eliz. demiſed them to Gilb. Smalman, and to the ſaid 1

Elizabeth his then wife, and to Thomas Smalman, habendum tc

to Gilbert and Elizabeth for their lives, the remainder to the it

ſaid Thomas for his life, yielding during their lives, the yearly t

rent of four marks, at the feaſts of the Annunciation of our t

Lady, and St. Michael the Archangel, by equal portions; u

and afterwards the ſaid Gilbert Smalman died; after whoſe e

death, ſcilicet 20 Sept. anno 3 Regis Jacobi, the ſaid Edward a

Fox by indenture, for the conſideration of 501. pred' by the ſ

®*rMod. Rep.87. ſaid Ihomas Powys to the Edward Fox paid, * demiſed, + t
T Rol. Rer. 73. granted, ſet, and to farm let to the ſaid Tho. Powys the faid l
tenements aforeſaid ; to have and to hold to the ſaid Thomas (

Powys from the day of the date of the ſaid indenture, for the c

term of ninety-nine years, yielding and paying therefore dur- |

ing the ſaid term, to the ſaid Edw. Fox and his heirs, the yearly {

rent of 40s, atthe feaſts of the Annunciation of our Lady, and !

St. Michael the Archangel, or within twenty-eight days after

every of the ſaid feaſts, and that the ſaid Eliz. did never attorn. (

And the only point in this caſe was, whether the ſaid demite

and grant to T. Powys ſhould amount to a bargain and fale, ſo [

that the reverſion with the rent ſhould paſs to T. Powys by the


(a) Cr, El, 166, ſtat, of uſes without any (a) attornm, And it was adjudged ” :
| this


Epward Fox's Cafe,


this demiſe and grant upon conſideration of 501, amounts to
a (a) bargain and fale for the ſaid years; for in caſe when a () 1 Mod. Rep,


freebold or inheritance ſhall paſs by deed indented and inroll-
ed, it need not have the preciſe words of bargain and ſale;
but words (&) equipolent, ot which do tantamount are ſuffi-
cient 3 as if a man (c) covenants in conſideration of money to
ſand ſeiſed to the uſe of his ſon in fee; if the deed be en-
rolled, it is a good bargain and fale, and yet there are not
any words of bargain and ſale, but they amount to ſo much,
2s it is held in Bedel's caſe, in the Seventh Part of my Reports,
40. b. So if a man for money (4) aliens and grants land to
one and his heirs, or in tail, or for life, by deed indented
and enrolled, it amounts to a bargain and fale, and the Jand
ſhall paſs without any livery and ſeiſin. And at the common
law before the ſtatute of (e) 27 H. 8. of uſes, if a man for mo-
ney bad aliened and granted lands to one and his heirs, &c.
by that the uſe of the land ſhould paſs, for it is a full bargain,
and all this was unanimouſly agreed ; but foraſmuch as the
(f) intention of the parties is the creation of uſes, (g) if by
any clauſe in the deed it appears, that the intent of the parties
was to paſs it in poſſeſſion by the common law, there no uſe
ſhall be raiſed ; and therefore if any letter of () attorney be
in the deed or covenant to make livery of the lands, according
to the form and effect of the deed, or other ſuch like, there
it ſhall not paſs by way of uſe ; quza, verba intentioni non e con-
tra debent inſervire ; & verba debent intelligi, ut aliguid operen-
tur. But in the caſe at bar, the intent of the grantor may be
well collected, that he did intend that the grant ſhould take
effect 3 and ſhould not depend upon any ſubſequent
attornment; for the rent reſetved thereupon was payable pre-
ſently; and thereſore it will be reaſonable, that Tho. Powys
the leſſee ſnould have the rent reſerved on the firſt leaſe for
lives preſently; and that he cannot have before attornment
(which peradventure will never be made) and e potius be-
cauſe the ſaid Tho. Powys has no means to compel the firſt
leflees to attorn; but if it ſhall paſs as a bargain and ſale, it
ſhall be preſently executed by the ſtat. of 27 H. 8. for there
needs no (i) inrollment in this caſe, becauſe but a term for
years paſſes, and no eſtate of freehold, and there needs no
(+) attornment, becauſe it is executed by the ſtatute.
by this conſtruction every one will have remedy for that which
he ought to have. Vide Sir Rowland (1) Heyward's caſe, in
the Second Part of my Reports, fol. 35. b.


94


177. 1 Ventr.
138. 2 Ventr.
318. 1 Roll.


Rep. 73 2Lev. 9.


2 Brounl 291,


292.2 Inſt. 272.
1 Jones 206.


1 Siderf. 26,

(5) 2 Inſt, 672,
2 Ventr. 318.
(c) 2 Brownl.
291, 292.

2 Iuſt. 672.

x Ventr. 138,

2 Ventr, 318,
7 Co. 39 b.

11 Co. 24. b. 2 54.
Cro. Bl. 394.
Cart. 138, 146.
Palm. 214, 215.
Jenk. Cent. 289.
(4) 2 Inſt. 272.
(e) 27 H. 8. c.
10.


Heco. Lit. 49.2.
2 Inſt. 272.


Hardr. 49.
1 Co. 100. a.


ed 2 Inſt, 272.
5) 2 Brownl,
291. 2 Inſt. 272.
2 Roll. 787.
Co. Lit. 49+ a»


(i) 2 Co. 36. »
2 Roll.Rep,204»
2 Inſt, 671.


And 2 Browal. 292.


(k) 2 Co. 36. a.
6 Co. 68. b. 69. a.
2 Browal. 291,


292.
0 1 Brown. 142.


2 Brownl. 292. 1 Jones 206. 2 Roll. 787. Hob. 159. Poph. 95. 2 Anderſ. 202, 203. 2 laſt. 671,


97. Yelv. 123, 124. 1 Mod, Rep. 176.


Po. IV. Bb


MATTHEW


Schoen 546.
Co. nt. 149. b.
Num. 29. Swinb.


(4) 1 Brownl.
Cro. Jac. 459


Part VIII.


MaTTHEw MANNING's Caſe


Trin. 7 Jac. 1.


1 debt for 200 marks by William Clark plaintiff, and
Matthew Manning adminiſtrator of Edward Manning
deceaſed, upon plene adminiſtravit pleaded, the jury gave a
ſpecial verdict to the effect following, which plea began Mich.
4 Jacobi, Rot. 1829. Edward Manning the inteſtate, anno 30
Eliz. was poſſeſſed of the moiety of a mill in Clifton, in the
county of Oxford, for the term of fiſty years, of the clear
yeariy value of 40]. and afterwards the ſaid Edw. Manning,
30 Eliz. made his will in writing, and thereby deviſed his
indenture and leaſe of the farm and mill in Clifton, and all
the years therein to' come to Matthew Manning after the
death of Mary Manning my wife, (which farm and mill
my will is, that Mary Manning my wife ſhall enjoy during
her life) conditionally; that the ſaid Matthew ſhall not de-
mile, ſell, or give the ſaid leaſe, but to leave it wholly to
John his ſon, &c. © In the mean time my will and meaning
„is, that Mary Manning my wife ſhall have the uſe and occu-
< pation both of the farm and mill, 8&c. during her natural life:
« yielding and paying therefore yearly to the faid Matt. Man-
ning, &c. during her natural life 7 |. at the feaſts of St. Mi-
c chael the Archangel, and the Annunciatton of our Lady,” and
made Mary his wife his ſole executrix, and died ; Mary took
upon her the charge of the will, and had not ſufficient to pay
the debts of the ſaid Ed. Manning above the ſaid term; but
ſhe entered into the ſaid farm and mill, and paid to Mat. Man-
ning the yearly ſum of 71. according to the fait will; and
(a) ſaid, that if ſhe died, the ſaid Mat. Manning ſhould have
the farm and mill aforeſaid z and afterwards the faid Mary;
16 years after the death of her huſband, died inteſtate, after
whoſe death the ſaid Mat. Manning entered into the ſaid 2

an


part VIII. Mar TRW Manntnc's Caſe,


and mill, and was thereof poſſeſſed prout lex poſtulat; and af-
terwards adminiſtration of the goods of the ſaid Edw. by the
ſaid Mary not adminiſtered was committed to the ſaid Matth.
and that none of the profits of the ſaid farm and mill, which
accrued in the life of the ſaid Mary came to the hands pf the
ſaid Mat. beſides the ſaid 7 I. yearly as aforeſ. And the doubt
ol the jury was, if the reſidue of the ſaid term in the ſaid farm
and mill ſhould be aſſets in the hands of the ſaid Matth. But
| conceived on the trial of the iſſue at Guild- hall in London,
that the deviſe to Matt. was good, and that there was ſufficient
* aſſent to the legacy, by the ſaid payment of the rent of 71.
But yet upon the motion of the plaintiff's council, I was con-
tented that the whole ſpecial matter ſhould be found as is a-
foreſaid. And the caſe was argued at the bar, and at divers ſe-
veral days debated at the Bench, and prima facie Walmſley Juſt.
conceived, that the deviſe to Matt. Manning after the death of
the wife was void, for the wife having it deviſed to her during
her life, ſhe had the whole term, and the deviſor could not
deviſe the (a) poſſibility over, no more than a man can do
by grant in his life ; for that which the teſtator cannot do
by no advice of counſel in his liſe, (5) the teſtator, who is
intended to be inops conſiliz, ſhall not do by his will; but
by grant in his life he could not grant the land unto the
wife for her life, the remainder over to another, for by the
grant the wife had the whole term at leaſt if ſhe fo long
lived, and a poſhbility cannot be limited by way of remain-
der; and altho' the later opinions in the caſe (where a man
poſſeſſed of a leaſe for years, deviſes it to one for life, the
remainder to another) have been, that the remainder was
good; yet he ſaid that the old opinion, which hath more rea-
ſon, as he conceived, was, that the remainder in ſuch caſe
was void, 28 H. 7. (c) 7 Dyer, Baldwin and Shelley, that the
remainder is void, Englefield contrary. (4) 6 E. 6. 74. acc. by
Hales and Montague: 2 E. 6. tit. Deviſe, Brook 13. that the
remainder is void, for the deviſe of a chattel for one hour is good
for ever. But Coke Ch. Juſt. Warburton, Daniel, and Foſter
contrary, that the deviſe was good to Matt. Manning ; and five
points were by them reſolved. 1. That Matt. Manning took
it not by way of remainder, but by way of an (e) executory
deviſe, and one may (/) deviſe an eſtate by his laſt will in
ſuch manner, as he cannot do by any grant or conveyance in
his life, as if a man is ſeiſed of lands in fee held in ſocage,
and deviſes, that if A. pays ſuch a ſum to his executors, that
he ſhall have the land to him and his heirs, or in tai}, or for life,
&c. and dies, and aſterwards A. pays the money, he ſhall have
the land by this executory deviſe, and yet he could not have
it by any grant or conveyance executory at the common law;
but it ſtands well with the nature of a deviſe; ſo in the caſe


1 Bulftr, 191, 192, Kc. 1 And. 122. c. 170. () Swinb. 145. 2 Brownl, N
167, Sanders and Corniſh. 3s 309


B b 2 ©


95


1 Lev, 28.


(a) Cro, EI. 0s
217. Cro, Jac.


198.
(5) L Co, 85. b.


(e) Dy. 7. pl. 8. g.
1 Bulſtr. 191.
192. Mo. 758.
Poſtea 97. a.
Wentw. 334.
Palm. 334.

(4) Dy. pl. 18.
1 Bulſtr. 195.
(e) 2 Bulſtr. 28.
1 Jones 15.

1 Lev. 290.

1 Mod. Rep. 52,
115. Moor 636,
748, 758. 4 Co.
66.b.2Roll.Rep,
218, 220, 427.
Cr. El. 796. Cr.
Jae. 198, 460,
461 Cr.Car.230.
B. N. C. 209.


10 Co. 47. 3. b.
POR. Eos 135.


2 Brownl. 173.


a3 H. 8.
r. Chat. 23.


See Cro, Cr. 166,


}
3
14
I.

|
|


-
i
:
l


l

1 =

| |
l,
|
|
L


- -— > — —


828 —— —— 2 —


—


Pp —— ——
* 2 —


— *
— —
— 2 £* of

Z 5 n_—


— 22 —


- = 4 *
22 ˙ ü . — — — 8 _ 8
a — — —— — Z==a%


Mar THEW ManxinG's Cafe. Part VIII.


at bar when the wife dies it ſhall veſt in Mat. Manning as by
an executory deviſe, as if he had deviſed that after his ſon has
paid ſuch a ſum to his executors, that he ſhall have his term;
or that after the death of A. that B. ſhall have the term; or
Dyer 74+ that after his ſon ſhall return from beyond the ſeas, or that
A. dies, that he ſhall have it, in all theſe caſes and other like,
upon the condition or contingent performed, the deviſe is
good, and in the mean time the teſtator may diſpoſe of it, and
therefore in judgment of law, (a) ut res magis valeat, the ex-
prog 2 ecutory deviſe ſhall precede, and the diſpoſition of the leaſe,
1 Mod. Rep. 10g. till the contingent happen, ſhall be ſubſequent, as in the caſe
at bar it was, and ſo all ſhall well ſtand together; for when
he made the executory deviſe he had a lawful power, and might
well make it: and afterwards in the fame will he had lawful
ower, and might well deviſe the leaſe till the contingent hap-
(5) Swinb. 135. pened, and therefore it is as much, (5) as if the 3 had
deviſed, that if his wife died within the term, that then Mat.
Manning ſhould have the reſidue of the term; and farther de-
viſed it to his wife for her life. 2. The caſe is more ſtrong,
becauſe this deviſe is but of a chattel, whereof no Præcipe
lies; and which may (c) veſt, and revelt at the pleaſure of the
deviſor, without any prejudice to any. And therefore if a
man makes a leaſe for years, on condition, that if he do not
ſuch a thing, the leaſe ſhall be void, and afterwards he grants
the reverſion over, the condition is broken, the grantee ſhall
(4) 3 Co. 64. b. take (4) benefit of this condition by the common Jaw, for the
4b. On. 1 leaſe is thereby abſolutely void: but in ſuch caſe if the leaſe
214. b. 219 a, had been for (e) life, with ſuch condition, the grantee
Plow. 135- b ſhou'd not take benefit of the breach of the condition; for
29% yy Cr. El. a freehold (of which a Præcipe lies) cannot ſo eaſily ceaſe;
49, 950. a 0 2 .
1 K l. 473,474. but is voidable by entry, after the condition broken, which
1 Leon. 61. cannot by the common law be transferred to a ſtranger;
. v. and therewith agrees () 11 H. 7. 17. a. & Br. Conditions
Plowd. 135. b. 245. 2 Mariæ, by Bromley the ſame difference. 3. There is
(f) 3 Co. 65 a. no difference when one deviſes his term for life, the re-
mainder over; and when a man deviſes the land, or his
8 leaſe, or farm, or the uſe (g) or occupation, or profits of
March. 106. bis land; for in a will the intent and meaning of the de-
Poſtea 96. b. viſor is to be obſerved, and the law will make conſtruction
8 of the words to ſatisfy bis intent, and to put them into ſuch or-
nf © 10 Co. 47. der and courſe, that his will ſhall take effect. And always
2. b. Plowd.524- the (+) intention of the deviſor expreſſed in his will, is the beſt
8 1. 190, Expoſitor, director and diſpoſer of his words: and when 2
Co. Lit. 4. b. man deviſes his leaſe to one for life, it is as much as to ſay,
(b) Plowd. $22. he ſhall have ſo many of the years as he ſhall live, and that
IF, gt g. ik he dies within the term, that another ſhall have it for
Co. Lit. 124 b. the reſidue of the years; and although at the beginning it be


Cro. Car. 9. uncertain how many years he ſhall live yet when he _


(a) 1 Co. 76. 2.


(%) Swinb, 135:


wank


MartTutw Mannixc's Caſe,


Part VIII.


is certain how many years he has lived, and how many years
the other ſhall have it, and ſo by a ſubſequent act all is made


certain. 4. That, after the executor- has aſſented to the firſt
deviſe, it lies not in the power of the firſt deviſee to (a) bar
him who has the future deviſe, for he cannot transfer more to
another than he has himſelf. 5. In many caſes a man by his
will may create an intereſt, which by grant or conveyance at
the common law he cannot create in his life; and therefore
when Sir Will. (6) Cordell Maſter of the Rolls, deviſed his
manor of Melford, &c. in the county of Suffolk, to his execu-
tors for the payment of his debts, and until his debts ſhould be
paid, the remainder to Edward his brother, &c. and made
George Carey and others his executors, and died, and after his
death the debts were paid; and his wife demanded dower,
and one queſtion amongſt others was moved, what intereſt or
eſtate the executors had? for if they had a freehold, then the
wife ſhould not have dower, and if they had but a chattel de-
terminable upon the payment of the debts, then ſhe ſhould be
endowed ; and this caſe was referred to Anderſon Ch. Juſt. of
the Common Pleas, and Francis Gawdie Juſt. of the King's
Bench, before whom the caſe was at ſeveral days debated
Paſch. 36 Eliz. and I was of counſel with the executors ; and
it was reſolved by them, that the (c) executors had but a chat-
tel, and no freehold ; for if they ſhould have a freehold for
their lives, then their eſtate would determine by their death,
and not go to the executors of the executors, and ſo the debts
would remain unpaid ; but the law adjudges it a particular in-
tereſt in the land, which ſhall go to the executors of the execu-
tors, as aflets for payment of his debts. But if ſuch eſtate be
made by grant, or conveyance at the common Jaw, the law
will adjudge it an eſtate of freehold, and ſo a more favourable
interpretration is made of a will in point of intereſt or eſtate
to ſatisfy the will of the dead for the payment of his debts,
than of a grant or conveyance in his lite; which he may en-
large, or make other proviſion at Eis pleaſure. And ſo was it
reſolved in the beginning of the reign of Q Elizabeth, that
where a man had iſſue a daughter, and deviſed his lands to
his executors for the payment of his debts, and until his debts
were paid. and made his executors and died, the executors
entered, the daughter married, and had iſſue and died, and
aſter the debts were paid, it was reſolved in the caſe of one
Guavarra, that he ſhould be tenant by the curteſy. Lide 3
H. 7. 13. 27 H.8. 5. 21 All. p. 8. 14 H. 8. 13.

Note reader, it has been of late oſten adjudged according to
theſe reſolutions, ſc. in Weldon's (4) caſe, Plow. Com. in Com-
muni Banco. In Paramour's (e) caſe, Pl. Com. in the K.'sBench,
Mich. 26 & 27 Eliz. in a writ of () error in the K. 's Bench,
on a judgm. given in the Com. Pleas, the caſe was ſuch, Tho.

B b 3 (a) Amner


(a) 10 Co. 47. 4.
b 52. 2. b.

Dy. 74. pl. 18.
140. pl. 41 Cr.
ac, 460, 461,

oor 748.
2 Brownl. 173.
Cro. Car, 293.
1 Bulſtr. 194.
3 Bulſtr. 123.
1 Roll. 620.
(5) Co. Lit. 4a. .
Cr, El. 315,316.
1 Jones 25.
1 Roll. 829, 8 30.
Raym. 136, 137.
1 Sid. 224.
2 Bulſtr. 273.
Aleyn 47.
1 Lev. 170.


(e) 1 Roll. 130.
Co. Lit 42. a.
Aleyn 47.

Cr, El. 315,316,


(4) 2 Rrownl).
309. Plow. 516,
$19. 2 Leon. 9a.
3 Leon. $9.

(e) 2 Brownl,
309. Plowd. 539,
540. 2 Leon. 92.
3 Leon. 89.
(f) 2 Leon. ga.
3 Leon. 89.

Ge db. 26.

1 And. 60.

1 Roll. 612.


*
7
5

Cl

6

*

"1

=

I

1
1

..

=.

*

4

0 »
[
1

3
7
3

"=

(
4
=
-
2
=

£ *

= 1

=

e

N
_
£
'v
=
=
4 *
4
1
bs -
F
. 2
:

N
=
7
|

n
=

Fi I
1 i
bl

*

4 *

*


(a) Jenk. Cent.
264 Moor 758.
1 Bulſtr. 192.

1 Roll. 612.

2 Leon. 92.

1 Leon. 92.

Co. Lit. 351. a.

Godb. 26.

4 And. 60, 61,


» Co. Lit-351-2,


(5) 1 Roll. 612.
2 Leon. 92.

2 Leon, 92.
Godb. 28.

1 And. 61, 62.
Jenk. Cent. 264.
Cro. El. 796.
(e) Antes 93. b.


1 Bulſtr. 192.


2 Bulſtr. 23.
March. 106.
Godb. 26.


Swinb. 135.


10 Co. 47. 4. b.
Flowd. 524. a.
Cra. El. 190.
(4) 1 Roll. 937.
1 Bulſtr. 192.

2 Leon. 93.

1 And. 61, 62.
(e) Foſtea 143. a.
Roll. 778. Mo,
573. Dy. 363. pl.
24. Cr. El. 278.
Cr. Jac, 246.

5 Co. go. b. ſenk.
Cent. 264. Vel v.
180. 2 Leon. 92.
2 Leon. $9, 90.
Codb. 27, 28.
Foilca 143. a.


MaTTHEwW Mannixc's Caſe. Part VIII.


(a) Amner brought an Ejeone firme againſt Nich. Lodding-
ton on a demiſe made by Alice Fulleſhurſt for ſeven years of
certain houſes in London, and on not guilty pleaded, the
Jury gave a ſpecial yerdict. Hugh Weldon was ſeiſed of the
ſaid houſes in fee, and 24 H. 8. demiſed them to Tho. Pier.
point for 99 years, who by his will in writing 1544. deviſed
his ſaid leaſe in theſe words, „ deviſe my leaſe to my wife
„ during her life, and after her death I will it go to her chil.
« dren unpreferred,” and made his wife his executrix, and
died, his wife entered and was poſſeſſed ratione doni & legationis,
and married with Sir T ho. Fulleſhurſt, and afterwards 2 & 3
Phil. & Mar, Beſtwick recovered againſt Sir Tho. 140],
debt in the Com. Pleas, and by force of a Heri facias directed
to Altham and Mallory Sheriffs of London the ſaid “ term was
ſold to N. Loddington the now defendant, and afterwards the
judgment againſt the ſaid Sir Tho. F. was reverſed in a writof
error in the King's Bench, et guod ad omnia que amiſit ratione
iudicii pred” reſtituatur, and afterwards Alice the wiſe and exe-
cutrix died, Alice Fulleſhurſt being then the only daughter who
was unpreferred, entered, and made the leaſe to the plaintiff
T. Amner. And this caſe was often argued at bar by the Ser-
jeants in the Common Pleas, and at laſt by the Judges, and in
this caſe three points were by them reſolved. 1. That the faid
(4) executory deviſe of the leaſe after the death, of the wiſe


to the daughter unpreferred, was good; and there is no dif-


ference when the term, or leaſe, or houſes, (c) and when
the uſe, or occupation, &c. 1s deviſed, and that in all theſe
caſes the executory deviſe is good. 2. That the ſale either by
Ahce the wife, or by the Sheriff on the Fieri facias, aſter the
wiſe was poſſeſſed as legatory, ſhould not (4) deſtroy the exe-


cutory deviſe, altho' the perſon to whom the executory deviſe


was made, was then uncertain, as long as Alice the wiſe lived;
for the ſaid Alice the daughter might have been preferred in
her life, and then ſhe ſhould take nothing, ſo that ſuch exe-
cutory deviſe which has dependence on the rſt deviſe may
be made to a perfon incertain,and this poſſibility cannot be de-
feated by any ſale made by the firſt deviſce, &c. 3. I bat the
ſale by the Sheriff by ſorce of the Fieri facias (e) ſhould ſtand,
altho' the judgment was after reverſed, and the plaintiff in the
writ of error reſtored to the value, for the Sheriff who mace
the ſale, had lawful authority to ſell, and by the ſale the ven-
dee had an abſolute property in the term during the life of
Alice the wife; and altho' the judgment, which was the war-
rant of the Fieri facias, be afterwards reverſed, yet the ſale
which was a coliateral act done by the Sheriff, by force of
the Fer; factas, ſhall not be avoided ; tor the judgment was,
that the plaintiff ſhould recover his debt, and the Fer!
facias is to levy it of the defendant's goods and chattels,
by force of which the Sheriff fold the term which the

| 7 delendant


Part VIII. MArTHREW ManxixG's Caſe.
defendant had in the right of his wife, as he (a) well might,


97


(a) Co. Lit,


and the vendee payed money to the value of it. And if the 351. «.
fale of the term ſhould be avoided, the vendee would loſe his * fea 177. a.


term, and his money too, and thereupon great inconvenience
would follow, that none would buy of the Sheriff goods or
chattels in ſuch caſes, and ſo execution of judgments (which
is the life of the law in ſuch caſe) would not be done. And
according to theſe reſolutions judgment was given in the Com-
mon Pleas ſor the plaintiff, and in the King's Bench upon a
writ of error the caſe was often argued at the bar before Sir
Chriſtopher Wray, and the court there, and at length the
judgment was affirmed, and ſo the ſaid three points were ad-
judged by both courts: and by theſe latter judgments you
will better underſtand the law in the books, in which there
are variety of opinions. 37 H. 6. 30. 33 H. 8. Br. tit. Chattels


33. 2 E. 6. tit. Deviſe. Br. 13. 28 H. 8. (5) Dyer 277. Plow. (Dy. 5. pl. 8. 9,


Com. in Weldon's and Paramor's caſe, &c. Quia judicia poſ- ＋ * 95. a.
. \ .7 Bulft. 191, 292,
teriora ſunt in lege fortiora. 283
Wentw. 334.


BASPOLE's


Palm. 334


—


—


6 —— wo — .


* p- =
8 —
. *
=


— e ˙ . RS


* —
r ̃ ͤ— . p ⏑—— 2. ooo * :
— * bs p__ . — 1 1 * 1 — =


_ * —
— —


2 Brownl. 309,
310. Cr ſac. 28 5,
236. 1 Bulſtr.
144, 145.

See 1 Salk. 71.
6 Mod. 35


B ASPO L E's Caſe.
Hil. 7 Jacobi 1.


WI FREEMAN brought an action of debt on
a bond of 251. bearing date 9 Aprilis an. b Jac,


againſt John Baſpole ; the defendant demanded oyer of the
condition, which was, That if the within bounden John
% Baſpole, &c. ſhall well and truly ſtand to, abide, fulfil,
„ and keep the award, arbitrament, order, rule, judgment,
and final determination of Francis Theobald, Gent. indif-
ferently named, elected, and choſen, as well on the part
and behalf of the ſaid John Baſpole, as of the ſaid William
Freeman, for to order, judge, rule, and final determina-
nation to make of all matters, ſuits, debts, duties, actions,
and demands whatſoever had, made, or depending between
* the ſaid John and William from the beginning of the world
© until the day of the date hereof, ſo as the ſaid award, order,
and final end be made and given up under the hand and
6 ſeal of the faid Francis Theobald, to either of the ſaid par-
« ties, at or before the feaſt of St. James the Apoſtle, next
« enſuing, that then this preſent obligation to be void ;” and
pleaded, that the arbitrator nullum fecit arbitrium, Sc. de d
ſuper præmiſſis in conditione pred” ſpecificat'. The plaintiff re-
plied, that the arbitrator 25 Juni, an. 6 Reg. nunc, by his
writing, made an order and award between the ſaid William
and John, de et ſuper pr emiſſis prædict' modo et forma ſequentibus,
viz, that whereas a ſuit was depending betwcen the {aid John
Baſpole and William Freeman, for a debt due by William
Baſpole, father of the ſaid John Baſpole deceaſed, to Robert
Freeman, father of the ſaid William Freeman deceaſed, which
* debt was 20 l. to be paid by 7 years then paſt to the ſaid
ob. Freeman. and now due to Will. Freeman, as adminiſtrator
of his father, which debt the ſaid J. Baſ pole, pro bona conſiderat
5 E* 2 | , | * , : ts promiled


RC ² A k 11 ˙— ]


Part VIII. BasporLt's Caſe. 98


ptomiſed to pay to the ſaid Will. as upon good proof appeared
to the arbitrator; that the ſaid J. Baſpole ſhould pay to the
ſaid W. Freeman, in conſideration of the ſaid debt long due,
and for his great coſts in that part ſuſtained, the ſum of 221.
and that after he requeſted the ſaid J. Baſpole to pay the faid
ſum of 221. which he refuſed, &c. upon which the defendant
demurred in law. And two objections were made againſt this
arbitrament : 1. Becauſe the arbitrament was made of (a) the (a) 1 Sand. 325.
one part, and not of the other, as in 7 H. 6. 40. b. that one ! Roll. Rep. 1.
party ſhould go quit of all actions had by the other againſt — — Jac.
him; and nothing is ſpoken of the actions which he had 355, 447, 7
againſt the other, and therefore void. 2. It doth not appear 664- Cr. El.go4.
that this matter of which he makes the arbitrament, was the 7H. 6. 40, 41. &


. ; . Hob. 49. Fits.
matter only which was between them, for the ſubmiſſion is Se,


general of all actions and demands, (b) / as the ſaid award be, Br. Arbitrem. 17.
&c. So that if he doth not make the award of all matters in Ph. 134.


i : 5 : " 1 Leon. 72, 71.
controverſy, the award is void. To which it was anſwered 1 Roll. 3


and reſol ved, that as to the firſt, the award was ſufficient (c) Dy- 386. pl. 39.
and good; for here the award is as well of the one part as of (?) ©*: El. 838,


. 2-0 239, $58.
the other, for the one receives money, and the other is dif- Connor,
charged of the debt, and of his promiſe to pay it, and is not 285, 355, 578.


like the ſaid cafe of 7 H. 6. for there one would be diſcharged 2 =
of the actions, and the other would receive nothing in ſatis- 5


; . Noy 62.
faction thereof. Vide (d) 22 E. 4. 25. b. As to the ſecond —— 58,


objection it was anſwered and reſolved, 1. That it appears by 112. 2 Browal.


the award that it was made, (e) de præmiſſis pred” in condi- T's 5


tione pred” ſpecificat', which words imply, that he had made 257. 1 Roll.
an arbitrament of all that which was referred to him, and ſo Nep. 437.


ſhall it be intended until the contrary be ſhewed and alledged * e
by the other party; for when the ſubmiſſion is general of all 1 Sand. 32, 33.


actions, &c. (/) generale nibil certi implicat, and therefore it * Sid. 282. Hur.


may well ſtand with the generality of the words, that there 8 cee


was but one cauſe depending in controverſy between them; 4 Leon. 94.
but where the ſubmiſſion is of (g) certain things in ſpecial, (e) Pyer 350,


and with a proviſo or condition, that the award be made, de n


4 . A I 45. H. b. 49»
premiſſ”, &c. or words which tantamount, there the arbitrator 1 Roll. 253.


ought to make the award of all, otherwile it is void. But if : Brownl. 58.


divers things in ſpecial are ſubmitted (+) without ſuch con- patter wot!
ditional concluſion, the arbitrator may make the award of 310. Cro. Jac.


any of them. And as it is of divers particular things, ſo it 447- 448.


is of divers particular perſons, And therefore if two on 1 on
the one part, and one on the other part ſubmit themſelves, (c) 1 Sid. 252.


the arbitrator may make an arbitrament between one of the Hut. 9. 1 Roll,


two of the one part, and the other of the other part, an- REP. 437.


. 0 : Hob. 19T+
it will be good. 2. Although there were many matters Cr. El, 839,858,


in controverſy; yet if one only be (i) ſignified to the arbitra- Er. Jac. 200,


tor, he may make an award of that, for the arbitrator is 78,878, 664.


{a 2 a . ; „Cr. Car, 216
in lieu of a Judge, and his office is to determine ſecund” 217. ;


allegata et probata, and the duty of the parties who are (f) 2 Co. 33. b.
grieved, and know their particular griefs, is to ſignify their : Roll.Rep.360,


3 Keb. 41
cauſes 2 Sid. 9


(eg) Cr. El, 33 .
558. Hob. 49. Hardr. 45. Dy. 242. pl. 52. March. Arbitre, 183, 184, 185. Cr. Jac. 200, 355.


4 Leon, 94. (+) Cr. El 839. Cr. [ac, 200 664. Dyer 242, b. Hob. 49. (i) Cr. Jac.
Hob. 49. Merch. Arbitrem. 180. : eee n


— EIFSx” VAST AE > — _—
—_— _ — —
. \ — =p


<——


— 2 x A —


— — * * *
* — ERS TIS STE © - - ot.
Sy


- - — ü ˙.1- Z


(a) 6 Co. 7. a,


Hard. 128.
Co. Lit. 103. a.
® x74 El. cap. 7.


(5) Cr. Jac. aoo.


2 Brownl. 210,
211. Hob. 287.


Hutt. 37, 38.


BASPHOLE's Caſe, Part VIII.


cauſes of controverſy to the arbitrator, for they are privy to
them, and the arbitrator a ſtranger, and each ought to do that
which lies in his knowledge; and if other conſtruction ſhould
be made, many arbitraments might be avoided ; for one
might conceal a treſpaſs committed, or other ſecret cauſe of
action given him, and ſo avoid the award, Et expedit reipublice
(a) ut fit finis litium. And this is like Cullamor's caſe on the
* ſtatute of Bankrupts, in the Second Part of my Reports,
Fol. 25 & 26. b. which provides, that equal diſtribution ſhall
be made of the bankrupt's goods between all the (5) creditors,
but that is, (as it is there reſolved) to be intended of thoſe who
will come in and ſignify their debts. And hereby you will
better underſtand your books in 39 H. 6. 9. 22 E. 4. 25.
19 H. 6. 6. b. 2 R. 3. 18. 4 Eliz. Dyer 216. 8 Eliz. Dyer
242.


Ou


Pa


I!


Sir RICHARD LECHFORD's Caſe.
Hil. 7 Jac. 1.


* an ejectment in the King's Bench by Thomas Undrell,
plaintiff. and Briſtow Elſey, defendant, on a demiſe made
by Will. Copley, 2 N. anno 2 ac. Reg. of a houſe, and 20
acres of land, &c. in Lee in the county of Surry, for the term
of one year; the defendant pleaded, that R. Lechford, Knt.
was ſeiled of the tenements in which, &c. in his demeſne as
of fee, and leaſed to the defendant for his life, and that Will.
Copley diſſeiſed him, and made the leaſe to the plaintiff, and
that the defendant re-entered, &c. and the plaintiff replied
and ſaid, that the tenements in which, &c. are, & a tempore
jus, Cc. were parcel of the manor of Sherwood in Lee
aforeſaid, whereof Henry Lechford, Eſq. was ſeiſed, and that
the ſaid tenements in which, &c. are, & a tempore cujus, c.
were demiſed and demiſable, &c. by copy of court roll, &c.
And that the ſaid Henry Lechford at the court of his manor,
anno 2 Fliz. granted the ſaid tenements to TI ho. Copley,
father of the ſaid Williain Copley, to have and to hold to him
and his heirs, by copy of court-roll, &c. And afterwards
the ſaid Thomas Copley died ſeiſed thereof of ſuch eſtate,
which deſcended to the ſaid William Copley his ſon and heir,
the leſſor, &c. the eſtate of the ſaid Henry Lechford in the
ſaid manor the ſaid Sir Rich, Lechtord, Knt. now has, who
entered upon the poſſeſſion of the ſaid William Copley the fon,
and ouſted him of the tenements, in which, &c. and demiſed
them to Briſtow Elſey, as is aforeſaid, upon whom the ſaid
William Copley re-entered and demiſed them to the plaintiff,
Kc. Lo which the defendants rejoined and confeſſed, that the
tenements in which, &c, were parce] of the manor, and de-
miſed and demiſable, &c. and the grant by copy made 5
the


99


Carth. 42, 44+


Cr. Jac, 226,
227. Cro. Jac.
101. Whitton
and Williams
the ſame point,


() Cr. Jac. 226.


(3) Cr. Jac. 226.


* * ——
n 4
nne


—


*
at — —


un — -


a ms”
— . — =


oo = *


Antes 44, &c.


2 7 —


(c) Co. Lt. 59. a.
Bridgm. 52.


J 0 * Sr
>


(d) Carth. 74


Sir Rienaxb Lecnrorp's Caſe, Part VII,


the ſaid Thomas Copley, and the deſcent to William Cops
ley, prout, &c. But farther he ſaid, that within the faid ma.
nor there is, et a tempore cujus, etc, was ſuch a cuſtom, that
if any cuſtomary tenant of the ſaid manor dies ſeiſed of any
lands or tenements, held by copy, &c. in fee-ſimple, &c.
that every heir of ſuch tenant ſo dying ſeiſed, ſhall pay a rea-
ſonable (a) fine for his admittance to be in full Court of the
ſaid manor by the Lord or his Steward impoſed and aſſeſſed;
and farther within the faid manor there is another cuſtom
a tempore cujus, etc. that if any copyhold tenant, ſeiſed of
any lands or tenements held by copy, &c. of the ſaid manor
in fee- ſimple dies thereof ſeiſed, and his heir doth not come at
the next Court of the ſaid manor, and claim the ſaid tene-
ments, and pray to be admitted to them, &c. then a (4)
public proclamation ſhall be made in full Court that the ſaid
heir come at the ſame Court to claim the ſame lands, and to
pray to be admitted, and ſo at two other Coutts following of
the ſaid manor, the like proclamation ſhall be made; and if
ſuch heir at any of the ſaid Courts in which proclamation hall
be ſo made, comes not to claim the ſaid tenements, and pray
to be admitted to them, then the lord of the manor has al-
ways uſed and accuſtomed to ſeiſe them into his hands, as for-
feited to bim; and pleaded, that three proclamations were
made at three ſeveral courts, &c. according to the cuſtom;
and the ſaid William Copley, fon and heir of the ſaid Tho-
mas Copley, came not to any of them to claim the ſame lands,
and pray to be admitted to them; wherefore the ſaid vir
Richard Lechford then and yet lord of the ſaid manor, ſeiſed
the tenements aſoreſaid, in which, &c. as (c) forfeited to
him, and leaſed them to the defendant, as aforeſaid. To
which the plaintiff ſaid, that the ſaid Thomas Copley, primo
Tutti, 27 Eliz. died, as is aforeſaid, ſciſed of the faid tene-
ments, after whoſe death the tenements aforeſaid, in which,
&c. (d) deſcended to the ſaid William Copley, as aforeſaid;
and that at the time of the death of the ſaid T homas Copley,
and at the time of the ſaid ſeveral proclamations, the ſaid Wil-
liam Copley was reſident at Bruxels beyond the ſcas, ce
quatuor maria, et ibi per totum tempus remanebat, and there for
all the ſaid time remained until the firſt day of September,
anno 1 Jacobi Reg which day he returned from Bruxels atore-
ſaid, into England; and that immediately after his return
to Lee, aforeſaid, then having notice, and not before, of the
death of the ſaid Tho. Copley, the ſaid Wm. 30 Sept. 1 J..
came to the ſaid Sir Rich. Lechford, then lord of the ſaid ma-
nor, and prayed to be admitted to the tenements aforeſaid, in
which, &c. and offered the ſaid lord any reaſonable fine for bis
admittance to them, which the ſaĩd lord utterly refuſed, &c. upon


which the deſendant demurred in law; and it was adjudget
tha


ſ
2
e
{
[
[
t
t
I
{


! ß, ˙ ³ a. ee


part VIII. Sir RicnaRDY Lzchronp's Caſe, 100


that this cuſtom and non · claim ꝰ ſhonld not bar him, who * Cr. Jac. 226,
was beyond fea (extra maria) at the time of the proclama- Cro. Jac, 101.
tions made, of his inheritance ; becauſe he who is out of the |
realm could not have (a) knowledge by intendment of law of (a) Cr. Jac.226
the death of his father, nor of the proclamations made, to
warn him to come to. claim his inheritance, and pray to be
admitted to it. And it appears by the ſtatute De modo levandi
fines, made (b) 18 E. 1. that a fine levied of lands in the (5) 2 Toft. 570,
Common Pleas, is as high a bar, and of as great force, and 5**
of ſo high nature in itſelf, that it bars not only thoſe who are
parties and privies to the fine and their heirs, but all other
people of the world who are of full age, out of priſon, of

memory, and within the four feas the day of the fine le-
vied, if they do not make their claim within the year and day,
c. And it appears alſo by the ſtatute de donis conditionalibus,
made (c) 13 E. 1. upon which it was concluded, that if the (e) co. Lit. 260. a.
ſublimity of a fine, which is ſo high a bar, and of fo great 2 * 331, 332,
force, and of fo puiſſant a nature, and which hath ſuch ſo-
lemnity in fo high a court of record, ſhall not bar him who is
out of the realm of his right; 4 fortiori proclamations made
in a baſe court in a private corner, ſhall not bar him. So
judgment final in a writ of (4) right in the Common Pleas (% Co.Lit. 254,
ſhall bind all ſtrangers, if they make not their claim within 1
the year and day after the judgment and execution; and yet
the common Jaw excepts infants, thoſe who are out of the
realm, or are impriſoned, &c. and therewith agree 5 E. 3.
222. and 7 E. 3. 335. that the year and day ſhall be account- 52
ed after the (e) execution, for by the tranſmutation of the poſ- (+) x Co. 96. b.
ſeſſion, the country has notice of it. Jide 4 E. 3. 46. & 11 97-*
R. 2. Eſcheat 13. Plow. Com. 356. And the reaſon why a wan
tecovery in a writ of right where the trial was by battle or
grand aſſiſe, was final to all ſtrangers, is, for the grand no-
tice that men have of battle, and of the trial by grand aſſiſe,
their proceedings and performance are with ſo notorious, fa-
mous, and public ſolemnities, and if ſuch recovery with ſuch
ſolemnities ſhould not bar him who was out of the realm, nor
infants, nor a man nen ſane memoriæ, nor a man in priſon; a
forttori cuſtom and proclamations in a private court of a manor
ſhall not bind them. And the law in theſe caſes was ground-
ed upon great reaſon; for he who is out of the realm, in another
country, cannot by intendment of law have notice of things
done within this realm; an infant has not underſtanding, nor
can know his right either to follow it by entry, or action; ſo of a
man non ſanæ memor” who wants reaſon and ſenſe to make a claim;
ſo of him who is impriſoned who by judgment of law ought to be


in ſal” ) & art? cuſtod ſe. ſalv? as to the party at whoſe ſuit (f) 3 Co. 44. a.
14rd. 30.
| 2 Inſt. 381.


Dalt. Sher, 147. Cr. Car, 466. 1 Roll. 807, 3 laſt, 35. Co. Lit. 260] a. g Co. 87. b.


*


a


(a) ꝙ Co. 37. b.
Co. Lit. 259. a.
Plowd. 360. a.
(65) Lit. ſect. 438.
Co. Lit. 259. b,
Lit. 102. b.

H. 6. 38. a. b.

itz. Default 1.
Br. Default 33.
Plowd. 360. a.
(c) Hob. 9 LL
Plowd. 360. a.
Co. Lit. 262. b.


(d) 9 Co. 140. b.


(e) 1 Roll. 567.
Plowd. 360. a.
Hob. 95.


® Mod. 221,
&c.

1 Show. 317, 83.
Salk. 386.
Comb. 118.
Lutw. 765.
ser. Jac. 131.


(z) Co. Lit.
262. b.
Lit. ſect. 441.


(b) Co. Lit. ſect.
440.


(i) Lit. ſect. 437.


( Plow. 372. a.


Stk Rrenanp LecarorD's Caſe: Part VIII.


he is impriſoned, becauſe he ought to be impriſoned fo ſtrong
that he may not eſcape ; and ara, in reſpect he ought to be
kept cloſe, without conference with others, or (a) intelligence
of things abroad; and he ought not to go out of the priſon to
make his claim. And that is the reaſon that a recovery (4)
by default againſt him in a real action ſhall not bind him, but
he ſhall reverſe it by error, as it appears in 5 Ed. 3. 50. b.
4 Ed. 2. Diſceit 51. Lit. 102. b. Nota, Yeader, that a (h
feme covert is not mentioned in any of the ſaid acts, but was
bound at common law by non- claim, becauſe ſhe had a huſ-
band who might make it, and that was one of the reaſons that
the ſtatute of 34 Ed. 3. c. 16. ouſted non-· claim; but the ſta-
tute of 4 H. 7. c. 24. excepts (4) feme coverts who are ſtran-
gers to the fine, ſo that ſhe makes her claim within five years
after the death of her huſband. And at the common law, men
out of the (e) realm, infants, men non ſane memorie, and in
priſon, who were not bound to make claim within the year
and day, were perpetually for them and their heirs exempted
from making claim. And therefore it was reſolved, that the
ſaid cuſtom in the caſe at bar is ſo to be intended, that it ſhall
bind him who doth not make his claim, &c. if he be within


the realm, * of full age, of perfect memory, and out of priſon ;


for no cuſtom by the law can extend to bar thoſe, who by
judgment of law are not bound to make claim. But it was re-
ſolved, that if William Copley had been within the realm at
the time of the firſt proclamation, and afterwards (f) gone
out of the realm, that the proclamation ſhould bind him, al-
though he be extra guatu? maria, at the time of the other pro-
clamations, for he ſhall not defeat the lord of his fine or for-
feiture by his own act. Yideg H. 7. 24 a. and the reaſon of
Lit. /:6. 3. fol. 104. a. was well obſerved, who having put the
caſe of non-claim of him who is out of the realm that it ſhall
not hurt him in the caſe of fine, he ſaith as follows, by greater
reaſon, &c. (g) that a diſſeiſia and a deſcent, which is mat-
ter in fact, ſhall not ſo much grieve him who is ſo diſſeiſed
when he was out of the realm at the time of the diſfcifin, and
alſo at the time that the diſſeiſor died ſeiſed, but that he may
well enter notwithſtanding the deſcent; upon which two
things were collected. 1. That as at the common law, if a man
was within the realm at the time of the ſine levied, aud within
the year went beyond the ſeas he ſhould be bound: ſo if a man be
diſſeiſed, and afterwards goes beyond the ſeas, a deſcent caſt al-
terwards ſhall toll the entry, as appeareth alſo by Littleton
103. b (J) The ſecond thing is, that if he who is out of the
realm ſhall not be bound by non claim on a fine, which is a
matter of record, @ fortior7 he ſhall not be bound by non-
claim on a deſcent which is a matter in pars. (I) It a man
be diſſeiſed and afterwards is impriſoned, and afterwarcs
a deſcent is caſt, it ſhall toll his entry, and therewith a-


grees 9 H. 7. 24. a. And (4) ſome ſay in this cale, that if
de ſeiſed of


a man land, and has iſſue two ſons, baſtard eigne


and mulier puiſne, and the father dies ſeiſed, the 212 m


ww ae


O = ©Q —


=” 5


part VIII. Sir RicgARD LECHToRD's Caſe, 101


beyond ſea, or within age, or impriſoned, or non ſane memoriæ,
and the baſtard eigne enters, and continues in peaceable poſ-
ſeſhon of the lands, and has iſſue, and dies, and the lands de-
ſcend to his iſſue, the right of the mulier in all the faid caſes
is bound for ever; and ſome hold the contrary. 2. It was re-
ſolved, that foraſmuch as William Copley was out of the realm
at the time of the death of his father, although he was not in
the King's ſervice, yet he ſhall not be (a) barred by the ſaid cuſ- (a) Cr, Jac.226,
tom and proclamations, becauſe he could not by intendment Palm. 533.

of law have notice; and at the common law he ſhould not

be barred by non- claim on a fine, or writ of right, Bracton

lib, 5. tract. de Exception cap. 29. fol. 436- () Excuſatur quis (8) Co. Lit.
quod clameum non appoſuerit, ut fi in toto tempore litigit ſuit ultrd 260. b. 261. a.
mare quacunque occaſtone : Litil. acc. fol. 103. a. Videg H. 4. 3. a.

26 H. 6. Error 27. 33 H. 6. 1. 1 Af. p.2. 21 H. 6. 24. 2 E.

3. Ciron. 153. Ihe preamble of the ſtatutes of 26 Hf. 8. cap.

13. & 5 & G E. 6. cap. 11. Note, reader, as to thoſe caſes

which have been put of baſtard eigne and mulier puiſne, I

conceive that the better opinion is, that in ſuch caſes the (c) (Ho. Lit. 244. a.
mulier ſhall be barred for ever; and the reaſon is, becauſe the

continuance in poſſeſſion, and dying ſeiſed in peace, and de-

ſcent to his ifſue makes him heir, and his iſſue ſhall inherit as

heir, becauſe he was legitimate by the law of holy church ;

for (as Bracton, Ib. 2. fol. 63. faith) (4) matrimonium ſub- (d) co. Lit. 245.
ſequens legitimos facit quad ſacerdotium (becauſe they are legiti- *

mate by the canon law) non (e) quoad ſucceſſionem, propt' con- (e) Co. Lit. 245.
ſuttudinem regni que ſe habet in contrarium, And by the law *

of England by the continuance in poſſeſſion, and dying ſeiſed |

in peace and defcent, &c. he is adjudged (/) heir to his O. Lit.
father, for although the baſtard dies ſeiſed without iſſue, ſo *** **

that the land doth not deſcend, the mulier ſhall have it ; and

therewith agrees Abridgm. Af. fol. 3. and the rule in 13 E 1.

Baſtardy 28. is ſo to be intended, (g) juſtum non eſt aligue m (4 Co. Lt. 244.
antenatum mortuum facere baſtardum, qui toto tempore ſuo, pro a

keitimo habeatur. Vide 30 E. 3 14. & 39 A p. 10. And in

the caſe of legitimation (which is in law fo precious and of ſo

great eſtimation) the law doth not reſpect infancy, or other

defects in the mulier, but prefers legitimation of blood before

any benefit of temporal inheritance, and therefore the law

ſaith, that by the death of the baſtard eigne in peace, he becomes, n
light heir, and by conſequence the mulier is barred. Vide 5 E. Br. 83

2, Br. Deſcent 49. * 31 Aſſ. p. 18. & 22. John Alleyn's caſe; Br. Diſcent 26.
& 33E. 3. Verdict 48. the ſame caſe. * 36 Aſſ. p. 2. Plowd. 5 I
Com. Stowel's caſe. Vide 10E.3.2 the dying ſeiſed of the baſ- + plow, 472. a.
ard eigne binds the () right, and the deſcent not only takes Fitz. Baſtard. 17.
Way the entry, but the right alſo; and therefore a deſcent in 3
that caſe may be a bar to the right, when it ſhall not take bie 25.

Way the entry in caſe of difſeihn, as a deſcent of (i) ſer- (5)Co-Lit.244.2,
Uces, rent, reverſion expectant on an eltate-tail, ax () Oo Li, 244
All a, 118. b.


Sir RiehARD LecnrorD's Caſe. Part VIII.


(«) Co. Lit. 15. ſhall bar (a) the right of the mulier as appears in (14) 18 k.

* 2. Baſt. 26. but ſuch deſcent ſhall not take away the entry or

claim of the diſſeiſee; and ſo in many other caſes, as appears

by the books afterwards cited in this caſe. And if a man bas

(3) co. Lit. 244. two (6) daughters, baſtard ᷑eigne, and mulier puiſne, and

2. they enter and occupy as heirs, now the law in favour of le-

gitimation will not adjudge the whole poſſeſſion in the mu-

(e) Co. Lit. lier, who then had the ſole right, but in both: ſo that if (c)

244. 2. baſtard dies ſeiſed, her iſſue ſhall inherit; and therewith agrees

17 E. 3. 59. abridged by Fitz. Tit. Baſt. 32. And if in the

| ſame caſe the daughters, ſcil. the baſtard eigne and mulier

(d) Co. Lit. 170. puiſne enter, and make (4) partition, this partition ſhall bind

. the mulier for ever, 2 E. 2. Baſt. 19. 21 E. 3. 34. b. 30 Aff.

p. 7. but if partition be made betwixt two daughters, where

one has no colour, as to the ſpecial eſtate-tail, there the par-

tition is void, 11 Aﬀ p. 23. Hugh de Wimondham's cafe,

(e) Co. Lit. 244. And an aſſiſe of (e) Mortdancefler doth not lie betwixt the mu-

b. 2 Inſt. 97. lier and the baſtard eigne, no more than betwixt two brothers ;

and therewith agrees Britton, c. 70. and if the baſtard eigne

enters, and is ſeiſed of lands as heir, he ſhall be vouched as

heir, and if he be within age the parol ſnall demur, 20 Ed. 3.

(f) Br. Voucher Voucher 129. And if a man has ifſue baſtard eigne and mu-

154. Co. Lit. lier puiſne, and dies, and the baſtard within age enters and is

os. — 4 54 impleaded, he ſhall have (g) age; and therewith agrees the

4. 5 H. 7. 2. a. book in 11 E. 3. Age 3. Which caſes prove, that when the

(z) Co. Lit, baſtard eigne enters into the lands, until he be interrupted, he

nn 6 is accounted heir, although the mulier be within age, for
oll. 145. : Ni ROY” ;

Co. Lit. 244.2, When the baſtard eigne is within age, of neceſſity the mulier

puiſne alſo ought to be within age. Vide 5 H. 7. 2. Andif

a man has iſſue baſtard eigne and mulier puiſne, and the bal-

tard has iſſue, and dies, in the life of his father, and aſter-

wards the father dies, and the iſſue of the baſtard enters and dies

without interruption ; ſome ſay it ſhall bar the mulier. 50 if

a baſtard born before marriage enters, and has iſſue, and dies

(4) Co. Lit. ſeiſed, it ſhall bar () the collateral heir, and the lord by eſcheat,

244+ 4. as well as the mulicr puiſne: ſo if the baſtard eigne enters and

dies ſeiſed, his wife with child with a ſon, and afterwards the

ſon is born, he ſhall inherit the land, for inaſmuch as his father

died in poſſeſſion without interruption, the mulier ſha!l not al.

ledge againſt the iſſue baſtardy in his father who is dead. And

(i) co. Lit, if the baſtard eigne dies ſeiſed, and his iſſue (i) endows the wile

244- 2. of the baſtard; yet the mulier ſhall not enter upon the tenant in

dower, for the right of the mulier was barred by the dying ſeiſed

and the deſcent: otherwiſe it is of a deſcent which tolls

entry only, and not the right. The ſame law in the caſe

aforeſaid, if the wife of the father of the baſtard eigne

and mulier puiſne be endowed, yet the iflue of the baltard

ſhall have the reverſion of it, cauſa qua ſupra vide 10 E. 3

Waſte 142. 20 H. 3. Baſt, 29. 2 Aſſ. p. 9. 14 E. 2. 8

13 E. 1.


part VIII. Sir Ricnany Lxchronp's Caſe, 102


13 E. 1. Baſtardy 28. 32 E. 1. Baſtardy 31. 39. E. 3. The

hat caſe. 35 AM. p. 2. 6 E. 3. 54. Abridg. tit. Faux Recov.

2. 10 E. 3. 2. Plow. Com. Talbois's caſe 57. and Stowell's

caſe 37 3» 374. Note, reader, the reaſon why the younger

{on who is born during the marriage of a lawful wife is called

mulier puiſne, ſeu filius mulieratus, is, becauſe this word (a) (a) Co. Lit,

(nulier) in Latin has three ſignifications. 1. Sub nomine mu- 243. b.

lieris continetur gquelibet fæmina. 2. Proprie continetur mulier

que virgo non eff. 3. Appellatione mulieris in legibus Angliæ

antinetur ux3r. () So that filius natus ex juſtd uxore appella- (4) Co. Lit.

tur in legibus Angliæ, filius mulieraius ; (c) ſicut baſtardus dici- 243: b.

tur a Graco vocabulo, baſſarts, 1. e. meretrix, ſeu concubina, quia 92 a tan
: OH . 43+ b.

groereatur ex meretrice five concubing, And therewith agrees

Glanvil, I. 7. c. 1. 9d ſi verum eſt, Ic. tunc melioris condi=

tionts eſt in | of baflardus filius quam mulieratus, &c. where he

makes an oppoſition of a fon mulier, to a baſtard ſon, and

there, mulier is taken for legitimate, procreat” de uxore, &

baſtardus ex meretrice ſive concubing, And therewith agrees

Britton, cap. 70. of Mortdaunceſter, fol. 81 b. where he ſaith,

in the ſame manner, of two brothers of divers mothers, and

between a brother mulier and a brother baſtard, &c. and

the books in 32 E. 1. Baſtardy 31. 6 E. 2. Baſtardy 24.

39 E. 3. 14. 39 Aſſ. p. 10. 44 E. 3. 12, &c. Littleton «bt


N


ſupra, &c.


| Vor, IV. Cc JOHN


Narr. in ſecond
deliverance.


The cognizance P


JOHN TAL BO I's Caſe,


Trin. 7 Jac. 1. Rot. 3661.
In the King's Bench.


Salop, i. 1 PENDLETON was attached by the writ
of the lady the Queen of ſecond deliverance, to

anſwer to John Chapman, of a plea, wherefore he took the
cattle of him the ſaid John Chapman, and them unjuſtly de-
tained againſt gages and pledges, &c. And whereupon the faid
John Chapman by Thomas Steer his attorney complaineth,
that the aforeſaid J. Pendleton, on the 2d day of September,
in the 6th year of the reign of the lord the now King, at Al-
brighton, in a certain place there called Bromley in the county
aforeſaid, took his cattle, that is to ſay, two heifers, and
them unjuſtly detained againſt gages and pledges, until, &c.
whereupon he faith that he is injured, and hath damage to the
value of 201. and thereof he bringeth ſuit, &c. And the
aforeſaid J. Pendleton, by Nich. Gibbens his attorney, com-
eth and defendeth the force and injury when, &c. and as bailiff
of J. Talbot, Eſq. doth well acknowledge the taking of the cattle
aforeſaid, in the aforeſaid place in which, &c. and juſtly, &c.
becauſe he ſaith, that the place in which it is ſuppoſed the
aſoreſaid taking was done, doth contain, and at the time of
that taking above ſuppoſed to be done, did contain in itſelf
three acres of paſture, lying in the aforeſaid field called
Bromley, in Albrighton, aforeſaid, and that long before the
time of taking the cattle aforeſaid ſuppoſed to be done, one
John Chapman father of the now plaintiff, was ſeiſed of
the aforeſaid three acres of paſture, with the appurte-
nances, in which, &c. in his demeſne as of fee, and the faid
three acres of paſture with the appurtenances, in which, &e.
held of the aforeſaid J. Talbot as of his manor of Albrighton in
the county aforeſaid, by fealty and ſervice of doing {uit
at the court of the ſaid John Talbot, of his manor ay”
rom


part
from |


* alſc
nant (
in wh
fhoulc
of a h
ſeilſed
by th
and ft
herio!
Chap
put
ſeiſed
when
there!
that t
death
the |
bealt
his d
Talby
te:
Ne.

iff o
the c
juſt]


fee 2


part VIII. Jon Tatgor's Caſe. 103


tom three weeks to three weeks, at that manor to be holden,
w alſo by the ſervice of rendering after the death of every te-
nant of the ſaid three acres of paſture with the appurtenances
in which, &c. dying thereof ſeiſed, the beſt beaſt which
ſhould be of ſuch tenant at the time of his death in the name
of a heriot, of which ſervices the aforeſaid John Talbot was
filed by the hands of the aforeſaid J. Chapman the father, as
by the hands of his very tenant, that is to ſay, of the fealty
nd ſuit of court aforeſaid, as of fee and of right, and of the
teriot aforeſaid, in his demeſne as of fee. And the ſaid J.
Chapman the father, of the three acres of paſture with the
ppurtenances, in which, &c. in his demeſne as of fee being
ſeiled in form as aforeſaid, afterwards, and belore the faid time
whzn, &c. at Albrighton aforeſaid, of ſuch his eſtate, died
thereof ſo ſeiſed. And the ſaid John Pendleton further faith,
that the aforeſaid John Chapman the father, at the time of his
teath, at Albrighton aforeſaid, was poſſeſſed of an ox, of - Co. Car. 269,
the price of 100 8. as of his proper ox, which ox was the beſt pl. 94. Poſt. 204.
beaſt of the aforeſaid John Chapman the father, at the time of
tis death, whereupon fell the heriot thereof to the aforeſaid J.
Talbot ; and becaufe the heriot aforeſaid, after the death of
de aforeſaid J. Chapman the father, at the ſaid time when,
le. was behind not delivered; the faid J. Pendleton, as bai-
If of the aforeſaid J. Talbot, doth well avow the taking of
tte cattle aforeſaid, in the aforeſaid place in which, &c. and
jltly, &c. for the heriot aforeſaid not delivered, as within his
ke and lordſhip, &c. And the ſaid J. Chapman now plain- Plea in bar to
üf ſaith, that the aforeſaid J. Pendleton, as Bailiff of the the cognizance.
areſaid J. Talbot, for the reaſon before alledged, ought not ac-
mowledge the taking of the cattle aforeſaid, in the place in which,
le. to be juſt, becauſe he ſaith, that long before the aforeſaid
ime of the taking aforeſaid done, and before the aforeſaid ].
Chapman the father had any thing in the ſaid three acres of
alture with the appurtenances in which, &c. one John Bar-
ley was ſeiſed of a meſſuage, and of half a yard land of mea-
e and paſture, with the appurtenances, containing by eſti-
tation 50 acres in Albrighton aforeſaid, whereof the ſaid
hee acres of paſture, with their appurtenances in which, &c.
dere parcel, in his demeſne as of fee; and the ſaid meſſuage,
ud one half yard land, meadow, and paſture wholly, with
de appurtenances whereof, &c. held of the aforeſaid J. Tal-
as of his manor of Albrighton aforeſaid by fealty, and
wing ſuit at the court of the ſaid J. Talbot of his manor afore-
d, from three weeks to three weeks, at that manor yearly
bde holden, as alſo by the ſervice of rendering after the
feath of every tenant of the ſaid meſſuage, and half yard
nd of meadow and paſture wholly with the appurtenances
Kereof, &c, dying thereof ſeiſed, the beſt beait that was
"0 62 of


Jonx TALZOr's Caſe, Part VIII.


of ſuch tenant, at the time of his death in the name of a he.
riot. And the faid John Barny, of the ſaid meſſuage, and
half-yard land, meadow and paſture, with the appurtenancez,
wholly in form aforeſaid, being ſeiſed, long before the time of
the taking, &c. that is to ſay, on the firſt day of May, in the
32d year of the reign of the lady the late Queen, of the ſaid
three acres of land, parcel of the aforeſaid half-yard land of
land, meadow, and paſture, with the appurtenances whereof,
&c. enfeofted the aforeſaid John Talbot, to have and to hold
to the ſaid J. Talbot, his heirs and aſſigns for ever: by virtue
of which feoffment, the aforeſaid J. Talbot was, and yet i
ſeiſed of the aforeſaid three acres of land, parcel, &c. in his
demeſne as of fee; and he the ſaid John ſo being thereof
ſeiſed, and the aforeſaid John Barny of the meſſuage aforeſaid,
and the reſt of the aforeſaid half-yard land, meadow and paſ-
ture, with the appurtenances whereof, &c. in form aforeſaid
being ſeiſed, the ſaid J. Barny afterwards, and before the
time of the taking aforeſaid done, that is to ſay, on the firſt
day of May, in the 36th year of the reign of the ſaid lady the
late Queen, of the aforeſaid three acres of paſture with the

_ appurtenances, in which, &c. enfeoffed the aforeſaid J. Chap-
man the father, and his heirs for ever; by virtue of which
feoffment, the ſaid J. Chapman the father, was ſeiſed of the
ſaid three acres of paſture with the appurtenances in which,
&c. in his demeſne as of fee, and ſo thereof being ſeiſed, the
ſaid J Chapman the father, after and before the ſaid time of the
taking, &c. at Albrighton aforeſaid, of ſuch his eſtate, of and
in the ſame three acres of paſture, with the appurtenances in
which, &c. died thereof ſeiſed, after whofe death the ſaid
three acres of paſture with their appurtenances in which, &c.}
deſcended to the ſaid J. Chapman now plaintiff, as ſon and heit
of the ſaid J. Chapman the father: by which the ſaid J. Chap-
man now plaintiff, into the ſaid 3 acres of paſture, with the ap-
urtenances in which, &c. entered, and was, and yet is there-

of ſeiſed in his demeſne as of fee; and fo thereof being ſeiſed,
the ſaid J. Chapman the now plaintiff, before the ſaid time of the
taking, &c. put his cattle into the aforeſaid place in which, &c
to eat the graſs in the fame then growing, as it was lawful for
him to do, which cattle were in the place aforeſaid, in which
&c. eating the graſs there growing, until the ſaid John Pendies
ton, on the aforeſaid 2d day of Sept. in the 6th year of the reign
of the lord the now King abovelaid, at Albrighton aforeſaid. in
the aforeſaid place called Bromley, did take the cattle of him
the ſaid J Chapman aſoreſaid, and them unjulily dctained again!
gages and pledges until, &c. as he above againſt him com-
| Demurrer to the plaineth; and this he is ready to verify : and the [aid
| | bar. John Pendleton ſays that inaſmuch as the aſorcſaid Joan
| Chapman, the taking of the cattle aforeſaid, in ide
avis"


part VIII. JohN Tarsor's Caſe,


aforeſaid place in which, &c. hath not alledged ſufficient to
bar, &c. and that he to that plea in manner and form afore-
faid pleaded needeth not, nor by the law of the land, is bound


to anſwer 3 wherefore, for want of a ſufficient plea in bar in


this behalf, the ſaid John Pendleton demands judgment, and
a return of the cattle aforeſaid, together with his damages to
be adjudged unto him : And the aforeſaid John Chapman now
plaintiff, inaſmuch as he ſufficient matter in law, to bar the
aforeſaid J. Pendleton, from juſtly avowing the taking of the
cattle aforeſaid, in the place in which, &c. above hath al-
ledged, which he is ready to verify, which matter the afore-
fad J. Pendleton doth not deny, nor to the ſame any ways an—
ſwereth, but doth wholly refuſe to admit the ſame averment,
as beſore prays judgment, and his damages, by the occaſion
of the taking and unjuſtly detaining of the ſame cattle, to be
to him adjudged, &c. And becauſe the juſtices here, will
adviſe themfelves of and upon the premiſes, before they give
their judgment thereof ; day is given to the parties, &c.


104


Joinder in de-
murrer,


2 Brownl. 293,
294. 10 Co.
108. a. b.


F. N. B. 72. d.


(a) Antea 103. a.
Cr. Jac, 260,
Plowd. 94+ as


Part VIII.


1


|


JOHN TALBO T's Caſe.


eee
Hil. 7 Tac. 1.


OHN CHAPMAN bronght a writ of ſecond deliverance
J againſt John Pendleton, of two heifers taken at Albrigh-
ton, in a place called Bromley in Albrighton, in the county of
Salop, &c. The defendant made conuſans as Bailiff to John
Talbot, Eſq. and ſaid, that the place where, &c. contained
three acres of paſture, lying in a field called Bromley, in Al-
brighton ; and that one John Chapman, father of the faid
John Chapman, whoſe heir he is, was ſeiſed of the ſaid three
acres of paſture in fee, and held them of the ſaid John Tal-
bot, as of his manor of Albrighton in the ſaid county by feal-
ty, and ſuit of court to the manor from three weeks to three
weeks, and by the ſervice to render after the death of every te-
nant of the faid three acres of paſture, in which, &c. dying
thereof ſeiſed, optimum animal, ſuch tenant had at the time of


his death nomine heriotti, of which ſervices he was ſeiſed by the


hands of the ſaid J. Chapman the father, as by the hands of
his very tenant, &c. and the ſaid John Chapman the father ſo
being thereof ſeiſed, died ſeiſed thereof, and that at the time
of his death he was poſſeſſed of an ox, of the (a) price of
100s. as of his proper ox, which ox fuit optimum animal of
the ſaid J. Chapman the father, which he had at the time of
his death, &c. And becauſe the ſaid heriot was behind, and
not delivered, the defendant, as Bailiff of the ſaid John Tal-
bot, acknowledged the taking of the cattle aforeſaid, in the


place where, &c. as infra feodum et dominium ſuum, etc. In bar


of which the ſaid J. Chapman, now plaintiff ſaid, that before
the ſaid J. Chapman his father had any thing in the ſaid 3 acres


of paſture, one J. Barney was ſeiſed of a houle, and a half *
| 0


— ww cywou tr cov uw. oo Ad AQ_Q» wel: fs i)


part VIII. TarBor's Caſe. 105


of land, meadow and paſture, containing by eſtimation fifty

acces, in Albrighton aforeſaid, whereof the ſaid three acres

of paſture in which, &c. were parcel, in his demeſne as of

ſee, and the faid houſe and half yard land, meadow and

paſture entire, held of the ſaid John Talbot, as of his ſaid

manor by fealty, ſuit to court, and heriot ſervice, after the

death of every tenant dying thereof ſeiſed; and the ſaid John

Baray being ſo ſeiſed of the ſaid meſſuage and half yard en-

tice, anno 32 Eliz. of three acres of land, parcel of the ſaid

half yard land, enfeoffed the ſaid John Talbot, to have and to

hold to him and his heirs: and afterwards, anno 36 Eliz. of

the ſaid three acres of paſture, in which, &c. enfeoffed the

faid John Chapman the father, to have and to hold to him

and his heirs, who died thereof ſeiſed, and they deſcended to

John Chapman the now plaintiff, &. Upon which the a- h
vowant demurred in law. And the only queſtion in this {>
caſe was, if the lord had, by the purchaſe of the ſaid three

acres of paſture, in which, &c. parcel of the tenements held

of him by heriot ſervice, extinguiſhed his heriot or not? And

the avowant's counſel did inſiſt ſtrongly upon the words of

Littleton, lib. 2. cap. lt. fol. 49. where he ſaith, that not-

withſtanding the purchaſe of parcel, &c. by the lord, the (a) (4) Lit. g.
homage and fealty remain entire to the lord; for the lord ſhall 223. Co. Lit.
have the homage and fealty of his tenant for the remnant of [4% * b.

the lands and tenements held of him, as he had before, be- 8.32! 294
cauſe ſuch ſervices are not annual ſervices, and cannot be ap- 295. ;
portioned ; which reaſon proves (as it was urged) that the he-

riot ſervice in the caſe at bar continues, for this ſervice is not

annual, being due only on the death of the tenant, and cannot

be apportioned becauſe it is entire, /c:/. optimum animal, So

they ſaid, that it appears by Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 3. & (5) 7 (8) Lit. ſect. 96,
Ed. 3. 29. a. b. that he who holds by knights ſervice, ought Lit. 20. a.

togo in perſon, or find another able perſon for him, properly a+ 8
arrayed for the war, &c. which 1s an entire ſervice: and yet 10
Littleton ſaith, abi ſupra, fol. 49 that if the lord purchaſes

part of the land ſo held (c the eſcuage ſhall be apportioned ; (%) Lit. ſect. 223.
which proves that the tenure by knights ſervice remains for Co. Lit. r4g. b.
the reſidue, and the reaſon is, as it was urged, becauſe Lit. 49. 3.

the entire ſervice was not annual, and the ſervice by the body

of a man cannot be apportioned. Alſo they cited the book

in 34 Ed. 3. () Heriot 1. where it is held, that if my te- (4) 6 Co. 1. 4.
nant, who holds of me by a heriot, aliens parcel of his

land to another, each of them is chargeable to me of a

deriot, becauſe it is entire; and altho' the tenant purchaſes 1

the land again, &c. I ſhall have of him, for each portion, a
keriot, So in the caſe at bar, although the lord purchaſes
| Cc4 parcel


parcel of the land, yet he ſhall have a heriot for the reſidue,


(a) Co. Lit. 149.
b.
(5) 6 Co. 1, 2.


(e) Co. Lit. 149.


(d) 6 Co. 1. b.
Moor 203.
Co. Lit. 149. Aa,


(-) 6 Co. 2. 2.


ff) Co, Lit.
149 as


(2 Co. Lit. 149
a. b


6 Co. 2. 4.


apportioned.


A
TarlrBorT's Caſe, Part Vill.


for it is entire, and not annual. But it was anſwered and
adjudged, per totam curiam, that in the caſe at bar, the heriot
(a) ſervice was extinct, And firſt, the reſolutions in (4) Bry.
erton's caſe, in the Sixth Part of my Reports, were affirmed
to be good law by the whole court. And in this caſe theſe
points were reſolved. 1. That ſome entire ſervices by aliena-
tion of parcel of the tenancy ſhall be (c) multiplied, {c/. that
every ſeveral alienèe ſhall pay ſeveral entire ſervices ; and ſome
entire ſervices, by alienation of parcel, ſhall not be multiplied,
but the lord ſhall be content with one amongſt all the ſeveral
alienees : and as to that, it muſt he known, that there are four
manner of entire ſervices: 1. When a thing entire, be it a
chattel valuable, or a thing of pleaſure, ſhall be rendered and
paid by the tenant to the lord, a chattel valuable, as an hoiſe,
an ox, gilt ſpurs, a bow or arrows, a ſword, a gauntlet, or ſuch
like; things of pleaſure, as a ſaulcon or other bird, a dog, or
ſuch things of pleaſure : all ſuch entire ſervices by alienation
of paicel of the tenancy ſhall be multiplied, and every alienee
{hall render the entire ſervice : and -yet, by the purchaſe of
parcel by the lord, the whole is (4) extinct, as it is reſolved
in the ſaid caſe of Bruerton. The ſecond is a perſonal ſer-
vice to be done by the tenant to the perſon of the lord, as
homage, fcalty, knight's ſervice, to be (e) carver, ſewer,
butler, or ſuch perſonal ſervices, to the lord, and ſome of
theſe ſhall multiply, and ſome not; and therefore homage
2nd fealty by alienation of parcel, ſhall multiply, becauſe
when the tenant doth homage or fealty, he doth them for
all the tenements which he holds of the lord, ſo that theſe
ſervices extend to the entire tenancy, and every parcel of
it, and although the lord purchaſes part, vet the homage and
ſcalty remain for the reſidue : ſo that although Littleton, ub:
ſupra, holds, that the homage and fealty by purchaſe of
parcel, ſhall not be extinct, but ſhall remain for the reſidue,
becauſe ſuch ſervices are not annual, and cannot be appor-
tioned, (yet) that is (/) ratic una, ſed nen unica, as appears
before. 80 knights ſervice, which is an entire ſervice to
be performed by the body of a man, ſhall be alſo multi-
plied by the alienation of parcel; and although the Jord
purchaſes parcel, the knights ſervice ſhall nut be ex-
tint, but ſhall remain for the reſidue, % (g) pro hom
publics & pro * regni, and the efcuage ſhall be

ut the perſonal ſervice of ſewer, carver,


butler, &c. or when the tenant is bound by his tenure ad
convivandum don ſuum & familia ſiam ſemel in anno, el al
equitanuum


part VIII. TALBO r's Caſe;


quitandum cum domino ſuo in com N. ſumptibus ſuis propriis,
&c. (vide 10 Ed. 3. 23. in John de Brompton's caſe) by alie-
nation of parcel, it ſhall not be apportioned nor multiplied :
' for ſuch ſervices which are for the private benefit of the lord,
and are perſonal to be done by a man, ſhall not be multiplied,
becauſe they are to be perſonally done by one man only, and
multiplication of them would be a prejudice, and chargeable


to the tenant, and the purchaſe of parcel of the tenancy by the.


lord, will extinguiſh all ſuch perſonal private ſervice. The
third is, when the tenant is to exerciſe a perſonal office, as to
he fleward of the court of the manor, or bailiff of the manor,
or collector of the rents of the manor, or woodward of the
manor, or the like offices, they, by alienation of parcel of
the tenancy, ſhall not be multiplied, but the lord may diſttein
each of them, in theſe caſes, to do it, but one only ſhall ex-
ercile it: and if the lord purchaſe any part of the tenancy, the
whole ſervice is extinct, The fourth is, when the tenant by
his tenure is to do manual labour, or work touching houſes,
lands, or tenements ; as to cover or repair the (a) hall of the
lord's houſe, or to make or repair his park pale, or to plough
or ſow the lord's demeſne, &c. or to reap his corn, or to cut
his graſs, or molere blada ſua, or ſuch like; theſe, or other
ſervices by alienation of parcel ſhall not be multiplied ; for
theſe works are to be done on a certain thing, which cannot
be multiplied. |

2. It was reſolved, that there is no difference between en-
tire annual ſervices, be they valuable, or things of pleaſure,
and which ſhall be multiplied, as aforeſaid, and between ſuch
entice ſervices not annual: as if lord and tenant be to render
a horſe every three, four, or five years, or upon alienation or
death ; in theſe and the like caſes, if the lord purchaſes parcel
of the tenancy, ſuch entire ſervices, not annua], ſhall be as
well extinct as the like annual ſervices, 5

3. It was reſolved, that if John Barny had firſt enfeoffed
John Chapman the father, of the ſaid three acres of paſture,


and afterwards had enſeoifed the lord of the ſaid three acres


of land, and notwithſtanding, the heriot ſervice had remained
tor the land which John Chapman the father held; and the
reaſon is, becauſe John Chapman, by his purchaſe of three
acres, held by one ſeveral and diſtinct tenure of heriot ſervice,
and therefore the purchaſe of the lord of any part of tne refidue


106


(a) 6 Co. 2. a.


which John Barny held, would extinguith only the herjot


which he ought to render, and not the heriot which John
Chapman, by reaſon of his diſtinct and ſeparate tenure, ought
to pay. *

4. There is a difference between heriot ſervice, and he-


not (5) cuſtom as to the extinguiſhment thereof, when (4) Co. Lit. 149,
| tho Þ 2Brownl.296,


Plo'\wd. 95, 96.


FFP TTT
— 1 3


- q —


rr 0 2
I— CC —
- — — —
==. G —


_
= —
—— —
— —
==


— 5


my


—


— — . 3


r


—— — —


B —— —— —— — — ——— rCgg . / 2 * l . Oo . — 2 RT I & n :
— —— 1 l b Me 2d 2 : - —
_ 4 —— - — — . E
— 1 — — - A _ * I'S"; - — — —— —
N wa _ a — — — — —
- — — — =_ - G l
- — —


IS —


, A
« 4. ve, a ©
—— a


TIS.» —ů— — 2
—


— ——


— —.


1
— —
— — — * 4


— 2
2


AA 2
— — —


. *
y -- >
&, he


2
n — — 2


© —
—

” OO Ot (oy

* © C -


K


TALBOr's Caſe. Part VIII.


the lord purchaſes parcel of the tenancy: for if the lord put.

chaſes parcel of the tenancy, the heriot ſervice is extind:

but if the cuſtom of the manor be, that upon the death of

every tenant of the manor, who dies ſeiſed of any lands held

of the ſame manor, the lord ſhall have a heriot ; although the

| lord purchaſes part of the tenancy, yet the lord ſhall have a

(s) Co. Lit. 149. heriot by the (a) cuſtom of the manor for the reſidue, for he
2 Brownl. 296. remains tenant to the lord, and the cuſtom extends to eve

$H. 7. 11. tenant. Vide reader, the books cited in the ſaid cafe of Bruet-

+ 6Co. 1, 2, &c, ton, + by which theſe differences, with the reaſon of them,


will appear.


Dr. BON;


Pa


U


— — —


A 0 W 6


Part VIII.


Dr. BON HA M's Caſe.
Mich. 6 Jac. 1.


In the Common Pleas.


London, I. ENRY ATKINS, of London, doctor in

phyſic; George Turner of London, doctor
in phyſic; Thomas Moundford of London, doctor in phyſic;
John Argent of London, doctor in phyſic; John Taylor of
London, yeoman ; and William Bowden of London, yeoman,
were attached to anſwer to Tho. Bonham, of London, doctor
in philoſophy and in phyſic, of a plea, wherefore they, toge-
ther with William Dun of London, doctor in phyſic, and
Richard Ware of London, ſkinner, with force and arms, him
the ſaid Thamas Bonham took, impriſoned, evilly treated,
and him in priſon, againſt the law and cuſtom of the king-
dom of England, did long detain, and other wrongs to him


107


Falſe impriſon«
ment,


did, to the great damage of him the faid Thomas Bonham,


and againſt the peace of the lord the now King, &c. And
whereupon he the ſaid Thomas Bonham, by Richard Coke,
his attorney, complaineth, that the aforeſaid Henry, George,
Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Taylor, and Wil-
liam Bowden, together with, &c. on the 1oth day of Novem-
ber, in the fourth year of the reign of the ſaid lord the now
King, with force and arms, him the ſaid Thomas, in the pa-
iſh of the Bleſſed Mary le Bow, in the ward of Cheap, took
and impriſoned, and evilly treated, and him there ſo in
priſon, for a long time, . that is to fay, by the ſpace of
leven days, againſt the law and cuſtom of this kingdom of
England, detained, and other wrongs, &c. to the great da-
mage, &c. and againſt the peace, &c. Whereupan he faith,
that he is injured, and hath damage to the value of


3001. and therefore he bringeth ſuit, &c. And the _
| 1


— *_ - *.
—


See 3 Ld. Raym.
The Entries
419. this char-
ter pleaded.


Dr. Bonnam's Caſe, Part VIII.


ſaid, Henry, George, Thomas Moundſord, John Argent
John Taylor, and William Bowden, by Francis Barker their
attorney, come and defend the force and injury, when, Kc.
And as to the coming with force and arms, they ſay, that they
are not thereof guilty, and of this they put themſelves upon
the country; and the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham likewiſe
and as to the reſt of the treſpaſs and impriſonment aforeſaid,
above ſuppoſed to be done, the ſaid Henry, George, Thomas
Moundford, John Argent, John Taylor, and William Bow.
den, ſay, that the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham ought not to
have his action aforeſaid againſt them, becauſe they ſay, that
before the aforeſaid time when it 1s ſuppoſed the aforeſaid
treſpaſs and impriſonment to be done, the lord Henry the
8th, late King of England, &c. on the 22d day of Septem-
ber, in the 10th year of his reign, by his letters patent (which
the ſaid Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent,
John Taylor, and William Bowden, ſealed with his great
ſeal of England, bearing date at Weſtminſter the ſame day
and year, bring here into court) reciting (that) Whereas he
thought it the duty of his kingly office, in all reaſon, to pro-
vide for the good and welfare of his people, at would fi. e.
ought) firſt of all to be done, if he might in due ſeaſon meet


with enterprizes of wicked men: firſt therefore, he held it


neceſſary to reſtrain the boldneſs of wicked men, who pro-
feſſed phylic more for avarice than out of confidence of a good
conſcience ; whereupon very many incommodities did ariſe,
to the rude and credulous common people : therefore, partly
imitating the example of the well governed cities in Italy,
and many other nations, and partly inclined thereunto, at
the requeſt of the great men and doctors, John Chambre,
Thomas Linacre, Ferdinand de Victoria, his phyſicians, and
of Nicholas Hatſwel, John Franciſco, and Robert Yaxley,
phyſicians, and chiefly of the right reverend father in Chriſt,
and Lord Thomas (Wolſey) titled of the holy church beyond
Tyber, Prieſt of the moſt holy church of Rome, Cardinal of
York, Archbiſhop, and our weil beioved Chancellor of our
kingdom of England; a college perpetual of Doctors and grave
men, who phylic in his city of London, and the ſuburbs,
and within ſeven miles from the ſaid city every way, might
publicly exerciſe, he willed and commanded to be inſtituted,
to whom both for his honour, and in the name of the public
good, and care (as he hoped) the ignorance and - rafhnels
of the malicious (which he remembered) as well by their ex-
ample and gravity to deter, as by his laws late made, and by
conſtitutions to be made by the ſame college to puniſh;
which that they might more eaſily well accompliſh, to
the remembered Doctors John Chambers, Thomas Linacre,
Ferdinand de Victoria his phyſicians, Nicholas Ilatſwe',


John Franciſco, and Robert Yaxley, phyſicians, he grammes,
tha


part VIII. Dr. Bonnam's Caſe.


that they, and all men of the ſame faculty, of and in the city
aforeſaid, ſhould be in deed and name, one body and com-
monalty perpetual, or college perpetual, and that the faid
commonalty or college every year for ever, might chuſe and
make of that commonalty, any prudent man, and ſkilful in
the faculty of phyſic, to be preſident of the ſaid college or
commonalty, to overſee, recognize, and govern, for that
year, the college or commonalty aforeſaid, and all men of
the ſaid faculty, and their buſineſſes ; and that the ſaid preſi-
dent and college or commonalty, ſhould have perpetual ſuc-
ceſhon, and a common ſeal, to ſerve for the buſineſſes of the
ſaid commonalty and preſident for ever; and that they and
their ſucceffors for ever ſhould be perſons able and capable to
purchaſe and poſſeſs in fee and perpetuity, lands, tenements,
rents, and other poſſeſhons whatſoever : he alſo granted to
them and their ſucceſſors, for him and his heirs, that they and
their ſucceſſors might purchaſe to them and their ſucceſſors,
as well in the ſaid city as out of it, lands and tenements what-
ſoever, not exceeding the yearly value of 121. notwithſtand-
ing the ſtatute of alienation in mortmain : and that they, by
the name of preſident of the college or commonalty of the
faculty of phyſicians, London, might plead, or might be im-
pleaded, before whatſoever Judges, in all courts and actions
whatioever; and that the aforeſaid preſident and college,
or commonalty, and their ſucceſſors, lawful aſſemblies, and
honeſt of themſe ves, and ſtatutes and ordinances for the whole-
ſome government, overſight, and correction of the college or
commonalty aforeſaid, and of all men of the ſame faculty in
the fame city, or within ſeven miles circuit of the ſaid city,
exerciſing, according to the exigence or neceſſity (as often, and
when need was) might lawfully, and without peril make,
without the hindrance of the ſaid late King, his heirs or ſuc-
ceſſors whatſoever, his Juſtices, Eſcheators, Sheriffs, and
other his Bailiffs and Miniſters, his heirs and ſucceſſors what-
ſoever: he alſo granted to the ſaid prefident and college, or


or ſeven miles in circuit thereof, do exerciſe the faid faculty
unleſs to this, by the faid preſident or commonalty, or their
ſucceſſors, (who for the time ſhould be) he be admitted by the
letters of the faid preſident and college, with their common
ſeal ſealed, upon the penalty of 100 ſhillings for every month,
that not being admitted, he ſhould exerciſe the tame faculty,
half thereof to the lord the King, and his ſucceſſors, and half
thereof to the ſaid picfident and college, to be applied: he
beſides, willed and granted, for him and his ſucceſſors (as
much as in him was) that by the preſident and coilege of the
aforeſaid commonalty for the time being, and their ſucceſfors
for ever, four (perſons) every year by them to be Nees
ö mou


eee and their ſucceſſors, that none in the ſaid city,


108


- Sa — TT” nuts. :


Dr. Bonnam's Caſe: Part VIII.


ſhould have the overſeeing, 2 correction, and go-
vernment of all and ſingular the phyſicians of the ſaid city,
exerciſing the faculty of phyſic within the ſaid city; and ſo of
other phyſicians foreign whomſoever, the ſaid faculty of phy-
fic any wiſe frequenting and uſing within the ſaid city, and
the ſuburbs thereof, or within ſeven miles in circuit of the
ſaid 4 and the puniſhment of them for their offences, in
not well exerciſing, doing, and uſing the ſame; as alſo the
overſight and ſearching of all medicines, and the reception
(recipes) of them by the ſaid phyſicians, or any of them, to
the liege people of the ſaid late King, for curing and healing
their infirmities, to be given, put, and uſed, as often, and
when need ſhall be, for the commodity and profit of the ſaid
liege people of the ſaid late King, ſo as the puniſhments of
the ſaid phyſicians, uſing the ſaid faculty of phyſic, fo in the
premiſes offending, by fines, amercement, and impriſonment
of their bodies, and by other ways reaſonable and fitting, be
executed: he alſo willed and granted, for him, and his heirs
and ſucceſſors, (as much as in him was) that neither the preſi-
dent, nor any of the college aforeſaid of phyſicians, nor their
ſucceſſors, nor any of them, exerciſing the ſame faculty any
way in future, within the city aforeſaid, and the ſuburbs
thereof, or elſewhere, ſhould be ſummoned or put, nor any
of them ſhould be ſummoned or put in any aſliſes, juries, in-
queſts, inquiſitions, attaints, and other recognitions within
the ſaid city, and the ſurburbs thereof, hereafter to be taken
before the Mayor, or Sheriffs, or Coroners of the ſaid city ſor
the time being, or by any their officer, or miniſter, or officers,
or miniſters, although the ſaid juries, inquiſitions, or recog-
nitions, were ſummoned upon the writ or writs of the ſaid
King, or his heirs, of record: but that the ſaid maſter or late

overnors, and commonalty of the faculty aforeſaid, and their
1 and every of them the ſaid faculty exerciſing,
againſt the ſaid late King, his heirs and ſucceſſors, and againſt
the Mayor and Sheritfs of the ſaid city aforeſaid for the time
being, and whatſoever their officers or miniſters, ſhould be


thereof acquitted and diſcharged for ever, as by the ſaid letters


patent, amongſt other things more ſully appeareth. And the
ſaid Henry, George, 'Thomas Moundford, John Argent,
John Taylor, and William, farther ſay, that by virtue of the
letters patents aforeſaid, the aforeſaid John Chambre, Thomas
Linacre, Ferdinand de Victoria, Nicholas Hatſwel, John
Franciſco, and Robert Yaxley, phyſicians, and all men of
the ſaid faculty in the city aforeſaid, were one body and com-
monalty perpetual, or college perpetual ; and that afterwards,
by a certain act of Parliament of the ſaid late King Henry the
8th, holden at London the 15th day of April, in the 14th year
of his reign, and from thence adjourned unto Weſtminſter,

In


part VIII. Dr. Bom HAM's Caſe;


inthe county of Middleſex, the laſt day of July in the I 5th year
of the reign of the ſaid late King, and then there holden, amongſt
other things, it was enacted by authority of the ſame Parlia-
ment, That for that, that the making of the ſaid corporation
of phyſicians was meritorious, and very good for the common-


wealth of this kingdom of England, and beſides, it was ex-


dient and neceſſary to provide, that no perſon of the ſaid
body politic or commonalty aforeſaid, ſhould be ſuffered to
exerciſe and to practiſe phyſic, but only ſuch perſons as ſhould
be profound, ſad, and diſcreet, groundedly learned, and
deeply ſtudied in phyſic, in conſideration whereof, and for
the farther authorizing of the ſaid letters patent, and alſo for
enlarging and amplifying of farther articles for the aforeſaid
commonwealth, to be had and made by the faid late King,
with the conſent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commonalty in the ſaid Parliament aſſembled, it is enacted
amongſt other things, that the aforeſaid corporation of the
commonalty and fellowſhip of the faculty of the art of phyſic
aforeſaid, and all and every grant, article, and other things
contained and ſpecified in the faid letters patent, ſhould be
approved, granted, ratified, and confirmed in the aforeſaid
act, and ſhould clearly be authoriſed and admitted by the
ſame, good, lawfu!, and available to the aforeſaid body cor-
porate, and their ſucceſſors, for ever, in as ample and large
manner as it might be taken, thought, and conſtrued by the
ſaid letters patent: and farther it is enacted, ordained, and
eſtabliſhed by the ſaid act, that the aforeſaid fix perſons, in the
aforeſaid letters patent named as principal, and firſt named of
the aforeſaid commonalty and fellowſhip, ſhould chooſe to
them two other of the ſaid commonalty, who from thenceforth
ſhould be called and named elects, and the aforeſaid elects
yearly ſhould chooſe one of them to be preſident of the ſaid
commonalty : and as often as any of the rooms and places of
the ſaid elects ſhould happen to be void by death, or other-
wiſe, then the ſuperviſors of the ſaid elects, within 30 or
40 days next after their deaths, or any of them, ſhould
chooſe, name, or admit one or more, as nced ſhould re-
quire, of the moſt learned and expert men of and in the
atorelaid faculty in London, to ſupply the place and number
of eight perſons, ſo that he or they who ſhould be choſen,
be firſt examined ſtrictly by the ſaid ſupervifors, according
tothe form deviſed by the ſaid elects, and alſo by the ſaid
luperviſors approved, as by the ſaid act amongſt other things
more fully appeareth. And the ſaid Henry, George, Thomas
Moundford, John Argent, John Taylor, and William,
tanher ſay, that afterwards, and before the time when
&, by another a& of Parliament of the lady Mary, the


Queen


109


Dr. Bonnan's Caie. Part VIII.
Queen of England, the 24th day of October, in the firſt


year of her reign, at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, reciting, that
whereas in the Parliament holden at London, the 5th day of
April, in the 14th year of the reign of the lord Henry the $th,
late King of England, and from thence adjourned unto
Weſtminſter, the laſt day of June, in the 15th year of his
reign, and there holden, it was enacted, that a certain grant
by letter patents of incorporation, made and granted by the


aforeſaid late King, to the phyſicians of London, and all


clauſes and articles contained in the faid grant, ſhouid be ap»
proved, granted, ratified, and confirmed by the ſaid Parlia-
ment; in conſideration whereof, it was enacted by the au-
thority of the ſame Parliament, that the aforeſaid ſtatute and
act of Parliament, in all the articles and clanſes in the ſame
contained, from thenceforth for ever ſhould ſtand and con-
tinue in full ſtrength, force, and effect, any ſtatute, law,
cuſtom, or any thing made, had, or uſed to the contrary, in
any thing notwithſtanding : and for the better reformation of
divers enormities happening to the commonwealth, by the
evil uſage and undue adminiſtration of phyſic, and for the
amplifying and enlarging of the laſt articles, for the better
execution of the things in the aforeſaid grant contained, it
was further enacted, that whenſoever the preſident of the col-
lege, or commonalty of the faculty of phyſic in London, for
the time being, or ſuch as the aforeſaid preſident and college
yearly, according to the tenor and meaning of the ſame act,
ſhould authorize to ſearch, examine, correct, and puniſh all
offenders and tranſgreſſors in the aforeſaid faculty, within the
ſame city and precinct in the aforeſaid act expreſſed, ſhould
ſend, or commit ſuch offender or offenders, for his or their
offences or diſobedience, contrary to any article or clauſe con-
tained in the aforeſaid grant, or act, to any ward, gaol, or
priſon, within the aforeſaid city and precinct aforeſaid (the
Tower of London excepted) that then, and from time to time,
the warders, gaolers, and keepers of the wards, gaols, and
and priſons within the city, or precinct aforeſaid (the Tower
of London excepted) ſhould receive into his or their priſons, all
and every ſuch perſon or perſons ſo offending, which ſhould be
ſent, or committed to him, or them, as aforefaid, and there
ſafely ſhould keep the perſon or perſons ſo committed into any
of their priſons, at the proper coſts and charges of the perſon
or perſons ſo committed, without bail or mainprize, until


ſuch offender and offenders, or diſobedients, be diſcharged of


the aforeſaid impriſonment, by the aforeſaid pretident ; and
ſuch perſons as by the aforeſaid college ſhould be authoriſed,


upon pain, that every ſuch warder, gaoler, or keeper, _
the


wh, yn es mic mc, (0 wn ©@y os „


2 — wh, was, ww ——— — — — — — cos wa, —


—


wy — . — . <= ©&A © fr FA — — — i wy


— rw s


— _—— 0 I”


Part VIIT. Dr. Boxnam's Caſe;


the contrary, ſhould loſe and forfeit double of ſuch fine and
amercement as ſuch offender or offenders, or diſobedients,
ſhould be aſſeſſed to pay, by ſuch as by the faid preſident and
college, as ſhould be authoriſed, as before is ſaid, fo as the
faid fine and amercement ſhould not be at any time above the
ſum of 201. the moiety whereof to be employed to the uſe of
the aid late Queen, her heirs and ſucceſſors, and the other
moiety to the atoreſaid preſident and college, all which for-
feitures ſhould be recovered by action of debt, bill, plaint, or
information, in any the ſaid late Queens, her heirs or ſucceſ-
ſors, courts of record, againſt any ſuch warden, gaoler, or
keeper, ſo offending, in which no effoin, wager of law, nor
protection, ſhould be allowed, nor be admitted for the defen-
dant: and further it was enaQted, by the authority of the ſaid
Parliament, that all juſtices, mayors, ſheriffs, bailiffs, conſta-
bles, and other miniſters and officers within the city and
precinct aforeſaid, upon requeſt to them to be made,
ſhould help, aid, and aſſiſt the preſident of the aforeſaid col-
lege; and all perſons, by them from time to time authorized,
for the due execution of the ſaid act, or ſtatute, upon pain;
for not giving help to them, of being in contempt of the ſaid
late Queen, her heirs or ſucceſſors, as by the fame act, a-
mongſt other things, more fully. appeareth. And the ſaid
Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John
Taylor, and William, further ſay, that by virtue of the ſaid
letters patent, and by force of the ſtatutes aforeſaid, one Tho-
mas Langton, Doctor of Phyſic, a man prudent and ſkijful
in the faculty of phyſic, and then one of the commonalty of
the college of phyſicians, in London aforeſaid ; and then alſo
being one of the eight electors of the college aforeſaid, before
the laid time when, &c. that is to ſay, the Zoth day of
Sept. in the year 1605, at the college of phyſicians, ſituate in
London, in the pariſh of St. Bennet, Paul's-whbarf, in the ward
of Baynard's-caſtle, was duly choſen and preferred to the office
of preſident of the college aforeſaid, and then and there held
the ſaid office of preſident of the college aforeſaid : and the ſaid
Tho. Langton being preſident of the college aforeſaid, the ſame
preſident and commonalty of the college aforeſaid, the fame
zoth day of September, in the year 1605, aboveſaid, at the col -
lege aforeſaid, did chooſe Ralph Wilkinſon, William Dun,
Richard Palmer, and John Argent, prudent men, and ſkilful
in the faculty of phyſic; and then being four doctors of the
college aforeſaid, to be the four cenſors or governors of the com-
monalty aforeſaid, to overſee, ſearch, correct, and govern, all and
lngular phyſicians of the ſaid city, uſing the faculty of phyſie
in the ſaid city, and other foreign phyſicians whomſoever, fre-

Vox. IV. D d quenting


110


Dr. Bonnau's Caſe, Patt VIII.


quenting to, and uſing the ſaid faculty of phyſic, any ways
within the ſaid city, and the ſuburbs thereof, or within ſeven
miles in circuit of the ſame city, and to puniſh their deſectz
in not well exerciſing, doing, and uſing the ſame ; as alſo to
overſee, and ſearch all manner of medicines, and their re-
ceipts, by the ſaid phyſicians, or any of them, for curing of
infirmities, as often as need ſhould be; and to puniſh the
faid phyſicians, delinquents, exerciſing the ſaid faculty of
phyſic, by fines, amercements, and impriſonment of their
bodies, and other ways reaſonable and fitting, according to
the form and effect of the ſaid letters patent, and the ſtatutes
aforeſaid : and the ſaid Thomas Langton being preſident of
the college aforeſaid, and the aforeſaid Ralph Wilkinſon,
William Dun, Richard Palmer, and John Argent, being
likewiſe the four cenſors or governors of the college aforeſaid,
the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham, within the aforeſaid time in
which, &c. that is to ſay, the 1oth day of April, in the year
of our Lord 1606, within London aforeſaid, in the aforeſaid
pariſh of the bleſſed Lady of Bows, in the ward of Cheap a-
foreſaid, contrary to the form and effects of the letters patent
aforeſaid, and the aforeſaid ſtatute made in the Parliament
aforeſaid, of the ſaid King Henry the 8th, did practiſe phy-
fic, not admitted by the letters of the aforeſaid preſident and
college, ſealed with their common ſeal ; whereas in truth, the
_ aforeſaid Thomas Bonham was inſufficient to practiſe phyſie;
by reaſon whereof, the faid Thomas Bonham afterwards, that
is to ſay, the 13th day of April, in the year of our Lord 1006,
at London, in the pariſh and ward aforeſaid, was ſummoned
by the aforeſaid cenſors or governors of the college aforelaid,
to appear before the preſident and cenſors, or governors of the
college aforeſaid, at the college aforeſaid, in the pariſh and
ward aforeſaid, the 14th day of April, in the year of our Lord
1606, aboveſaid, then next following, to be examined upon the
premiſes: at which 14th day of April, in the year of our Lord
1606, aforeſaid, at the college aforeſaid, came the aforeſaid J.
Bonham in his proper perſon, before the aforeſaid preſident
and cenſors, or governors of the ſaid college, and then there was
examined of his ſcience in his faculty of phyſic to be adminil-
tered, by the aforeſaid cenſors or governors of the college atore-
ſaid; and becauſe the ſaid Thomas Bonham ſo examined an-
ſwered leſs aptly and inſufficiently in the art of phyfic, be then
and there upon his examination aforeſaid, was found by tbe
aforeſaid prefident and cenſors, or governors of the colicge
aforeſaid, leſs ſufficient and unſkilful to adminiſter phylic 3
and for that the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham being many times
examined, and forbidden by the preſident and cenlors, 0
governors aforeſaid, for the cauſes aforeſaid, to _—
phy


part VIII. Dr. Box As Caſe.


hyſic for a month, or more, after ſuch forbidding of him
within London aforeſaid, in the aforeſaid pariſh of the bleſſed
Mary of Bows, in the ward aforeſaid, without the licence of
the aforeſaid preſident and college, under their common ſeal,
contrary-to the form of the letters patent aforeſaid, and the
ſtatutes aforeſaid did practiſe, then and there it was granted,
by the aforeſaid preſident and cenſors, or governors of the col-
lege aforeſaid, that the aforeſaid Thomas, for his ſaid diſobe-
dience and contempt, be amerced to 100s. in the next aſ-
ſembly of the aforeſaid preſident and college, at the college
aforeſaid to be paid : and then and there it was commanded to
the ſaid Thomas Bonham, by them the prefident and cenſors,
or governors of the college aforeſaid, that the aforeſaid Tho-
mas Bonham, from thenceforth, ſhould forbear to praCtiſe
phyſic within the aforeſaid city of London, and the ſuburbs
thereof, and ſeven miles circuit of the ſaid city, until the ſaid
Thomas Bonham, were found to be ſufficient, and ſhould be
admitted to practiſe the ſaid art of phyſic, within the city and
circuit aforeſaid, by the preſident and college aforeſaid, under
the pain of being caſt into priſon, if in the premiles, as is
aforeſaid, he ſhould offend. And the faid Henry, George,
Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Taylor, and Wil-
liam Bowden, further ſay, that after and betore the aforeſaid
time when, &c. that is to ſay, the firſt day of October, iu
the year of our Lord 1606, aboveſaid, at the college afore -
faid, at London aforeſaid, in the pariſh and ward aforeſaid,
the aforeſaid Thomas Langton, Doctor of phylic, a man
prudent and ſkilful in the faculty of phyſic, and then one of
the commonalty of the college of phyſicians in London afore-
ſaid, and one of the electors of the college aforeſaid, was
elected and choſen into the office of preſident of the college
aforeſaid, for one year then next following, and the oſſice of
preſident of the college aforeſaid, then and there held: and
the faid Thomas Langton being preſident of the college afore-
laid, the ſame preſident and commonalty of the college aſore-


| faid, the faid firit day of October, in the year of our Lord 1606,


aboveſaid, at the college aforeſaid, chole the aforeſaid George
Turner, Thomas Moundford, William Dun, and John Argent,
octors, men prudent and ſkilful in the faculty of phyſic, and


then being four of the college aforeſaid, to be the four cenſors


or governors of the ſaid college, to ſuperviſe, ſearch, correct, and
govern, all and ſingular the phyſicians of the ſaid city, and o-
ther foreign phyſicians whomſoever, frequenting to, and ex-
ereiſing the ſaid faculty of phyſic within the ſame city, and the
ſuburbs of the ſame city, or within ſeven miles circuit of the
aid city, and to puniſh their defects, in not well exerciſing,


doing and uſing the ſame 3 as allo to overſee, and ſearch all


D d 2 manner


111


— — p
— — —
— — — —


Dr. Bonnam's Caſe. Part VIII.


manner of medicines and receipts by the ſaid phyſicians, ex-
erciſing the ſaid faculty of phyſic within the city of London
aforeſaid, and the circuit aforeſaid, or any of them, for the
curing of diſeaſes, as often as need ſhould be required, and to
punith the ſaid phyſicians exerciſing the faculty of phyſic in
the premiſes, delinquents, by fines, amercements, and im-
priſonments of their bodies, and other ways reaſonable and
fitting, according to the form and effect of the letters patent
aforeſaid, and the ſtatutes aforeſaid: and the ſaid Thomas
Langton being preſident of the college aforeſaid, and the a-
foreſaid George Turner, Thomas Moundford, William Dun,
and John Argent, being likewiſe the four cenſors, or gorer-
nors of the college aforeſaid, the ſaid Thomas Bonham, before
the time when, &c. that is to ſay, the 2oth Day of Otto.
ber, in the year of our Lord 1606, aboveſaid, within Lon-
don aforeſaid, that is to ſay, in the aforeſaid pariſh of the ble.
ed Mary of Bows, in the ward of Cheap aforeſaid, did prac-
tiſe phyſic, contrary to the form of the aforeſaid letters patent,
and the ſtatutes aforeſaid, and the aforeſaid forbidding and
command of the aforeſaid prefident and cenſors; and aſter-
wards, that is to ſay, the ſame 2oth day of October, in the
year of our Lord 1606, aforeſaid, the ſaid 'Thomas Bonham,
at London aforeſaid, in the aforeſaid pariſh of the bleſſed
Mary of Bows, in the ward of Cheap aforeſaid, was ſummon-
ed by the aforeſaid cenſors, or governors of the college afore-
ſaid, to appear beſore the ſaid cenſors, at the college aforeſaid,
in the pariſh and ward aforeſaid, the 22d day of the faid
month of October, upon the premiſes to be examined, at
which 22d day of October, in the year of our Lord 1606,
aboveſaid, at the aſſembly of the college aforeſaid, holden at
the college aforeſaid, at [onion e. in the pariſh and
ward aforeſaid z afterwards, that is to ſay, the ſame 22d
day of October, in the year of our Lord 1606, aboveſaid,
before the ſaid George 8 William Dun, Tho. Mound-
ford, and John Argent, then cenſors and governors of the
college aforeſaid, becauſe that the ſaid Thomas Bonham, by
the aforeſaid cenſors or governors of the college aforeſaid,
as it is ſaid, being warned to appear at the college aforeſaid,
before the prefident and cenſors, or governors of the college
aforeſaid, the aforeſaid 22d day of October, in the ſame
day, did not appear, then and there it was conſidered by the
ſaid cenſors or governors of the college aforeſaid, that the
ſaid Thomas Bonham, for his diſobedience and contempts,
ſhould be amerced to 101. and that the ſaid Thomas Bonham,
for the cauſes aforeſaid, ſhould be arreſted, and delivered
into cuſtody, and the ſaid Henry, George, Thomas Mound-
ford, John Argent, John Taylor, and Wm, (Bowden) _
| as


part VIII. Dr. Bonnam's Caſe.


ſay, that afterwards, and before the time when, &c. that


is to ſay, the 24th day of October, in the year of our Lord
1606, aboveſaid, the faid Thomas Langton, preſident of the
college aforeſaid, at London, in the aforeſaid pariſh of the
bleſſed Mary of Bows, in the ward of Cheap aforeſaid, died;
aſter whoſe death, and before the time when, &c. that is
to ſay, the 25th day of October, in the year of our Lord 1606,
aboveſaid, the ſaid Henry Atkins, a prudent man, and ſkil-
ful in the faculty of phyſic, and one of the commonalty of the
college aforeſaid, and one of the then eight electors of the col-
lege aforeſaid then being, at the college aforeſaid, within
London aforeſaid, in the pariſh and ward aforeſaid, was in
due manner choſen, and into the office of preſident of the col-
lege aforeſaid, for one whole year then next following, and
then and there held, and as yet doth hold the ſaid office of
preſident of the college aforeſaid ; and the ſaid Henry Atkins
being preſident of the college aforeſaid, and the aforeſaid
George Turner, William Dun, Thomas Moundford, and John
Argent, being cenſors or governors of the college aforeſaid, at
an aſſembly of the college aforeſaid holden, at the college afore-
ſaid, within London aforeſaid, in the pariſh and ward aforeſaid,
the 7th day of Nov. in the year of our Lord 1606, aboveſaid,
before the aforeſaid Henry Atkins, then preſident of the col-
lege aforeſaids and the aforeſaid George Turner, William
Dun, Thomas Moundford, and John Argent, then cenſors or
governors of the college aforeſaid, came the aforeſaid Thomas
Bonham in his proper perſon, of which 'Thomas Bonham,
when the aforeſaid Henry Atkins, then preſident of the col-
lege, and the aforeſaid George Turner, William Dun, 'Tho-
mas Moundford, and John Argent, then cenſors or governors
of the college aforeſaid aſked whether he would ſatisfy to
the college aforeſaid, for his diſobedience and contempts
aforeſaid, and again ſubmit himſelf to be examined, and to
obey the judgment of the college aforeſaid ; and the aforeſaid
Thomas Bonham, then and there anſwered, that he, before
that had within London aforeſaid, done and practiſed, and
then after within London aforeſaid, would do and practiſe
phyſic, no leave being aſked of the ſaid college, and that he

would not, in any thing, to the preſident and cenſors, or gover-
nors of the college aforeſaid, yield obedience; and then and there
affirming the aforeſaid preſident and cenſors, or governors afore-

ſaid to have no authority over thoſe who are made doctors in the

univerlity ; by which, the ſaid cenſors or governors, for the of-

fences and diſobedience aforeſaid, then and there ordained and

decreed, that the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham ſhould be ſent to

priſon, there to remain, until from thence, by the preſident and

| 4-3 -- cenſors,


112


Replication.


Dr. Box nAu's Caſe, Part VIII.


cenſors or governors of the college aforeſaid, for the time be.
ing he ſhould be delivered, as by the ſaid letters patent, and
the ſtatutes aforeſaid, it is ordained and eſtabliſhed ; and then
and there made their warrant, with the common ſeal of the
ſaid college or commonalty ſealed, and to the keeper of the

riſon of the lord the King, in the Compter, London, in the
Poultry, in the pariſh of St, Mildred, in the ward of Cheap
directed, and commanded by the faid warrant to the keeper
of the priſon aforeſaid, that the ſaid keeper of the priſon afore.
laid, ſhould receive the body of the ſaid Thomas Bonham, and
him, in the priſon aforeſaid, of the ſaid lord the King, there
ſhould ſafely keep, without bail or mainprize, at the proper
coſts and charges of the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham, until the
aforeſaid Thomas Bonham, by the command of the preſident
and cenſors, or governors aforeſaid, or their ſucceſſors, he
ſhould be delivered ; which Thomas Bonham, for his offences
and diſobedience aforeſaid, together with the warrant afore-
ſaid, in form aforeſaid made, the faid Henry Atkins then be-
ing prefident of the college aforefaid, and the aforeſaid George
Turner, William Dun, "Thomas Moundford, and John Ar-
gent, then being the four cenſors or governors of the college
atoreſaid, by virtue of the letters patent, and ſtatutes afore-
ſaid, and the atoreſaid William Bowden and John Taylor as
ſervants of the ſaid Henry Atkins, preſident, and of George,
William Dun, Thomas Moundford, and John Argent, and
by their the ſaid preſident, and four cenſors or governors afore-
ſaid, warrant, the aforeſazd time, when, &c. to one
Richard Ware, then keeper of the faid priſon of the lord the
King, of the Compter aforeſaid at London, in the pariſh of
St. Mildred the virgin, in the Poultry, in the ward of Cheap
aforefaid, did commit and deliver into ſafe cuſtody, according
to the form and effect of the letters patent, and ſtatutes afore-
ſaid, as to them it was lawful to do; which commitment of
the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham, for the cauſes aforeſaid, in form
aforeſaid done, is the ſame treſpaſs and impriſonment whete-
of the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham above complaineth : and
this they are ready to verify, and thereupon pray judgment, if
the ſaid Thomas Bonham, his action aforejaid againſt them
ought to have, &c. And the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham
ſaith, that he, for any thing before, &c. alledged to have his
action, ought not to be barred, becauſe proteſting that he
the ſaid 'Thomas Bonham, was not inſufficient, nor was found
by the aforeſaid preſident and cenſors, or governors of the
college aforeſaid, to practiſe phyſic, nor unfitly or infut-
ſiciently to the aforeſaid preſident and cenſors, or governors
of the college aforeſaid, in the art of phyſic did anſwer, a8
the ſaid Henry Atkins, George Turner, Thomas Moundford,


John


Part VIII. Dr. BoxuAu's Caſe,


John Argent, John Taylor, and William Bowden, above have
alledged, for plea, the ſaid Thomas Bonham faith, that by the
aforeſaid act in the aforeſaid Parliament, of the aforeſaid late
King Henry VIII. holden at London aforeſaid, the aforeſaid
5th day of April, in the 14th year of his reign, and from
thence adjourned to Weſtminſter, in the aforefaid coynty of
Middleſex, until the laſt day of July, in the 15th year of the
reign of the faid King, and then and there holden, it was
further enacted by authority of the ſame Parliament, that
whereas in the dioceſes of England, out of London, it was
not then very likely always to find men able ſufficiently to ex-
amine, according to the ſtatute, ſuch as ſhould be admitted
to exerciſe phyſic in them, that no perſon then after be ſuf-
fered to exerciſe phyſic through England, until the faid perſon
ſhould be examined at London, by the aforeſaid prefident, and
three of the aforeſaid electors, and ſhould have from the ſaid
preſident and electors, letters teſtimonial of their approbation
and examination, except he ſhould be a graduate of Oxford
or Cambridge, who had accompliſhed all things for his form
without any grace. And further, the ſaid Thomas Bonham
faith, that he the ſaid Thomas, the ſecond day of July, in
the year of our Lord 1594, in the Univerfity of Cambridge
aſoreſaid, took the degree and dignity of a doctor in phyſic,
and then and there, that is to ſay, the ſaid ſecond day of Tuly.
in the year of our Lord 1595 aboveſaid, in the Univerſity a-
foreſaid, at Cambridge aforeſaid, in the county of Cambridge,
was duly and lawfully ordained, and made a graduate of the
Univerſity aforeſaid, that is to ſay, doctor in phyſic, accord-
ing to the laws, ſtatutes, conſtitutions, and ordinances of
the ſaid Univerſity of Cambridge aforeſaid, and that he the
ſaid Thomas Bonham, then and there had accompliſhed all
things concerning his degree aforeſaid, by his form, with-
out grace, from time to time, according to the laws, ſtatutes,
conſtitutions, and ordinances of the ſaid Univerſity of
Cambridge aforeſaid : by colour whereof, the ſaid Thomas
Bonham, a graduate of the Univerſity of Cambridge a-
ſoreſaid, that is to ſay, being doCtor in phyſic in the form
aforeſaid, who had accompliſhed all things concerning his
degree aforeſaid, for his form, without any grace, the ſaid
faculty of phyſic from time to time in the faid city of
London, that is to ſay, in the aforeſaid pariſh of the Bleſſed
Mary of Bow, in the ward of Cheap aforeſaid, did exerciſe,
as it was lawful for him to do, until the aforeſaid Henry
Atkins, George Turner, Thomas Moundford, John Argent,
John Taylor, and William Bowden, together with, &c. the
aforeſaid roth day of November, in the fourth year above-
faid, with force and arms, him the faid Thomas Bonham, at
London aforeſaid, in the aforeſaid pariſh of the Blefled Mary.
& Bow, in the ward of Cheap, took and impriſoned, and

Dd 4 him


Joinder in de-


Dr. Bownam's Caſe, Part VIII.


him there in priſon long, that is to ſay, by the ſpace of ſeven
days, againſt the law and cuſtom of this kingdom of Eng.
land, did detain, as the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham above a.
gainſt them complaineth, and this he is ready to verifie;
whereupon, inaſmuch as the aforeſaid Henry Atkins, George
Turner, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John Taylor,
and William Bowden, the treſpaſs and impriſonment aforeſaid,
above have acknowledged, the ſaid Thomas Bonham prays
judgment, and his damages, by reaſon of the treſpaſs and im-
priſonment aforeſaid, to be adjudged unto him, &c. And the
aforeſaid Henry Atkins, George Turner, Thomas Mound-
ford, John Argent, John Taylor, and William Bowden fay,
that the aforeſaid plea of the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham, above
by replication pleaded, 1s not ſufficient in Jaw, for him the ſaid
Thomas Bonham to maintain his ſaid action, againſt them
the ſaid Henry Atkins, George Turner, Thomas Moundford,
John Argent, John Taylor, and William Bowden, and that
they to that plea in manner and form aforeſaid by replication
pleaded, need not, nor by the law of the land are bound to
anſwer, and this they are ready to verifie, whereupon they
pray judgment, and that the ſaid Thomas Bonham may be

arred from having his action aforeſaid againſt them, &c,
And the aforeſaid Thomas Bonham, foraſmuch as he, ſuſh-
cient matter in law, to maintain his action aforeſaid, againſt
the ſaid Henry Atkins, George, Thomas Moundford, John
Argent, John Taylor, and William Bowden, above hath al-
ledged, which he is ready to verifie, which matter the aforel.
Henry, George, Thomas Moundford, John Argent, John
Taylor, and William Bowden, do not deny, nor to the ſame
any ways anſwer, but the fame averment altogether to admit
do refuſe, as before, prays judgment and his damages, by
_ occaſion of the treſpaſs and impriſonment aforeſaid to be ad-
judged to him, &c. And becauſe the Juſtices here will ad-
viſe themſclves of and upon the premiſes aforeſaid, whereof
the parties have put themſelves upon the judgment of the
court aforeſaid, before that they give their judgment thereol,
day is given to the parties here, until in eight days of St. Hila-
ry, to hear their judgment thereof, becauſe the ſame Juſtices
here thereof are not yet, &c. |


Dr. B O N-


\


part VIII. | 114


Dr. BON HA M's Caſe.


Hil. 7 Tac. 1.


HOMAS BONHAM, doctor in philoſophy and phy- Skinner 568.

fic, brought an action of falſe impriſonment againſt 4 Re

Henry Atkins, George Turner, Thomas Moundford, and 256, .. 535

John Argent, doctors in phyſic, and John Taylor, and Wm. 1 LA. Raym.

Bowden yeomen ; for that the defendants, the 10 Nov. anno 4 45+

Jacobi, did impriſon him, and detain him in priſon ſeven

days. The defendants pleaded the letters patent of King H. 8.

bearing date 23 Septemb. anno 10 of his reign, by which he

recites, (a) Quod cum Regii officu ſui munus arbitrabatur di- (a) 2 Brownl,

timis ſue hominum felicitati omni ratione conſulere, id autem 256, 260.

vel imprimis fore fi impreborum conatibus tempeſitve occurreret,

Sc. And by the ſame letters patent, the King granted to

John Chambre, Thomas Linacre, Ferdinando de Victoria,

John Halſwel, John Frances, and Robert Yaxley, guod ipſi om-

neſſue homines ejuſdem facultatis de et in cavitat* London fant

in re et nomine unum corpus et communitas perpetua, per no-

men preſidentis et collegii, five communitatis facultatis medi-

ing London, &c. And that they might make meetings and

ordinances, &c. But the caſe at bar doth principally con-

liſt on two clauſes in the charter, The firſt, conceſſumus

iam eiſdem preſidenti & collegia ſeu communitati et ſucceſ-

Jribus ſuis, quod nemo in didtd civitate, aut per ſeptem mil-

laria in circuitu ejuſdems exerceat dictam facultatem medi-

ine, niſi ad hoc per dic preſident” et communit' ſeu ſucceſſores

ſuss, qui pro tempore fuerint, admiſſus ſit per ejuſdem præſiden-

14 et collegii literas 2 uo communi figillat” ſub pena cen-
: tum


(a) 14 & 1 5H.8.
cap. z.

1 Roll. 598.

4 Inſt. 251.
Raſtal Phyſi-
cians 3.

2 Bulſt. 18 5.
Lit. Rep. 168,
169, 172, 212,
215, 246, 247,
248, 249.

1 Jones 261.
Cr. Jac. 121,
159, 160.

Cr. Car. 2 56.
Palm. 486

(5) 1 Mar, c. 9.
Raſtal's Phyſi-
cians 7.

Lit. Rep. 169,
172, 173, 212,
213, 215, 248,
249, 350, 351.
1 Jones 263.
Cr. Car. 257.
Cr. Jac. 121.
& Init. 251,

2 Brownl. 2 57,
262 265, 266.


Dr. Box n Au's Caſe. Part VIII.


tum ſolidorum pro quolibet menſe quo non admiſſus eandem faculty.
tem exercuerit, dimid' inde dom” Regi & heredibus ſuis, et dini.
dium dict“ præſidenti et collegio applicand', &c. The ſecond
clauſe is, which immediately follows in theſe words, pr teen
voluit et conceſſit pro ſe et ſucceſſoribus ſuis, quantum in ſe ſuit, qu
per preſident” et collegium prædict communitat” pro tempore exiſt
et eorum ſucceſſores imperpetuum, quatuor ſingulis annis per ipſy
eligerent” qui haberent ſuperviſum et ſcrutinium, correctionem t
gubernationem omnium et ſingulorum dit?” civitatis medicorum, u.
tentium facultat” medicing in eadem civitate, ac aliorum medicorum
forinſecorum guorumcunque facultatem illam medicine aligus may
Frequentantium et utentium infra eandem civitatem et ſuburbia tjuſ.
dem, ſive infra ſeptem milliaria in circuitu ej» ſdem civitalis, ac
punitionem eorundem pro delictis ſuis in non bene exeguend fact.
end et uten illa : necnon ſuperviſum et ſcrutinium omnium medi.
cinarum, et earum receptionem per dictos medicos ſeu aliquem
eorum hujuſmodi ligeis dicti nuper Regis pro eorum infirmiati-
bus curand et ſanand* dand imponend et utend” quoties et quand
opus fuerit, pro commodo et utilita” eorundem ligeorum difti
nuper Regis: ita quod punitio eorundem medicorum utentiun
difta facultate medicine 4 in præmiſs delinguentium per fine,
amerciamenta et impriſonament* corpo um ſuorum, & per alias
vias rationabiles & congruas exequeretur, prout by the ſaid charter
plenius liguet. Et quod virtute pred” literarum patentium pred” J.
Chambre, Tho. Linacre, &c. & omnes homines ejuſdem faculla-
tis in arvit pred” fuer” unum corpus et communitas perpet ſive cl.
legium perpetuum. And afterwards, by act of Parliament
made anno (a) 14 H. 8. it was enacted, that the ſaid corpo-
ration, and every grant, article, and other things in the
ſaid letters patent contained and ſpecified, ſhould be ap-
proved, granted, ratified, and confirmed, &c. in tam ampio
& largo modo pront poterit acceptari, cogitari, et conſiru per
eaſdem literas patentes. And further it was enacted, that the
ſaid fix perſons named in the faid letters patent, as prin-
cipal of the ſaid college, ſhould elect to them two others of
the ſaid college, who ſhould be named ele&i, aud that the
ſaid elects ſhould chuſe one of them to be preſident, as by
the ſaid act appears: and further, they pleaded the act cf
(6) 1 Marie, by which it is enacted, Yusd quedam conceſſt
per literas patentes de incorporatiane fatid per prædic! nuper
Regem medicis London. t omnes clauſulæ et articuli Or
ten! in eadem conceſſiane approbarentur, concederentur, li-
ficarentur et confirm! per predift” Parlian” , in confiderariant
cujus inattitat' fuit authoritate euſdem Parliaments. Qui
præd' ſlatut et afum Parliamenti in emnibus ariicuns 4
clauſulis in coden content” extunc impaſlerum flarent et chi.


tinuarent in plens robare, c. And further it was n
c


part VIII. Dr. Boxnnam's Caſe; 115
ed, © That whenſoever the preſident of the college, or com-
« monalty of the ＋ * of phyſic at London for the time
« being, or ſuch as the ſaid preſident and college ſhall yearly,
« according to the tenor and meaning of the ſaid act, autho-
« rize to ſearch, examine, correct, and puniſh all offenders
« and tranſgreſſors in the ſaid faculty, &c. ſhall ſend or com-
« mit any ſuch offender or offenders for his or their offence
« or diſobedience, contrary to any article or clauſe contained
« in the ſaid grant or act, to any ward, gaol, or priſon within
« the ſame city (the Tower of London except) that then from
« time to time the warden, gaoler, or keeper, &c. ſhall re-
« ceive, &c. ſuch perſon fo offending, &c. and the fame ſhall
& keep at his proper charge, without bail or mainprize, until*
« ſuch time as ſuch offender or diſobedient be diſcharged of
« the ſaid impriſonment by the ſaid preſident, and ſuch per-
ce ſons as ſhall be thereunto authoriſed, upon pain that all and
« every ſuch warden, gaoler, &c. doing the contrary, ſhall loſe
« and forfeit the double of ſuch fines and amerciaments as
« ſuch offender and offenders ſhall be aſſeſſed to pay, by ſuch
« as the ſaid preſident and college ſhall authoriſe as aforeſaid,
ce {q that the fine and amerciament be not at any one time a-
« hove the ſum of 201. the one moiety to the King, the other
e moiety to the preſident and college, &c.” And further
pleaded, that the ſaid Thomas Bonham, 10 April 1606, with-
in London, againſt the form of the ſaid letters patent, and the
ſaid acts, exercebat artem medicine, non admiſſus per literas pred”
prefidentis & collegii figillo eorum communi figillat' ubi revera
pred” Tho. Bonham ſuit minus ſufficiens ad artem medicine exer-
cend”, By force of which, the ſaid Thomas Bonham, 30 Apri-
lis 1606, was ſummoned in London by the cenſors or gover-
nors of the college, ad comparend” coram prefiden® & cenſor” ſtve
gubernatorib' collegii pred” at the college, &c. the 14th day of
April next following, ſuper premiſſis examinand*. At which
day the faid Tho. Bonham came before the preſident and cen-
ſors, and was examined by the cenſors de ſcientid ſud in facultate
fua in medicinꝰ adminiſtrand'. Et quia præd Thomas Bonham
fic examinatus minus apte & inſuffictenter in pred” arte medicine
reſpondebat, & inventus fuit ſuper examinationem pred” per pred”
præſident & cenſores minus inſuſſiciens & inexpertꝰ ad artem medi-
ting adminiſtrand' ac pro es quod pred” Thi, Bonham multoties
ante tunc examinatus, & interdictus per preſident” & cenſores, de
cauſis pred” ad artem medicine adminiſirand per unum menſem et
amplius poſt talem interdictianem facultatem illam in Lond" pra?
ne licentia, c. ideo adtunc & ibid' conſideratum fuit per pred?
prefident” & cenſores, quod præd Thomas Banham pro inobe-
dientia et contempt” ſuis pred” amerciaretur to 10059. in proxi-
mis comitiis præd' preſident et callegii per ſolvend' et deinceps
abſlineret, &c, quouſque inventus fuerit ſuſſiciens, &c. ſub pœna
£ conjictends


— F ·qu ũ—¹ͤ .ů ?⁊ĩß⁵uuñyX —⏑0.?


— —_— — — WEE” — —
bo 1 . . . » -- .


—— Pr


. CT ISAACS wa WH +


(a) 2 Brownl.
201, 202.


Dr. Boxnam's Caſe, Part VIII.


conjiciendi in carcerem ſi in præmiſſis delingueret. And that the
ſaid T. Bonham, 20 Octo. 1606, within London did practice
phyſic, and the ſame day he was ſummoned by the cenſors to
appear before the preſident and them, 22 Octob. then next
following, at which day Bonham made default: ideo conſider.
atum fuit per pred cenſores, that for his diſobedience and con-
tempt he ſhould be amerced to 10 l. and that he ſhould be
arreſted and committed to cuſtody ; and afterward, 7 Noy,
1606, the ſaid T. Bonham, at their aſſembly came before the
preſident and cenſors, and they aſked him if he would fatisfy
the college for his diſobedience and contempt, and ſubmit
himſelf to be examined, and obey the cenſure of the college,


who anſwered, that he had practiſed and would practiſe phy.


ſic within London, nulla à collegio petita venia, and that he
would not ſubmit himſelf to the preſident and cenſors, and
aflirmed, that the preſident and cenſors, had no authority over
thoſe who were doCtors in the univerſity ; for which cauſe,
the ſaid four cenſors, /c. Dr. Turner, Dr. Moundford, Dr,
Argent, and Dr. Dun, then being cenſors or governors, pro
offenſis et inobedientia pred” adtunc & 16” ordinaverunt & decre-
verunt, quod præd 7. Bonham in carcerem mandaretur ib” reman-
ſur quouſque abinde per præſident & cenſores, ſeu gubernatores
collegii præd pro tempore exiſien deliberaretur, and there then by
their warrant in writing, under their common ſeal, did com-
mit the plaintiff to the priſon of the Compter of London, &c.
abſque ballia five manucapt ad cuſtagia & onera ipſius T. Bun-
bam, donec præd T. Bonham per pracept' prefiden' & cenſor
collegii pred” ſiue ſucceſſor ſuor liberatus eſſet; and Dr. Atkins
then preſident, and the cenſors, and Bowden and Taylor as
their ſervants and by the commandment of the ſaid preſident
and cenſors, did carry the plaintiff with the warrant, to the
gaol, &c. which is the ſame impriſonment. The plaintiff
replied and faid, that by the ſaid act of 14 Hf. 8. it was fur-
ther enacted, And where that in the dioceſes of England,
out of London, it is not like to find alway men able ſuffici-
© ently to examine (after the ſtatute) ſuch as ſhall be admitted
* toexercile phylic in them, that it may be enacted in this
«© preſent Parliament, that no perſon from henceforth be ſuf.
« fered to exerciſe or practiſe phyſic through England, until
« {ſuch time that he be examined at London by the ſaid preli-
«. dent and three of the ſaid elects, and to have from them
« letters teſtimonial of their approving and examination,
« except he be a graduate of Oxtord or Cambridge, which


% have accomplithed all things for his form without any


„ grace :” and that the plaintiff, anno Dom. 1595, Was 4
graduate, /c. a doctor in the univerſity of Cambridge, and
had accompliſhed all things concerning his degree for his
form without (a) grace, by force whereof he had exer-
ciſed and practiſed phyſic within the city of London until
the defendants had impriſoned him, &c. upon which the


ceſendant demurred in law. And this caſe was often
argue


part VIII. Dr. Box HAu's Cafe;


argued by the Serjeants at bar in divers ſeveral terms; and
now this term the caſe was argued by the Juſtices, and the
effect of their arguments who argued againſt the plaintiff
(which was divided into three parts) ſhall be firſt reported.
The firſt was, whether a doctor of phyſic of the one univer-
ſity or the other, be by the letters patent, and by the body
of the act of 14 H. 8. reſtrained from practiſing phyſic within
the city of London, &c. The ſecond was, if the exception
in the ſaid act of (a) 14 H. 8. has excepted him or not. The
third was, that his impriſonment was lawful for his ſaid diſ-
obedience. And as to the firſt, they relied upon the letter of
the grant, ratified by the ſaid act of 14 H. 8. which is in the
negative, ſc. nemo in difta civitate, &c. exerceat dictam facul-
tatem nifi ad hoc per predif?” præſidentem & communitatem, &c.
admiſſus fit, &c. And this propoſition is a general negative,
and (6) generale didtum eſt generaliter intelligendum ; and nemo
excludes all; and therefore a doctor of the one univerſity or
the other, is prohibited within this negative word nemo. And
many caſes were put where negative ſtatutes ſhall be taken
firifte et excluſive, which I do not think neceſſary to be recited
here. Alſo they ſaid, that the ſtatute of (c) 3 H. 8.c. rt.
which in effect is repealed by this act of (4) 14 H. 8. has a
ſpecial proviſo for the univerſities of Cambridge and Oxford,
which being here left out, doth declare the intention of the
makers of the act, that they did intend to include them within
this general prohibition, nemo in difta civitate, &c. As to
the ſecond point they ſtrongly held, that the ſaid latter clauſe,
and where that in the dioceſes of England, out of London,”
&c, this clauſe, according to the words, extends only to places
out of London, and ſo much the rather, becauſe they pro-
vided for London before, nemo in didtd civitate, Sc. Alſo
the makers of the act put a diſtinction betwixt thoſe who ſhall
be licenſed to practiſe phyfic in London, &c. for they ought
to have the admittance and allowance of the preſident and
college in writing, under their common ſeal ; but he who
ſhall be allowed to practiſe phyſic throughout England, out
of London, ought to be examined and admitted by the preſi-
dent and three of the elects, and ſo they ſaid, that it was lately
adjudged in the King's Bench, in an information exhibited
againſt the ſaid Dr. Bonham for practiſing phyſic in London
for divers months As to the third point they ſaid, that for
his contempt and diſobedience before them at their aſſembly
in their college, they might well commit him to priſon for
they have authority by the letters patent and act of Parliament,
and therefore for a contempt or miſdemeanor before them they
may commit him. Alſothe act of (e) 1 M. has given them power
tocommit them for every offence or diſob. contrary to any article


or clauſe contained in the ſaid grant or act. But there is an expreſs 2


negative article in the ſaid grant, and ratif, by the act of 14 H. 8.


116


(a) 14 & 15 H.
8. cap. 5.


(5) 11 Co. 59. a.
Co, Lit. 36. -
2 Inſt. 81.
Hard, 305.


(c) Raſtal. Phy-
ſician 1.

(4) 14 & 15 H.
8. c. 5.

1 Roll. 598.

4 Inſt. 251.
Raſtal Phy-
ſician 3.

2 Bulſtr. 18 5.
Lit. Rep. 168,
169, 172, 212,
215, 246, 247,
243, 249.

1 Jones 261.
Cr. Jac, 12 1,
159. 160.
CiC. 256,
Palm. 486.
Car t. 115.


6 Mod. 12 5.
() 1 Mar. c. 9.
Raſtal Phy-
ſician 7.

Lit. Rep. 169,
172, 173, 212,
213, 215, 248,
249, 350, 351
1 Jones 263.
Cr. Car. 257.
Cro. Jac. 121.
Inſt. 251.
Brownl. 2571
262, 265, 206.


E Carr, 115.
A


«
r £ —=—x-
2 "v6. _ — | - 3


(a) 2 Brownl.
264.


(4) 2 Brownl,


264- |


(e) 2 Brown),
264.


Dr. Bonnam's Caſe, Part Vit,


Nod nemo in dif civitate, He. exerceat, Ec. and the defer.
dants have pleaded, that the plaintiff had practiſed phyſie in
London by the ſpace of one month, &c. and therefore the aq


of 1 Marie has authoriſed them to impriſon him in this caſe;


wherefore they concluded againſt the plaintiff. But it was
argued by Cole Chief Juſtice, Warburton and Daniel Juſ-
tices of the Common Pleas, to the contrary. And Daniel
Juſtice conceived, that a doctor of phyſic, of the one univer-
ſity or the other, &c. was not within the body of the act, and
if he was within the body of the act, that he was excepted

the ſaid latter clauſe 3 but Warburton argued againſt him for
both the points ; and the Chiet Juſtice did not ſpeak to thoſe
two points, becauſe he and Warburton and Daniel agreed,
that this action was clearly maintainable for two other points,
and therefore in this action the Chief Juſtice omitted to ſpezk
to the ſaid two points; but to two other points, he and the
faid two other Juſtices, Warburton and Daniel, did ſpeak,
fe. 1. Whether the cenſors have power, for the cauſes alledged
in their bar, to fine and impriſon the plaintiff. 2. Admitting
that they have power to do it, if they had purſued their power,
But the Chief Juſtice, before he argued the points in hw,
becauſe much was ſaid in commendation of the doctors of
phyſic of the college in London, and ſomewhat (as he con-
ceived) in derogation of the dignity of the doCtors of the uni-
verſities, he firſt attributed much to the doctors of the faid
college in London, and confeſſed that nothing was ſpoke in
their commendation which was not due to their merits : but
yet that no compariſon was to be made between that private
college, and either of the univerſities of Cambridge and Oxford,
no more than between the father and his children, or between
the fountain and the ſmall rivers which defcend from it; the
univerſity is alma (a) mater, from whoſe breaſts thoſe of that
private college have ſucked all their ſcience and knowledge
(which I acknowledge to be great and profound) but the law
faith, erubeſcit lex filios caſtigare parentes : the univerſity is the
fountain, and that and the like private colleges are tanquem
rivuli, which flow from the fountain, et melius eſt perere fonte“
guam ſectari rivulos. Briefly, Academiæ (b) Cantabrigia & Oxon
ſunt Athenæ noftra nobiliſſimæ, regni ſoles, oculi & anime regni,
unde religio, humanitas, et doctrina in omnes regni partes uberrint
diffunduntur : but it is true, nunguam ſufficiet copia !audati!!,
quia nunguam deficiet materia laudis ; and therefore thoſe um
verſities exceed and excel all private colleges, quantum mt
virburna cupreſſus. And it was obſerved that K. H. 8. in his ſaid
letters patent and the K. and the Parliam. in the act of 141.5:


in making of a law concern, phyſicians, for the more ſafety and


health of men, therein follow the order of a good phyſician (Ker
(e) enim omn artes cenſetur habere in ſcrinis pet?” ut) tory medicina
a : , 7


— |


Part VIII. Dr. Box nAu's Caſe, 117


ot duplex, remevens, (a) & promovens; removens morbum, & (a) 2 Brownl,
ramovens ad ſalutem and therefore five manner of perſons 24.

(who more hurt the body of man than the diſeaſe itſelf, one

of which ſaid of one of their patients, ſugiens morbum incidit in

medicum) are to be removed; 1. Improbi. 2. Avari, qui me-

dicinam magis (b) avaritie ſue cauſa quum ullius bong conſcientiæ (3) 2 Brownl,

fiducia profitemtur. 3. Matitiofi, 4. Temerarii. 5g. Inſcii. 258.

And of the other part five manner of perſons were to be pro-

moted, as appears by the ſaid act, ſc. thoſe who were, 1. pro-

found. 2. ſad. 3. diſcreet. 4. groundly learned. 5. profoundly

ſtudied. And it was well ordained, that the profeſſors of

phyſic ſhould be profound, ſad, diſcreet, &c. and not youths,
who have no gravity and experience; for as one faith, (c) In (e) 2 Brownl

juvene theologo con ſcientiæ detrimentum, in juvene legifia bur ſee 264.
ditrimentum., in juvene medico coemiterit incrementum. And it

ought to be preſumed, every doctor of any of the univerſities

to be within the ſtatutes, 75 to be profound, ſad, diſcreet,

groundly learned, and profoundly ſtudied, for none can there

de maſter of arts (who is a doctor of philoſophy) under the

ſtudy of ſeven years, and cannot be doCtor in phyſic under

ſeven years more in the ſtudy of phyſic ; and that is the rea-

ſon that the plaintiff is named in the declaration doctor of

Philoſophy, and doctor of 2 quia oportet medicum eſſe

phileſophum, (d ubi enim philoſophus deſinit, medicus incipit: (4) 2 Brown!,

as to the two points upon which the Chief Juſtice, Warbur- 263.

ton and Daniel, gave judgment. 1. It was reſolved by them,

that the ſaid cenſors had not power to commit the plaintiff for

any of the cauſes mentioned in the bar; and the cauſe and

reaſon thereof ſhortly was, that the ſaid clauſe, which gives

power to the ſaid cenſors to fine and impriſon, doth not ex-

tend to the ſaid clauſe, /c. quod nemo in dictd civitate, fc, exer-

ea! dictam facultatem, &c. whieh prohibits every one from i
practiſing phyſic in London, &c. without licence from the
preſident and college; but extends only to puniſh thoſe who

practiſe phyſic in London, pro delictis ſuis in non bene (e) exe» (e) 2 Brown!,

guendo, faciende & utendo facultate medicine, by fine and im- 258.
priſonment: ſo that the cenſors have not power by the letters

patent, and the act, to fine or impriſon any for practiſing

phyſic in London, but only pro delictis ſuis in non bene exeguen-

ds, c. ſe. for ill, and not good uſe and practice of phyſic.

And that was made manifeſt by five reaſons, which were

called vivide rationes, becauſe they had their vigour and life % Godb. 418.
from the letters patent, and the act itſelf ; and the beſt ( 6 ee
expolitor of all letters patent, and acts of Parliament, are II
the letters patent and the acts of Parliament themſelves, 3 Co. 59. b.

by conſtruction, and conferring (g) all the parts of them Godd. 324.


*


Co. Lit. 381.
i together » 5 Co. oh, 4


-
:
*
1
N


/


＋


—


|
*
i}
|
|
|
|


| |


(a) Wing Max.
239. |
(5) Wing, Max.
239.


(-) a Browal.
264.
Cart. 115.


(4) 2 Btowul.
264.


Dr. Bownam's Caſe, Part Il.


together, (a) Optima flatuti interpretatrix eff (omnibus particuli
ejuſdem inſpectis) ipſum flatutum; and (5) injuſtum «ft niſi wn
ege inſpefta una aliqua gjus particula propoſita judicare vel reſpon
dere. The firſt reaſon was, that theſe two were two abſolute
perfect, and diſtin clauſes, and as parallels, and therefore
the one did not extend to the other; for the ſecond beging,
præterea voluit et conceſſit, &c. and the branch concerning fine
and impriſonment is parcel of the 2d clauſe. 2. The firſt
clauſe prohibiting the practice of phyſic, &c. comprehends
four certainties: 1. Certainty of the thing prohibited, .
practice of phyſic.- 2. Certainty of the time, /c. practiſe for
one month. 3. Certainty of penalty, ff 5l. 4. Certainty
in diſtribution, ſc. one moiety to the King, and the other
moiety to the college, and this penalty he who practiſes phyſic
in London incurs, although he practiſes and ules phylic well,
and profitable for the body of man; and on this branch the
information was exhibited in the King's Bench. But the
clauſe to puniſh delifia in non bene exequends, &c. on which
branch the caſe at bar ſtands, is altogether uncertain, for the
hurt which may come thereby may be little or great, lere v4
grave, exceſſive or ſmall, &c. and therefore the King and the
makers of the act could not, for an offence ſo uncertain, im-
poſe a certainty of the fine, or time of impriſonment, but
leave it to the cenſors to puniſh ſuch offences, ſecundum guan-
titatem delicti, which is included in theſe words, per fine,
amerciamenta, impriſonamenta corporum ſuorum, et per alias vias
rationibiles et congruas. 2. The harm which acrcues by 103
bene exequendo, &c. concerns the body of man; and therefore
it is reaſonable that the offender ſhould be puniſhed in his
his body, /c. by impriſonment ; but he who practiſes phylic
in London in a good manner, although he doth it without
licence, yet it is not any prejudice to the body of man. 3.
He who praCtiſes phyſic in Lon. doth not offend the ſtatute


by his practice, unleſs he practiſes it by the ſpace of a month.


But the clauſe of non bene exeguendo, c. doth not preſcribe
any certain time, but at what time ſoever he miniſters phytic
non bene, &c. he ſhall be puniſhed by the ſaid ſecond branch:
and the law hath great reaſon in making this diſtinction, for
divers nobles, (c) gentlemen, and others, come upon divers
occaſions to London, and when they are here they become
ſubject to diſeaſes, and thereupon they ſend for their phyſi-
cians in the country, who know their bodies, and the
cauſe of their diſeaſes ; now it was never the meaning of
the act to bar any one of his own phyſician ; and when he
is here he may practiſe and minifter to another by two or (4)
three weeks, &c. without any forfeiture ; for any one who


practiſes phyſic bene, &c. in London (although he has not taken
any


© 1 1 »— — _ ® wy


part VIII. Dr. Boxnali's Caſe, 118


ny degree in any of the univerſities) ſhall forfeit nothing, un-
les he practiſes it by the ſpace of a month; and that was the
reaſon that the time of a month was put in the act. 4. The
cenſors cannot be (a) judges, miniſters, and parties; judges
to give ſentence or judgment; miniſters to make ſummons z
and parties to have the moiety of the forfeiture, quia () aliquis (a) Co. Lit.141,
nn debet eſſe Fudex in propria cauſa, imo iniquum eft aliquem ſue 1 3 87,
rei ofſe judicem 3 and one cannot be Judge and attorney for 2 Bren. 26 5
any of the parties, Dyer 3 E. 6. 65. 38 E. 3. 15. 8 H. 6. 19. Dyer 220. pl 4.
b. 20. a. 21 E. 4. 47. a. &c. And it appears in our books, (#) Co. Lit. 14:,
that in many caſes, the common Jaw will (e) controul acts of * .
Parliament, and ſometimes adjudge them to be utterly void: 2 *
for when an act of Parliament is againſt common right and Hov. 37.

. 2 Browul. 198
reaſon, or repugnant, or impoſſible to be performed. the 265. *
common law will controul it, and adjudge ſuch act to be void; Hard. 140.
and therefore in 8 E. 3 20. a. b. Thomas Tregor's cafe on the
ſtatute of W. 2. c. 38. & artic* ſuper chartas, c. 9. Herle (4) (d)8E. z. zo. b.
faith, ſome ſtatutes are made againſt law and right, which
thoſe who made them perceiving, would not put them in cx-
ecution : the (tat. of W. 2. (e) c. 21 gives a writ of Ceſſavit (e) 2 Inſt. 401,
hered: af pa heredem tenent” & ſuper eos quibus alienatum 492+
furrit hujuſmodi tenementum: and yet it is adjudged in 33 E.
3 (f) Ceſſavit 42. where the caſe was, two coparceners lords,“ £ ) 2 Brownl,
and tenant by fealty and certain rent, one coparcener had iſſue 254. i.
and died, the aunt and the niece ſhail not join in a Ce//avit, F. N. B. 20g. f.
becauſe the heir (g) ſhall not have a C avit for the ceſſer in (8) 2 Erowal.
the time of his anceſtor, F. N. B. 209. F. and therewithagrees V4. N. B. 138.
Plow, Com. 1 10. a. and the reaſon is, becauſe in a Cæſſavit the b. 2 laſt. 442,
tenant before judgment may render the arrearages and da-
mages, &c. and retain his land, and that he cannot do when
the heir brings a C-//avit for the cefler in the time of his an-
celtor, for the arrearages incurred in the life of the anceſtor do
not belong to the heir: and becauſe it would be againſt com-
mon right and reaſon, the common law adjudges the ſaid act
of Parliament as to that point void. The ſtatute of (+) Car- (5) 2 Inft. 580,
ile, made anno 35 E. I. enacts, that the order of the Ciſter- L
cans and Augultines, who have a convent and common ſcal, *
that the common ſeal hail be in the keeping of the Prior, who
is under the Abbot, and four others of the moſt grave of the
houſe, and that any deed ſcaled with the common ſeal,
which is not ſo in keeping ſhall be void: and the opinion
of the court (in an. 27 H. 6. Annuity 41.) was, that this
ſtatute was (i) void, for it is impertinent to be obſerved, * 0 588.4
for the ſeal being in their keeping, the Abbot cannot ſeal any 3
thing with it, and when it is in the Abbor's hands, it is out
of their keeping ip/o face; and if the ſtatute ſhould be (4) #) 2 Brownl,
ooſerved, every common ſeal ſhall be defeate4 upon a fim- > 8
pie ſurmiſe, which cannot be tried. Note rcader the words *
Vol. IV. E. e of


—ͤ—P— ——[— tj! —


— — — —— — - —
—— ——ů— — — 1232 —— — —
4 — - * bg * >


Dr. Bonnam's Caſe, Part VIII.


of the ſaid ſtatute at Carliſle, ann» 35 E. 1. (which is called
Statutum religiojorum) are, Et inſuper ordinavit dominus Rey ts


Natuit, quod Abbates Ciſterc“ & Præmonſtraten' or din? religioſinum,


fa) Dy. 313. pl.
1


1 Co, 47. à.

Dav. 2. A.
ene
Cro. Car. 82, 83.
2 Roll. Rep. 246,
247. Jones 234 ·
Lit, Rep. 43.

(5) 1 And. 45.

3 Leon. 58.

4 Leon. 40, 41.


{c) 4 Co. 43- 3
(d) 2Ventr. 170.
4 Co. 43. 2.

5 Co. bi, 2:

11 Co. £9- b.

1 Roll, Rep. 95.
Cawly 78.

Noy 82.
Bridgm. 122.
Cro, Jac. 481.
Wing. Max. 69 Fo


(e) Poſtea 154 · b.
Raymond 330.
Hawkes's Max.
21. Styles 391.
(f) Crv. El. 208.
2 Leon. 47.
Owen 84, 85.

1 And. 245.

6 Co. 64. b.

3 8
2 Roll. Rep 276.
Winch. 92.
Lane 69.

Lit. Rep, 64,67,
289.

Styles 391.


Sc. de cetero habeant figillum commune, et illud in cuſlodid Pri.
ois monaſterii ſeu domus, et quatuer de dignioribus et diſcretioriby;
ej uſdem loci conventus ſub privato figills Abbatis ipſius loci cuſſlod
depo”, Sc. Et ſi forſan aliqua ſcripta obligationum, donatianum
emptionum, venditionum, altenationum, ſeu aliorum quorumenque,
contradtuum alio figills quam tali figills communi ſicut præmittit
cuſtodit inveniant” a modo figillat', pro null penitus habeantur
emnique careant firmitate. So the ſtatute of 1 E. 6. c. 14 gives
chauntries, &c. to the King, ſaving to the donor, &c. all ſuch
rents, ſervices, &c. and the common law controuls it, and
adjudges it void as to ſervices, and the donor ſhall have the
rent, as arentſeck, diſtrainable of common right, for it would
be againſt common right and reaſon that the (a) King ſhould
hold of any, or do ſervice to any of his ſubjects, 14 Eliz. Dyer
313. and fo it was adjudged Mich. 16 & 17 Eliz. in Com Bau-
co in ( Strowd's caſe. So if any act of Parliament gives to
any to hold, or to have conuſans of all manner of pleas ariſin

beſore him within his manor of D. yet he ſhall hold no plea,
to which he himſelf is party; for, as hath been ſaid, iniquum
efl aliquem ſue rei eſſe judicem. 5. If he ſhould forfeit 5].
for one moiety by the firſt clauſe, and ſhould be puniſhed ſor
practiſing at any time by the ſecond clauſe, two abſurdities
fhould follow, 1. That one ſhould be puniſhed not only twice
but many times for one and the ſame offence. And the di-
vine faith, Quad (c) Deus non agit bis in idipſum ; and the law
ſaith, Nemo debet bis puniri pro uno deliclo. 2. It would be ab-
ſurd, by the firſt clauſe, to puniſh practiſing for a month,
and not for a leſſer time, and by the ſecond to puniſh practiſing
not only for a dav, but at any time, fo he ſhall be puniſhed by
the firſt branch for one month by the forfeit of 51. and by the
ſecond by fine and impriſonment, without limitation for
every time of the month in which he practiſes phyſic.
And all theſe reaſons were proved by two grounds, or
maxims in law; 1. (e) Generals clauſula non porrigitur ad ta
gue. ſpecialiter ſunt comprehenſa : and the caſe between Car-
ter and (/) Ringſtead, Hil. 34 Eliz. Rot. 120. in Commun
Banco, was cited to this purpole, where the caſe in effect was,
that A. ſeiſed of the manor of Staple in Odiham in the
county of Southampton in fee, and alſo of other lands in
Odiham aforeſaid in fee, ſuffered a common recovery ot
all and declared the ule by indenture, that the recover?!
ſhould ſtand ſeiſed of all the lands and tenements in U-
diham, to the uſe of-A. and his wife, and to the heirs
of his body begotten; and further, that the 3


]
|
|
J
f
|
|
|
|
|


part VIII. Dr. Box HA u's Caſe;


ſhould ſtand ſciſed to the uſe of him, and to the heirs of his
body, and died, and the wife ſurvived, and entered into the
ſaid manor by force of the ſaid general words; but it was ad-
judged, that they did not extend to the ſaid manor which was
ſpecially named : and if it be ſo in a deed, a fortriori, it ſhall
he ſo in an act of Parliament, which (as a will) is to be ex-

ounded according to the intention of the makers. 2. (a) Yer-
ba poſteriora propter certitudinem addita ad priora que certitudine
indigent ſunt reſerenda. 6 E. (b) 3. 12. a. b. Sir Adam de
Clydrow Knight, brought a Præcipe quod reddat againſt John
de Clydrow, and the writ was, Quod juſte, &c. reddat mane-
rium de MWicomb et duas carucatas terre cum pertinentiis in Cly-
draw, in that caſe the town of Clydrow ſhall not relate to the
manor, gui4 non indiget, for a manor may be demanded with-
out mentioning that it lies in any town, but cum pertineutiis, al-
though it comes after the town, ſhall relate to the manor,
quia indiget. Vide 3 E. 4. 10. the like caſe But it was ob-
jected, that where by the ſecond clauſe it was granted, that
the cenſors ſhould have ſuperviſum et ſcrutinium, correqtionem
et gubernationem omnium et ſingulorum medicorum, c. they had
power to fine and impriſon. To that it was anſwered, 1.
That that is but part of the ſentence, for by the entire ſen-
tence it appears in what manner they ſhall have power to
puniſh, for the words are, ac punitionem eorum pro delictis
ſuis in non bene exequend?, faciendo, vel utendo illa facultate ;
ſo that without queſtion all their power to correct and puniſh
the phyſicians by this clauſe is only limited to theſe three
caſes, /c. in non bene exequends, fuciends, vel utendo, fc. Alſo
this word punitionem, is limited and reſtrained by theſe words,
ita quod punitis eorundem medicarum, Ic. fic in præmiſſis delin-


119


(9) Wing. Mts


Lit. Rep. 66.
(5) Lit. Rep. 66,
Wing. Max. 67.
Styles 78.


guentium, &c, which words, /ic in præmiſſis delinquentium,


limit the former words in the firſt part of this ſentence, ac
punitionem eorum pro delictis ſuis in non bene exequendo, &c.,
2. It would be abſurd, that in one and the fame ſentence
the makers of the act ſhould give them a general power to
puniſh without limitation; and a ſpecial manner how they
ſhall puniſh, in one and the ſame ſentence. 3dly, Hil. 38 Eliz,
in a Quo warrants againſt the Mayor and Commonalty of Lon-
don, it was held, that where a grant is made to the Mayor
and Commonalty, that the Mayor for the time being ſhould
have (c) plenum et integrum ſcrulinium, gubernationem, et correc-
tionem amnium et fingulorum myſleriorum, Sc. without granting
them any court, in which ſhould be legal proceedings, that
it is good. for ſearch, whereby a diſcovery may be made of
offences and defects, which may be puniſhed by the law in
any court, but it doth not give, nor can give them any ir-


regular or abſolute power to correct or puniſh any of the
. ſubjects


(c) Cart. 110,
121.


= — — —
— ———
. *


(a) Paſtea 121. a.


The fecond
point.


( 2 Inft. 379,
380.

W. 2. c. 11.
Plowd. 17. b.
Raſt. Account 2.


(c Poſſea 12c.b.
2 Brownl. 266.
2 Inſt, 380.

2 Bulſtr. 139.
Fitz. Bart. 44.
Br. Account 6.
Br. Det. 16.


Br. Exccution


135.
Bi. Faux Impri-
nent 32.


Dr. Boxnan's Cafe, Part VIII.


ſubjeQts of the kingdom at their pleaſure. 2. It was objected,
that it is incident to every court created by letters patent, or act
of Parliament, and other courts of record, to puniſh any miſ-
demeanor done in court, in diſturbance or contempt of the
court, by impriſonment. To which it was anſwered, that
neither the letters patent nor the act of Parliament bas granted
them any court, but only an (a) authority, which they ought
to purſue, as it ſhall be afterwards ſaid. 2. If any court had
been granted them, they could not by any incident authority
implicite granted them, for any miſdemeanor done in court,
commit him to priſon without bail or mainprize, until he
ſhould be by the commandment of the preſident and cenſors,
or their ſueceſſors, delivered, as the cenſors have done in this
caſe. 3. I here was not any ſuch miſdemeanor for which any
court might impriſon him, for he only ſhewed his caſe to
them, which, he was adviſed by his counſel, he might juſti-
ſy, which is not any oſſence worthy of impriſonment. Ihe
ſecond point was, admitting that the cenſors had power bythe
act, if they had purſued their authority, or not? And it was
reſolved by the Chief Juſtice, Warburton and Daniel, that
they had not purſued it for ſix reafons. 1. By the act, the
centors only have power to impoſe a fine, or amerciament ;
and the preſident and cenſors impoſed the amerciament of 51.
upon the plaintiff, 2. T he plaintiff was fummoned to appear
co am preſidente et cenſoribus, Cc, et non comparuit, and therefore
he was lined 101. whereas the preſident had no authority in
that caſe, 3. The fines or amercements to be impoſed by
them, by ſorce of the act, do not belong to them, but to the
King, for the King bad not granted the fines or amercements
to them, and yet the fine is appointed to be paid to them,
in proaimis comitiis, and they have impriſoned the plaintiff
for non-payment thereof. 4. They ought to have committed
the plaintiff preſently, by conſtruction of law, although
that no time be limited in the act, as in the ſtatute of W.
2. cap. II. (%) De ſervientibus, ballivis, &c, qui ad compo-
um 1Teddend tenentur, Sc. cum dom hujuſinodi ſervientium
dederit ets auditores cempeti, it contingat ipſas in arrearaugus
ſuper compotum ſuum «mmbus allocatis et allocandis, arreſten-
tur corpora eorum, et fer teſlimonium auditorum ejuſdem cms
pott mittantur et liberentur proximæ gavlg dimini Regis in
partibus illis, etc. In that cafe, although no time be limit-
ed when the accomptant ſhall be impriſoned, yet it ought
to be done (c) preſentiy, as it is held in 27 H. 6. 8. a. and
the reaſon thereof is given in Fogaſſa's caſe, Plowd Com. 17. b.
that the generality of the time ſhall be reftrained to the pre-
ſent time, for the benefit of him upon whom the pain ſhall be
inſlicted, and there with agrees Flow, Com. 206. b. in Stradling'

CAC»


part VIII. Dr. Box HAu's Caſe.


caſe. And a Juſtice (a) of Peace upon view of the force,
ought to commit the offender preſently. 5. Foraſmuch as the
cenſors had their authority by the letters patent and act of
Parliament, which are high matters of record, their proceed-
ings ought not to be by parol, & eo potius, becauſe they claim
authority to fine and impriſon, and therefore, if judgment be
given againſt one in the Common Pleas in a writ of (%) recap-
tion, he ſhall be fined and impriſoned, but if the writ be vi-
contiel in the county, there he ſhall not be fined nor impri—
ſoned, becauſe a writ of the court is not of record, F. N, B. in
Recaption; ſo in F. N. B. 47. a. a plea of treſpaſs vi et ar-
mis doth not lie in the county court, hundred court, &. ſor
they cannot make a record of fine and impriſonment ; and re-
gularly they who cannot make (c) a record, cannot fine and
impriſon. And therewith agrees 27 H. 6. 8. Book of En-
trics, tit. Account, fol. —. The auditors make a record when
they commit the defendant to priſon ; a juſtice of Peace upon
view of the force may commit, but he ought to make a record
of it. 6. Foraſmuch as the act of 14 H. 8. has given power
to impriſon till he ſhall be delivered by the preſident and the
cenſors, or their ſucceſſors, reaſon requires that it ſhould be
taken ſtrictly, for the liberty of the ſubject (as they pretend)
is at their pleaſure : and this is well proved by a judgment in
Parliament in this very caſe ; for when this act of 14 H. 8. had
given the cenſors power to impriſon, yet it was taken fo lite-
rally, that the gaoler was not bound to receive fuch as they
ſhould commit to him, and the reaſon thereof was, becauſe
they had authority to do it without any court: and there-
upon the ſtatute of 1 Ma. (d) cap. 9. was made, that the gaoler
ſhould receive them upon a penalty, and yet none can com-
mit any to priſon, unleſs the gaoler receives him: but the
firſt act, for the cauſe aforeſaid, was taken fo literally, that
no neceſſary incident was implied. And where it was ob-
jected, that this very act of 1 Mar. cap. . has enlarged
the power of the cenſors, and they urged it upon the words
of the act; it was clearly reſolved, that the ſaid act of
1 Mar, did not enlarge the power of the cenſors to fine
or impriſon any perſon for any cauſe for which he ought
not to be fined and impriſoned by the ſaid act of (e)
14 H. 8. For the words of the act of Queen Mary are,
according to the tenor and meaning of the ſaid act:“ alſo
& ſhall. fend or commit any offender or offenders for his or
their offence or diſobedience, contrary to any article or clauſe
contained in the ſaid grant or act, to any ward, gaol, &c.”
But in this caſe Bonham has not done any thing which
appears within this record, contrary to any article or
clauſe contained within the grant or act of 14 H. 8. Alſo


Ee 3 the


I


120


(a) 2 Brownl,
266.

16 N. 2. e. 3.
3 U. 6. c. 9.

6 Mod. 125.


(5) Antes 60. b.
41 a. 8 Co. 41,
11 Co. 43. b.
F. N. B. 73. d.


(c) Antea fo. 28.
b. 41. a. Go. h.
F. N. B. 73. d.
10 Co. 103. a.


Rep. Q A. 146.
(4) *
257, 262, 265,
266.

Raſt. Phyſ 7,
Lit. Rep. 169,
172, 173, 212,
217 248, 249,
350, 331.

Cr, Jac. 127.
Cr. Car. 257.
1 Jones 263.
Car. 115.

4 Inſt. 251.
(e) 14 & 15 H.
8. cap. 5.
Roll. 598.

4 Inſt. 251,
Raft. Phyſ. 3.
2 Bulitr, 18 5.
Lit. Rep. 168,
169, 172, 212,
215 246, 247,
248.249. 1 Jones
261, Cro, Jac,
121, 159, 160,


the gaoler who refuſes ſhall forteit the double value of eg Fry


Cart. 115,


L Co. 133 b.
1 Lev. 195.


95 Cro. Jac. 133.
pl. 70, 325.


Lit. Rep. 172.
Mour 464.
1 Sid. 336.


Pyer 39. pl. 62.


Fitzgib. 2 50.


(6) Er. Jac. 173.
Cr. Car. 5. Mo.
464. Poſtea 133.
b. 9 Co. 110. b.
Doc. pl. 70, 32 5.


Palm. 287.
Lit. Rep 172
252. 2 Bulſtr.


94. Antes 93. a,


1 Sid. 336.
c) 7 Co. 25. à.
er 15. pl. 78.
Cr. Car. 209.
Co. Lir. 303. b,
6 Mod. 119.


7 Hob. 199.
Hatd. 38.


(4) Styles 3 54.


T 3 Co. 52. b.


fe) 3 Co. 52. b.
Cro. El. 62.
1 Leon, 242.


{f) Antea 170. b.


2 Brownl. 266.
2 Inſt, 380,
Bar. 44. Br.


| * 24. &c.


Dr. Box RHAu's Caſe, Part VIII.


the fines and amerciaments that any offender or diſobedient
ſhall be aſſeſſed to pay; which pioves that none ſhall be re.
ceived by any gaoler by force of the act of 14 H. 8. but he
who may be lawfully fined or amerced by the act of 14 H. 8.
and that was not Bonham, as by the reaſons and cauſes afore.
ſaid appears. And admitting that the replication be not ma-
terial, and the defendants have demurred upon it; yet ſoraſ.
much as the defendants have confeſſed in the bar, that the
have impriſoned the plaintiff without cauſe, the plaintiff ſhall
have judgment: and the difference is, when the plaintiff (a)
replies, and by his replication it appears that he has no cauſe
of action, there he ſhall never have judgment: but when the
(5) bar is inſuſhcient in matter, or amounts (as the caſe 1s) to
a confeſſion of the point of the action, and the plaintiff replies,
and ſhews the truth of the matter to enforce his caſe, and in
judgment of law it 1s not material, yet the plaintiff ſhall have
judgment, for it is true that ſometimes the declaration ſhall
be made good by the bar, and ſometimes the bar by the repli-
cation, and ſometimes the replication by the rejoinder, &c.
but the difference is, when the declaration wants time, place,
or other (c) circumſtance, it may be made good by the bar, ſo
of the bar, replication, &c. as appears in 18 E. 4. i6. b. But
when the declaration wants ſubſtance, no bar can make it
good; ſo of the bar, replication, &c. and therewith agrees 6
E. 4. 2. a good caſe, and nota there dictum Coke. Vide 18 E.
34. b. 44 E. 3. 7. a. 12 E. 4. G. 6 H. 7. 10. 7 H. 7. 3. 11
ut when the plaintiff makes replication, ſur-
rejoinder, &c. and thereby it appears, that upon the whole re-
cord the pl. has no cauſe oi action, he ſhall never have judg-
ment, although the bar or rejoinder, &c. be inſufficient in
matter; for the court ought to judge upon the whole record,
and every one ſhall be intended to make the beſt of his own
caſe. Vide (d) Ridgeway's caſe, in the Third Part of myReports


52. b. and ſo theſe differences were reſolved and adjudged be-


tween + Kendal and Helyer, Mich. 25 & 26Eliz. in the K.
Bench, and Mich. 29 & 3o Eliz. in the ſame court, between
(e) Gallys and Burbry. And Coke Ch. Juſt. in the concluton
of his argument obſerved ſeven things for the better direction
of the preſident and commonalty of the ſaid college lor
the future. 1. That none can be puniſhed for practiſing phy-
ſic in London, but by forſeiture of 51. by the month, which
is to be recovered by the law, 2. If any practiſe phyſic there
for a leſs time than a month, that he ſhall forfeit nothing.
3. If any perſon prohibited by the ſtatute offends in nn bene
exeq', &c. they may puniſh him according to the ſtat. within
the wonth. 4. Thoſe who they may commit to priſon by the
ſtat. ought to be commit. (/) preſently, 5. The fines. which 2


Ac.ount 6. Br, Det. 16, Bro Exec, 133. Br, Faux Impiiſfonment 33, 2 Bulfir, 139, 6 Med. 125.


part VIII. Dr. Boxnam's Caſe. 121
et, according to the ſtatute, belong to the King. 6. They


cannot impoſe a fine, or impriſonment without a record of

it. 7. The cauſe for which they impoſe fine and impriſon-

ment ought to be cextain, for it is (a) traverſable: for although (a) 2 Brownl,
they have letters patent, and an act of Parliament, yet becauſe 77%

; . ; . 482

the party grieved has no other remedy, neither by writ of

ertor, or otherwiſe, and they are not made Judges, nor a

court given them, but have an (5) authority only to do it, the (6) Antea 119.b.
cauſe of their commitment is traverſable in an action of falſe

impriſonment brought againſt them; as upon the ſtatute of

() bankrupts, their warrant is under the great ſeal, and by (e) 13 Fl, cap.7,
act of Parliament ; yet becauſe the party grieved has no other 7 Jac. cap. 15.
remedy, it the commiſſioners do not purlue the act and their

commiſſion, he ſhall traverſe, that he was not a bankrupt,

although the commiſſioners affirm him to be one; as this

term it was reſolved in this court, in treſpaſs between Cutt

(4) and Delabarre, where the iſſue was, whether Will. (% 4 wo, 275.
Cheyney was a bankrupt or not, who was found by the com- & 273.
miſſioners to be a bankrupt ; a Vrtiori in the caſe at bar, the

cauſe of the impriſonment is traverſable ; for otherwiſe the

party grieved may be perpetually, without juſt cauſe, impri-

ſoned by them: but the record of a force made by a Juſtice

of Peace is not traverſable, becauſe he doth it as Judge, by

the ſtatutes of (e) 15 R. 2. and 8 H. 6. and ſo there is a dif- (e) r5R. 2. e. 2.
ference when one makes a record as a Judge, and when he 8 H. 6.c. 9.
doth a thing by ſpecial authority, (as they did in the caſe at

bar) and not as a Judge. And afterwards, for the ſaid two

lait points, judgment was given for the plaintiff, ue contra»

dicente, as to them. And I acquainted dir Thomas Fleming,

Chief Juſtice of the King's Bench, with this judgment, and

with the reaſons and cauſes of it, and he well approved of the

judgment which we had given : and this 1s the firſt judgment

on the faid branch concerning fine and impriſonment which

has been given ſince the making of the faid charter and acts

of Parliament, and therefore I thought it worthy to be re-

ported and publiſhed.


[See Carthew. 492. 6 Mod. 125.] "0


Ee 4 'The


121 | Part VII.


.


_— — — —— ¶ ” — .


—


The CAs E of the City of
LONDON.


Hil. 7 Jacobi 1.


Skin. 374. N Habeas Corpus was directed Mich. 7 Jacobi, out of
Lucas 131, &c. this court, to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of
_ Q A:49 London, to have the body of James Wagoner, who was ar-
2 Brownl. 29738, relted in London, and remained in the cuſtody of them, or
284. ſome of them: Sir I homas Campbel, Kt. Mayor of London,
Raymond 394. ö


2 Sid. 120, 121, and the Aldermen, and Sebaſtian Harvey and William Cokein,
3 Bulſtr. 190. Sheriffs of London, make ſuch a return, that the city of
2 Roll.Rep.155, London ef? antiqua civitas, quodgue in cadem civitate talis habe-
27 827 480 tur, & a toto tempore cuj us contraria memoria hominum non exiſli
x Wilſon 233. Habebatur conſuetudo, uſitata et approbata, wiz. quod fi aligue
conſuetudines in dittd cvitate obtent et approbat” in aligud fart

diſſiciles ſeue defectivæ exiſtant, ſeu extiter' aut aligqua in eaten

civitate de novo emergentia ubi remedium prius non exiſtit ſeu exti-

terit ordinat* emendatione indigeant five indiger unt. Major et A

dermanni civitatis pred” pro tempore exiſtent” de afſenſu communi-

(a) 2 Brownl, tatis ejuſdem civitatis remedium (a) congru” ſenæ fidei et ratimi
284, 285. conſonum, pro communi utilitate civium dif” civitatis, et alts-
=: 27+ rum fideliiim domini Regis nunc et pregenitorum ſuorum ad can-
in time of Lord dem confluent', apponere poſſint et potuerunt ordinat” quoties et
Hardw. 407. guando eis videbitur expediri, dum tamen ordinatio hujuſmadi di-
mino Regi nunc et progenitoribus ſuis, et populo ſus utilis, et

bone fidei et conſona fit ratieni. Et ulterivs fignificanius qued

dicta conſuetudo, & onnes aliæ conſuetudints civitalis præd a


lem pole


part VIII. The Citty of Lowpox's Caſe.


ſenpore pred”, c. 1 aut horitate Parliamenti domini Ri-
thardi nuper Regis Angliæ Secundi poſt Conqueſlum, apud Weſtm”
anno regni ſui (a) ſeptimo tent” tun“ Majori et Communitati
zuſdem civitatis et ſucceſſoribus ſuis 3 et conſirmat fuer”,
Ft nos prefat” Major et Aldermanni ac Vic civitatꝰ Lond? pred”
ulterius certificamus, quod in communi concilio tent” ſecundum con-
ſuetud civit” Lond in Camera Guildhaldi ejuſdem cvitat” decima
quinto die Aprilis, anno regni domini noftri facobi nunc Regis An-
gliæ, Ec. quarto, per Leonardum Halliday, Militem, nuper Ma-
jorem civitatis Lond' præd', et ejuſdem civitatis Aldermannos, de
aſer ſu communitatis ejuſdem civitatis in eodem commmuni concilio
aſemblat” exif” ſecundum prad” conſuetudinem ci vitatis pred” ordi-


rat', inaitat* & [tabilit” fuit, modo & forma, prout in Anglican
| g


verbis ſequit', viz. where by the ancient charters, cuſtoms,
franchiſes, and liberties of the city of London, confirmed b

ſundry acts of Parliament, no perſon not being free of the
city of London, may or ought to ſell or put to ſale any wares
or merchandizes within the ſaid city, or the liberties of the
ſame, by retail, or keep ny open or inward ſhop, or other
inward place or room, for ſhew, ſale, or putting to fale of any
wares or merchandizes, or for uſe of any art, occupation,
myſtery, or handicraft within the ſame. And whereas alſo
Edward, ſometime King of England, of famous memory,
the third of that name, by his charter made and granted to
theſaid city in the fiſteenth year of his reign, confirmed alſo
by Parliament, amongſt other things granted, that if any cuf-
toms in the ſaid city before that time obtained and uſed, were
in any part hard or defeCtive, or any things in the ſame city
newly ariſing, where remedy before that time was not or-
dained, ſhould need amendment, the Mayor and Aldermen
of the ſaid city, and their ſucceſſors, with the aſſent of the
Commonalty of the ſame city, might put and ordain thereunto
fit remedy, as often as it ſhould ſeem expedient to them, ſo
that ſuch ordinance ſhould be profitable to the King, for the
profit of the citizens, and other his people repairing to the
laid City, and agreeable to reaſon. And whereas by force of
the ſaid cuſtoms, franchiſes, and liberties, and of the charter
lalt before mentioned, confirmed as is aforeſaid by Parliament,
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the faid city,
did the 12th day of October, in the third year of the reign of
Edward, ſometime King of England the Fourth, as a thing
thought fit and convenient for that time (amongſt other
things) agree and ordain, that the baſket-makers, gold
wire-drawers, or other foreigners, contrary to the liber-
ties of the ſaid city, holding open ſhops in divers places


I22


(a) 2 Brownl,
284, 28 5.


of the city, and uſing (6) myſteries within the faid (5) Cart. 120,


City,


The City of Lowpox's Caſe. Part VIII


city, ſhould not from thenceforth hold ſhops within the liberty
of the city aforeſaid ; but if they would hold any ſhop, of
dwell in the ſame liberty, they ſhould dwell at Blanch-Apple.
ton, and there hold ſhops, ſo as they might have ſufficient
dwelling there. And where alſo the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons of the ſame city did afterwards, the 16th day
of May, inthe 17th year of the reign of our late ſovereign
Jord of famous memory, King Hen. 8. as a matter thought
fit and agreeable for that time, ordain, eftabliſh and ena,
that no manner of perſon or perſons being eſtrange from the
liberties of the ſaid city; from thenceforth ſhould hold and
keep any open ſhop within the ſaid city or liberties of the
ſame, neither with any lattices before, nor yet without lat-
tices (certain numbers of poor men occupying the feat of
botchers, taylors, and coblers only excepted) upon pain of im-
priſonment, and alſo to forteit and to pay 40s. to the uſe, of
the commonalty of this city, as often as he or they ſhould do
the contrary, And where allo the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons of the ſame city did afterwards the 2cth day of
January, in the ſaid 17th year of King Hen. 8. (reciting that
where at a common council holden the 16th day of May, in
the 17th year of the reign of King Hen. 8. it was ordained
and enacted, that no manner of perſon or perſons, being
eſtrange from the liberties of this city, ſrom thenceforth
ſhould hold or keep any ſhop or ſhops within this city or liber-
ties of the ſame, neither with any lattices before, nor yet
without any lattices, upon pain of impriſonment) further or-
dain and eſtabliſh, that if any perſon or perſons, being
foreigners, ſhould hold and keep open any ſhop or ſhops, asis
aforeſaid, he ſhould forteit for every time ſo doing 40s. to be
levied by diſtreſs, to the uſe of the Commonalty of the ſaid
city, by the Chamberlain for the time being, or other officer
of this city, and alſo have impriſonment by the diſcretion of
the Mayor and Aldermen for the time being. Now foral-
much as divers and ſundry ſtrangers and foreigners ſrom the
liberties of the ſaid city (nothing regarding the faid ancient
charters, franchiſes, cuſtoms, or liberties of the ſaid city, and
acts and ordinances heretofore made according to the lame,
but wholly intending their private profit) have of late years
deviſed and practiſed by all ſiniſter and ſubtle means how
to defraud the ſaid charters, liberties, cuſtoms, good orders
and ordinances, and to that end do inwardly, in private and
ſecret places, uſually and ordinarily ſhew, ſell, and put to
ſale their wares and merchandizes, and uſe arts, trades,
occupations, myſteries, and handieraſts within the faid


city and liberties of the ſame, to the great dein
| all


Part VIII. The City of Lonpon's Caſe;


and hurt of the ſaid city, who pay lot and ſcot, bear offices,
and undergo other charges which ſtrangers and others not free
are not chargeable withal, nor will perform. For refofma-
tion of which diſorders, and for avoiding of ſuch prejudice and
damage as thereby groweth to the freemen of the ſaid city,
and is now more of late than was in any time heretofore ſuf-
ſered, and to provide for the common profit and good of the
freemen and citizens of this city; it is therefore by the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in this common council
aſſembled, ordained and eſtabliſhed, that no perſon whatſo-
erer (not being free of the city of London) ſhall at any time
aſter the feaſt of St. Michael now next enſuing, by any colour,
way, or mean whatſoever, either directly or indirectly, by
himſelf, or by any other, ſhew, fell, or put to ſale, any wares
or merchandizes whatſoever, by retail, within the city of
London, or the liberties or ſuburbs of the ſame, upon pain to
forfeit to the Chamberlain of the city of London for the time
being, to the uſe of the Mayor and Commonalty, and
citizens of the ſaid city, the ſum of 5 l. of lawful money of
England, for every time wherein ſuch perſon ſhall ſhew, fell,
or put to ſale any wares or merchandizes by retail, within the
ſaid city, liberties, or ſuburbs thereof, contrary to the true
intent and meaning hereof ; and it is farther ordained and
eſtabliſhed, that no perſon whatſoever (not being free of the
city of London) ſhall at any time after the ſaid feaſt of St, Mi-
chael now next enſuing, by any colour, way or mean what-
ever, directly or indirectly, by himſelf or any other, keep
any ſhop or other place whatſoever, inward or outward, for
ſhew or putting to ſale of any wares or merchandizes what-
ſoever by way of retail, or uſe any art, trade, occupation,
myſtery, or handicraft whatſoever, within the ſaid city, or
the liberties or ſuburbs of the ſame, upon pain to forfeit .the
ſum of 51. of lawful money of England, for every time
wherein Zach perſon ſhall keep any ſhop or other place what-
ſvever, inward or outward, for ſhew, ſale, or putting to


lale of any ware or merchandizes whatſoever by way of


retail, or uſe any art, trade, occupation, myſtery, or han-
dicraft whatſoever within the ſaid city, or liberties or
ſurburbs of the ſame, contrary to the true intent and mean-
ing hereof: all which pains, penalties, forfeitures, and
ſums of money to be forfeited by virtue of this act and or-
dinance, ſhall be recovered by action of debt, bill, or
plaint, to be commenced and proſecuted in the name of
the Chamberlain of the city of London for the time being,
in the King's majeſty's court to be holden in the —

.


123


The City of Loxpon's Caſe, Part VIII.
the Gui d- hall of the city of London, before the Lord Mayor


and Aldermen of the ſaid city, wherein no eſſoin or wager of
Jaw ſhall be admitted or allowed for the defendant : and that
the Chamberlain of the ſaid city for the time being ſhall in all
ſuits to be proſecuted by virtue of this act or ordinance againſt
any offender, recover the ordinary coſts of ſuit to be expended
in and about the proſecution thereof ; and further, that one
equal third part of all forfeitures to be recovered by virtue here-
of, (the coſts of the ſuit for the recovery of the fame being
deducted and allowed) ſhall be, after the recovery and re-
ceipt thereof, paid and delivered to the treaſurer of Chriſt's
Hoſpital, to be employed towards the relief of the poor chil-
dren to be brought up and maintained in the ſaid hoſpital.
And one other equal third part, to him or them which ſhall
firſt give information of the offences for which ſuch forſei-
tures ſhall grow, and proſecute ſuit in the name of the Cham-
berlain of the ſaid city for recovery of the ſame (any thing in
this act to the contrary notwithitanding.) Provided always,
that this act or ordinance, or any thing therein contained,
thall not extend to any perſon or perſons for bringing or cauſ-
ing to be brought any victuals to be fold within this city and
the liberties thereof; but that they and every of them
may ſell victuals within the ſaid city and the liberties there-
of; as they might lawfully have done before the mak-
ing hereot; any thing herein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wiſe notwithſtanding. Ulteriuſque nos præfat
nunc Major & Allermanni ac Vicecm" civitatis præd' certifica-
2nus, quad ante adventum brews dicti damini Regis nobis din edli,
& hic huic ſchedulæ conſut Jac Wagener in brevi illo nominat
captus fuit in civitatꝰ præd' & in priſena dicti dom“ Regis nunc
ſub cuſled' naſirum præfut' Vie detent? ſuit virtute cujuſdem bille
original de pl' debiti ſuper demand quinque librarum legalis mone-
te Anglie verſus ipſum, 9 die menſis Sept" anno regni domint Re-
gis nunc ſeptimo, ad cur” prad” dom” Reg coram Humfredo lied
Milite, nuper Majore, & Aldermanuis civitat' præd' in prev
camera Guiidhaldd ejuſd' civitatis, ſecund' conſuet' civitat” pre
tunc tent” ad ſeftam Cornelii Fiſh, camerarii civitat” Lond” ſuper ac?
Communis Concilii pred” pred? 15 die Aprilis, ar” 4. prev ut
praf* confeft' offirmat', cujus quidem bille orig” tenor ſequitur in
hæc verba, ſcilicet Cornelius Fiſh, Camerarius civitat' Lond” gui

die Sept anno regni domini n:ftri Jacobi nunc Regis Anglia,

'c. ſeptimo, & ſemper poflea huciſque fuit & adpuc exiſiit
Camerarius didtæ civitat', per Robertum Smith attornat" ſuum
petit verſus Jacobum Wagoner quingue libras legalis monete An;
liæ quas ei debet & injuſte detinet, &c, eo quod cum in


Communi Concilio ſecund' conſuetud' ciuitat' pra d in camerd
Guil.chalda


—


Part VIII. The City of Lonpon's Caſe.


Cuildhalda difte civitat” fituat” in parochid ſancti Michael in
Baſſieſhaw in warda de Baſſreſhaw Lond” pred” decimo quinto die
fprilis, an' regni dom” no/lri Jacobi nunc Regis Angl', &c. quar-
1s, vigore & authoritate Communis Concilii illius ordin & flabilit
extitit, quod nulla perſona quæcunque non exiſtens liber civitat“
Lind” ad aliquod tempus pot fæſtum ſandti Mich' tunc prox” ſe-
quen' per aliquem colorem, viam aut modum, quecunque ſrve di-
elle vel indirecte, per ſe vel per aliguem alium, oflenderet, ven-
dertt, aut ad venditionem poneret, aligqua mercimonia aut merchan-
diſas quacungue per retal infra cavitat” Lond” libertates aut ſus
burb” ejuſd* ſub paena fortsſacere camerario civitatꝰ Lond” pro
tempore exiſtenꝰ ad uſum Majoris & Commun' ac civium die? ci-
vital” ſummam quinque librarum legalis monetæ Angliæ pro quoli-
bet tempore quo talis perſona oflenderet, venderet, aut venditioni
exponeret, aliqua mercimonia aut merchandiſas per retaP infra
lic“ civitat, liber tatꝰ aut ſuburb” ejuſdem, contra veram inten-
tionem actus Communis Concilii prad'. Cumgue tunc & ibid au-
thoritate præd' ulterius ordinat & flabilit” extitit, quod nulla per-
ſoma quecunque non exiſlens liber civit' Lond' ad aliguod tempus
7% diftum feflum ſancti Mich tunc prox” ſequent” per aliquem
clirem, viam aut modum, quacunque directe vel indirecte, per
ſe vel per aliguem alium, teneret, aliquam ſhoppam aut alium locum
guemcungue intra vel extra, Ang inward or outward, pro of-
tenſione, venditione, aut poſitione altquorum mercimoniorum aut
merchandiſarum quorumeunque ad venditionem per viam retal',
Ang by way of retail; aut uteretur aliqud arte, artific', occu-
pation', myſter', aut manuali occupatione, quibuſcunque, AngP
any art, trade, occupation, myſtery, or handicraſt whatſo-
ever, infra civitat Lond” aut libertat' aut ſuburb” ejuſd* ſub pœna
ſeriſfacere ſummam quinque librarum legalis monetæ Angliæ, pro
quolibet tempore quo talis perſona teneret aliquam ſhoppam, aut
alum lacum quemcungque, infra vel extra, Ang” inward or out-
ward, pro o/tenſione, venditione, aut poſitione aliquorum merci-
momorum aut merchandiſarum querumcungue ad venditionem per
viam retaP, aut uteretur aliqud arte, artificio, nccupatione, myſ=
terio, aut manuali occupatione, quibuſcungue Angl any art, trade,
occupation, myſtery, or handicraft whatſoever, infra dit” ci-
vitatem, aut libertat”, aut ſuburl” ejuſdem, contra veram inten-
llonem aus præd . Cumgue tunc et ibidem authoritate prada” ulterius
nactitatum extitit, quod omnes que quidem pence, penalitates, fo-
Nfatture et pecunie ſumme forisfaciendæ virtute dicti atlus
/wve ordinis, Augl' ordinance, recuperarentur per adtionem debiti,
ble, froe querel®, commenſand” & proſequend” nomine camerari
aut” Lend pro tempore exiſlentis, in curid regia Majeſtatis

tenend*


I 24


|
\
|
|
|


Cro! El. 352,
253. -

See 3 caſes in
2 „Kc. 339,


The City of Loxpox's Caſe, Part VII.


tenend in camerd Guildhalda ctvitat” Lond' coram Domino My.
jore & Aldermannis ejuſdem civitat” in quibus null un' aut li
gis vadiatio admitteretur aut allocaretur pro deſend. Et qued
Camerarius dictæ cvitatis pro tempore exiſlens in omnibus [egg
projequend” virtute dict af? ſiue ordinis, Ang or ordinance,
contra aliguem offenſorem, recuperaret ordinar* cuſtag* ſefig, ty.
pendend in & circa proſecutionem ejuſdem. Et ulterius, quid
wna ægualis tertia pars omnium forisfactur' recuperand' virty
dict af (cuſtag ſectæ pro recuperatione earum exiſtent dedu?
& allocat” ) paſi recuperationem & recepticnem inde ſalveretuy &
deliberaretur Theſaurario Heſpitalis Chriſti diſponenda, Ang' tg
be employed, erga opem pauper puerorum educandorum & ma.
nutenendorum in ditto hoſpitali et una alia equalis tertia pars
illi vel illis gui primum daret information” de offenſis pro quitus
tales foriifadturæ ſurgerent, Aung ſhould grow, & proſequer'


ſeam in nomine Camerarii dictæ civitatis pro recuperatione earund


aliquo in dicto att in contrar* non obſlante, prout per pred” afium
communis concilii præd“ plene ligquet. Præd' tamen defenden;,
actum Communis Concilii præd' minime ponderans, nec fœnam in
eodem contentam aliqualiter verens poſt dic feſtum Sancti Miha-
elis in atlu pred” mentionat' & ante affirmationem hujus bill: ori-
ginalis, ſcil. dicto ſeptimo die Septembris, anno regni dumini n/-
tri Jacobi nunc Regis Angi &c. ſeptimo, præd' infra dich di.
vitatem London, viz. in parochid Sancti Chriſtopheri Lendin
non ex iſtens perſona liber dictæcivitatis uſus eft manual: occupations
of a tallow-chandler, contra veram intentionem actus Comminis
Concilii pred” per quod act is accrevit prafato guærenti qu peiend
exigend & habend' de prefato defend* dict quingue libras mods
petit quas dif? defend prefato querenti nondum folvit, licet ſæ-
pius, c. ad damnum dicti gucrentis quingue ſolidorum & inde
producit ſeftam, Cc. ſuper quam quidem billam original“ partes
pred” placitaverunt, & fic indeterminat' dependit, Sc. Et hat
e&ft unica cauſa captionis & detentionis præd Jacobi Wagoner in
priſona & ſub cuſtodid præd' quam und cum corpore ſus cram dict
TFuſliciarits dicti domini Regis apud Weſlmonaſter” ad diem in lreti
pred” content parat habemus, una cum diele brevi, prout nobis
interius per idem breve præcipitur.

In this caſe it was reſolved, that the ſaid cuſtom of London,
* that no perſon whatſoever, not being free of the city of Lon-
& don, ſhall by any colour, way, or mean whatſoever, direct!7
« or indirectly, by himſelf or any other, keep any ſhop or any
« other place whatſoever, inward or outward, for {hew or put:
« ting to ſale of any wares or merchandizes whatſoever by way
« of retail, or uſe any trade, occupation, myſtery or handi-
« craft, for hire, gain, or ſale, within the city of London,


is, upon the whole matter diſcloſed in the return, a good
| (a) cuſtom;


„„ p Minn cs, SS.


Part VIII. The City of Lonpoxn's Caſe,


a) cuſtom z and that ſuch conſtitution made according to the
cuſtom alledged in the return, upon pain of forfeiture of 5 J.
was alſo good. And as to that, 1. It was reſolved, that
there a difference between ſuch a cuſtom within a city, &c.
and a charter granted to a city, &c. to ſuch effect; for it is
good by way of cuſtom () but not by grant; and therefore no
corporation made within time of memory can have ſuch pri-
vilege, unleſs it be by act of Parliament. So a cuſtom, that
goods foreign bought (c) and foreign ſold within a city ſhall
be forfeited, is good, as appears Dyer, Mich. 10 & 11 Eliz.
' 279. but ſuch privilege cannot begin by charter. And there-
\fore. in the Fifth Part of my Reports, Trin. 41 Eliz. between
Waltham and Auſtin, in Communi Banco, the caſe was, that
King H. 6. granted to the corporation of (4) Dyers in Lon-
don, power to ſearch, &c. and if they found any cloth dyed
with logwood, that the cloth ſhould be forfeited ; and it was
adjudged, that by the patent no forfeiture can be 1mpoſed on
the goods of a ſubject, and therefore in hujuſmodi caſubus for-
tior & petentior eft vulgaris conſuetudo, quam regalis conceſſio. So
it appears by the Reg. 105. b. the cuſtom of Rippon is, guod
archiepiſcopus (e) Eborum ratione dominit ſui de Ripon talem li-
bertatem in villa præd' habeat & a tempore, &c. habuit quod nul-
lus in ead villd uti debeat ſeu conſuevit officio ſive myſterio tincto-
ris fine licentia ipſius archiepiſcopi. But Trin. 44 Eliz. in an
action on the caſe between Edw, Darcy, Eſq. plaintiff, and
Tho. Allen defendant, the caſe was, that —_— Elizabeth
granted to the plaintiff, that he ſhould have the ſole traffic with
(/) playing-cards, and ſhould only import them from beyond
the ſea into this kingdom, alſo that he ſhould have the ſole
making, of playing-cards in this realm, in ſuch ample manner
as Ralph Bows had it before ; and it was adjudged, that the
grant to make playing-cards only, and to reſtrain trade and
traſſic was void, becaule trade and traffic is the liſe of every
commonwealth, and eſpecially of an ifland. And it is true,


125
(a) Bridg. 140 ·
41 |


nſt. 249.
Carth. 1 69.


*


() Lutw. 564.
Salk, 204.

2 Roll. 203.
Mod. Rep. 18.
11 Co. 54. a.
87. b.

Bridgman 140.
Cart. 115.

Cr. El. 803.

(c) Moor 58rs,
2 Keb. 397.

2 Roll. 597. Poſt.
126. a. 128. a.
2 Brownl. 287.
1 Jones 162.

Dy. 279. pl. 104
(d) 2 Inſt. 47.
Poſtea 127. bs
Palm. 5.


(e) 2 Brom nl.
178, 170.
Owen 67.


(f) 2 Inft. 4.
2 Brownl. 287.
Hob. 212,

11 Co, 84. b.
86.a. Moor 677,
672, &c, Noy
173, 174, &c.

q Inſt. 182,

2 Keb. 269.


trade and traſhc cannot be maintained or increaſed without Hard. 55, 162.


order and government; and therefore the King may erect
gillum mercatorium, i. e. A fraternity or ſociety or corporation
of merchants, to the end that good order and rule ſhould be
by them obſerved for the enereaſe and advancement of trade


and merchandiſe, and not for the hindrance or diminution of


2 Roll. 214.
Poſtea 129.
Caſes in law,
&c. 131.
Lucas 13m.


It: And it is to be known, that (g) guildan is a Saxon word, (g 2 Brown),


and ſignifies folvere, i. e. that all of ſuch fraternity ſhall be ſub-


ject to pay ſcot and lot: and therefore at this day ſuch part of the
country which is contributary among themſelves to pay common
charges, is called the guildable ; and if there be any ſpecial liber-


ty, it is called the franchiſe, 8 E. 3 (Y) 37. a. b. Jeffery at Hay (b) 2 Brown.


238.


orought an action of treſpaſs againſt Wm at Ford and Robert 287, 178.
ray, that they wrongfully with force had bicken his fold at * Bal. 195.


tings: the defendant pleaded, that Johan de Frichborn was
and


The City of Lonpon's Caſe. Part VIII.
and yet is ſeiſed of the manor of Haſtings in fee, and that
the ſaid Johan and her anceſtors, and all the lords of the faid
manor whoſe eſtate ſhe has, à tempore cu &c. have uſed to
have this franchiſe, i. to have a free fold, (i. liberam faldam)
through the whole town of Haſtings, and to have a lock of
wool of the ſheep, ſo that none in the town of Haſtings ought
to have a free fold without agreement made with her; and if
any did erect a fold without agreement, &c. that the lords for
the time being had uſed to abate it, and that Jeffery at Hay
the plaintiff, ſet up a new fold without agreement, wherefore
the defendants, as ſervants to the ſaid Johan, came and diſ-
Joined the hurdles, and abated them, &c. And there Parn-
ing Serjeant took two exceptions to this preſcription. 1. That


it is in the negative, ſcil. that none ought to have a ſold,


8 E. 4. f.


(a) 2 Brownl.
287.


(50% 1 Roll. 559.
1 Leon. 142.
Owen 67.
Raym, 327.
Bridg. 140.

2 Brownl. 179,
2 Bulſt. 195.
Cr. El. 203, 204.
Styles 421.

2 Roll. Rep. 201.
Lit. Rep, 2 50.


2. Becauſe every one of common right might have a ſold in
his own land, and therefore it would be againſt reaſon to ouſt
him of that which the common law gives him ; and although
he ſaid that the lords have uſed to have a free fold, that is of
common right alſo, yet that cannot take from a man that
which common right gives bim: et non allocatur, becauſe the
preſcription contains an affirmative with a negative, and every
preſcription is againſt common right: then the plaintiff re-
plied and faid, that the defendants have juſtified the abating
of the fold, by reaſon of the ſeigniory of Johan: to which we
lay, that the place where the fold is ſet, is out of the lordſhip
of Johan, &c. and no plea, becauſe the ſaid Johan claims the
{aid franchiſe through the whole town of Haſtings, as well
out of her lordſhip as within; whereupon the plaintiff made
another replication, by which caſe it appears, that although
folding of ſheep is for the maintenauce of tillage (which is
fo much eſteemed and favoured in law) yet by cuſtom and
uſage a man may be barred thereof upon his own land, and an-
other than he, of whom the land is held, may have it; and there-
with agree 3 E. 3. 3.a. John de Sedgeford's (a) caſe, where the
Prior of Trinity of Norwich, lord of the manor of Sedgeſord,
made the like preſcription, Mich. 32 & 33 Eliz. in Banco Regis,
Sir George (b) Farmour brought an action on the caſe again!
Brook, and ſhewed that he was ſeiſed of the manor of T orcet-
ter in the county of Northampton, in fee, and that all the te-
nements of the ſaid town are held of his ſajd manor, and ſhewed
that a temp” cuj etc. he, and all thoſe, &c. had had a bake-houle
parcel of the ſaid manor, maintained at their charge; and that
this bake-houſe was ſufficient to bake bread for all the inhabi-
tants, and for all paſſengers through the ſame town ; and the
bread ſo baked, had uſed, &. to be ſold at reaſonable prices,
and that no other perſon within the ſaid town has uſed to
bake any bread to ſcll to any perſon ; and it was adjudger

a ca”


part VIII. The City of Low pox's Caſe. 126


a reaſonable cuſtom by * Sir Chr. Wray, & totam cur: 0

et this cuſtom reſtrains a man from een his ade” vb. Cumberd. 33
in a certain place, vide Regiſt. 105, 127. 11H.6.19. 9 E 12855
3.4. There are divers cuſtoms in London which are againſt Cuſtoms of L
common right, and the rule of the common law, and yet the don, .
are allowed in our books, and es potivs, becauſe they have =
only the force of a cuſtorn, but are alſo ſupported and fortified
by authority of (a) Parliament. 1. They have a cuſtom (3)
concerning the arreſt and impriſonment of the body of a man 2 — 155
that the creditor may arreſt the (5) debtor before the da of Br. London *
payment to drive him to find ſureties, L. 5 E. 4 30. 2, 1 'H
6. 3.2. and 2 Hen. 7. 15. 2 Hen. 4. 12. b. 2 They have
a cuſtom to enter the houſe of another which is his (c) caſtle;
and therefore the cuſtom of London 1s, that when a chaplain 1 5 ht
or a Prieſt has a woman in his houſe or chamber, and one 7 Co. 6. a Cr.
hath an ill ſuſpicion thereof, he ho hath ſuch ſuſpicion ma e e ere
come to the conſtable of the ward (4) or beadle, and with him 5
may enter into the houſe or chamber of the chaplain or Prieſt br Treſoait 94s
and commit the offender to priſon, 2 H. 4. 12. b. 2 H. 7.1 5
3. By their cuſtom the goods of a man in which he LA * *
abſolute property may be forfeited, as in the caſe before of ſo- |
reign bought and foreign fold. 4. They have a cuſtom which
alters the courſe of juſtice, ſcil. where an action is brought be-
fore one Judge, to remove it pending the plea before another
as 10 H. 6. 15. a. In an action of debt on an eſcape of a
1 taken by Capias on a ſtatute merchant at the plaintiff's

* the deſendant ſaid, that the cuſtom of London is, that
3 ere a plaint is affirmed before the Sheriff of London (e)

at _ Mayor at the ſuggeſtion of the plaintiff or defendant 2 &. raging
my end for the parties, and if it be found on examination 5.8. Fits, Pre»
_ the Mayor, that the plaintiff is ſatisfied be may award 857 *
at the plaintiff ſhall be barred ; and that the plaintiff af- Br. — bo.
2 a plaint of this matter, and was examined before the a
e on examination it was found that part was paid,
* that the plaintiff had taken a bond for the reſidue, idee the
1 2 awarded that he ſhould be barred, and it was adjudged,
ra — cuſtom was good, for that examination was pending
7 rr and e contra, if they preſcribe to examine it after
07G gent, vide 1 E. 4. G. b. executors charged in London {/-+) Hard
2 60 wh e (g) contract; 15 Eliz. Dyer, in London the May- 4 Jnr. 5
; , o is the Coroner ſhall not pronounce the judgment ( 5 Co. 32. b.
upon the outlawry, but the Recorder. And many excepti 8
were taken to ti 1 ptions Noy 53 Se inb.
ae ie return, becauſe the cuſtom alledged in the 328, 329. Poſtea
moving of the return was not purſue. For the cuſtom there 733, *
we Re conſiſts upon two general parts, ſcil. the miſchief 8 5 14347 xs
ro 3 the milchiets were three. I. If any were OY RY
ee 4 If defectire. 3. If a new caſe ariſes which emend”
3 the remedy is, that the Mayor and Aldermen with
In 1 5 the commonalty, have power by the cuſtom ap-
Vor. IV. Fi ponere


— Ot...


E423 =


|
|
|
|
4
|


— ———ꝛ RS <= —ęE— m


N
N
|
:
{
|
|
þ


— . ——


(a) 9 Co. 54. b.
Doct. pl. 86.
Fitz. Brief. 602.
Br. faux | atin,
&% 13. 40. E. 3.
15. a, |
(+) 9 Co. 54. b.
Plowd. 49 Ab.
DoR. pl. 86.

13 H. 4. 17. 3.
Er, Mortdanceſ-
ter 3. 7 Co. 39.
b. 11 Co, 25. 2.
{c) 9 Co. 54. b.
(4) 9 Co 54. b.
(e) 2 Brownl.
286. 4 Inſt. 2 50.
2 Anderſ. 2706,
277. 2 Bulſtr.
r89, 190.

3 Kep. 225.
(f) 2 Brownl.


286, 287.


The City of Lon pon's Caſe. Part VIII.


ponere remedium, which remedy ought to have five qualities.
1. Remedium debet eſſe congruum, it ought to have fit propor-
tion and congruity, 2. It ought to be bone fidei conſonum,
85 t ought to be ration: conſonum. 4. Pro communi utilitate civium

7 altorum fidelium ad eandem civitatem confluentium. 5. Dud


it utile Regi populo. And it was objected, that the ſaid con.


ſtitution appoints a remedy which has but one of the ſaid five
qualities; for it provides only, as appears by the expreſs words
of the conſtitution for the benefit of the Sa of the ſaid
city, ſcil. “ for avoiding of ſuch prejudice and damage az
„ groweth to the freemen of the ſaid city, & and to pro-
“ vide for the common profit and good of the freemen and
& citizens of this city, it is therefore, &c.“ by which it ap-
pears that this remedy was only made for the freemen of the
city, and ſo not purſuant, & non allocatur, becauſe it appears
to the court, that this remedy has all the ſaid five qualities,
and therefore it was reſolved, that it nced not be averred by
the party. Vide 46 E. 3. 16. b. no price (a) of money ſhall
be expreſſed in the writ, becauſe it appears of itſelf, 12 H. 4.
17. the ſon (5) within age brings an aſſiſe of Mortdanceſter,
he need not aver, that it is within the time of limitation, for
it appears, vide Plow. Com. (c) Partridge's caſe, 87. the ſame
ground, vide 26 H. 6 Gard. (4) 58, &c. But for the better
underſtanding of the true reaſon of the reſolution in this caſe;
firſt, it was obſerved, that one may be liber (e) homo, that is
a freeman of London by three ways, /czl. 1. By ſervice, as he
who ſerves his apprenticeſhip. 2. By birthright, as he who
is the ſon of a freeman of London, 3. By redemption, that
is, by allowance of the court of Mayor and Aldermen, and
all theſe three ways are allowed by the cuſtom of the city of
London, and by no other means can a man become a iree-
man of London: for none can be made free of the city of Lon-
don by charter; and therefore it appears in Rot. Pat. 32 E. 3.
in Turri London, that King Ed. 3. granted to John (/ Fal-
count de Luca apothecary, citizen of London, 9d ipſe cm.
nibus libertatibus quas caves civitatis pred” habent eadem civitite
& alibi infra regnum noflrum Anglia, habeat, gaudeat, et utatur,
& guod de tribus denariis de libra, et omnibus aliis præſtationibus
Y cuſiumis quas alienigenæ de bonis & merchandiſis ſuis inſia
reg Angliæ ſoluere tenentur, de propriis bonis & merchandiſis it-
ſius Fohannis infra idem regnum ad totam vitam ſuam fit quietus
& guod plus quam alii cives noſiri Landon indigenæ pro cuſii.
mis merchandiſarum & aliorum bonorum ſuorum nobis fobount
folvere non teneatur, nec ad hoc aliquaiiter compellatur. But
all theſe words do not make him a ſreeman of London,
for he ought to attain unto it by one of the ſaid three
ways, according to the ſaid cuſtom. And it was ſaid, that
he was the firtt apothecary that cver was in this 108 1


„% YG — — — c to b{ 8 ws 5 we = NR 3 _ ,0qC0 3 + ww mc. W


A * j „ „ m H » @© SK , we AS Aw mood www” ffiok


nn — Fre nnn wc


part VIII. The City of London's Caſe.


And it was reſolved, that it appears that the remedy appointed
by the ſaid conſtitution has all the ſaid five qualities. 1. Yuod
remedium pred” fuit congruum, that is apt and proportionable to
the offence, for it appears by act of common council in 3 E. 4.
which inflicts the penalty of 40s. upon a foreigner who keeps
an open ſhop, &c. that he who keeps an inward ſhop is a greater
offender than he who keeps an open ſhop; for London is a mar-
ket (a) overt every day, except only the (5) ſabbath- day, but ſe-
cret places in corners, as the caſe of the faid James Wagoner
is, is more dangerous and offenſive than outward ſhops, for
there he may uſe deceit, and is not ſubject to any ſearch; (e)
ui male agit odit lucem, and, omnia delicta in aperto leviord ſunt.
f 11H. (6.) 7. 19 a. b. The Prior of Dunſtable brought
an action on the cale againſt J. B. butcher, and declared that
he was lord of the town of D. and that he, &c. had a market
twice in the week, and the correction of the ſaid market, and
that all butchers, and all others who fell meat or any other
commodity which came to the ſaid market, that they onght to
ſell them in the High- ſtreet of the faid town, upon the Prior's
ſtalls, paying 1d. to the Prior; and that the detendant is a
butcher, and fold his meat ſuch a market-day within his own
houſe occultè, and had procured others ſo to do, by which, &c.
the defendant pleaded that he was a houſholder in the ſaid
town of D. and all thoſe who are houtholders in the ſaid town
have uſed @ tempore cujus, Ic. to ſell their wares, &c. ever
market-day in their own houſes, or where ever elſe they pleaſ-
ed; and there Coteſmore who gave the rule in the caſe, and
the reaſon of it, ſaid, this preſcription is not to the purpoſe ;
for if the Prior had a market within the town, and is lord of
the town, you cannot preſcribe to ſell meat in your own houſe
on the market-day ; for the market cannot be but in an open
place, and the Prior then would loſe the benefit of his market,
i hey might ſell their wares in their houſes, and alſo where
he has the correCtion of the market and to ſee if the things
which ſhall be ſold are lawful and vendible, which cannot be
tned by his officer if it be not in open market, and alſo he
would loſe his toll of the things ſold; ſo that when the market
belongs to the Prior, which ought to be held in the market-
pace appointed for that purpoſe, he cannot hold a market in
bis own houſe, but in the common place, upon the market-day ;
wherefore, &c. Aad as it hath been ſaid, London has a mar-
ket every day in the week, Sunday only excepted, vide Mich.
32 & 33 Eliz. in the Fitth Part of my Reports, 63. a. a con-
litution (d) in London, that all broad- cloth by citizen or
loreigner {hall be put up to fale at Blackwell-hall, ſo that it
may appear to be ſaleable. And note there a penalty in-
ited tor the reſtraint of a lawſul act, but here, of an
unlawful. And therefore if a foreigner who keeps an
open ſhop ſhall forfeit forty-ſhillings, he who is a foreigner
Ff 2 and


Wo Warranto 81.
i 2 Brownl. 237 288.


Hard 56, 21>. Lane 24. Bridgm, 143) 141. 2 Roll. Rep, 115. 1 Roll.


127


(a) 2 Brawnl,
288. 5 Co. 8 3. b.
Dyer 122. pl. 16.
Or. Eliz. 454.
35 H. 6. 29. b.
Moor 360, 625.
2 Inſt. 713.
Poph. 34. An-
derſ. 344. 2 An-
derl. 115. 3 Co.
78. b. 9 Co. 66. b.
(99 Co. 66. b.
Gr. Jac. 280,
496, enk. Cent.
291. 1 Jones
156, 157.
Cawly 78.

Dy. 168 pl. 17.
Hales pl. Co. 47.
2 Brownl. 288.
(<) 3 Co. 37. b.
9 Co. 66. a.

2 Brownl. 288.
1 Leon, 143.
Br. Preſcripuon
93.


(4) 1 Roll. 36 f.

3 Leon. 264. |

Hob, 212.

Moor 580.

2 Jones 14%.

Cr, Car. 498.
reb. Argument

in QuoWarranto

33. Pollexfen's

Argument in


The City of Lonpon's Caſe. Part VIII


and offends in ſecret corners is worthy to forfeit 51. And i

was alſo obſerved, that the value of an ounce of ſilver ſince

3 E. 3. has been raiſed. Alſo remedium uit congruum in te-

ipect of the manner of puniſhment, /c. by impoſing a pecuniary

pain, and not a corporal pain, ſc. impriſonment; and therewith

agrees the ſaid caſe of Blackwell-hall, Mich. 32 & 33 El. &Trin,

| 38 El. in the Fifth Part of my Reports, fol. 64 a. Clark's cafe,

(a) 2 Inft. 54. (4) a conſtitution cannot be made on pain of impriſonment;

x Roll. 363. 366, and the caſe cited before of Trin. 41 Eliz. inter Waltham (6)

367. Moor 41> & Auſten, that a conſtitution cannot be made on pain of for-

580, 412. 2 Bul. ©, .

328. Stiles 85. feiture of goods, therefore it ought to be on a reaſonable

x Roll. 599. cuniary pain, or not at all. 2. Remedium fruit bone fidet con.

1 ſonum; for the reme sy is to ſuppreſs that which is done mals

» Brownl. 288. fide and in deceit to defraud the ſaid cuſtom. 3. Remedim

Bridg. 141, r42- fuit rationi conſonum ; for it is the rule of law and reaſon, que

©) N 12 5 (c) clam delinquens magis punitur quam palam. 4. Remediun

+ as. 4 Dver Fuit pro utilitate civium & aliorum. 1. Civium, for foreigners


279. b. in Marg. are not ſubject to ſcot and lot, &c. 2. Aiorum, for the con-
(8 Brown fluence of people from all the parts of the realm to London


produces three great inconveniences. 1. Depauperationem, ſe,
impoveriſhing of all the good towns in England. 2. Deps-
pulationem, depopulation of towns in every country, 3. De-
flrutttonem, deſtruction in the end of all trades and tradeſmen
in every part of the realm. 4. Civium & aliorum, by the peſ-
tlence, by reaſon of the multitude of people, and peſtering
of the air, whereby it is dangerous, not only to the ſubjedts,
but alſo to the King himſelf, and the great lords who attend
upon his royal perſon. 5. Remedium fuit utile Regi & populs;
not only for avoiding the peſtilence as before is ſaid ; but alſo,
it London ſhould daily increaſe, it would be in time ſo popu-
Jous, that it would become ungovernable by the magiſtracy of
t.) Poſt, 130. a. the city: and as, when the city of London (which is tanquam (4)
epitome totius regni) is not well governed, all the parts of the
kingdom find the inconvenience thereof ; ſo when this city 1s
well governed, all the parts of the kingdom are kept in better
order, quod ulile eft Regi et populo. Allo the city would become
fo populous, that it would not be ſubject to ſearch, &c. whereby
fraud and deceit would increaſe in all wares and vendible com-
modities, not only to the prejudice of the city itſelf, but
alſo of the King and the whole realm. Secondly, it was
objected, that the ſaid return conſiſts much in recital
which ought to have been directly and certainly alledged. 19
which it was anſwered and reſolved, that this is not on a de-
murrer in law, but a return on a writ of privilege, upon which


no iſſue can be taken, or demurrer joined, neither upon ct
award herein doth any writ of error lie, and therefore the
| return


part VIII. The City of London's Caſe. 123


return is no other but to inform the court of the truth of the /

matter, in which ſuch a * preciſe certainty is not required „ R.l1, Rep.
25 in pleading. Thirdly, it was objected, that by the ſtatutes 138.

ofg E. 3. c. I. & 2. 25 E. 3. c. 2. 27 E. 3. c. 11, &c. it was

enacted, that every one might ſell any commodities, or things

faleable in any city, &c. in groſs, or by retail, and that every

ſtatute, charter, letters patent, proclamations, uſage, allow-

ance, or judgment to the contrary are void. To which it was

anſwered and reſolved. 1. That the ſtatutes extend only to |
merchants, aliens, and denizens, which import and export |
rendible things, and do not extend to take away the cuſtom of |
a city of foreign bought (a) and foreign ſold, as it was re- (a) Ante 12 5. a. |
folved, ut ſupra, Mich. 10 & 11 Eliz. Dyer, in the cafe of 2 Brownl. 287.
the city of Vork; and vide the ſtatute of 2 Rich. 2. cap. 1. Ng! .
which reſtrains the ſale of wares by retail, &c. by merchants, 2 Roll? 597
aliens, &c. 2 Theſe ſtatutes do not extend to tallow-chand- 1 Sand. 312.
lets, or other ſuch like artificers, nor to any manufactures made C. Fl. 110.

by them within the realm. 3. It appears by the judgment of

the whole Parliament, anno (b) 7 H. 4. cap. 9. that notwith- (2) 41nfl. 249.
ſtanding all the ſaid ſtatutes, it was not lawful within the city

of London (the charters whereof are eſtabliſhed and confirmed

by many Parliaments) for any, be he merchant, alien, deni-

zen, or other leige man whatſoever, who was a ſtranger or fo-

reigner to the liberty of the city of London, ſcil. who was not

a freeman of the ſaid city, to fell any merchandizes by retail,

Kc. within the ſaid city: and by the fame act it was ordained.

and eſtabliſhed, that as well the drapers and ſellers of cloths,

2s other merchants with other merchandizes, as wine, iron,

oil, wax, and other things appertaining to merchandize, be

tree, to ſell in groſs their merchandize, ſcil. their cloths, iron,

oil, wax, and other their merchandizes, as well to any of the

King's ſubjects as to the citizens of London, notwithſtanding

any liberty or franchiſe granted to the contrary, which act had

deen made in vain, if the city of London had been reſtiain-

ed by the ſaid former acts: but becauſe the faid act did

tend to the great hindrance of the Mayor and citizens

aoreſaid, and very like to be the deſtruction of the citi-

zens, and againſt their grants and confirmations, at the

next Parliament, ſcil. anno (c) 9 H. 4. an act of Parliament (c 41nd. 249.
not printed was made, (which is to be ſeen in Rot. Parlia- n Records
ment! apud Glu 28 Octobris anno 9 H. 4.) in theſe words 88

ſollowing. Item, the Commons pray, that as by diverſe Note.

Kings of England, your progenitors and predeceſſors, our

lovereign lords, by their charter confirmed by you by autho-


ty of Parliament amongſt other franchiſes and liberties to
143 the


1
1


jꝗ6HAw —— u—U—U—»F̃mee '! —U—Pͤ . —


— —— — . — — — — —


mt ay —— — — — >
*


—— — —


— PY -
_


i
}


: 7
2 2 „
— —
*
.


coco umnwuwywyp. K . R EE * *
—— —L—p—᷑ͥ wÜ — —


—


Anfxer,


The City of Loxnon's Caſe. Part VIII.


the Mayor and citizens of London, and their ſucceſſors, it ha
been granted, that no merchant eſtranger to the liberty of the
faid city ſnoùld ſell any merchandizes within the liberty of the
faid city to other merchant ſtranger, nor ſuch merchant ſtranger
ſhould buy of other merchant ſtranger any merchandizes, un,
der forfeiture of the faid merchandizes : which franchiſes and
liberties the faid Mayor and citizens of London which now
are, and their predeceſſors, by authority of the ſaid grants and
confirmations have had and enjoyed ever ſince till at your laſ
Parliament holden at Weſtminſter, in the which by authority
of the ſame Parliament the ſaid article of their ſaid liberties
was revoked and annulled by ſtatute, fo that as well drapen
and ſellers of cloth, as other merchants, with their divers
merchandizes, as wine, iron, oil, and wax, and other things
belonging to merchandizes, are free to ſell, in groſs their
cloths and other their merchandizes aforeſaid, as well to any
the King's liege people, as to the ſaid citizens of London, noi.
withſtanding any franchiſe or liberty granted to the contrary;
to the great prejudice of the Mayor and citizens aforeſaid, and
the likely deſtruction of the ſaid citizens againſt the grants and
confirmations aforeſaid : that it would pleaſe you our ſovereign


Lord, with the aſſent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in


this Parliament, to repeal and annul the ſaid ſtatute in your
ſaid laſt Parliament touching that article: ſo that the faid
Mayor and citizens, and their ſucceſſors, be entirely reſtored
to their ſaid liberties and franchiſes by ſtatute : fo that from
henceforward no merchant being a ſtranger to the liberty of
the ſaid city, fell any merchandizes within the liberty of the
ſaid city to other merchant ſtranger; nor that ſuch mer:
chant ſtranger buy of other merchant ſtranger any ſuch mer-
chandizes within the liberty of the ſaid city under forfeiture
thereof, Saving and reſerving to all lords, knights, eſquires,
and all other leige denizens of our ſovereign lord the King,


power at their will to buy within the liberty of the ſaid city


of any merchant, ſtranger, merchandizes in groſs to their
own uſe, ſo that they do not ſell them again to any 0-
ther. 'The King wills, that the citizens of London have
their liberties and franchiſes touching this article, as en-
tirely as they had before the laſt Parliament held at Welt
minſter, the ſtatute made at the ſaid Parliament not-
withſtanding. Neta, reader, this act is not only 3?
ood expoſition and explanation of the former ſtatutes
| Eg = touching


,


#* oK r pc . — . . Co wo


„85 *


F i . ED. » oY.


WW. 6a Ro 42


Part VIII. The City of Lonpon's Caſe,


touching this matter; but alſo a good demonſtration of the
cuſtom and liberty of the city of London in theſe points. In
London a citizen and freeman may, by their cuſtom, deviſe
in (a) mortmain, notwithſtanding the ſtatute of mortmain be
to the contrary ; and ſo in other like caſes. Vide 8 Hen. 7. 4.
b. 9 Hen. 6. 58. 7 Hen. 6. I. a. 45 Ed. 3. 26. b. 28 Aſſ. 25,
5 H. 7. 10. a. 11 H. 7. 21. a. 23 Eliz. Dyer 373. for all the
cuſtoms of London are eſtabliſhed and confirmed by act of
Parliament, as appears by this retorn. And it was obſerved,
that in the caſe at bar, in the ſaid retorn there are five general
parts: 1. 'The cuſtom. 2 The general act to enable and pre-
ſerve this cuſtom, which was before all the ſaid ſtatutes.
A particular charter, anno 15 Ed. 3. which of itſelf was not
ſufficient, and therefore it was confirmed and eſtabliſhed by
act of Parliament. 4. Former precedents of conſtitution in
the like caſes, viz. in 3 E. 4. &17 H.8. 5. The conſtitution
upon which the aCtion was brought in London. But the
court took adviſement upon one part of the retorn, by which
it is averred, Pued Jacobus Wagoner uſus eff manuali occupatione
de tallow chandler, &c. and doth not ſhew that he ſold any
candles, &c. for if he made them for his own uſe, (5) without
ſelling any for lucre or gain, he might well do it, as every one
may bake or brew, &c. for his own uſe, without ſelling bread
or beer: but it ſeems that is implied by the faid averment,
that it is his trade; by which he lives by tale of his com-
modities of his trade, and not only to make them for his
own uſe, for it is not properly ſaid, that one uſes a manual
occupation; when he makes no more than for himſelf, as
he who brews or bakes for his own uſe, it is not properly
ſaid, that he uſes the manual occupation of a brewer or
baker, and that appears by the ſtatute of 5 Eliz. cap. 4.
(c) for there is enacted, ** That every perſon being an houſe-
holder and four and twenty years old, &c. and uſing and ex-
« ercifing any art, myſtery, or manual occupation, ſhall, &c.
have and retain, &c. an apprentice, &c.” But without queſ-
tion, he wha uſes the making of any manufacture for his own
uſe, as making of candles, &c. cannot retain any apprentice with-
in the ſtatute of 5 Eliz. So in another part of the act it is
enacted, ** That it ſhall not be lawful to any perſon or perſons,
«* &c. to ſet up, occupy, ule, or exerciſe any craft, myſtery, or
* manual occupation, except he ſhall have been brought up
therein ſeven years at the leaſt, as an apprentice, &c.“ And
yet he who bakes, brews, makes candles, &c. for his own
uſe, is not ſaid in law to uſe any manual occupation:
and upon this branch, and much to this purpoſe, a judg-
ment was given in the court of Exchequer, and afterwards
alfirmed in a writ of error in the Exchequer-chamber, Mich.
| f4 6 Jacobi,


129


(a) 2 Bulſtr. 189.


I Roll. 556.
Dyer 255. pl. Js
373- b. pl. 13.
Br. Cuſt. 41. 7.
Br. Dev. 51. 22.
H. 7. 19. b.
H. 6. 1. A,


5
7
23 All, 24-


(% Bridg. 140,
141. 11 Co. 54+
a. Hob. 111,
183. Moor 886.
Cr. Car. 499.
Jenk.Cent. 284.
13 Co. 12. Palm,
544. Lit. Rep,
251.


(e) 11 Co. 54. a.
Moor 869.

God b. 253+
Hard. 56. Cart.
119. Palm. 396.
Hob. 183, 211.
2 Roll. Rep. 29.
1 Sid. 303.

2 Keb. 125.

2 Bulſtr. 186.


1 Roll. Rep. 10.


Calthorp 9g.

3 Bulſtr. 179.
Styles 223, 383.
479 |

Cr, Jac, 8 5,179
Cr. El. 737.

Cr. Car. 316,
347, 499, 516.
2 Roll. 579.

1 Jones 412.
Noy 5. 2
132. 5 Co. 63. b.


Palm, 544;


(a) Cr. Jac. 178,
779. Jenk.Cent.
234. 13 Co. 11,
12. Sho le's cale,
M. 6. Jac.

* Salk. 611.
Palm. 393


(b) 13 Co, 12.


(e) 13 Co. 12.


(d) Palm. 542.


Cr. Jac. 178.


13 Cc. 12. Hetl.
102. 2 Bulitr.
189, 190. Jenk.
Cent, 234.


(e) Lit.Rep.251.


11 Co. 54. 2.


Pridg. 140, 141.


11 Co. 64. 2.
Hob. 183, 211,
Moor 886.

. Car, 400.
Jenks. Cent.234s
14 Co. 12.


'* againſt the ſaid act, for t he ſaid words imply, that he
|


The City of Lonnon's Caſe. Part VIII.


6 Jacobi, and the caſe, worthy to be known, was ſuch, Tay.
lor did inform in the Exchequer, on the ſtat. of 5 Eliz. c. 4.
tam pro dom” Rege, quam pro ſeipſo, againſt (a) Shoile, that he
had exerciſed the art and myſtery of a brewer, &c. for divers
months againſt the ſaid act; and “* averred, that the defendant
did not uſe or exerciſe the art or myſtery of a brewer at the
time of the making of the ſaid act, nor had been an apprentice
for ſeven years at the leaſt, in the art and myſtery of a brewer,
according to the ſaid act, &c. 'The defendant demurred in
law upon the information, and judgment was given againſt
him by the Barons of the Exchequer, on which judgment a
writ of error was brought in the Exchequer-chamber, and
Mich. 6 Jacobi Regis, the matter was argued by counſel on
both ſides : and two errors were aſſigned, one, that a brewer
is not within the ſaid branch of the ſaid act, on which the
information is conceived, for the words are, „That it ſhall
% not be lawful to any perſon or perſons, other than ſuch as
« now do lawſully uſe or exerciſe any art, myftery, or manual
„occupation, to ſect up, uſe, or exerciſe any art, myſtery, or
occupation, except he ſhall have been brought up therein

ſeven years at the leaſt, as an apprentice :” and it was ſaid,
that the trade of a brewer is not any art, myſtery, or manual
occupation within the ſaid branch, becauſe it is eaſily and
prelently learned, and need not have ſeven years apprentice-
ſhip to be inſtructed in it, for every houſewife in the country
can brew; and the ſtatute of (%) 22 Hen. 8. cap. 13. declares,
that a brewer is not a handicraft artificer. The other error
was, that the ſaid averment was not ſufficient, for the (c) aver-
ment ought to be as general as the exception in the ſtatute 1s,
ſc. that the defendant did not uſe any art, myſtery, or occupa-
tion, at the time of the making of the act; for by their pre-
tence, if he exerciſed any art, myſtery, or manual occupation
then, as a taylor, carpenter, &c. he might now uſe any other
art, myſtery, or manual occupation whatſoever. As to the
firſt, it was refolved, that the art of a (4) brewer, ſcil. to keep
a common brew houſe to ſell beer to any other, is an art,
myſtery, and manual occupation within the ſaid branch of the
act; for in the beginning of the act it is enacted, “ That no
6+ perſon ſhall retain for leſs time than a whole year in any
« of the ſciences, crafts, myſteries, or arts of cloathing, &c.
„ bakers, brewers, &c. cooks, &c.” So that by the judgment
of that very Parliament, the trade of a brewer is an art and
myſtery : which words are in the ſaid branch upon which
the ſaid infor mation is grounded. And it was reſolved,
that he who brews or bakes, &c. for his own (e) uſe, doth
not uſe or exerciſe any art, myſtery, or manual occupation


cc


ſo


ma wed


Z. ]


part VIII. The City of Lowpox's Caſe; 130


ſo uſe or exerciſe the art, myſtery, or manual occupation,

that by ſale of the commodities of his occupation he gets his

living ; but to ſay, that it is not any art, myſtery, or manual

occupation, becauſe every houſewife brews for her (a) private (e) Lit-Rep-25x,
uſe; ſo likewiſe ſhe bakes and dreſſes meat, &. and yet none ng} wo _
can keep a common bake houſe, or cook's-ſhop, to fell to 11 co. 64. *
others, unleſs he has been an apprentice, &c. according to the 13. Co. 12.


faid act, for they are expreſsly named alſo in the act, as arts 25 Hob. 184,


and myſteries: and the act of 22 Hen. 8. explains, that a 211. Moor 886.


brewer, baker, chirurgeon, (6) or ſcrivenor alien, &c. are no 8 284.
handicraftſmen within the purview and intention of certain pe- fy a.
nal laws, but that doth not prove that they are not arts or a l
myſteries; for art or myſtery is more general than handicraft,

for that is reſtrained to manufactures, but not within the pe-

nalty of the ſaid ſtatutes; and it is no queſtion, that in truth

they all are arts, myſte:1es, or manual occupations. As to


the ſecond, it was reſolved, that (c) the intent of the act was, (c) 13 Co. 12. |


that none ſhould take upon him any art, myſtery, or manual

occupation, but ſuch in which he had ſkill and knowledge :

and therefore the ſtatute intended, that he who uſed any art,

myſtery, or manual occupation, at the time of the ſaid act,

might uſe the ſame art or myſtery ; for (4) guod quiſque norit (4) Co. Lit. 25.
in hac ſe exerceat ; and the words of the ſaid branch are, as now 8 *
do lawfully uſe, fc. And it was ſaid, that it was (e) very ne- 13 Co. 32.
ceſſary that brewers ſhould have {kill and knowledge in brew- 2 13 Co. 12»
ing good and wholeſome beer, for that doth much conduce to

men's health. And ſo the firſt judgment was affirmed. And

in this caſe at the bar, as well by the Serjeants as by the Juſ-

tices in their arguments, much was ſaid of the antiquity of

the city of London, Ammianus Marcellinus, who wrote a-

bout 1200 years paſt, ſaith, that then it was (f) eppidum vetuſa, ( 4 Toft, 247.
tum. Cornelius Tacitus, (who married the daughter of Cneiug * Brownl. 286.
Lucius Agricola, and who was in this kingdom with Agricola

feven years) ſaith, Quod Londinum tempore Neronis (which is a-

bove 1500 years ago) was (g) copia negotiatorum et commeatu (g) 4 Inſt 247,
maxime celebre. And omitting all that (h) Stephanides (who Frags” 226.
wrote in the reign of Hen. 2.) has ſaid of the honour and an- *
tiquity of this city, I ſay, Quod hæc eſi camera Regis, cor reipul-

lue, et tanquam (i) epitome ſotius regni. [See Carthew 163.] (i) Antes 125. b.


*


Popham 6, To
Moor 594.
Cr. El. 288.
Duke ſur Cha-
ritable Uſes


79, 80.


” a,
euer,
FOES RSA 2


— g
6 © J Ds 223


The Caſe of THrtTrord
«--a< SCHOOL, OC.


n.


[JPON a private bill exhibited in the Parliament for
erection of a free-ſchool, maintenance of a preacher,
and of four poor people, ſcil. two poor men, and two poor


75, women, according to the will of Sir Thomas Fulmerſton, Kt.


a queſtion was moved by the Lords, and was ſuch : land of
the value of 351. anno q Eliz. Regina, was deviſed by
will in writing to certain perſons and their heirs, for the
maintenance of a preacher four days in the year, of a
maſter and uſher of a free grammar-ſchool, and of certain
poor people; and a ſpecial diſtribution was made by the
teſtator himſelf, in the ſame will, amongſt them, of the
revenues, ſcil. to the preacher a certain ſum, and certain
ſums to the ſchoolmaſter and uſher, and to the poor peo-
ple, amounting in the whole to 351. per annum, which
was the yearly profit of the land at that time; and after-
wards the land became of greater value, ziz. of the value
of 100l. per annum. Now two queſtions were moved,
1. Whether the preacher, ſchoolmaſter, uſher, and poor,
ſhould have only the ſaid certain ſums appointed to them
by the founder, or that the revenue and profit of the land
ſhould be employed to the increaſe of the ſtipend of the
preacher, ſchoolmaſter, uſher, and poor? 2. If any ſurpluſage
| remainc


—


part VIII. The Caſe of TxzTroRD School. 131


remained, how it ſhould be employed? And it was reſolved,
on hearing of counſel learned on both parts, ſeveral days at
Serjeants inn, by the two Chief Juſtices, and Walmſley, Juſ-
tice (to whom the Lords referred the conſideration of the caſe)
that the revenue and profit of the ſaid land ſhould be em-
ployed to the increaſe of the ſtipend of the preacher, ſchool-
maſter, &c. and poor, and if any ſurpluſage remained, it
ſhould be expended for the maintenance of a greater (a) num- () 10 co. 30. b.
ber of poor, &c. and nothing ſhould: be converted by the de-
viſees to their own uſes. So in the caſe in queſtion, where
lands in Croxton, in the county of Norfolk, were deviſed by
Sir Richard Fulmerſtone, to his executors, to find the ſaid
works of piety and charity, with ſuch certain diſtribution as
is aforeſaid 3 and now the value of the manor was greatly in-
creaſed, that it ſhall be employed in performance and increaſe
of the ſaid works of piety and charity inſtituted and erected
by the founder: for it appears by his diſtribution of the pro-
fits, that he intended the whole ſhould be employed in works
of piety and charity, and nothing ſhould be converted to the
private uſe of the executors, or their heirs. And this re-
ſolution is grounded on evident and apparent reaſon ; for, as
if the lands had decreaſed in value, the preacher, ſchool-
maſter, &c. and poor people, ſhould loſe, ſo when the lands
increaſe in value, par: ratione, they ſhall gain. And they
faid, that this caſe concerned the colleges in the univer-
ſities of Cambridge and Oxford, and other colleges, &c.
For in ancient time, when lands were of ſmall yearly value,
(victuals then being cheap) and were given for the main-
tenance of poor ſcholars, &c. and that every ſcholar, &c.
ſhould have 1d. or 1 d. ob. a day, that then ſuch ſmall al-
lowance was competent in reſpect of the price of victuals,
and the yearly value of the land; and now the price of
victuals being increaſed, and with them the annual value
of the lands, it would be now injurious to allow a poor
ſcholar 1 d. or 1d. ob. a day, which cannot keep him, and
to convert the reſidue to private uſes, where, in right, the
whole ought to be employed to the maintenance or increaſe
(if it may be) of ſuch works of piety and charity which
the founder has expreſſed, and nothing to any private
ule; for every college is ſeiſed in jure collegii, ſcilicet,
to the intent that the members of the college, according
to the intent of the founder, ſhould take the benefit, and
hat nothing ſhould be converted to private uſes. Panis
| egentium


— — 1 ˙¹-¹ —
— — —— — —


1 2? ̃ — ea——————


— — — — _—
—


— —


— —— — — — . —
— —


= — —
22 — — —  ——


OR — TT D *


—— —
— —


— ——


—
— . =
— 1 de


— * P


The Caſe of THE TOR D School. Part VIII.
(a) Duke fur


egentium (a) vita pauperum, et qui defraudat eos homo ſanguinis
1 for eft. And ade upon e had with = *
Charitable Uſes Juſtices, they were of the ſame opinion; and according to
$0. their opinions, the bill paſſed in both houſes of Parliament,
* * . and afterwards was confirmed by the King's royal aſſent,
Note, reader, there is a good rule in the act of Parliament
called, Statutum Templariorum : ita ſemper quod pia & celeber.
rima voluntas dinaterum in omnibus teneatur & expleatur, & per.

petuo ſanctiſſimè per ſeveret.


TUR:;


Part VIII. | | 132


TUR N O R's Caſe.
Paſeh. 8 Facobj 1. =
In the Common Pleas.


| TERMINO Michaelis, anno 6 Jacobi, Rot. 1811. Edward priqgm. $6. j
Turnor, Gent. executor of E. Turnor, brought an action See Skinner 407,
of debt againſt Ed. Lawrence, and others, adminiſtrators of — 1
Richard Booker, on a bond of 1001. made by the ſaid Ri- Lucas eng ne
chard Booker to E. Turnor, the teſtator: the defendants
pleaded in bar a former judgment in the King's Bench, upon
ſeveral bills, which amounted to 601. &c. Et ulterius dic
quod OY ad curiam domini Regis tent” apud civitatem Ci-
ceſir in Guildhaldd civit' pred” coram Roberto Adams tunc Ma-
Jore dictæ civit? die Lune, videlicet 23 die Febr' anno regni ipſius
dim” Regis guarto, Thomas Billet querebatur verſos ipſos Edw' &
alios defendentes adminiſtratores dicti Richardi Broker de placito
quod tidem Edward, Sc. redderent ei centum libras quas ei adtunc
injuſtè detinuerunt, ſuper quo ad eandem curiam iidem Edu Laws-
rence, &c, Solemniter exacti ſuerunt, & per Leonard Smith,
attornꝰ ſuum comperuerunt & tunc' dixerunt quod ipſi non potuerunt
dedicere actionem pred Thome Billet pred”, nec quin ſcriptum
obligator* virtute cujus idem Thomas Billet debitum pred de eiſdem
Edwards, &c. exigebat, fuit factum præd Rich Booker nec quin
pred” Richard” Booker in vitd ſud debuit præd' Thome Billet præd
debitum centum librarum, modo & forma prout præd' Thomas Bil-
let, adtunc verſus eos quergbatur + whereupon judgment was


|

1

given in the ſame court for the ſaid Tho. Billet; and pleaded | | |
|

|


(


another judgment for 601. in the ſame court, at the ſuit of
John Githens; and pleaded divers other former recoveries
in actions of debt in the ſame court againſt the ſame ad-
miniſtrators,


(a) Vaugh. 104.
Bridgm. 80.
9 Co. 108. b.


(3) Bridgm. 80.


(e) 3 Keb. 877.
1 Roll. Rep. 504.
Latch. 111.

9 Co. 109. a.

2 Jones 92.


See Rep, Q. A,
146.


(4) Plow. 43. b.
44+ a. 48. a.
Br. Colluſion 20.


(e) Plowd. 51. a.
Fitz. Dower 42.
Br, Dower 15.
Br. Fauxifier de
Recovery 6.

Br. Colluſion 10.
Plowd. 54. b.


To RN oO R 's Caſe. Part VIII.


miniſtrators, amounting in the whole to 5141. 8 d. and that
they have not goods or chattels of the inteſtate in their hangs
to be adminiſtered, præterguam bona & catalla quæ (a) ny
attingunt ad valentiam pred” 5141. 8 d. verſus ipſos in forms
pred” recuperat', which are arable and liable to the ſaid
ſeveral executions. The plaintiff replied and ſaid, that the
ſaid recovery of the ſaid John Githens (6) habita fuit per fray.
dem & covinam, Qc. ad ipſum Ediu. Turnor de debito ſuo pref}
defraudand & decipiend', upon which they were at iſſue to he
tried by the country: and as to the ſaid recovery of the ſaid
1001. againſt the defendant, that the defendant after the
death of the ſaid Rich. Booker, and after the ſaid recovery,
and before the purchaſe of the ſaid original writ, 24 Feb. ann
4*.reg. nunc, have paid to the ſaid Tho. Billet 601. parcel ofthe
ſaid 1001. recovered by him as is aforeſaid, in full ſatisfac-
tion and diſcharge of the ſaid judgment, with which payment
the ſaid Thomas Billet held, and yet holds himſelf contented
and ſatisſied, and then and there offered, and yet offers to
rcleaſe the ſaid Edward Lawrence, &c. the ſaid 1001. or to
acknowledge ſatisfaction thereof in the ſaid court of our lord
the King at Chicheſter, at the charges of the ſaid adminiftra-
tors: but the ſaid Edward, &c. deceitfully, and to the intent
to (c) defraud and deceive the ſaid Edw. Turnor executorem de
Juſto debito ſuo, cognitionem ſatisfactionis, de pred” cenium libris,
Sc. Sive de judicio pred? relaxari, &c. diſtulerunt & adhuc dif-
ferunt & judicium pred” inde in ſuo robore & vigore permanert
ſinunt ad intentionem pradiftam. And made the like replica-
tion to the other recoveries : whereupon the defendant de-
murred in law; and the point in law was, when a judgment
is given againſt an adminiſtrator or executor, for a juſt debt,
due by the inteſtate or teſtator, if the ſaid ſubſequent agree-
ment as is before alledged, ſhall avail the plaintiff or ret!
and it was objected, that foraſmuch as the judgment was ob-
tained bong fide tor a juſt and true debt, the ſubſequent agree-
ment cannot make the' recovery covenous, and fo long as
it remains in force, unleſs the executors have goods and
chattels in their hands above that judgment, they are not
bound by law to pay any other debt, and covin cannot bc
alledged in doing of a lawful act; as in a writ of dower
(4) againſt a diſſeiſor, if the tenant pleads in abatement
of the writ an entry by the difſeiſec, the demandant
ſhall not be received to aver the entry to be by covin to
abate his writ, becauſe the entry is congeable and Jawfu!,
and mixt with no wrong, as it is held in 15 Ed. 4. 4. b.
but if a woman has lawful title (e) of dower, and
cauſes another to diſſeiſe the tenant againſt whom ſhe re-


covers upon a good title, it ſhall not bind the difſeiſce,
| | as


3 Co. 78. a, 5 Co. 31. 2. 11 Ed. 4. 2. a. 6 Co. 58. . 44 E. 3. 45: b. 46. a. Co.


Lit. 35. a. 357, b. 1 Siderf, 21. Lane 44. 1 Roll. 549. 2 Roll. Rep, 17, Perk. ſect. 396. 44


Ail, 29. 18 H. 8


* & A.


Part VIII. TOUR NOR 's Caſe,
as it is held in 44 Ed. 3. 45. b. The ſame law of him who is


put to his Formedon, or any other real adion: and the rea-
{on is, becauſe the demandant's right is mixed by covin with
a tort, which is an ill herb, and makes the whole act tortious.
Vide 25 AM. pl. 1. 22 AM. pl. 92. 27 Aſſ. pl. 74. 41 AM. pl.
28. 44 Aff pl. 29. 11 H. 4. 60, 61. 15 E. 4. 4. b. II E.
4. 2. 7 H. 7. II. 1 fl. 8. 5. 19 H. 8. 13. But it was


anſwered and reſolved, and ſo adjudged, that the plaintiff


ſhould (a) recover; for an executor or adminiſtrator ought to
execute his office, and adminiſter the goods of the deceaſed
(b) lawfully, truly, and diligently : lawfully, in paying of all
duties, debts and legacies, in ſuch precedency and order as
they ought to be paid by the law : truly, to (c) convert nothing
to his own uſe ; for an executor or adminiſtrator hath not the
deceaſed's goods to tris own uſe, but in another (4) right, and
to another uſe, and ought not, by any practice or device, to
bar or hinder any creditor of his debts, but ought truly to
execute his office, according to the truſt which is repoſed in


133


(a) Bridgm. 80.


(5) 5 Co. 27. b.


(4) Cart. 134.


him: diligently, quza (e) negligentia ſemper habet comitem infor- (e) 3 Bulſtr. 110.


tunium. Then in the caſe at bar, when the adminiſtrator
compounds with one who has a judgment of 1001. for 601.
and the plaintiff offers to (/) releaſe or to acknowledge ſatis-
faction and they defer it, to the intent that the judgment may
ſtand in force, by which the plaintiff will be defrauded of his
true debt, and the adminiſtrators convert the deceaſed's goods
to their private uſe, which is altogether agaiuit their office and
the truſt repoſed in them; and therefore be ſuch agreement

either precedent before the recovery or ſubſequent after the
recovery it is all one as to the creditor who is a third perſon,
for he is defrauded as well by the ſubſequent agreement as by
the agreement precedent, and thereby theadminiſtrators againſt
their office and the truſt repoſed in them, would make a private
gain, where they ought not, and the creditor, who is a ſtran-
ger, would loſe his debt, which is by the law due to him:
and an agreement between two ſhall not hurt or prejudice a


Y Jones 914
92.


third perlon. And (g) Goodale's cafe, in the Fifth Part of (g) Poph. 99,
my Reports, fol. 95. was Cited and well applied to this caſe, 180. Cr. El.383,


And if any prejudice accrues to the adminiſtrators in this caſe,
it is their own fault, for Billet the plaintiff would have releaſed
to them or acknowledged ſatisfaQton, but they deferred it, to
the end by this means to bar the plaintiff of his juſt and true
debt. 2. It was reſolved, that the bar as to all the recovery
pleaded in the court of Chicheſter was inſufficient, for the
validity of the ſaid recovery was all the lite and force of the
bar: and, 1. It doth not appear that the Mayor had juriſdic-
tion * or power (/) to hold a court, either by preſcription or
patent. 2. It appcars by the declaration in the ſaid court, that
the action of debt was brought for 100 l. without making men-
tion of any bond, and therefore it ought not to be intended,
that there was any bond, and then the ſaid adminiſtrators were
not chargeable in an action of debt with a ſimple (i) contract,


and


384. Jenk.
Cent. 261.

Gold ſb. 176,177.
Co. Lit. 209. b.
Moor 708, og.
1 Roll. 421.
Hob. 72.

3 Lev. 141. :


* 6 Mod. 72.
(Y Vaugh. 93,
94. 1 Jones 451.
Cro. El. 489.
Cro. Jac, 184,
493, 832

Cro, Car. 46.
Velv. 46,


(i) Antea 126.2,


Hard. 30 3. Velv.
20. Vaugh. 93.


2 $ Co. 82. b. 9 Co. 86. b. $7. a. Cro. El. 121, 409. Noy 54, Poph. 32. Swinb. 328, 329.


© And. 182, 183. 1 Leon, 165. Mo, 366, 1 Sid. 333+ Goldſb. 106, 107.


mmm SE


"li.


. R _ 2 ————. ae. eee ⁰ ůuòur ] U ee Eee SES


bd oo. oo. ——— — — — —— — — — 2 — —


——— I —


— 2 — —


r , r ] . ], Ü... ⁵ ö
— — —


—
_— — — ——— 7 —


(a) Co. Lit.
303. b. Doct.
pl. 69. 7 Co.


286. 8.
(3)Cro.Car.209,


Co, Lit. 303. b.
DoR, pl. 69.
7 Co. 25. 2.


(c) Cr. Jac. 221,
133. Cro.Car, 6.
Doct. pl. 70. 32 5.
Lit. Rep. 130,
172. Mo. 464.
1 Sid. 336. Dy.
39. pl. 62. Antea
120. b. 9. Co.
53. a. 110. b.
Godb, 138.

1 Lev. 195.


TuRRNOR“s Cale, Part VIII.


and although the defendant in his bar doth confefs that the
debt was due by bond, yet that will not make the declaration
good; for when the declaration wants (a) circumſtance of
time or place, &c. it may be made good by the bar : but when
a declaration, bar, or replication, &c. wants (6) ſubſtance, it
cannot be made good by the other's plea. And fo you will
better underſtand ' 294 books in 18 Ed. 4. 16. b. 22 E. 4. 2.
b. 6 E. 4.2. 11 H. 7. 24. 6 H. 7. 6. 10. 5 H. 7. 12. 38 Ul.
6. 17, 18, 19. 18 E. 3. 30. 38 E. 3. 34. b. Plow. Com. 220.
Vide F. N. B. 21. 3. It was reſolved, that in the caſe at bat,
if the (c) replication had been inſufficient, cil. that the faid
agreement ſubſequent ſhould not avail the plaintiff; yet upon
the whole record the plaintiff ſhould have judgment, becauſe
the bar was inſufficient in matter: and a difference was taken,
when by the replication it appears that the plaintiff has no
cauſe of action, there the plaintiff ſhall never have judgment,
although the bar be inſuſſicient; as in debt on a bond, with
condition to perform (4) covenants in an indenture ; the de-


Hob. 14. Velo. fendant pleads performance of all the covenants generally,


152, 153. Palm,
287. Winch, 37.
985 Cro. El. 2 32.
fo. Jac. 560.
Cro. Car. 422.
Co, Lit. 303. b.
2 Roll.Rep.1 59.
Hob. 14-
(e) Poſtea 163. a.
3 Co. 52. b.
1 Sand. 286.
Hob. 199. Cro.
Jac. 133, 221,
312. Hard. 32.
2 Bulſtr. 94.
Styl. 3 54. Palm.
287. Lit. Rep.
172.
(f)Cre. Jac. 133.
Cro, Car. 5.
Poph. 42. Antea
120. b. 9 Co.


110. b. Doct. pl.


70, 325. Lit.
Rep. 341. Godb.
138. Palm. 287.
Wiuch. 37.


Fitzgib. 205.


Q Co. 110. b.
(g) Hob. 14.
Flow. 66. b.

7 Ed. 4. 31. a. b.
Fitz. Judgm. 50.
Moor 105.


Dyer 119. pl. 6.


1 And. 168.


where it appears that divers of them are in the negative or
disjunctive, and ſo the plea in the general affirmative is inſuf-
ficient : yet if the plaintiff replies, and ſhews a breach of one
of the covenants, which on his own ſhewing is no breach;
upon which the defendant demurs, judgment ſhall be given
againſt the plaintiff, becauſe upon the whole (e) record, it
appears that the plaintiff has no cauſe of action; for the bond
is indorſed with condition to perform the covenants, ſo that
the plaintiff has no cauſe of action until there be a breach of
covenant; and on the plaintiff's own ſhewing there is not any
breach which is ſufficient in law to give the plaintiff cauſe of
action; and it ſhall be always intended, that every man will
ſhew the beſt of his caſe : but when the defendant's (/) bar is
inſufficient in ſubſtance, and the plaintiff replies, and ſhews
the truth of his caſe, whereby he ſhews no matter againſt him-
ſelf, but matter explanatory, or perhaps not materia!, there the
court ſhall adjudge upon the whole record, and (the declaration
being good) for the inſufficiency of the bar, without any
regard to the replication, judgment ſhall be given for the phin-
tiff: as if a man pleads a grant by letters patent in bar, which
are not ſuflicient, the plaintiff, by replication ſhews another
clauſe in the ſaid letters patent, which clauſe is not material,
and the defendant demurs in law, in this caſe judgment ſhall
be given againſt the defendant, & fic in ſimil bus. And ſo
you will better underſtand your books in 7 E. 4. 28. Tilly g
and Woody's caſe, 11 H. 7. 28. and the books aforelaid;
and other books vouched in Dr. Bonham's caſc.


MART


part VIII.


MARY SHIPLE 's Caſe.


Paſcb. 8 Facobi 1.


RINITY, 4 Jacobi, Rot. 28. in the King's Bench,
T Mary Shipley brought an action of debt on a bond of
200 l. againſt Chriſtopher Beane and Ann his wife, executrix
of Francis Haſil wood the obligor z the defendants pleaded fully
adminiſtered, and ſo nothing in their hands. The plaintiff
replied, that they had aſſets. The jurors found aſſets to the
value of 1721. and judgment was given to recover the (a)
whole debt of 2001. and damages and coſts of the goods of the
teſtator, i, c. (b) & fi non, tunc the damages of their own
proper goods. Upon a writ of Error brought upon the ſame
judgment in the Exchequer-chamber, the ſaid judgment was
affirmed, Hill. 7. Fac. For upon the bar, the effect of which
is, nothing in their hand, the plaintiff might have prayed her
(c) judgment preſently ; for thereby he confeſſes the debt,
but that he cannot have execution until the defendants have
goods of the deceaſed ; as in a writ of (4) meſne, if the de-


judgment preſently, for this plea will ſerve him only to fave
him from damages. Vide 11 H. 4. 52. a. So in a (e) Warrantia
Charte againſt the heir, the def. pleads nothing by deſcent, &c.
the plaintiff ſhall thereupon recover pro loco et tempore. So in
debt againſt (/) the heir, if he pleads nothing by deſcent,
the plaintiff may have judgment preſently, and a Scire facias
Vor. IV. G g when


Cr, El. 5924 887. 1 Vent. 94, 95, 96. (d) Co. Lit. 100. a. Hob. 39, 217, Br. Meine 5, Fitz.
N. B. 134. K. 1 Vent, 94. Noy- 149. Hob. 39, 199, 217. Co. Lit. 266, a, (/


Meſne 23. (e) F.


Vat. 95, 96. Dyer 373. pl. 14.


in 2 Saund, 226,


ſendant pleads, not diſtrained in his default, he may pray 13


134


N. This caſe is
denied to be law


Cro Cars 372.


(a) Allen 3), 38.
Styles 88. 1
1 Vent. 94. 9 H.
7. 15. a. Raſt.
Ent. 328. b.
Cro. Eliz 592.
Cr. Cor. 167,373.
1 Roll. 929.
1 Leon. 68.
(5)Cro, ac, 647,
648. Palm. 314.
Dyer 185. pb 67.
1Roll. 928, 932.
Oy 120. 2 E. 4.


11 H. 4. 5. a.
r. Exec. 51.
Fitz, Judg. 68.
(c) ob. 199.
1 Sid. 448.
8 Sand. 226.
face Exec. 27. p
Co. Lit. *
Moor 246.
Swinb. 329.


6 -
l 1 a — 0 —— = i = * SD ———
2 ů — — — . ̃ ſꝗB—9ũñ— p ̃7§7—r——Ü“i — — -
— — — L
— — — — - - — - - a
_—_ __ — - 2 = \ -
a - — — — —
— — - - -
=


N — ak. qa > So.
— o - = _ —
2 —


22 — —U


— — 8 — — — r 1 * - — L
XS - - — = — * 2 Pea _
- — — — —— * *


— ſ— — 22.


[ \ 1
nd


ws 42 op. — I Oe N —_—  — —— —² — 7 . — ˙* A SEES


Mary SHirLExr's Caſe. Part vin.


when aſſets deſcend. Vide Old N. B. in Marrantid Chartæ tg

a) Antes 52. b. 21 (a) Ed. 3 9. b. Br. tit. Warrantia Charte 30. But the

lowd. 440. a. b. trial (Verdict) in the caſe at bar, is a good direction to the

Sheriff what he is to do; but yet that doth not alter the judg-

ment of the law; and it is the better form, and more agree.

able to law to have judgment for the whole, than for part oſ

{3)Co.Lit.466.b. the debt, according to (6) the aſſets found. Vide Sym's caſe
Antea 53, 54 before for this matter.


_—_ ah oY 1 0


Sir JohN NEDHAu's Caſe.


Paſch. 8 Jacobi 1.


In the Common Pleas.


RTHUR POST and Catharine his wife, adminiſtra- Obe gts.

| trix of Eliz, Weldiſh, brought an action of debt againſt Rep. O. A. 4r.
Sir John Nedham (which plea began Mich. 7. Facobi, Rot. Swinb, 355,357.
232.) on bond of 2001. made to the ſaid Eliz. Cui guidem |

ath' adminiflratio omnium & ſingulorum bonorum, Cc. que fuer”
prejat' Eliz. tempore Refs per WilliheP permiſſione divina
Rolfens Epiſcopum apud Roffen' poſi Mortem pred” Eliz. commiſſa
fuit 5 Febr', 1605. The defendant pleaded, quod poſt mor tem
dite Eliz. & ante commiſſionem adminiſtrationis, pred” ſcilicet,

13 Maii 1604. The Dean and Chapter of Canterbury being
guardians of the ſpiritualties (a) ſede vacante of the Archbiſhop (4) Swinb. 355
of Canterbury, committed adminiſtration of the Goods, &c. 357.
of the ſaid Elizabeth to the defendant, eo quod eadem Eltz, tem-
pore mortis ſue habuit bona notabilia in divers“ dicces' provinciæ
Cant, which adminiſtration committed by the ſaid Dean, &c.
doth yet remain in force, and demanded judgment if the

action. The plaintiff replied, that after the faid adminiſtra-

tion granted by the ſaid Dean, &c. to the defendant, and
before the purchaſe of this original writ, ſc:1. 4 Nov. 1607.
before Dr. Bennet, commiſſary of the Prerogative court of
Canterbury, at the ſuit of the ſaid Catharine, againſt the
faid defendant, the adminiſtration granted to the defendant

was pronounced and declared pro nulla et invalida ad omnem
juris effeflum : upon which the defendant demurred in
law, And in this caſe three points were reſolved, Foraſ-
much as the defendant has not ſhewed in his bar, that the

inteſtate had bona notabilia in (5) certain, for this cauſe it (% Swinb, 455,
ſhall be taken that the adminiſtration was granted where 357.
the inteſtate had not bona notabilia in ſeveral dioceſes : but

yet it was agreed, that ſuch adminiſtration was not void, (c) (+) cr, x1, 237,
but voidable, as it was adjudged in (4) Hugh Vere's caſe, 457. Hob. 185.


appears in the Fifth Part of my Reports, fol. 29 & 30. Kell a5
Go 2 2. It (4) Swind. 337.


Moor 145. 5 Co. 30. a. 2 Jones 78. 3 Bulſt, 276. Dav. 444 4. 47. a+ 4 Leon. 218.


a] Cr. El. 241,
457. Hob. 185.
S vinb. 355.
Moor 693.

x Roll. Rep. 423.


(5b) Plow, 233.4.


(c 2 Cor 55. b.
4 Co. 2. b. go. 3.
Cro, Eliz. 585.
Co. Lit. 35. a.
10 Co. 62.2.
Hutt. 51. Dav.
32.8. Cawly214.
2 Bulſt. 304,305.
Bulſtr. 192.
4 3 Co. 78. b.
Co. 19. a.
Dyer 339- pl. 46.
18d 21.
2 Keb. 12.
roſea 143. b.
Cro. El. 460.
(e) Antea 133. a.
Cart. 134


co. 39. a.
Swinb. 351,
Co Lis. 292. a.


le) 5 Co. 34- 2.
9 Co. 39. a,


+ Roll. 918.
Swinb. 351,352.
Dyer 355, 356.
pl. 8. 1 Ke 854.
Wentworth 2
2 Iaſt. 398.
Kelw. $1. a. b.
(Wett. 2. c. 19.
2 Inſt. 397.

N (i) 5 Co. 67. b.
Cro. Ei. 678,
679, 718, 719.
2 And. 132.
Raym 434.
Swinb. 238,

\ 20 278.

arch 138.
2 Inſt. 398.
Owen 35. Dall.


$5-

(&) Co. Lit. 59. b.

(!)F.N.B. 120.4,
Br. Treſpaſs 83.
Br. Juriſdict. 23,

Br. Oidi. 5.


Sir Jonm NE DunAu's Caſe, Part Vit,
2. It was objected, that foraſmuch as the adminiſtration
granted to the defendant was not void, but (a) voidable, ſo


long as it was in force, the inferior ordinary ought not to hare


committed adminiſtration, for the prerogatrre adminiſtation,
granted by the Archbiſhop, and the adminiftzation granted
by the inferior ordinary cannot (5) ftand and be both of effe&
together; for thereupon confufon will enſue 3 and therefore
the adminiftration granted by the inferior ordinaty was utter
void; and although the faid prerogative adminiſtration be
afterwards revoked, that ſhall not make the other adminiftr.
tion of any better effect than it was at the time it was granted,
quia (c ) quod in initio non valet, tractu temporis non contaleſct,
But it was anſwered and reſolved, that now inaſmuch as the
eccleſiaſtical Judge has pronounced and declared the letters
of adminiſtration granted to the defendant pro nulla & invalid
ad omnem juris effeftum, we mult give credit to them, that it
was for cauſes not appearing to us void ab initio Vide 17 Eli.
Dyer (4) 339. the like judgment upon the ſame reaſon, Alls
the adminiſtration is but an authority, becauſe he has nothing
to his (e) own ufe, but all to the uſe of another, and an au-
thority may expect and commence in futuro, and therefore
it ſhall be ſuſpended until the other be repealed or declared
void. And it was ſaid, that there are tria genera executorim,
primus à lige conſlitutus, & tdeo dicitur legitimus, ut Epiſcbu;
fecundrs a teſlatore conflitutus, & tdeo dicitur teflamentaring, ut
executor ; tertius ab Epiſcopo conſtitutus, & ideo dicitur dation,
ut adminiſtrator. And it is to be obſerved, that the Biſhop
who is executor, appointed by the law, is not permitted by
the law to make a releaſe of any debt, (/) or gift of any goods;
for he has a ſpecial property in the deceaſed's goods for the
benefit of the dead, and nothing to his own uſe; and it ap-
pears in 9 Eliz. Dyer 255. that the ordinary has not (g) power
to give authority to another to ſell the deceaſed's goods, becauſe
he himſelf has no ſuch authority, and the ſtat. of Welt. 2.
cap. 10. ( Bona deven ad manus ordinarii diſponenda, that i


38. for the good of the deceaſed, and as to this purpoſe he is like


an adminiſtrator, Auran' (i) min' tate, who has a ſpecial powel
committed to him to diſpoſe of the deceaſed's goods for his
benefit, and nothing in piejudice of the executor, as it is bel!
in Prince's caſe, in the Fitth Part of my Reports, 29. b. 80 the
lord who takes a furrender of lands held by copy of court roll
to the uſe of another, has power () only to grant it according
to the uſe of the ſurrender, and not to any ſtranger as 118
held in the Fourth Part of my Reports in Weſtwick's cle.
Vide 5 Hen. 4. 18. b. the (/) ordinary ſhall not have an achlon
of treſpals for carrying away the goods before an actual poſſeſtion
of them, (as execn;ors or adminiſtrators may have) but belote
poſſeſſion the ordinary ſhall ſue for them in the Spiritual Court;
and Fitzherbert in abridging the caſe, tit. Tepe 7 Fn

equitury


part VIII. Sir Joux NxpuAu's Caſe.


ſquitur, that the Ordinary ſhall not have an aCtion of debt, {a)
as Ordinary. 3. It was reſolved, that the committing of (5)
adminiſtration by the Archbiſhop to the obligor, ſhall not
extinguiſh the debt, but the debt remains; but if the obligee
makes the obligor his executor, it is a releaſe in law of Ne
debt, for it is the act of the obligee himſelf, and therewith
agrees 8 Ed. 4. 3. a. 21 Ed. 4. 2. b. &c. in the ſame manner
as if a woman (c) obligee marries the obligor, or one of the
obligors, it is a releaſe in the Jaw of the debt, for it is by the
act of the obligee herſelf, and therewith agree 11 H. 7. 4. and
21 Hen. 7. 29. But if a woman (4) executrix marries the
debtor, it is no releaſe in law, becauſe ſhe has the debt in
another right, and if it ſhould amount to a releaſe in law, it
would amount to a Devaſtavit, which is a wrong, which the law
will not ſuffer. And ſo it was adjudged in the King's Bench,
Mich. 30 & 31 Eliz. where in debt againſt a woman (e) exe-
cuttix, ſhe pleaded fully adminiſtered, and it was found that
the defendant had married the obligor, and that the huſband
was dead, and it was adjudged to be no releaſe in law, nor the
debt extinct, but only ſuſpended during the coverture, and ſo
a difference. Note, that Fleta /ib. 2. cap. de Teſtamentis,


ſays, De bonis drfuntt trina debet eſſe dipoſitio ; 1. Neceſſitatis ut
(f) funeralia ; 2 Utilitatis, that every one ſhall be paid in
ſuch precedency as he ought to be. 3. Veluntatis, as lega-


cies, &c.


Sir


136


(a) 1 Ro'l 906.
1 Leon, go, 91.
1 Roll. 934.
Swinb. 325, 300,
301. S. Ik. 303.
I Salk. 327.
Salk. 163.
85 Brownl. 76.
r. Car, 313,
373. Co. Lit.
264. b 1 Roll.
974. Plowd.
184. b. 186. a,
Hob. 10.
Cr. Car. 373.
Went. 4 2 Pele.
= Moor 236,
G. 1 ſones 348.
- 2h — oa
1 Roll, 940.
Br, — 112.
8 E. 4. 3. a.
Swinb. 300, 301.
Hutt. 17.
(d) x Roll.
940. Hob. ou
C >, Lit. 264. b.
(e) Cr. El. 114,
150 1 Roll.
934, 93
Co. * b.
Moor 236.
1 Leon. 320.
()20H. 7. 5. a.
3 Inſt. 202.


o


2 Brownl, 289.
322, 3237 324,


16, Godb, 167,


Part vill


Sir FRANCIS BARRINGTON's
Caſe.


Paſch. 8 Jacobi 1.


In the Common Pleas.


n Richard Chalke, plaintiff in replevin, and
and Will. Peter, and Nicholas White, defendants, which
began Hill. 6 Jacobi, Rot. 157. on a long and impertinent
pleading, the caſe was ſuch; dir Robert Rich, Lord Rich,
was ſeiſed of the foreſt or chace of Hatfield (whereof the place
where, &c. was parcel) in fee, and by his deed indented,
bearing date 30 Jan. 19 Eliz for good conſideration granted
to Sir Thomas Barrington, Knt. and his heirs, omnes beſcs
arbores tam marem' ſubboſcos & ſpinas quam alia genera quorum-
cunque, adtunc creſcent” ſtant” & exiſtent” ſimul cum omnibus arbt-
ribus, vocat timber trees, boſeis ſubboſeis, & ſpinis quibuſcun-
que, gue ad aliquod tempus extunc impoſlerum forent creſcent” flant
renovant” ſiue exiflent” in et ſuper illis partibus foreie præd com-
muniter vocat Buſhend quarter, et gquarterium vocat” T akely quar-
ter (except the land and foil of the ſame wood) with liberty to
encloſe them, and to hold them encloſed for the preſervation
of the ſpring of wood which ſhould be for ſuch time, as by the
laws and ſtatutes of the realm is appointed and enacted, and
not otherwiſe ab/que mole/tatione ſeu interruptione of the ſaid
Lord Rich, his heirs or aſſigns, and to exclude the deer,
and all other cattle, out of the wood ſo incloſed, and to
have the herbage and feeding thereof, as any owner of the
wood might do, by the laws and ſtatutes of this 2
8 | W1tnOU


Part VIII. Sir Fra, BARRIxGrox's Caſe. 137


without interruption of the ſaid Lord Rich, his heirs or aſſigns.
And that the plaintiff is ſeiſed of a houſe and ſix acres of land
in Hatfield in fee, to which he has common appurtenant for
all cattle levant and couchant, &c. in and through the whole
foreſt or chace of Hatfield; which grant made by the Lord
Rich, was in performance of an award made between the faid
Lord Rich, and Sir Tho. Barrington, by the Lord Burghley
Lord Treaſurer of England, Thomas Earl of Suſſex, Sir Wil-
liam Cordel Maſter of the, Rolls, and Sir Gilbert Gerrard At-
torney-general, which arbitrament and grant was confirmed
and eſtabliſhed by (a) act of Parliament, anno 27 Eliz. with () 2 Brown).
a * ſaving to all ſtrangers, &c. And that the ſaid Sir T ho. Bar- 289, 323, 324»
rington died, after whoſe deceaſe the ſaid wood deſcended to 88. 167, 168.
Sir Francis Barrington, as to his ſon and heir, who, 1 Feb. * x Jones 235.
1 Jacobs, felled the wood in the place in which, &c. and took
it to his own uſe, and 10 Mar. following incloſed it for the
preſervation of the ſpring, and ſo has maintained it, according
to the laws and ſtatutes of this realm: and the parties demurred
in law: and if the plaintiff was barred of his common or not
was the queſtion, And in this caſe the defendants pleaded the
ſaid arbritrament, and the ſaid act of Parliam. at large; but to
no purpoſe, for without queſtion, neither the arbitrament nor
the act (in reſpect of the ſaving) can bar the plaintiff of his
common: but all the doubt of the caſe ariſes upon two acts of
Parliament not pleaded, /c. the act of (b) 22 E. 4. c. 7. and the (5) 2 Brownl.
att of 35 H. 8. c. 17. And firſt it was objected, that the ſaid 795 hi $
act of 22 E. 4. has barred the plaintiff of his common; for by 70 = ;
the ſame act it is enacted, that if any of the King's ſubjects Godb. 167, 168,
having woods growing in his own ground, within any foreſt, „ 6 Ho
chace, or purlieu, &c. cauſes the ſame wood, or any part; Roll, Rep. 92.
thereof to be felled by licence of the King, or his heirs, in his 1 Jones 233.
foreſts, chaces, or purlieus, or without licence, in the fo-
reſt, chace, or purlieu of any other perſon, or make ſale of the _
lame wood: be it lawful for the ſaid ſubjects poſſeſſors of the
lame ground whereupon the wood grew, and to other perſons
to whom ſuch wood ſhall be fold, immediately after the wood
ſo felled, to coppice and encloſe the ſame ground with ſufficient
hedges able to keep out all manner of beaſts and cattle out of
the tame ground, for the preſervation of their young ſpring :
and the ſame hedges ſo made, the ſaid ſubjects may keep con-
tinually by the ſpace of ſeven years next after the. ſame in-
cloling ; and there is no ſaving in the aCt for the commoners ;
and therefore (as it was urged) they ſhall be excluded of their
common during the ſeven years ; tor every one 1s party and
privy to an ack of Parliament, and the rights and intereſts of
thole which are not ſaved by the ack of Parliament are
dound: and the makers of the act have greater regard to
e preſervation of the ſpring of woods for the common-


Gg 4 wealth


{a) 55 H. S. e. 17.
4 Brown]. 290,
3225 327, 324,
225, 328.
Godb, 167, 169,
271.


(3) 11 co. 59. a.
62. b. 64. b.

1 Jones 185.

1 Co, 25. b.
Cro, Jac. 12 1.


Godb. 169.
2 Roll. Rep. 4 10.


423.

Stanf.Prer. 69. b.
Hawkſ. Max.
452. 2 Inſt. 685.
(<) 2 Brownl.
324, 325-

11 Co. 49. b.

7 Roll. Rep, 96,
$92 137»


Sir Fx A. BxarxrInGTOn's Caſe. Part VIII.
wealth in maintenance of timber and woods, than to' common
in the woods of ſubjects within foreſts or chaces after a tea-
ſonable time, till the ſpring be of ſuch growth that beafts or
cattle' cannot hurt or hinder it. And theſe words, to incloſe
the ſame-land with ſufficient hedges able to exclude all manner
of beaſts or cattle out of the ſame ground, were firongly
urged to prove the intent of the makers of the act, to exclude
not only the beaſts of the foreſt,” 5f chaſe, but alfo cattle of
commoners ; for beaſts of the foreſt are not called cattle; and
the words are, able to exclude all manner of beaſts and cattle
out of the ſarne ground; which general words extend to beaſts
and cattle of the commoner. To which it was anſwered by
the plaintiff's counſel : 1. That the ſaid act of 22 E. 4. doth
not extend to this cafe, becaufe the ſtatute extends only to
thofe who are owners of the ground; for the words of the act
in divers parts thereof are, growing on their ptoper ground,
and in this cafe Sir Francis Barrington has but a profit appren-
der in another's ground, for the ground remains to the Loid
Rich. 2. It was anſwered, that the ſtat. of (4) 35 H. 8. cap.
17. which is in the negative, „That it ſhall not be lawful to
% #tiy perſons which have or ſhall have any woods wherein
any ought to have any common, &c. to fell and cut down
e theſatne woods (except it be to his own uſe and occupation
“4 until ſuch time as the fourth part of the ſaid ground or ſoil,
« Kc. be divided, &c. fenced and inclofed, &c.“ Ft (6) leges


poſteriores, priores contrarias abrogant. To which it was an-


ſwered by the defendant's counſel, that Sir Francis was out of
this prohibition, and within the exception of this branch ; for
he has taken the faid wood tb his own uſe; and he who takes
wood wherein others have common is out of the prohibition
of this act. And now this term the caſe was argued at the
Bench by the Judges, and in this caſe theſe points were re-
ſolved. 1. That Sir Francis Barrington has an (c) inheritance
as profit apprender in aliens ſolo, and that the ſoil remains
to the Lord Rich. 2. That the ſtatute of 22 E. 4. ſhall
extend to Sir Francis Barrington, notwithſtanding he has
not the ſoil; for the words are, that it be lawful for the
faid ſubjects poſſeſſors of the ſame ſoil, or to other perſons
to whom ſuch wood ſhall be fold; and the faid grant
for the conſiderations in the faid award mentioned to Sit
Thomas Barrington and his heirs, was a perpetual fale to
him within the words and intention of the act. 3. The
ſaid act doth not extend to the wood of a ſubject, ia
which any other has common, but only to a ſeveral wood:
for by the common law, he who has a wood in which
another has common cannot incloſe it to eat


Part VIII. Sir FAA. BAR NIN rox's Caſe, 138


the commoner of his common, be it in ſoreſt or chace, or out
of foreſt and chace. But he who has a ſeveral wood in a fo-
reſt, may after the fall incloſe it for three years parvo foſſato |
(a) et baſſa haia ſecundum aſſiſam foreſt, as appears by the Ad (a) 3 Brownl,
quod damnum in the Regilter 257. Then it appears by the 04d. 270.
preamble of the ſaid act, that it extends only to a ſeveral wood;

for it tecites, that where ſubjects have felled their woods, &c.

they could not heretofore incloſe their ground to preſerve the

germens longer than three years, which proves what the com-

mon law was before in ſuch caſe z but without queſtion that

extends only to a ſeveral wood; for none could incloſe a wood

wherein another had common for a day, &c. But now this

ſtatute has enlarged the tnne to ſeven years, and has alſo

raifed the hedges; for where he might before incloſe it parvo |
foſſato (b) et baſſa haia, he may now make magnam et altam (5)"2 Brownl,
laiom, ſufficient to exclude all manner of beaſts and cattle. 326.

4. It appears by the preamble, between what perſons, and for

and againſt what perſons this act was made; and the parties

to this great contract by act of Parliament are the ſubjects hay-

ing woods, &c. within foreſts, chaces, or purlieus of one part,

and the King and other owners of foreſts, chaces and purlieus

of the other part; ſo that the commoners are not any of the

parties between whom this act was made: and therefore the

caſe well argued in 21 H. 7. 1. a. b. inter the Prior of (c) (0% Brownl.
Caſtleacre, and the Dean of St. Stephens, and left at large in 320, 327:

the printed Report, was afterwards adjudged, as appears by , Jon ngg,096:
the record thereof, which began Paſch. 18 H. 7. Rot. 416. e
that the act of * 2 H. 5. being made between the King and H. 6. 7.
Priors aliens, by which the priorys aliens were given to the

King, did not extinguiſh the annuity of the Prior of Caſtleacre

which he had out of a reQory parcel of a priory alien, although

there was not any ſaving in the act. And Mich. 25 & 26 El.

(4) Boſwel's caſe, in Curid Hardorum, where it was reſolved, (d) 2 Brownl.
that when an act makes any conveyance good - againſt the SA
King, or any other perſon or perſons in certain, it ſhall not 3
take away the right of any other, altho? there be not any ſaving Cr. El. $08.

in the act. 5. If the act had extended to wood in which 2 Anderf. 190,
others had common; yet the concluſion reſtrains the generality '?”
of the precedent words; for the ſtatute doth not give an ab-
ſolute and indefinite power to the owners of wood to incloſe,

&c. but to incloſe the ground, to keep it incloſed, and to
repair it, without (e) ſuing the King's licence, or other ( Brownl.
perſons, or their officers of the ſame foreſts, chaces, or ** |
purlieus, fo that this concluſion limits the precedent words
only againſt the King, and other owners of foreſts, chaces,
and purlieus; but no word in the whole act gives autho-
ity to them to incloſe againſt any commoner. And where
it was faid, that this word cattle cannot be applied


to


(a) Co. Lit. 233.
a.


(5) 2 Brownl,


327.


(e) Hard. 268.


® Weſt. 1. c. 20.
2 Ink, 198, 199.
(d) 2 Brownl.
222, 324, 325
327. Godb. 168,
169, 171.

4 Co. 76. a 77.4
2 Roll. 465,466
8 Co. 28. a.
DoR. pla. 336,
837. Yelv. 106.
Hob. 310.


Sir Fra. BAR RING TOxN's Caſe, Part VIII.


to beaſts of the foreſt; it was anſwered, that they might fitly
and properly be called beaſts and cattle of the foreſt. And b
it is ſaid in the preamble of this very act, beaſts and cattle of
the foreſt. And it is to be known, that there are five manner
of beaſts of the foreſt, /c. hart, hind, hare, wild boar, and
wolf; (a) and five manner of beaſts of chace, /c. buck, doe,
fox, martin, and roe; and beaſts and fowls of warren are,
hare, coney, pheaſant, and partridge. Vide Regiſt. 96. 43 B.
3. 13. 38 E. 3. 10. 3 H. 6.12.15. Liber Intr. Treſpaſs in
unting, 585. 12 H. 8. 9. b. (Y) Holinſhed's Chronicle 3<,
num. 30. 6. it was reſolved, that the ſaid clauſe of the att of
5 H.8. in the negative, reſtrains only the owner of the
wood from felling his own wood on a penalty, which without
queſtion doth not exclude the commoner of his common : and
the ſaid words (c) (except it be to his vwn uſe or occcupation) ſerve
to exclude the owner out of this penalty, and are to be intend-
ed of his own proper neceſſary uſe ; as to repair his houſe, or
to burn in his houſe, &c. Then there is another clauſe
which prohibits the commoner that after the ſaid felling (that
is to ſay, after the diviſion and felling, for the diviſion of the
fourth part ought to precede the felling) in any ſuch part, i.e,
in the fourth part, ſodivided, no beaſts or cattle, during ſeven
years, ſhall be ſuffered to feed there, upon penalty, &c. and
the lord is excluded to feed with his cattle in the three parts
during the ſeven years, and after the ſeven years (until a new
felling, according to the act) the commoner ſhall have his
common again. And it is to be obſerved, that by the ſtatute
of 22 E. 4. the owner of the wood ought firſt to fell the wood,
and after encloſe, and by the ſtatute of 35 H. 8. he ought firlt
to encloſe, and after, within four months, fell the wood. 7,
It was reſolved, that the ſtat. of Weſtm. 2. * de malefaftoribu
in parcis, charta de fore/id, and theſe acts of 22 E. 4. and 35
8. are general laws concerning all perſons, whereof the
court ex . ought to take notice, and eo potius, becauſe
this act ot 22 E. 4. concerns the King.


| De. DR URY'


Dr. DR UR Y's Caſe.
Paſch. 8 Fac. 1. Rot. 364 2.


In the Common Pleas.


P ERETOFORE as it appeareth in the term of the Holy

Irinity, in the 7th year of the reign of the lord the now
King of England, &c. and of Scotland the ty Noam in
the 3642 roll, it is contained thus, Surrey, ſſ. It was com-
manded to the Sheriff, that whereas of the grievous complaint
of Owen Bray of Cobham in the county aforeſaid, Gent. to
the lord the King, grievouſly complaining, it was ſhewed,
that whereas John 8 55. doctor of laws, in the court of the
lord the King, of the Bench here, that is to ſay, in the term
of St. Michael, in the fifth year of the reign of the ſaid lord
the now King of England, before the Juſtices of the ſaid
lord the King, of the Bench aforeſaid here, that is to ſay, at
Weſtminſter, by judgment of the faid court had recovered
againſt the ſaid Owyn, as well a certain debt of two hundred
pounds, as thirty-three ſhillings and four pence, which to the
ſaid John in the court aforeſaid, of the ſaid lord the King
here were adjudged for his damages which he had by occaſion
of the detaining of the ſaid debt whereof he is convicted :
and whereas alſo the ſaid Owyn, for that that he did not come
into the ſaid court of the lord the King here, to ſatisfy the
aforeſaid John of the debt and damages aforeſaid, was put
in exigent in the county of the ſaid lord the King of Suſ-


ſex, to be outlawed, and on that occaſion afterwards, that is


to lay, on the nineteenth day of May, in the ſixth year of the
reign of the lord the now King, was outlawed ; and not-
withſtanding the ſaid Owyn, in execution for the debt and
damages aforeſaid, by virtue of a certain writ of the
ſaid lord the King of Capias utlagatum thereof to the late
Sheriff of the aforeſ. county of Surrey, by Herbert Morley, Eſq.
then Sheriff of the aforeſaid county of Surrey, at the ſuit of
the ſaid John was taken, and impriſoned: and after he was
fo taken and impriſoned, was by the ſaid Sheriff out 3

S


139


— > =
— — — > 2
— —


— —
N 2 = =. og ů——ů— f
= =_ 2


= _—
— P
— a — — —
- 22 — —ʃ 3
—


Dr. Drvay's Caſe. Part VIII.


the fame priſon at large, where he would, freely and volunta-
rily ſuffered to go, and from the execution aforeſaid vas de-
livered, as the ſaid Owyn by ways and means convenient, was
ready to ſhew ; yet the aforeſaid. john. ſueth forth execution of
the debt and damages aforeſaid, againſt him the ſaid Owyy,
by reaſon of the recovery aforeſaid, and endeavoureth, and
threateneth unjuſtly, him the ſaid Owyn, to be taken and im-
priſaged, to his no, ſmall damage and grievance.; whereupon
he hath. beſought the lord the King of a proper remedy for him
to be provided. The ſaid lord the King, willing, what is
juſt to be done to the ſaid Owyn in this behalf, hath com-
manded to the Juſtices here, that the complaint of the ſaid
Owyn in this behalf being heard, and calling before them
the parties aforeſaid, and others which in this behalf they
ſhall ſee kit to be called, and their reaſons thereof here being
heard; to the ſaid Owyn full and ſpeedy juſtice they ſhould
cauſe to be done in this behalf, which of right, and according
to the law and cuſtom of the kingdom of the lord the King of
England ſhould be done. And that they cauſe to come here
at this day, that is to ſay, from the Holy Trinity in fiſtcen
days, the aforefaid John, to anſwer, of and upon the pre-
8 20 and futther to do and receive, what the Court of the
faid lord the King here ſhall conſider in that behalf: and now
here, at this day, come as well the aforeſaid Owyn, by Otho
Gayer his attorney, as the aforeſaid John, by John Nye his
attorney ; and upon this the ſaid Owen ſaith, that whereas the
aforeſaid John, in the Court the ſaid lord the now King here,
that is to fay, in the term of St. Michael, in the fifth year of
the reign ot the ſaid lord the now King of England, &c. be-
fore Edward Coke, Knight, and his companions then Juſtices
of the faid lord the King of the ſame bench here, that is to
ſay, at Weſtminſter, by the conſideration of the ſaid Court,
recovered againſt the ſaid Owyn, as well the aforeſaid debt of
two hundred pounds, as the aforeſaid thirty-tbree ſhillings and
four-pence, which to the ſaid John in the ſame Court of the faid
lord the King here was adjudged for his damages, which he
had by occaſion of detaining the ſame debt whereof he is con-
victed ; and whereas alſo the ſaid Owyn, for that he did not
come into the ſame Coprt of the ſaid lord the King here, to ſa-
tisfy the ſaid John of his debt and damages, he was put in exi-
| go in the aforeſaid county of Suſſex to be outlawed, and on


at occaſion afterwards, that is to ſay, on the ninth day of


May, in the ſixth year of the reign of the lord the now King,
was outlawed, upon the ſaid outlawry, the aforeſaid John Dru-
ry, afterwards, that is to ſay, in the term of the Holy 'Trivt-


1 in the ſixth year of the reign of the lord the now King
aboveſaid, ſued forth out of the Court of the lord the King


of the bench here, a certain writ of the ſaid lord the King of


Capias wilogatum againlt him the faid Owyn, chen to the
b


part VIII. Dr. Dauxx's Caſe.


Sheriff of the aforeſaid county of S. directed, by which writ
the ſaid lord the King then commanded the ſaid Sheriff of 8.
that he ſhould not omit'for any liberty within his county, but
that he take the ſaid Owyn outlawed in the ſaid county of
Suſſex, the ſaid gth day of May, in the ſixth'ygearof the reign
of the ſaid lord the now King aboveſaid, at the ſuit of John
Drury, of the p'ea of debt, whereof he is convicted, &e. And
him ſafely to keep, &c. ſo that he ſhould have his body be-
fore the Juſtices of the ſaid lord the King here on the morrow
of All Souls then next coming, to do and receive what the
Court of the ſaid lord the King thereof ſhould conſider in that
behalf: by virtue of which writ, the ſaid Owyn afterwards,
that is to ſay, on the ſeventh day of October, in the ſixth year
aforeſaid, at Guildford, in the aforeſaid county of Surry, by
the aforeſaid Robert Morley, then being SheritF of the afore-
faid county of Surry, was taken and impriſoned, and
after he was ſo taken and impriſoned, the ſaid Owyn
by the ſaid Sheriff the ſame day and year, &c. at Guild-
ford aforeſaid, out of that priſon at large, where he would
freely and voluntarily to go was ſuffered, and from the execu-
tion aforeſaid was delivered: and this he is ready to verify:
whereupon he prayeth judgment, and that the aforeſaid John
from having his execution aforeſaid by colour of the judgment
aforeſaid may be barred, and that the ſaid Owyn thereof be
diſcharged, &c, And the aforeſaid John prayeth licence
thereof to imparl here, until in eight days of St. Michael, &c.
and hath it, &c. And the ſame day is given to the aforeſaid
 Owyn here, &c. at which day the plea aforeſaid was adjourn-
ed, by writ of the lord the King of common adjournment here,
until from the day of St. Michael, in one monch then next ſol-
lowing, at which day, here cometh as well the-ſaid Owyn, as
the ſaid John by their attornies-aforeſaid, and upon this, far-
ther prayeth licence thereof to imparl here, &c. until from
Eaſter day in 15 days, and hath it, &, And the fame day is
given to the faid Owen here, &c. at which day of fifteen days
of Eaſter, come as well the aforeſaid Owyn, as the aforeſaid
John by their attornies aforeſaid, and upon this the ſaid Owyn
prayeth that the aforeſaid John, to his writ and declaration
aforeſaid may anſwer: and the ſaid John Drury faith, that
he for any thing before alledged from having execution of
his debt and damages againſt him the faid Owyn, ought not
to be barred or delayed, becauſe he faith, that after the
aforeſaid time, when it is ſuppoſed the aforeſaid Owyn out
of the cuſtody of the aforeſaid Sheriff of Surry, to have
eſcaped, and before any farther execution againſt the afore-
laid Owyn, by him the ſaid John, by reaſon. of the judg-
ment aforeſaid, was ſued forth and had, that is to ſay, in
the term of St. Michael, in the ſixth year of the reign of
the ſaid lord the now King aboveſaid, out of the aforeſaid
Court of the ſaid lord the now King, of the bench here,

h upon


1
14
|
|
|
|
|


Dr. Dkvay's Caſe. Part VIh,


upon the ſaid outlawry (as is before ſaid) pronounced, iſſued,
forth a certain writ of the ſaid lord the King, of Capias utlaga-
tum, againſt him the ſaid Owyn, at the ſuit of the ſaid John,
then to the Sheriff of the county of Middleſex directed; b
which writ the lord the King commanded the aforeſaid She.
riff of Middleſex, that he ſhould not omit for any liberty of
his county, but that he ſhould take the ſaid Owyn by the name
of Owyn Bray, late of Cobham in the county of Surry, gent.
outlawed in the aforeſaid county of Suſſex, the aforeſaid gth
day of May, in the ſixth year of the reign of the lord the now
King aboveſaid, at the ſuit of him the ſaid John, by the name
of John Drury, Doctor of Laws, of a plea of debt whereof
he was convicted, if he ſhould be found in his bailiwic; and
him ſhould ſafely keep, &c, ſo that he ſhould have his body
here, that is to ſay, at Weſtminſter aforeſaid, on the afore-
ſaid morrow of All Souls, in the ſame term of St. Michael, in
the year aforeſaid, to do and receive what the Court of the
ſaid lord the King, thereof ſhould conſider in that behalf: at
which morrow of All Souls here, that is to ſay, at Weſtmin-
ſter aforeſaid, cometh the aforeſaid Owyn, by William
Brown then his attorney; and the Sheriffs, that is to fay,
George Bolles and Richard Farrington, then Sheriff of the
aforeſaid county of Middleſex, then here returned that the afore-
ſaid Owyn was not found, &c. and upon this the ſaid Owyn,
then prayed oyer of the writ of Exigent, upon which the ſaid
Owyn, at the ſuit of the ſaid John Drury aforeſaid, in form
aforeſaid ſtood outlawed : and it was then read to him in theſe
words, * James by the grace of God, of England, Scotland,


c

c
c
«
s
c
4
«
«
«
c
0
6
6
«
6
4
C
0
6
4


France, and Ireland, King, defender of the faith, &c. To the
Sheriff of Suſſex greeting: we command you that you put
in Exigent Owyn Bray, late of Cobham in the county of
Surry, gent. from county to county, until according to the
law and cuſtom of our kingdom of England he be outlawed,
if he ſhall not appear; and if he ſhall appear, then that you
him take, and cauſe ſafely to be kept ſo as you have his bod)
before our Juſtices at Weſtminſter, on the morrow of (the
Holy) Trinity, to ſatisfy to John Drury, Doctor of Laws, as
well of a certain debt of two hundred pounds, which the ſaid
John in our ſaid Court, before cur Juſtices at Weitmiaſter
recovered againſt him, as of thirty-three ſhillings and ſout -
pence, which to the ſaid John, in our ſame Court were ad-
Judged for his damages, which he had by occafion of the de.
taining the ſame debt, whereof he is convicted; and
whereupon you returned to our Juſtices at Weſiminſter,
in eight days of St. Hilary, that the aforeſaid Owyn !
not found in your bailiwic, and have you there this
writ, Witneſs Edward Coke at Weſtminſter, the 25th day
of January, in the 5th year of our reign of England, France
and Ireland, and of Scotland the forty-firſt,” Which being


read and heard, the ſaid Owyn ſaid, that he of the outiavry


aforeſai


part VIII. Dr. Dzunv's Cafe.


aforefaid, ought not to be charged, becauſe the ſaid writ of
Exigent had not any certain day of retorn, this word (Holy)
between the words, morrow and Trinity, not having any ſig-
nification, as by the writ aforeſaid then it appeared, and for
the fame cauſe the ſaid Owyn then prayed judgment, aud that
the outlawry aforeſaid, in form aforeſaid pronounced and
had, be annulled, made void, and altogether holden for
nought. Upon which, the writ aforeſaid then being ſeen,
and by the Tuſtices here then fully underſtood, to the ſame
Juſtices it then appeared, that the allegation of the aforeſaid
William Brown in diſcharge of the aforeſaid Owyn of the
outlawry aforeſaid was true: therefore then it was considered
in the ſaid Court here, that the ſaid Owyn by occaſion of the
outlawry aforeſaid, ſhould not be moleſted or troubled, but
ſhould go thereof acquitted, &c. as by the record thereof in
the ſaid Court here remaining fully appeareth : and ſo the ſaid
John Drury ſaith, that there is not any ſuch record of the
outlawry aforeſaid, as the ſaid Owyn by his writ and declara-
tion aforeſaid above ſuppoſeth : and this he is ready to verify:
whereupon he prayeth judgment, if he from having execu-
tion of his debt aforeſaid and damages aforeſaid againſt the


aforeſaid Owyn ought to be barred, &c. and the aforeſaid


Owyn faith, that the aforeſaid plea of the aforeſaid John in
form aforeſaid above pleaded, is no ſufficient in law for him
the ſaid John to have and maintain his execution by reaſon of
the judgment aforeſaid, and that he to that plea in manner
and form aforeſaid above pleaded, needs not, nor by the law
of the land is bound to anſwer ; and this he is ready to verify:
wherefore for default of a ſufficient plea of the aforeſaid John
in this behalf, the ſaid Owyn, as before prayeth judgment,
and that the ſaid John from his execution by reaſon of the
judgment aforeſaid be barred ; and that the ſaid Owyn be
thereof diſcharged, &c. and the aforeſaid Joha inaſmuch as


he ſufficient matter in law for him the ſaid John, his execu-


tion by reaſon of the judgment aforeſaid againſt the ſaid Owyn
to have and maintain, above hath alledged, which he is ready
to verify, which matter the ſaid Owyn doth not deny nor to
the ſame any ways anſwereth, but the ſaid averment altogether
refuſerh, as before, prayeth judgment and execution of his
debt and damages aforefaid, againſt the ſaid Owyn to him to
be adjudged, &c. and becauſe the Juſtices bere will adviſe
themſelves of and upon the premiſes, before they give their
Judgment thereof, day is given to the parties aforeſaid here
until the morrow of the Holy Trinity to hear their judgment


thereof, &c. becauſe the ſame Juſtices here thereof are not
yet, CC,


Paſch.


—
— — — - -
—  — — — ———R—————— _ —
— — — — — - _ = — - =_
— — - - . - . = —
— — — — — — — — 2
— —— — — - — — — >
- - - — — — - 2 * >
- — _ — — — - - _—


Part VIII.


Dr. D RUR Y's Cake
Paſch. 8 Jacobi 1.


WYN BRAY brought a writ of Audita querela again|
John Drury, Doctor of the Civil Law, ſetting forth,


that whereas the ſaid Dr. Drury, Mich. 5 Fac. Regis, in this
Court had recovered againſt the ſaid Owyn a debt of 200]. and


338. 4d. for damages and coſts, and whereas the ſaid Owyn,


| becauſe he came not into Court to ſatisfy the ſaid debt and


damages, was put in Exigent, and thereupon 19 Mali, am
6 Regis, nunc, was outlawed : and that the ſaid Owyn, by


force of a writ of Capias utlagatum ad ſeftam pred” Johann!


Drury capt” & impriſonatus fuit, and in execution for the ſaid
debt and damages; and ſo being in execution, was deliyered
out of priſon by the Sheriff from the ſaid execution, and ſul-


fered to go at large, &c. The defendant pleaded, that after


the ſaid eſcape, and before the purchaſe. of the. ſaid writ of
Audita querela, ſe. Mich. 6 Fac. the ſaid writ of Capias utla-


gatum was awarded out of this Court returnable crafting an


(a) Vaugh. 153.


marum, at which day the Sheriff retorned non (a) eff invn-
tus ; and thereupon the ſame day the ſaid Owyn appeared, and


demanded oyer of the Exigent, which was read to him ;, and
- thereupon it appeared, that the. retorn of the, ſaid writ of
Exigent was uncertain and thereupon he prayed, quod ul.


garia prædicta in formd prad' promulgatd & habita adnullaretur,


 » evacuaretur, & pro nullo pœnitus teneretur : ſuper. quo viſo brew


pred” & per juſliciar hic tunc plene intellecto, eiſdem Juſliciar hic
tunc conſlabat, guod allegatios pred” Owyni in exoneration?m ſuam at
utlagar pred” verd extitifſet ; ideo tunc conſid fuit in eaden .


Part VIII. Dr. Dau x's Caſe, 142


hic quod idem Owynus occaſtone utlagar' pred” in aliqus non mo-

l:flaretur, nec gravaretur, fed iret inde quietus prout per record?

inde in eadem curid hic reſidenꝰ plenius liquet : et fic idem Johan

Drury diciz quod non habetur aliquod tale recordum utlagarie pred”:

quale pred? Owynus per breve & narrationem ſuam pred” ſupe-

rius ſupponit : & hoc paratus eft verificare : unde petit judicium ft

ipſe ab executione ſud præd de debito & dampnis prad” verſus

pred” Owynum habend” precludi debeat, &c. And thereupon

the plaintiff demurred ; and it was objected that the ſaid out-

lawry was not void, but (a) voidable, and that at the time of (a) Hard. 25.
the eſcape (by which the ſaid Dr. Drury was entitled to an

action of debt, upon the eſcape, apainſt the Sheriff) the out-

lawry was in force, and the Sheriff“ ſhall never take advan- ro. F!iz.g94,
tage of error in the proceeding againſt the defendant, but {hall os 205.
be charged for the eſcape, notwithſtanding the record be er- e
roneous. And ſo it was aljudged in the Exchequer, Trin. Cod. 6.
31 Eliz, by Sir Roger Manwood, and the other Barons, 9 Co. 68. a.
where the caſe was, that Edward Clere, Francis Woodhouſe,

and William Gervys, 18 Aug. 28 Eliz. acknowledged a re-

cognizance of 2001, in the Chancery, to George (5) Ogaell, (3) 2 Leon. 84,
upon which recognizance George Ognell, 16 Jan. 29 Eliz. 85, Kc.
ſued a Scire factas out of the Chancery againſt the ſaid recog- r

TE El. 213,214.
nizors, upon which nihil was returned; and ſo upon another 507,
Scire facias, whereupon menſe Paſchæ 29 Elix. judgment was Y*lv- 42»

. k < - Goab. 403.
given, ſc. ideo conſideratum fuit per curiam, quod pred” Georgius 2 Balg 64 6
recuperaret verſus prædictos Ed. Fr. & Mill. 2001. &c. And *
that the ſaid George have execution againſt them, where-
upon he ſued forth a Levari facias, upon which it was return-
ed, that they had nothing, for which the Court did award a
Capias ad ſatisfaciend* retornable Octo Hil. directed to the
Sheriff of Norfolk, Clement Paſton, Efq. then Sheriff of the
lame county; by force whereof the ſaid Sheriff arreſted the
ſaid Francis Woodhouſe, and William Gervys, 16 Jan. 30
Eliz. And that the ſaid Francis Woodhouſe, at the time of
the ſaid arreſt, was in priſon under the cuſtody of the ſaid
Sheriff, being attained of felony ; and afterwards the ſaid
Francis and William eſcaped out of the cuſtody of the ſaid (e) r Roll. 897.
Sheriff; upon which eſcape G. Ognell brought an action 2 wy
of debt againſt the ſaid Clement Paſton, => an ac- Cr. El. .
comptant in the Exchequer, And in that caſe it was re- Cr. Jac. 3.
ſolved, that the award of the (c) Capius ad ſatifaciend was er- R- « Bl. 165,
roneous; for by the law the bodies of the recognizors were 4 * "th 280,
not liable to execution, and yet, becauſe the Sheriff could 289.
not take advantage of the (4) error, it was adjudged, that Aa :
he ſhould anſwer for the eſcape ; and therewith agrees 21 E. 4. — wb So 4 4
23. b. But it was adjudged, that in the caſe at bar, the Audita 9 Co. 68. a.
querela doth not lie; and in this cafe two points were reſolved. 2 Rall. Rep. a fa.


1. (e) A difference was taken and agreed between a thing mov hg
VoI. IV. Ih colla- (e) 2 Roll. Rep.


254.


1 1 Sand. 38.
elw. 18. b.


-


(5) Hardreſs 6.
Cr. Jac. 3, 280,
289.
Cro. El. 165.576,
0 797. —
2 Leon. 85.
Dyer 67. pl. 16.
Moor 2 75, 276.
9 Co. 68. a.

2 Roll. Rep. 2 12.
Godb. 403.

(c) Cr. Jac. 646.
(4) Poſtea143.b.
5Co . 99. d.

1 Roll. 777,778.


Dr. Dzavry's Caſe. Part VIII.


collateral executory, and executed; for when an erroneous
judgment is given, and afterwards the judgment is reverſed
by a writ of error, collateral acts executory are barred thereby,
as if a man has judgment in a Quare impedit, and has a writ
to the Biſhop, and the Biſhop refuſes to admit the plaintiff's
clerk, now the plaintiff upon this collateral refuſal, may have
a writ of Quare non admiſit; but if the defendant reverſes
the judgment in a writ of error, and afterwards the plaintiffin
the Quare impedit brings a writ of Quare non eduihs the de-
fendant may plead nul tiel record : vide 26 E. 3. 75. b. by
Wilby and Hill. So it was reſolved, if A. be in execution at
the ſuit of B. upon an erroneous judgment, and afterwards el
capes, and afterwards the judgment is reverſed by a writ of
error, the action upon the eſcape is gone; for he may plead
nul tiel (a) record, becauſe without a record the action is not
maintainable ; but yet it is true, that till the erroneous judg-
ment, or execution, 1s reverſed by a writ of error, the Sheriff
or gaoler, ſhall not take (5) benefit thereof; for there he can-
not plead nul tiel record, becauſe till it is reverſed, it remains
of force, although there is apparent error, as it is held in 34
H. 6. 2. b. and (21) 22 E. 4. 23. b. But in the ſame caſe, if
the plaintiff brings an action of debt againſt the Sheriff cr
gaoler, upon the eſcape, and has judgment and execution,
and afterwards the firſt judgment is reverſed ; yet foraſmuch
as this judgment upon this (c) collateral thing is executed,
notwithſtanding the reverſal of the firſt, it remains in force,
as appears in the like caſe (4) 7 H. b. 42. a. where the caſe
in effect is, that the conuſee of a ſtatute ſtaple in a writ of de-
tinue of the ſaid ſtatute upon garniſhment, recovers by erro-
neous judgment againſt the garniſhee, and has the ſtatute de-
livered to him; the garniſhee brings a writ of error, and the
conuſee ſues execution upon the ſtatute and has it; there it is
held, that although the garniſhee doth reverſe the judgment,
yet foraſmuch as the ſtatute is now executed, this execution
ſhall not be avoided by the reverſal of the judgment ; for the
judgment was only to have the ſtatute delivered, and the
execution on the ſtatute is a thing executed, not depend-
ing upon the judgment. So if a man recovers by erroneous
judgment, and preſents to a benefice, or enters into the
perquiſite of a villain, and afterwards the judgment is te-


. verſed by writ of error, becauſe theſe collateral things ate


(e) Cr. Jac. 484.
Yelv. 36-
1 Brown), 8 3.


executed, they ſhall not be diveſted, as it is held in 4H. 7.


11. and there fol. 12. a. Brian ſaith, that it was adjudyed,


that if the defendant pleads that the plaintiff is outlawed,
and the plaintiff replies, quod non habetur. aliguod recordum,
&c. and the defendant has a day to bring in the record, and
before the day the record is reverſed, the Juſtices ſhould cer-
tify nul tiel record: and therewith agrees 6 El, Dyer (e) 5

| 0


part VIII. Dr. Davav's Caſe, 143


go in the caſe at bar, foraſmuch as the record is defeated and

avoided before the defendant is obliged to plead, he may well

plead nul tiel (a) record, vide 13 E. 3. Barr 253. But if two (a) Cro. El. 270,
Judgments are given, and the laſt depends merely upon the firſt () Cro. Jac.646,
as upon its foundation, there if the firſt fundamental judg- pr _
ment is (5) reverſed by writ of error or attaint, the latter (c) 1 "4" op
(which appears in the record to be dependent upon it) ſhall be Yelv. 155.
reverſed alſo, as in Aſiſe & (c) Reddiſſeiſin: ſo of a judgment ? Nr
upon the original, and another judgment in a (4) Scire facias, Palm 0”
the ſame law of one judgment grven againſt the tenant and an- Br. Error 24, 44,
other againſt the vouchee and the like, 43 E. 3. 3. a 13. E.4. 8 -7 .
4. a. 8 H. 4. 4. 4 E. 3. 36. 8 H. 7. 10. a. 11 H. 4. 4. 6. a. b. 11H 2
4 E. 4. 29. a. 6 E. 4. 9. b. 9 H. 6. 38. b. 10 H. 6. 6. And 2 Bulſtr. 175.
wide 26 E. 3. 57. (75.) a. b. that by the reverſal of the 1 * 2
judgment given in a Quare impedit, the judgment given in a » Palm, 187.
Duare non admifit is alſo reverſed. 2. There is a difference (d)Cro. Jae. 646,
between mean acts done in the execution of juſtice, which =

are compulſive, and acts which are voluntary: and therefore, 1 E. * Mig a

if an erroneous judgment is given in debt, and the Sheriff, Br: Error 46,170,
by force of a Fiere facias (e) ſells a term of the defendant and (<) Antez 96. b.
atterwards the judgment is reverſed by a writ of error, yet the 4 *
term ſhall not be reſtored, but only the ſum, &c. becauſe the Þy. 352. pl. 24.
Sheriff was commanded and compelled by the King's writ N 773.

to ſell it, &c. But if a Capias (/) utlagatum is awarded, N rank
whereby the Sheriff is commanded to take the body, &c. & Jeck. Cont, 264.
bina & catalla, quze per inguiſition' invenerit in manus noftras : 2 92.
capias ut de vero valore, &c. and by force of that writ, the dend. un
Sheriff, by inquiſition takes the goods and chattels of the man Nele, 180.
outlawed and ſells them, and afterwards the outlawry is re- tes, 10g.
verſed, the party ſhall be reſtored to his goods and chattels, (/2 Cr. EL 270
becauſe the Sheriff was not commanded nor compelled by the Moor 250.
King's writ to ſell them; and therewith agrees 5 El. Dy. 223. 5,78.
C) Proctor's caſe. And according to this reſolution it was 7 ; 2E 0
adjudged in C. B. between Amner (þ) and Loddington, and pl. gr. + co
afterwards Mich. 26 & 27 El. in a writ of error affirmed in O. B-adl. 27. pl.
the King's Bench. 3. T here is a difference between a re- _ 84.
covery upon an elder title, and a reverſal of a record by a Co. Lit. 128. b.
writ of error: and therefore if A. recovers dower in an an- Taltos X42 Bo
cient demeſn againſt H. and has execution, the tenant reverſes 8 Pg 8
the judgment in a writ of falſe judgment and becauſe the wo- Goab. 26.

man has held the land for two years, between the firſt judg- 7 Leon 92-
ment and the reverſal, it was inquired of the yearly value of the : I *
land, and the 2 years taxed to 20 marks; and thereupon the Jenk. Cent. 64.
tenant ſued a Scire factas againſt the woman to have execution Ng, 758.

of the ſaid 20 marks. In bar of which the pleads, that the has : oo 7
brought a writ of right cloſe, in the nature of a Cui in vitd, Co. Lit. 351. as
againſt the faid H. the now plaintiſi, and proceſs continued till Ooleſb. 103, 108.
he recovered the land by elder title, and demands judgment |

If of the iſſues of the ſame lands by any judgment recovered

ſince, H. ought to have execution: but it was adjudged, that

foraſmuch as the judgment given for H. remained in force,

by force of which he ſhould have the ſaid 20 marks as damages


I h 2 ſevered


4

t 11 N 1

| 1 1 Wal
1 111

1 IM 000
N

1
4


* Palm. 302.


(a) Antena 143.
a


1 And. 36.pl.91.
O. Bendl. 27. pl.
108.

Co. Lit. 128. b.
Godb. 84.

(5) Br. Privi-
lege 28, 29.
Fitz. corpus cum
caula, 8, 9.
(c)aH 5.c. 2.
Cro. Car. 261.
(4) Cro. El. 33.
Cio. Jie. 43.
Yelv 57.

(e Dyet >
Le) Dyet 339
Antea 135. b.

3 Co. 78. b.

© Co. 19. a.

I Sid. 21.

2 Keb. 12.

Cro. El. 460.


(/) Antear4:.b,


{> 90. b.
7. Erto! 66.
1 Roll. 305,777,


778.
(z) Cro. Fac,
645, 646.


Dt. Dabnv's Caſe: Part VIII.


ſevered from the land, and the recovery in the Cui in vita doth
doth not refer to them, for this reaſon, although A. had re-
covered by elder title, H. ſhould have execution of the da-
mages, 20 E. 3. Scare facias 12.3. * in Herbeit's caſe. 4. The
caſe at bar is ſtronger, becauſe the judgment to avoid the ſaid
outlawry is declaratory, which declares the outlawry to be null,
and the proceeding therein to be without warrant, and void,
and all that without a writ of error, becauſe there is a nullity
in the outlawry, foraſmuch as the writ of Exigent, which is
the warrant to proceed to outlawry, wants ſubſtance, and by
conſequence no warrant in law; and therefore when it is ſo
declared by the judgment of the Court, it is void ab initiy;
vide (a) Proctor's caſe, 5 El. Dyer 223. In 38 fl. 6. 4b,
& 12. b. One who had cauſe of (5) privilege in the Common
Pleas, was arreſted in London, and before judgment the de-
fendant delivered a writ of Superſedeas in the inferior Court,
and notwithſtanding that, the Recorder proceeded to judg-
ment, and thereupon his body was taken in execution, and af-
tewards his body was brought into C. B. by a writ of (c) Cir-
pus cum cauſa ; and becauſe after the (4) Superſedeas there was
a nullity in the proceeding as well to judgment as in execution,
the Court awarded, that the party ſhould be diſcharged of the
execution ; and ſo he was ilmifſed without ſuing any writ of
error ; for by this declaratory award, the judgment and exe-
cution are utterly void. And vide 17 El. Dyer 339. (e) ad-
miniſtration is committed to the wife, of the goods, &c. of the
huſband, who recovers debt as adminiſtratrix, depending
which ſuit, the ſon of the inteſtate, by covin betwixt him and
the defendant procures new adminiſtration to him and his
his mother, no cauſe of revocation of the firſt expreſſed in the
ſecond, and aſter judgment releaſes to the defendant, the wite
ſues execution, the defendant upon this releaſe brings an Au-
dita querela, and the defendant pleads the matter ſupra, and
ſentence declaratory that the ſecond adminiſtration was void,
and adjudged pro defendente. Bur if the letters of adminiſira-
tion had been good, and the adminiſtrator makes a releaſe,
and aſterwards the letters of adminiſtration are repealed, there
the releaſe is good: ſo there is a difference between a ſentence
declaratory, by which letters of adminiſtration are declared
to be void, and a ſentence of repeal, which allows them good


till they are repealed. Neta, reader, where it is ſaid before


in the firſt difference, that collateral things executed by
execution upon eſcape, or upon the ſtatute recovered in
the writ of detinue, in (f) 7 H. 6. 42. a. b. ſhall not be
avoided by the reverſal of the firſt judgment, the ſame
is true; and yet I conceive, that he ſhall have remedy
upon the reverſal of the judgment, by (g) Audita Que:
rela, becauſe the cauſe and ground of the collateral ac-


tion is diſproved and avoided by the reycr{.1 of the firſt
5; judgment ;


Part


judgn
upon
like t
in ace
rearap
and t
writ,
broug
querel


ed, i-
appea


part VIII. Dr. DRunr's Caſe, 144


judgment; and the firſt plaintiff reſtored to his form

upon which he may have his juſt and due remedy. a4 i 8

like the caſe in Dyer 3 Eliz 203. executors have judgment

in account, and have the defendant in execution for the ar- 1 7 MY

—_ now the will is annulled, guza the teſtator an ideot Wente 21

and the record ſpiritual was removed into the Chancer by .

writ, and ſent into the King's Bench, where the os 2 Sand U

—— and thereupon the defendant brought an Audita Orth. Leg. 26,

qerels, becauſe the will was diſproved: and i was reſolv- Ce. Em. 39,
A amerd Scaccarii, anno 35 H. 8. (as I have heard, it Ney. 7 7


appears by the record) that the Audita querela did well lie.


Hh 3 DAVEN.


| 1 |
10


Aal


(a) i Jac,
691.


4% Palm. 484.


Part VIII.


DAVENPORT' Cate.


Trin. 8 Jacobi 1.


1 BRADSHAW brought a Quare impedit 3.
gainſt John Davenport, George Wood, Clerk, and the
Biſhop of Lincoln, of the vicarage ot the church of Orton fu.
per Montem, in the county of Leiceſer (which began Trinit' 7
22 Rot” 1008.) And the caſe was ſuch, George Haſlings

arl of Huntingdon, was poſſeſſed of the rectory of Orton, to
which the advowſon of the ſaid vicarage was appendant for
fifteen years; and by his deed, 18 Haiti, 19 Eliz. granted to
Robert Bradſhaw now plaintiff, as he alledged in his declara-
tion, Primam & (a) proximam advocation' et donationem prad
vicariæ de Orton (um eadem prim” et proxim' extunc vacare con-
tingeret per aliguas vias ſeu media quecunque, fi cad contingeret
fore vacud durante ter mino annorum adtunc in efſe de retina
de Orion conceſſ. prefato comiti per præfatum nuper Epiſcapun
Oxonien', Ihe defendants pleaded, that aſter the faid
grant of the next avoidance, the ſaid Earl ſo being of the
ſaid rectory, to which, &c. poſſeſſed, died thereof poſſeſſed,
inteſtate, poſt cujrrs mortem, /cil' primo die Maii, 1605, ad-
miniſtration of his goods, &c. was committed to Henry now
Earl of Huntingden ; and afterwards the ſaid now Earl, 9
Feb. 3 Jacobi, (b) ſurrendered his ſaid term in the faid rec-
tory, to which, &c. to the Biſhop of Oxford then in rever-
ſion, which he accepted, per quod pra terminus annorum dt
et in rectorid præd cum pertin? ad quam, &c, deter minavit,
and the Biſhop demiſed the ſaid rectory, with the apput-
tenances, to Davenport, one of the defendants, for his
life; and afterwards the ſaid vicarage became void, &c.


upon which the plaintiff demuired; and the ſole _


*


I an. 400 © R8-


* nt ñ *


part VIII. PAV NOR T's Caſe.


of this caſe was, if by the ſaid ſurrender the ſaid grant of the
next avoidance was void or not. And it was objected, that
the ſaid grant of the next avoidance was upon expreſs limita-
tion, if the vicarage became void during the term then in e,
and by the ſurrender the term was merged and extinCt ; ſo
that the vicarage became not void during the term, becauſe
that happened after the ſurrender. But if the limitation had
been during the years, there it had been otherwiſe, for the
years could not determine but by (a) efluxion of time, But
it was anſwered and reſolved, that notwithſtanding the ſur-
render, yet the pl. ſhould have the next (5) avoidance, and that
for three reaſons : 1. The ſaid limitation implies no more than
the law would have ſaid ; for if tenant for years grants the next


(a) Co.Lit.45.b,
I Co. 154. a.


(5) Palm, 484.


(c) avoidance, the law implies this limitation, if the church (c) Cr, Jae, 691*


becomes void during the term, and therefore (4) e preH⁰ eorum


moſt beneficially for the grantee. And as to that, the notable
caſe of (e) Thurſton de Holland, Parſon of Preſton, in 6 E.
3. 54 b. & 55 a. was cited, where the caſe was; that in the
time of R. 1. debate was between the Abbot of S. and Theo-
band C. upon the advowſon of the church of Preſton, and
thereupon they agreed, and a fine was Jevied between them
15 Mich. 6 R. 1. before the Archbiſhop of Cantebury, the Bi-
ſhop of Rocheſter, &c then Juſtices of C. B. between the a-
ſoreſaid Abbot and the ſaid Theoband ; by which fine the Ab-
bot granted the advowſon to T. and to his heirs for ever, ſo
that at every preſentation by T. or his heirs, the clerks fo
preſented, &c. ſhould pay to the ſaid Abbot and his ſucceſ-
fors for ever 10 marks per ann. which accord was made in
the preſence of the Ordinary of the place, who aſſented to it,
at which time the church of Preſton was void ; and upon
that fine the ſucceſſors of the Abbot of S. brought a writ
of annuity againſt the ſaid T. de Holland, Parſon of P. And
there Parning, Serjeant, took exception to the declaration,
that foraſmuch as the grant of the annuity is in a ſpecial
manner to be paid by the Clerks who ſhould be preſented
by I. or his heirs, that the plaintiff ought to have ſhewed
In his declaration, that the defendant was prefented by the


ſaid I' or his heirs. To which Sadlier ſaid, we conceive that


the Parſon ſhall be charged by whomſoever he is preſented.
And Berle, C. J. who gave the rule, ſaid, that although had
T. aliened the advowſon, the annuity would not be thereby
extinct ; wherefore Parning paſſed over to another matter:
by which caſe it appears, that altho' T. had aliened the ad-
vowlon, and although the annuity in the body of the grant 1s
limited to be paid by the preſentees of T. or his heirs, yet
the preſentee of his alicnze ſhould pay it, for otherwiſe,
| H h 4 b


Co. Lit. 379. a*


393. Latch, 25.
Palm. 433, 437.
Antea 56. b.
Wing Max. 235.
4 Co. 73. b.

5 Co. 112 3.

11 Co. 60. 2.
10 Co. 39. a.
Co, Lit. 191. 6.
205. a. Lit. Rep.
111, 2 Inſt. 365,
2 Sand. 351,

2 Bulſtr. 131.

1 Mod. Rep. 190.
Hard. 92.

Hob. 170,

* Winch. 96.
(e) Hob. 41.


5 Co. 17. b.


SE - — = — — ——
— — — - - — —
— —  ” I EE OED I EE CY I nn ern gc On
— = ==> 7 OWE ES 5 2 7
- . + l
- 2 — - 5 — *
2 = — — - —
— — -


- :
== = —
— _—
= :
—


2 Co. Lit. 7 1. b.
ref. to 8 Co.


(5) Pref. 3-Rep,
p- 5+ Fitz. Co-
nulans 57. Br.
Conuſan. 40.


(c) 9 E. 4. 18.
1 Jones 62. Cro.
Car, 102. Lit.
Rep. 336. Dall.
65. Poph. 40.
1 Co. 67. 3. 87.
9 Co. 107. b.
Plowd. 198. a.
Co. Lit. 338. b.
(4) Antea 75. b.
e) Br. Expoſi-
tion de parols 44.
3 Co. 154. a.
Bridgm. 102.
Co. Lit. 45 b.
6 Co. 79.
7 Co. 38 b.
2% E 4 13 ·


DaveneorT's Caſe. Part VIII.


by bis own grant, he would defeat the annuity which he him.
ſelf had granted. Note, reader, in this caſe of 6 E. z. there
are divers things worthy obſervation, and amongſt them the
antiquity of the (a) Common Pleas; for it appears thereby
that it was a court long before the ſtatute of Magna Charta,
made ing Hen. 3. as appears alſo in (b) 26 Al. pl. 24. where
it appears, that King Hen. 1. made letters patent of confirma-
tion to the Abbot of B. of all uſages ; and that they ſhould
have conuſans of all manner of pleas, ſo that the Juſtices of
one Bench, nor the other, nor Juſtices of aſſiſe, ſhould no-
thing intermeddle, &c. which is a direct proof, that in the
time of King Hen, 1. there were courts of the one Bench and
the other, and alſo Juſtices of Aſſiſe, &c. 3. The term for
the benefit of the grantee, has to ſome reſpe& continuance,
and therefore if leſſee for years grants a rent charge, and after-
wards ſurrenders, yet for the benefit of the grantee the (c) term
has continuance ; although in rei veritate it is determined;
and therewith agrees 5 Hen. 5. 10. a. But it is true, that
the lefſee himſelf, by his ſurrender may prejudice himſelf of
an (d) increaſe of an eſtate to be made to himſelf, as it is re-
ſolvedin 35 H. 8. (e) Expoſitien de parols 44. Vide the Rectot


of Cheddington's caſe, M. 38. Eliz. in the Firſt Part of my
Reparts, fol. 154 a,


The


part VIII. 146


1
* 4 "ws * hw
— —


* The SIX CARPENTERS Cale. * See 6 Mod.


70, 216.
Fitzgib. 86, 18 5.


Mich. 8 Jacobi 1.


N treſpaſs brought by John Vaux againſt Tho. Newman,
carpenter, and five other carpenters, for breaking his
houſe, and for an aſſault and battery, 1 Sept. 7 Fac. in Lon-
don, in the pariſh of St. Giles extra Cripplegate, in the
ward of Cripplegate, &c. and upon the (a) new aſſignment, () 4 00. 5.
the plaintiff aſſigned the treſpaſs in a houſe called the Queen's 18. b.

Head. The defendants to all the treſpaſs preter fractionem
domus pleaded not guilty ; and as to the breaking of the houſe,
ſaid, that the ſaid houſe pr ad” tempore quo, &c. et diu antea et
poſtea, was a common Wine Tavern, of the ſaid John Vaux,
with a common fign at the door of the faid houſe fixed, &c.
by force whereof the defendants, prad' tempore quo, &c. viz.
hora quarta poſt meridiem into the faid houſe, the door thereof
being open, did enter, and did there buy and drink a quart
of wine, and there paid for the ſame, &c. The plaintiff, by

way of replication, did confeſs, that the ſaid houſe was a com-
mon (6) tavern, and that they entered into it, and bought and (3) Kelw. 38. a.
drank a quart of wine, and paid for it; but further ſaid, that
one John Ridding, ſervant of the ſaid John Vaux, at the re-
quelt of the ſaid defendants, did there then deliver them an-
other quart of wine, and a pennyworth of bread, amounting
to 8 d. and then they there did drink the ſaid wine, and eat
the bread, and upon requeſt did refuſe to pay for the ſame :
upon which the defendants did demur in law: and the
only point in this caſe was, if the denying to pay for the
wine, or non-payment, which is all one (for every non-
payment, upon requeſt, is a denying in law) makes the en-
try into the tavern tortious. And firſt, it was reſolved when
entry, authority or (c) licence is given to any one by the (g 2 Roll. 551,
law, and be doth abuſc it, he ſhall be a treſpaſſer ab ini- Lei. 96, 97-

. tio;


The Six CarrenTrERs Caſe, Part VIII.


tio but where an entry, authority, or licence is given by the
(a) 5 H.'7.11.2, (a) party, and he abuſes it, there he muſt be puniſhed for his
4 3 abuſe, but ſhall not be a treſpaſler ab initio. And the reafon
21 E. 4. 19. b. Of this difference is, that in the caſe of a general authority or
(5) 2 Roll. 561, licence (6) of law, the law adjudges by the ſubſequent act,
21 F. 4. 19, b. quo anime, or to what intent he entered for ad exterior indi-
76. b. per Cateſ- . . .
by. Yelv.g6, 95. cant interiora ſecreta. Vide 11 H. 4.75. b. But when the
Perk, ſe&. 191. party gives an authority or licence himſelf to do any thing, he
SH. 7. 17. 2. cannot, for any ſubſequent cauſe, puniſh that which is done
by his own authority or licence, and therefore the law gives
authority to enter into a common inn, or tavern, fo to the
lord to diſtrein z to the owner of the ground to diſtrein Camage-
feaſant ; to him in reverſion to ſee if waſte be done; to the
commoner to enter upon the land to ſee his cattle, and {ich
like: Lide 12 E. 4. 8. b. 21 E. 4. 19. b. 5 H. 7. 11. a. 9 fl.
6. 29. b. 11 H. 4. 75. b 3 Ul. 7. 15. b. 28 H. 6. 5. b. But
if he who enters into the inn or tavern, doth a treſpaſs, as if


0% Perk. ſet. he (c) carries away any thing; or if the lord who diſtreins for


119. 2 E. 4. 5


Cro. Car. 196. tent, or the owner ſor damage-feafant, works or kills the (4)


Yelv. 96. diſtreſs ; or if he who enters to ſee waſte breaks the houſe, or
(4) 12 E 4.8. b. (e) ſtays there all night; or if the commoner cuts down a
22 tree, in theſe and the like caſes, the law adjudges that he
Cro. Jac. 148. entered for that purpoſe; and becauſe the act which demon-
Perk. ſect. 191. ſtrates it is a treſpaſs, he ſhall be a treſpaſſer ab initio, as it
A appears in all the faid books. So if (/) a purveyor takes my
11 H. 4. 75 b. P. 3 Kew
Fitz. Treſp. 176. Cattle by force of a commiſſion, for the King's houſe, it is
Br. Treſp. 97. Jawful ; but if he ſells them in the market, now the firſt tak-


75 1 ing is wrongful ; and therewith agrees 18 H. 6. 19. b. Et


18 H. 6.9. d. ſic de ſimilibus.
2 Inft. 546. 2. It was reſolved per tetam curiam, that (g) not doing,


8 5 cannot make the party who has authority or licence by the
1 Roll.Rep.130, law, a tteſpaſſer, ab initis, becauſe nut doing is no del.
paſs , and therefore if the leſſor diſtreins for his rent, and

thereupon the leſſee tenders him the rent and arrears, &c.

and requires his beaſts again, and he will not deliver them,

this not doing cannot make him a treſpaſſer ab nz ; and

therewith agrees 33 H. 6. 47. a. So if a man takes cattle da-
mage-feaſant, and the other offers ſufficient amends, and he

_ refuſes to re-deliver them, now if he ſues a Replevin, he ſhall

(% Lir. Rep.34. recover (/) damages only for the detaining of them, and not
Dr. & Stud. lib. for the taking, for that was lawful; and therewith agrees F. N.
EEE B. 69. g. temp. E. 1. Replevin 27. 27 E. 3. 88. 45 E. 3.9.
(i) x Roll. Rep. So in the caſe at bar, for not (i) paying for the wine, the
60. 2 Bulfl. 312. deſendants ſhall not be treſpaſſers, ſor the denying to pa,
for it is no treſpals, and therefore they cannot be treſpaſſers

(4) Sid. 3. ab initio; and therewith agrees directly in the point, (k
12 E. 4. 9.4. b. 12 Edw. 4.9. b. For there Pigot, Serjeant, puts this Very
caſe, if one comes into a tavern to drink, and when


he has drunk he gocs away, and will not pay the ta-
vernef,


Part VIII. The Six CAR ENT ERS Caſe.


verner, the taverner ſhall have an action of treſpaſs againſt
him ſor his entry. To which Brian, Chief Juſtice, ſaid, the


147


faid caſe which Pigot has put, is not (a) law, for it is no treſ- (J) 12 k. 4.9. b,
{s, but the taverner ſhall have an action of debt: and there N. It is good


before (5) Brown held, that if I bring cloth to a taylor, to 7 nn


have a gown made, if the price be not agreed in certain before,
how much I ſhall pay for the making, he ſhall not have an
action of debt againſt me; which is meant of a general action


of debt : but the taylor in ſuch a caſe ſhall have (c) a ſpecial (c) x Sid. 5.


action of debt; ſcil. that A. did put cloth to him to make a
gown thereof for the faid A. and that A. would pay him as
much for making, and all neceſſaries thereto, as he ſhould
deſerve, and that for making thereof, and all neceſſaries
thereto, he deſerves ſo much, for which he brings his action
of debt: in that caſe, the putting of his cloth to the taylor to
be made into a gown, is ſufficient evidence to prove the ſaid
ſpecial contract, for the law implies it: and if the taylor
over-values the making, or the neceſſaries to it, the jury may
mitigate it, and the plaintiff ſhall recover ſo much as they
ſhall find, and ſhall be barred for the reſidue. But if the
taylor (as they uſe) makes a bill, and he himſelf values the
making and the neceſſaries thereof, he ſhall not have an action
of debt for his own value, and declare of a retainer of him to
make a gown, &c. for ſo much, unleſs it is ſo eſpecially agreed.
But in ſuch caſe he may (4) detain the garment until he is


(d) Hob. 42.


paid, as the hoſtler may the horſe. Jide Br. Diſtreſs. 70. and Yelv. 67. Cro.


all this was reſolved by the court. Vide the Book in 30 Aſſ.
pl. 38. John Matrever's caſe, it is held by the court, that if
the lord, or his bailiff comes to diſtrain, and (e) before the


Car. 271, 272.
Br. Diſtreſs 71.
Palm. 22 3. Hutt.
101. 22 E. 4.


diſtreſs the tenant tenders the arrears upon the land, there the 49.b. Moor 877,


diſtreſs taken for it is tortious. The ſame law for damage- ?


feaſant, if before the diſtreſs he tenders ſufficient amends ;
and therewith agrees 7 E. 3. 8. b. in the Mr. of St. Mark's
cale, and ſo is the opinion of Hull to be underſtood in 13
H. 4. ) 17. b. which opinion is not well abridged in title
Treſpaſs 180. Note reader this difference, that tender upon
the (g) land before the (+) diſtreſs, makes the diſtreſs tortious;
tender after the diſtreſs, and before the impounding, makes
the detainer, and not the taking wrongful; tender afte1
(„) che impounding, makes neither the one nor the other
wrongful ; for then it comes too late, becauſe then the caule
is put to the trial of the law, to be there determined. But
after the law has determined it, and the avowant has return
irrepleviſable, yet if the plaintiff makes him a ſuſſicient ten-
der, he may have an action of Detinue for the detainer aſter;
or he may, upon ſatisfaction made in court, have a writ ſor
the re-delivery of his goods ; and therewith agree — _

OOKS


8 2. b.

1 Roll. Rep. 449.
2 Roll. Rep. 438.
2 Roll. 85. 92.
3 Bulſtr. 269,


(e) Br. Diſtreſs 3y. |


Br, Tender, &c,


f) 2 Roll. 56 1.
S2 Sid. 40.
(+) 5 Co. 76. a,
2 Init. 107.

(i) 2 Roll. 561.
1 Brownl, 173.
2 Inſt, 107,

5 Co. 76. a.


The Six CARPENTERS Caſe. Part VIII.


books in 13 H. 4. 17. b. 14 f. 4. 4. Regiſir' Fudi 37. 45

E. 3. 9. and all he books before. Vide 14 Ed. 4. 4. b. 2H,

= 12. 22 Hen. 6. 57. Doctor and Student, lib. 2. cap. 2,

. Diſtreſs 72. and Pilkington's caſe, in the Fifth Part of

my 3 G1, I. 76. and ſo all the books which prima facie

mus to diſagree, are upon full and pregnant reaſon well re
conciled and agreed,


EDWARD


WW


hk % «a, © uy ow „% „% % wa at ff „ AS . . oo © mma ae ry #A Mc -—


ne 4 —— —


Part VIII. 148


— r
—
» r


EDPWARD ALTHAM's Caſe.
Trin. 8 Jac. 1.
In the Common Pleas.


AHOMAS LAWRENCE, and Marcia his wife, by Dowea,

Charles Cardinal their attorney, demand againſt Edw.
Altham, Gent. and Margaret his wife, the third part of 100
acres of land, 10 acres of meadow, and 69 acres of paſture,
with the appurtenances in Gogheld, as the dower of the faid
Marcia, of the endowment of Thomas Naſh the elder, ſome-
time her huſband, &c. And the aforeſaid Edward and Mar-
garet, by fohn Rowley their attorney, come and fay, that
the aforeſaid Thomas Lawrence, and Marcia, the dower of
the ſaid Marcia, of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appur-
tenances, whereof, &c. of the endowment of the ſaid Thomas
Naſh, ſome time the huſband, &c. againſt them ought not to
have, becauſe they ſay, that the ſaid Thomas Naſh, ſome
time the huſband, &c. was ſeiſed of the tenements aforefaid,
whereof, &c. in his demeſne as of fee, and held the ſame of
John Wentworth, Eſq. as of his manor of Gosfield with the
appurtenances in the county aforeſaid, in fee ſocage, that is to
ſay, by fealty only, for all manner of ſervices and demands;
and the ſaid Thomas being ſo ſeiſed of the ſaid tenements
with the appurtenances whereof, &c. on the 10, day of April,
in the year of our Lord 1592, at Gosfield aforeſaid, made his
teſtament and laſt will in writing, and by the fame his laſt
will, willed and bequeathed the tenements aforeſaid, with the
appurtenances, whereof, &c. to one Zachary Naſh, younger
ſon of the ſame Tho. Naſh, to have and to hold to the ſaid
Zachary, for the term of his life, and afterwards there died
of ſuch eſtate thereof ſo ſeiſed; after whoſe death the ſaid Za-
chary entered into the tenements aforeſ. with the appurtenances,
whereof, &c. and was thereof ſeiſed in his demeſne as of free-
bold, for the term of his life, by virtue of the bequelt —_—_—

an


.


EDwWwARD ALtHalt's Caſe. Part VII.


and the reverſion of the tenements aforeſaid. with the appur-
tenances, whereof, &c. after the death of the ſaid Thomaz
did deſcend to one Thomas Naſh, as ſon and heir of the afore«
faid Thomas Naſh, ſome time huſband, &c. by which the
faid Thomas the fon was ſeiſed of the ſaid reverſion of the
tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof, &c.
as of fee and right; and the ſaid Thomas ſo thereof being
ſeiſed, and the aforeſaid Zachary of the tenements aforeſaid,
with the appurtenances, whereof, &c. ſo as before is aid,
being ſeiſed, the aforeſaid Marcia, after the death of the faid
Thomas Naſh, ſome time her huſband, &c. in the widoy-
hood of the ſaid Marcia, whilſt ſhe was ſingle, that is to ſay;
on the 27th day of April, in the 35th year of the reign of the
lady Elizabeth, late * of 2. at Gosheld aforeſaid,
by her writing of releaſe, which the ſaid Edward and Margaret
ſealed, with the ſeal of the ſaid Marcia, bring here into court,
whoſe date is the fame day and year, by the name of Marcia
Naſh, the widow of Thomas Naſh Jate of Feringe in the


county of Eſſex, deceaſed, remiſed, releaſed, and altogether


for her, her heirs, executors, and adminiſtrators, for ever
quit claimed, to the aforeſaid Thomas Naſh, ſon and heir of
the aforeſaid Thomas Naſh, ſome time the huſband of the
ſaid Marcia, by the name of Thomas Naſh of Wethersfield
in the County aforeſaid, yeoman, ſon and heir of the (aid
Thomas Naſh, late her huſband, all and all manner of ations,
as well real as perſonal, all ſuits, quarrels, and demands
whatſoever, which ſhe the ſaid Marcia, or her executors,
againſt the ſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon, or his executors, they
ever have or had, then had or ought to have, or any ways then
might or would have by reaſon of any thing, cauſe, or deed
whatſoever, from the beginning of the world, unto the Cay
of the date of the ſame writing of releaſe ; after which writ-
ing of releaſe to the aforeſaid Thomas the ſon, made by the
ſaid Marcia, as before is ſaid, the aforeſaid Thomas the on,
of the reverſion of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurt?-
nances, whereof, &c. in form aforeſaid being ſeiſed, at Gol-
field aforeſaid, died of ſuch his eſtate thereof ſeiſed; alter
whoſe death the ſaid reverſion of the tenements aforeſaid, with
the appurtenances whereof, &c. did deſcend to the aforeſaid
Margaret, as daughter and heir of the aforeſaid Thomas the
ſon, by which the {aid Margaret was ſciſed of the ſaid reverhon
of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, where,
&c. as of fee and right, and ſhe the ſaid Margaret fo of tie
ſame reverſion, as before is ſaid, being ſeiſed: and the aſoreſ.
Zachary of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances,
whereof, &c. in form aforeſaid being ſeiſed, the ſaid Zachary
after w. at Gosfield aſoreſ. died of ſuch his eſtate thereof ſeiſed


after whoſe death the ſaid Margaret, entered into the _—_
A


— , Wc WW» F WW” =” ane” Mr" YO” ̃ ÿ‚ PO 0 On ¾˙¼—0i 7 7˙˙ . TO ER Oh PE ES 199 Ps Oe OS Pon 3


part VIII. EpwaRD ALTHAM'S Caſe, 149


aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof, &c. and was
thereof ſeiſed in her demeſne as of fee and ſo thereof bein

ſeiſed, the ſaid Margaret afterwards, and before the day of
bringing the original writ aforeſaid, of the ſaid 'Thomas Law-
rence and Marcia, at Gosfield aforeſaid, took to huſband the
aforeſaid Edward Altham, by which the ſaid Edward and
Margaret were, and yet are, ſeiſed of the tenements afore-
ſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof, &c. in their demeſne
as of fee in the right of the ſaid Margaret: and this they are
ready to verify ; whereupon they pray judgment if the afore-
ſaid Thomas Lawrence and Marcia, dower of the ſaid Mar-
cia, of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances,
whereof, &c. of the endowment of the ſaid Thomas Naſh,
ſome time the huſband, &c. againſt them ought to have, &c.
And the aforeſaid Thomas Lawrence and Marcia pray oyer
of the aforeſaid writing of releaſe ; and it is read unto them
in theſe words, 'To all faithful people to whom this preſent
« writing ſhall come, Marcia Naſh, the widow of Thomas
« Naſh, late of Feringe in the county of Eſſex, deceaſed,
“greeting in our Lord God everlaſting, know ye, that I the
« aforeſaid Marcia being in my pure widowhood, and hav-
© ing full power to remiſe, releaſe, and altogether for me,
© my heirs, executors, and adminiſtrators, for ever to quit
« claim, to Thomas Naſh of Wethersfield in the county
« aforeſaid yeoman, ſon and heir of the ſaid Thomas my late iS
„ huſband, all and all manner of actions, as well real as per- [| |

|


277 — 2 —


— —7ð7 — —— 2
E T_T 2


— — * —

2 = = — = >
So 2 -
. T — >


« ſonal, ſuits, quarrels, and demands whatſoever, as alſo all
my dower, and title and action of dower, to me apper- Ie
* taining, by the death of the ſaid "Thomas my huſband, of Wb
any of his lands and tenements in Wethersfield aforeſaid, i

% what or which, I the ſaid Marcia, or my executors againſt I!
6 him the ſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon, or his executors, I |
ever had, have, or any ways hereafter may have, (have ||

* or may have) by reaſon of any thing, cauſe. or deed what- |

* ſoever, from the beginning of the world, unto the day | | |
of the date of this preſent writing of releaſe. And fur-

* ther know ye, that I the aſoreſaid Marcia, have given |
and remiſed to the ſaid Thomas Naſh the fon, all the goods | 10
« late of the ſaid Thomas my huſband, which were in the | Wl 1!


«-polleſhon of him the ſaid Thomas the ſon, or his aſſigns,
* at the time of the making of this writing of releaſe : in |
« witneſs whereof to this wy preſent writing, I have ſer my WHIT"
„ ſeal, dated the 27th day of April, in the 25th year of | Ws
* the reign of our lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God ROAR
* of England, France, and Ireland, Queen, Defender of che e
« Faith, &c.” Which being read and heard, the ta!d 'Lho- .
1s Lawrence and Marcia ſay, that they for any thing be- Ul
fore alledged, ought not to be barred from having the dower
of the ſaid Marcia, becauſe they fay, that the aforeſzid

| Tnomas


EpwaRD ALTHAM's Caſe; Part VItt,


Thomas Naſh, ſome time huſband, &c. in his life-time, and
at the time of his death, was ſeiſed as well of the tenements
aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof, &c. in Gosfield
aforeſaid, as of two meſſuages, and 200 acres of land, with
the appurtenances in Wethersfield aforeſaid, in his demeſne
as of fee; and ſo thereof being ſeiſed at Gosfield aforeſaid, by
his laſt will and teſtament in writing deviſed the tenements
aforeſaid, with the appurtenances whereof, &c. in Gosfield
aforeſaid, to the aforeſaid Zachary Naſh, younger ſon of the
faid Thomas Naſh, ſome time huſband, &c. and afterwards
at Gosfield aforeſaid, died; after whoſe death the ſaid Thomas
Naſh the younger, as ſon and heir of the ſaid Thomas Naſh,
ſome time huſband, &c, entered into the tenements aforeſaid,
with the appurtenances in Wethersfield aforeſaid, and was
thereof ſeiſed in his demeſne as of fee. ' And the faid Zachary
into the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof,
&c. in Gosfield aforeſaid entered, and was thereof ſeiſed in
his demeſne as of freehold for the term of his )ife ; and the
ſaid Thomas Lawrence and Marcia farther ſay, that at the
time of the death of the aforeſaid Thomas Naſh, ſome time
huſband, &c. the aforeſaid Zachary was within tke age of 21
years, that is to ſay, of three years, by which the ſaid Marcia,
whilſt ſhe was ſingle, as guardian and for nurture of the faid
Zachary entered into the tenements aforeſaid, with the
appurtenances, whereof, &c. in Gosfield aforeſaid, and was
thereof poſſeſſed, the aforeſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon being ſeiſ-
ed of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances in We-
thersficld aforeſaid, and that the ſaid Zachary being ſeiſed of
the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof,
&c. in Gosfield aforeſaid, in form aforeſaid z and the ſaid
Marcia in form aforeſaid ſo being poſſeſſed, afterwards,
and before the making of the aforeſaid writing of releaſe here
in court brought, at Gosfield aforeſaid, it was concluded and
agreed between the ſaid Marcia, whilſt ſhe was ſingle, and
the aforeſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon, that the ſaid Marcia
ſhould releaſe to the ſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon, all her dower
happening to her by the death of the aforeſaid Thomas Nath
ſome time the 3 &c. of all lands and tenements of
the ſaid Thomas, in Wethersfield aforeſaid ; and that the faid
Thomas Naſh the fon, ſhould enfeoff John Tiler the elder,
and John Tiler the younger, and their heirs, of the teue-
ments aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof, &c. in
Gosfield aforeſaid, to the uſe of the ſaid Zachary, and the
heirs of his body lawfully begotten : and the ſaid J homas
Lawrence and Marcia farther ſay, that the aforeſaid J homes
Naſh the ſon being ſeiſed of the tenements aforeſaid, in
Wethersfield aforeſaid, in the form aforeſaid z and the afore-
ſaid Marcia of the tenements, with the appurtenance*,


whereof, &c. in Gosfield aforeſaid, being poſſeſſed, ry


Part VIII. EpWwARDUD ALTHA's Caſe,


Marcia aſterwards, that is to ſay, on the aforeſaid 27th day of
April, in the 35th year of the reign of the ſaid lady Eliza-
beth, late jy ne) of England aboveſaid, whilſt ſhe the ſaid
Marcia was fingle, at Gosfield aforeſaid, the aforeſaid writing
of releaſe to the aforeſaid Thomas the ſon, ſealed and deliver-
ed: and the aforeſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon, on the 28th day
of April, in the 35th year of the reign of the ſaid late Queen
aforeſaid, at Gosfield aforeſaid, enfeoffed the aforeſaid John
Tiler the elder, and * Tiler the younger, and their heirs,
of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof,
&c. in Gosfield afpreſaid, to the uſe of the aforeſaid Zachary,
and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten ; and afterwards
he the ſaid Zachary, at Gosfield aforeſaid, died without heir
ol his body lawfully begotten 3 and this they are ready to ve-
rify ; whereupon they pray judgment and ſeiſin of the third
art of the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances
whereof, &c. in Gosfield aforefaid, to be adjudged to them,
&c. And the aforeſaid Edward and Margaret ſay, that the
aforeſaid plea of the ſaid Thomas Lawrence and Marcia plead-
ed in manner and form aforeſaid in reply, and that the mat-
ters therein contained are not ſufficient in law, for them the
faid Thomas and Marcia, the dower of the ſaid Marcia, in
the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whercot,
&c, againſt the ſaid Edward and Margaret, to have and main-
tain : and that they need not nor by the law of the land are
bound thereto'to anſwer ; and this they are ready to verify ;
wherefore, for default of a ſufficient replication of the afore-
ſaid Thomas and Marcia, in this behalf the ſaid Edward and
Margaret, as before pray judgment, and that the ſaid Thomas
Lawrence and Marcia, from the dower of the ſaid Marcia, of
the tenements aforeſaid, with the appurtenances, whereof,
&c. againſt them ought to be barred. And the ſaid Thomas and
Marcia, foraſmuch as they ſufficient matter in law, for the ſaid
Thomas and Marcia, to have and maintain their action aſore-
ſaid, againſt the ſaid Edw. and Margaret above, by replication
have alledged, which they are ready to verify, which matter
the ſaid Edw. and Margaret do not deny, nor to the fame any
ways anſwer ; but the averment aforeſaid do altogether refuſe
to admit, as before, pray judgment and ſeiſin of the third part
aforeſaid to be adjudged unto them, &c. And becauſe the
Juſtices here will adviſe themſelves of and upon the premiſes,
before they give their judgment thereof, day is given to the
parties aforeſaid here, until in eight days of St. Michael,
to hear their judgment thereof, becauſe the ſaid Juſtices
here thereof, are not yet, &c,


Vor, IV. 13 EDWARD


1 Brownl. 62,
63. 10 Co. 51. a.


Part VIII.


EDWARD ALTHAM's Caſe.


Mich. 8 Jacobi 1.


In the Common Pleas.


HOMAS LAWRENCE, and Marcia his wife, brought

a writ of dower againſt Edward Altham, and Margaret

his wife, and made demand to be endowed of the 3d part of 100
acres of land, 10 acres of meadow, and 60 acres of paſture, with
the appurtenances, in Gosfield, in the county of Eſſex, as the
dower of the ſaid Mercia, of the endowment of T homas Naſh
the elder, her late huſband: the tenants pleaded in bar, that
the ſaid Thomas Naſh was ſeiſed of the tenements aforeſaid in
fee, and held them in ſocage; and afterwards, 10 Aprilis,
1592, by his will in writing, deviſed the ſaid tenements,
whereof, &c. to Zachary Naſh, his younger ſon, for the term
of his life, and afterwards died thereof ſeiſed, after whoſe
death the ſaid Zachary entered, and was thereof ſeiſed for the
term of his life; and the reverſion of the ſaid tenements de-
ſcended to Thomas Naſh, ſon and heir of the ſaid Thomas
the huſband, and afterwards the ſaid Marcia one of the
demandants in her widowhood, when ſhe was ſole, ſcil.
27 Aprilis, 35 Eliz, by her deed did remiſe, releaſe, and
for her, her heirs, executors, and adminiſtrators, for ever
quit claim to the ſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon, omnes &
omnimodas attiines, tam reales quam . ſeclas, que-
relas & demanda quecunque gue ipſa Marcia vel executores
ſui verſus prefat' Thamam Naſh filium vil executores ſuos
unguam habuiſſet ſeu habuiſſent, tunc habuit vel habuerunt ſeu
guoviſmado tune in futurum habere potuiſſet vel patuiſſent, ra-
tione alicujus rei, cauſe vel facti cujuſcungue ab origine mundi
uſque diem dat” ejuſdem ſcripti aan and afterwards
the ſaid Thomas the ſon died ſciſed of the ſaid reverſion,
alter whoſe death. it deſcended: to the ſaid Margaret, you
0


part VIII.


EpwaRůUD ALTH am's Caſe, 151


of the ſaid Edward Altham, the other of the tenants, and af-

terwards the ſaid Zachary died, and the ſaid Margaret entered,

Kc. And the demandants demanded oyer of the ſaid deed,

which was read to them in theſe words, Omnibus Chri/li fidel:-

bus ad ques, &c. as in the record here before at Jarge. And

the demandants replied and ſaid, that the ſaid Thomas Naſh

the father, was ſeiſed in his demeſne as of fee, as well of the

tenements, whereof, &c in G. aforeſaid, as of two meſſuages,

and 200 acres of Jand in Wethersfield aforeſaid; and by his

will in writing deviſed the ſaid tenements, whereof, &c. in

G. to the ſaid Zachary Naſh, as is aforeſaid, and afterwards

died; after whoſe death the ſaid Thomas Naſh, the fon, en-

tered into the ſaid tenements in Wethersfield, as his fon and

heir, and was ſeiſed thereof in fee, and the ſaid Zachary en-

tered into the ſaid lands in Gosfield, &c. And that the

ſaid Zachary was, at the time of the death of the ſaid Thomas

the father, of the age of three years, wherefore the ſaid Mar-

cia, as guardian by nature, entered into the ſaid tenements in

G. and that afterwards, and before the ſaid releaſe, it was

concluded and agreed by the faid Marcia, when ſhe was ſole,

and the ſaid Thomas Naſh the ſon, that the ſaid Marcia

ſhould releaſe to the ſaid Thomas Nath the fon, all her dow-

er of the tenements in Wethersfield aforeſaid, &c. and that

the ſaid Thomas the ſon ſo ſeiſed of the tenements in Wethers-

field, and the ſaid Marcia fo poſſeſſed of the tenements in G.

ſhe made the ſaid releaſe, &c. and afterwards the ſaid Za-

chary died, &c. upon which the tenants demurred in law.

And in this caſe two queſtions were moved and argued at the

bar and bench. The firſt was, whether the ſaid releaſe made

by the wife to him in reverſion expectant on an eſtate for life,

ſhould extinguiſh her (a) dower ? The 2d, whether the ſaid (9) x Co. 214.6,

foreign concord and agreement of the parties ſhould qualify Co. Lit. 265. a,

the force of any of the words of the releaſe? As to the firſt, * hy” Hf

the ſaid deed of releaſe was divided into three parts; in the 245. Poſtea

firſt was con ſidered the words of the releaſe ; in the ſecond the 131. b. 154. %

words of qualification ; and in the third, the words of rela- Pes. Pl: 149%

tion. As to the words of the releaſe, they appear to be of

two ſorts, the one general, the other ſpecial: the general

contains four words, actiones, ſectas, querelas & demand :

the ſpecial contains three, dstem, titulum, & adtiones dotis :

the words of qualification are, mihi contingent” per mortem dit ii

Thome nuper viri mei, de aliquibus terris & tenementis ſuis in .

præd'. The words of relation, or relative words are, u

vel quas ego preefat' Marcia vel executores mei verſus ipſum Tho,

Oc. unguam habui, habeo, ſeu quoviſmado in futurum habere pote-

ro ratione alicujus rei, &c, As to the firſt word (azttores) it |

was reſolved, that in this caſe, the releaſe of all actions (5) Co, Lit. 24.

real to Thomas the ſon, having but a reverſion expectant a. |

on a freehold, did not extinguiſh the dower, becaule (L/) 222 Pl. ft
. . e 2 2 51. d.

actis oft jus proſequendi in judicis quid alicut debetur, as it 18 Poftea 152, a,

11 2 deſcribed a laſt, 40s


*


[1
3:88
ET It
[1
' » 1
1
1 |
ah
FL j
FT
*
1
, 1
: =
. l l
Ul
i '
: 4
_
1
7
4 :
1
ie)
. 1
*
; 1
: \
: \
*
. '
[1
ww»
I 1 [
uf :
| IT |
: 1
10444
uot
N 1 1
: \ ! 4
*
'
N
* N
9 t
11
I +. +
il; \þ =
I. 1
WH 1
JV t
1 =
' 99
| \ | 4
N i
vn q
WING
LINE |
*
WAA
is
:
8
160
*
168
} 1
*
Nu. -
N #
* 5
#1
1 1
IT !
ä 1715 0
Me
Des
2
ih
s 44 '
, $444 l
- it : l
: "nd 1
j | : \ "
e 1
wy |
N e 10
17
e
e ! :
n TH
Ny :
:
þ f
677
it! |
N
(


ll |
{M8 1M
100 ; 100


Dee
1006


See 4 E 5 El.
Dyer 207.

(a) 4 & 5 Eliz.
Dyer 217. vl. 2.
Moor 34. Poſtea
153.b. 1 And. 8.
5 Co. 71. a.

N. Benl. 126.
pl 190.

Co. Ent. 115. pl.


8.
(5) Lit. ſect. 49 5,


405.
Co. Lit. 286. a.
Lit, fol. 116. a.


See 9 E. 3. 22. 23


(e) 3 Co. 29. b.
Hob. 222.

1 Co. 87. b.
Lit. ſect. 191.
fol. 115. b.
Co. Lit. 265. b.
266. a.


284. b. 10 Co.
48. b. 9 H. 5.
26. a. 7 E. 4.
13. b


2 Roll. Rep. 32
Br. Releaſe g,
T3, 53. 20 H. 7.
IO, a.

(4) Antea 151.4.
1 Co. 112. b. Co.
Lit. 265 a. 5 Co.
71. 2. 16 E. CO
Fitz. Bar. 245.
Poſtea 154. a.
Doct. pl. 149.


(e) Fitz. Bar. 24 5.


U ) Co. Lit. 345.


(g) 4 Co. 63. a.


Part VIII.


deſcribed in (a) Dyer 4 & 5 Ph. & Mar. * 217. out of Brac-
ton, lib. 3. cap. 1. And the wife cannot ſue Thomas the jon,
to recover her dower by judgment, becauſe he is not tenant to
the præcipe, not can he render dower to her, for at the time
of the releaſe, Zachary was tenant of the freehold, and Litt.
Releaſe, fol. 115. holds, that in actions real, which (+) ought
to be ſued againſt the tenant of the freehold, if the tenant has
a releaſe of actions real of the demandant made to him before
the writ purchaſed, and he pleads it, it is a good plea for the
demandant to ſay, that he who pleads the plea had nothing in
the freehold at the time of the releaſe made, for then he had
no cauſe to have any action real againſt him. And therefore
Coke, Chief Juſtice ſaid, the opinion in 14 Hen. 6. 11. a.
was of great difficulty, ſcil. If one releaſes to him in the re-
verſion expectant on an eſtate for life all actions real, and af-
terwards tenant for life is impleaded, and prays in aid of him
in reverſion, or vouches him, or he 1s received in theſe caſes
(as it is there ſaid) although præcipe be not begun againſt him,
yet foraſmuch as by the receipt or voucher he is become tenant
to the præcipe of him who made the releaſe, and ſhall be bound
by the judgment, he ſhall have advantage to plead the releaſe
of all actions real: but the doubt is, becauſe at the time of
the releaſe made, he had no cauſe (as Litt. ſaith) to have any
action againſt him: but doubtleſs, after receipt or entry into
the warranty by the vouchee, a releaſe by the demandant to
the tenant by receipt, or the (c) vouchee, is good, becauſe
both, at the time of the releaſe made, were tenants in law to
the demandant, but a releaſe to them by any ſtranger is not
good: vide 7 Ed. 3. 46. 18 Ed. 3. 12. 8 H. 4. 5. a. 7 Ed. 4.
13. b. 20 H. 6. 29. 22 Hf. 6. 12. 5 H. 7. 41. a. Lit. 114. b.
lib. 1. in my Reports, fol. 87. & lib. 3. fol. 29. But if the wiſe
had releaſed totum jus, all her right to him in the reverſion,
her (4) dower had been extinct, becauſe her dower would ac-


EpWARD ALTHAM's Caſe


3- crue to the demandant, not only out of the eſtate for life, but


alſo out of the reverſion, and that was affirmed for good law,
as well at the bar by both parties, as at the bench, according
to the book of () 16 Ed. 3. cited in Hoe's caſe, in the Fifth
Part of my Reports, fol. 70, 71. a. For when the right,
which is the foundation and principal, is releaſed, by conſe -
quence the action, which is but the mean to recover it, 7. jus
proſequendi, is alſo releaſed ; and that appears in ꝙ Hen. 6. 47-
10 H. 4. 6. 21 H. 7. 23. 19 H. 6. 4. and therefore jus is
well divided in Plow. Com. in Nichols's caſe 487. b. where it
appears that Jus eft ſextiplex, ſcil. 1. (/) Jus recuperandi, i. e.
proſequen' : 2. Jus intrandi 3. Jus habendi 4. Jus retinenat
5. Jus pertipiendi: 6, Jus poſſidendi: and therefore when a man
releaſes totum jus generally, all his rights are thereby releaſed.
But if the (g) diſſeiſce releaſed to the diſſeiſor, omnes aclion
i. Jus recup ſiue proſeguen in judic, his right of — * *

thereby


Part VIII. Epwak D ALTHAu's Caſe.


thereby releaſed: for when a man bas (a) divers means to
come to his right, he may releaſe one of them ſpecially, and
yet take benefit of the other; and therewith Littleton agrees,
fol. 115. b. and 19 Aﬀ.pl. 3. 19 H. 6.4. 21 H. 6. 23. 21
H. 7. 23. But when a man has not any means to come to the
land (6) but by way of action, there, if he releaſes all actions,
thereby his right incluſive, by judgment of law, is gone, be-
cauſe by his own act he has barred himſelf of all means and
remedies to recover or attain to it : for a releaſe of all advan-
tages upon the account, is a good bar in an action of debt
upon the account, 9 Ed. 4.49. And therefore if the diſſeiſee
releaſes all actions (c) to the heir of the diſſeiſor, thereby his
right in judgment of law is gone. But if the heir of the diſ-
ſeiſor makes a leaſe for life, the remainder in fee, and the
difleiſee releaſes to the (d) tenant for life all actions which he
has againſt him; and afterwards tenant for life dies, the diſ-
ſeiſee, notwithſtanding this releaſe, ſhall have an aCtion againſt
him in remainder, for he releaſes but the action; and the act
in law never extends the aCt of the party farther than his ex-
preſs words, as if the lord diſſeiſes his tenant, and makes a
leaſe for life, this releaſe in law ſhall be but for the life of the
lefſee ; for it is true, that (e) fertior & potentior eff depoſitio le-
gis quam hominis, and ſo it is true, that (/) fortior & equior eft
depoſitio legis quam hom. (g) Ipſæ etiam leges capiunt ut jure
regantur. But if the diſſeiſee releaſes all actions to the diſ-
ſeiſor, and afterwards the diſſeiſor dies ſeiſed, (Y) and after
wards the diſſeiſee dies, there, a right deſcends to the heir of
the diſſeiſee; becauſe, notwithſtanding the releaſe, a right re-
mained. Vide (i) 21 Hen. 6. 1. the opinion of Newton:
and it was obſerved, (4) actio e jus proſequendt in judicis; and
therefore by the (/) judgment, the action is determined, for
the judgment is the end of the action (jus proſequend: in ju-
dicio) and therefore a releaſe of all actions is no bar (m) of ex-
ecutions; and therewith agrees 26 H. 6. Execution 7. and
Br. Releaſes 87. and 19 Hen. 6. 4. and Litt. 116. b. But in
a (n) Scire facias grounded upon a judgment, a releaſe of all
actions is a good plea, becauſe he ſhall have a new judgment ;
and thereſore there it may well be called jus proſequend: in ju-
dicio, and therewith agrees 18 E. 4.7. b. Then the words
farther are, quod alicui debetur, i. e. which is due to any, ſo
that by releafs of all actions, (o) real and perſonal, ſuch actions
are only releaſed in which the plaintiff ſhould recover any thing
in the realty or the perſonalty which is due to him, which is
included in theſe words, quod ſibi debetur. And therefore if


152
3 Lit. 286.


4 Co. 63 a.

Lit. ſect. 496.
dect. 498,
fol. 116. a. b.


(5) Co, Lit. 286.


(e) Oo. Lit. 28 ö.
286. a.


(d) Co. Lit. 27 5.
b. 285, bs


Co. Lit. 264. b.


ſe) 15 Co. 67. b.
6 Co. 64. a.

2 Roll Rep. 315.
Hutt. 18.

2 Sidert. .

Co. Lit. 4 2,
(f) Co. Lit.
338. a.

6 Co. 69. b.

(es) 2 Co. 25. b.
5 Co. 100 3.

9 Co. 123. b.
Co. Lit. 10. a.
143. a. 166. b.
174 b. 271. b.
( Co. Lit.
285. b.

(i) 10 Co. 51. b.
(+) Antea 151 4.
Co. LA. 285, a.
Dyer 217. pl. 2.
10 Co. 51. b.

2 Inſt. 40.

(/) Ce. Lu. 289. a.
(m) Poſt. 153.
(2 Co. Lit. 290.
b.


Lit. ſect. 504,
c.

vr.-cire fac 188.
EI. Kcleaſe 57.


8 — — —


N


„


| 0


L148 \
11907


as _ * — —
— -
- _


\ 'l ,
Wn bl.
e


Mil N

y | Me
"i
Au


100 4
l


a man is outlawed in a perſonal action by proceſs upon (% o Lat. 2805
the original, and brings a writ (p) of error, and he pleads (4) Co. Lit. 288.
againſt him a releaſe of all actions perſonal, that is no b.

Li 3 Lit. ſect. 503.


plea;


(a) Co. Lit. 288.
b. Lit. 117. b.
Lit. ſect 503,
(5) Poftealc4 a,
Fitz, Error 64.
Antea 143. a.
Br. Error 47+


(e) Co. Lit. 28g.
us


Epw. AlrnhAu's Caſe. Part VI I


plea: for by the ſaid action he ſhall recover nothing that is
due to him, but he ſhall only reverſe the outlawry to diſcharge
himſelf of that diſability. So that the ſaid writ of error doth
not agree with the ſaid deſcription of an action; for it is not
(a) jus proſequendi in judicio quod ſibi debetur : but in ſuch a caſe
a releaſe of writ of error is a good plea; and therewith Lit-
tleton agrees, 116. b. and the book in (5) 11 Hen. 4. 6. a. b.
where the caſe was, 'Treſcullard brought a writ of error againſt
T. ſon and heir of John Penros, upon a judgment againſt him
in a writ of rediflcifin, at the ſuit of the ſaid J. Penros, and
alſo of an outlawry thereupon againſt him pronounced for that
cauſe, and aſſigned two errors; one, becauſe the Sheriff took
the inqueſt in the town, and not on the land, according to the
ſtatute. 2. Becauſe the Sheriff made a precept to a Bailiff to
ſummon the jury, who returned a pannel, which was removed
hither as parcel of the record, and the Sheriff took the inqueſt
by ſome who were not returned by the Bailiff. And there
Huls, as to the firſt error, ſaid, if the Sheriff cauſe the jury
to view the waſte, he may take the inqueſt at another place,
ſo here. And as to the ſecond error, he ſaid, that the Sheriff
may vary from the return of the Bailiff; for the Sheriff himſelf
is the perſon who makes the array, who is alſo a judge in the
caſe : Gaſcoign, If the Sheritf had not made the precept, and
the return by the Bailiſf had not been made parcel of the re-
cord, it would be as you ſay; but he has ſent this return as
parcel of the record, whereby he afhrms the return of the Bai-
liff; and if he had made proceſs againſt the jury by Hab. Corp.
and had taken the inquett by others, it is error, guod Huls con-
ceſſit; and Rolfe of counſel with the defend. in the writ of er-
10r pleaded, that the pl. thould not be received to aſſign error,
for aſter the judgm. the pl. in the writ of error, by his deed
which is here, releaſed to the ſaid J. Penros, who recovered in
the writ of rediiſeifin all his right in the land, and all actions
and demands; and although both the errors were aſſigned in
the principal record, and thereof by the ſaid releaſe he is
ſtopped to aſſign error; and althdugh the outlawry was good
in proceſs, yet becauie the record and judgment are the
original of the proceſs of the outlawry ; therefore if there be
defect in the original judgment, the outlawry which is depend-
ing upon it, is reverſible ky Gaſcoigne, guod Huls offirmavit :
wherefore he reverſed the outlawry, notwithſtanding the re-
leaſe. Which judgment agrees with Littleton, and is worthy
obſervation in the principal point of judgment. So if the
body of a man condemned in debt be in execution, and the
Plaintiff releaſes the debt, and all executions, and the def. re-
leaſes to the pl. all actions, yet upon the releaſe of the plain-
tiff he ſhall have an (c) Autita querela: for thereby be ſhall
recover nothing, but diſcharge his body of impriſonment.

But


L — ode ˙ at ona. Cs ee _ _sGXCH<© © ©  _a=_rc oo ]


Part VIII. EowARD ALTHAM's Caſe,


But if the plaintiff after judgment releaſes to the defendant
all actions, and afterwards his body is taken in execution, he
ſhall not have an Audita guerela thereupon, ſor (a) an execu-
tion is no action, as has been ſaid before; and therewith a-
grees 13 H. 4 Releaſe 53. Alſo it was obſerved, upon theſe
words (quod alicui debetur) that in ſome caſe a debt or (5) duty
ſhall be barred by a releaſe of (c) all actions, although no
action at that time lies for the debt: as if a man be bound to
another in a certain ſum, to be paid at the feaſt of St. (4) Michael
next following, if the obligee before the feaſt releaſes to the
obligor all actions, he ſhall be barred for ever of the duty, for
it is “ debitum preſently, although it be not preſently /olvena? :
and therefore if one be bound to another in 401. to be paid
at four uſual feaſts of the year, and three of the feaſts are paſt,
in that caſe for 3ol. there is debitum and ſelvend alſo, and yet
the obligee ſhall not have an action of debt (e) till the laſt feaſt
be paſt, and notwithſtanding that, a releaſe of all actions be-
fore the laſt feaſt diſcharges all; (/) but if a man leaſes land to
another for the term of a year, rendering 40l. rent, to be
paid at the four uſual feaſts by equal portions, in this caſe if
one feaſt be paſt, he ſhall have an action of debt preſently,
and ſhall not tarry till all the days be paſt, for there, the duty
accrues upon the receiving of the profits oF the land, and till
the feaſt incurred in which it is to be paid, there is neither
debitum nor ſolvend', and therefore there, a releaſe of all actions
before the feaſt is no bar, but in reſpect of the ſeveral percep-
tion of the profits of the land, the rent after every feaſt 1s
demandable by action of debt: and ſo fude cauſam diverſitatis
made in (g) Litt. 117. (which was never added by Littleton
himſelf) is well explained. And therewith agree 7 H. 6. 26.
a. 45 E. 3. 8. a. L. 5 E. 4. 41. b. 13 H. 4. Avowrie 240.
Vide 3 Ma. Dyer (0) 113. 5 Ma. (i) Dyer 108. upon ¶ſumpſit
or covenant in which damages are to be recovered, an action
lies after the firſt day, & F. N. B. 267. & 16 E. 3. Fieri fac 4.
that upon (4) a recognizance which is a judgment in law, ex-
ecution lies after the firſt day, and ſo all the books are well
reconciled and agree; wheicfore it was concluded in the caſe
at bar, that by the releaſe of all actions made to him in rever-
fon the dower of the wife was not barred, becauſe at the
time of the releaſe ſhe had no cauſe of action againſt
him. As to this word (QOuerelas) (1) it is to be known,
that quarrels extend not only to actions as well real as
perſoual, as, it is held in 9 E. 4. 44. a. butalſoto(m)
cauſes of actions and ſuits, as it is held in 39 H. 6. 9. b. 80
that by releafe of all quarrels, not only actions depending
in ſuit, but cauſes of action and ſuit alſo are releaſed.
And ſo it is where one releaſes to another all actions,
not only actions depending, but alſo (2) cauſes of


114 (q) ac- 5


153


(a) Lit. e. og.
0, Lit. 239. as |


(% Cro. El. 370,
(<) Co. Lit. 28 5.
a.


(d) 1Brownl. 62.


*1Bulſt. 67, 178.
Co. Lit. 292. b.


(e) 1 Brownl,
62, 63. 5 Co.

8 r. b. Co. Lit.
47. b. 202. b.
F. N. B. 131. a.
10 Co. 128. b.
2 Leon. 10%, 108,
131. Owen 42.
F. N. B. 130,
131, h. Benl. in
Ath. pl. 10.

O. Benl. 3. pl. 8.
Yelv. 67. Cr.
Eliz, 118, 119,


776, 807. 4 Co.


94. b. N. Benl.
57. Pl. 93.
3 Leon. 4.
4 Leon. 13.
Moor 13. Benl.
in Kelw. 208,
209. 3 Co. 22. a.
Cr. Car. 24. Cr.
Jac. 50 5. 2 Sands
337. 1 Roll. 29,
601. 1 Roll.
Rep. 221. 2 Roll.
Rep. 47. Br.
Action ſur le
Caſe 108. in fine,
1 Leon. 300.
(f) 1 Brownl,
62, 65. Co. 7 .*
21. 5 Q Fa
47. b. 10 Co.
128. b. 2 Leon.
108, Owen 42.
Cr. El. 1 18, 119.
Co. 22. a.
1 Roll. Rep. 221.
(e) Lit. ſect 513.
Co. Lit. 292.
Lit. 118. b.
() Dyer 113 pl.
557 56.
(i) Br. Action


ſur le Caſe 108. 1 Leon. 300. () Co. Lit. 47. b. F. N. B. 130. h. 1 Roll. Rep. 221. Co. Lit.292.
b. Jac. 505. 10 Co. 128. b. 2 Inſt, 395, F. N. B. 257. d. (1) Co. Lit. 292. a. Lit, ſect. 511.


(m) Lit, 292. a (u) Co. Lit. 285. 4.


===> — —


— .
— — SS ene nos ooo
— — ” — — —
—


tt Mi
WM 1h
Man!“
"II "ny


i


_— —C
— — — — — — —


—— — —
— — —
— — —
— ä
—
—


() o. Lit. 28 f. a.
(7 10 Co. 51. b.
Dyer 57. a. b.
Co, Lit, 28 5. a.
(c) rt And. F.

4 & 5 Elie. Dyer
217. pl. 2. 5 Co.
71. à. N. Beal.
126. pl. 190.
Co. Ent. 725
pl. 5 Ames
151. b. Moor 34.
(4) Co. Lit. 292.
8


(e) Co. Lid. 291.
a. 2 Roll. 404.
26 H. 6. Fitz.
Execut. 7.


(f) 2 Roll. 404.


Fi'z. Execut. 7.


Co. Lit. 291. 3.
{g) Co. Lit.
292. b. 5 Co.


2 a. 1 Co. 112.


2 Roll. 404.
10 Co. 51. b.
Cr. Jac. 170.
Mv. 34 Hutr.19,
2 Bulſtr. 231.

x Anderſ. 8.
Poph 136. Lit.
R 87. Yelv.156.
(60 Co. Lit.


os ; ip


(4) Co. Lit. 345.
b.
(!) Co; Lit. 345.
d.


(m) 1Brown] 63.
959 1Brownl. 63.
o, 115. Co. Lit.
291. b. Lit. ſect.
£08, Poph. 136.
2 Roll. Rep 20.
Cr. Jac 170,300,
4*6, 487.
2 Roll. 406, 407,
408. Bride. 124,
125. 20 All. 5.
Fitz, Releaſe 39.
Br. Relcaſe 35.
Long, quinto E.
4. 42. 4. 40 E. 3.
8. a. 34 H 8.
Br. Releaie go.
Yelv. 156, 214,
215. Hob. 216.
3 Brownl, 63.


EpwarDd ALTHAM's Caſe, Part VIII.


(a) actions are releaſed. Vide 35 H. 8. 57.4 & 5 Eliz. (c)
277. b. Trinit. 4. Eliz. Rot. 1027, &c. And this word
querela is derived a querend?, unde etiam querens who is the
plaintiff, and quarrels, controverſies, and debates, are (d) hy-
nonima, and of one and the ſame ſignification. And for this
word (ſeas) is to be known that by releaſe of all (e) ſuits,
executions are barred, for none ſhall have execution without
ſuit or prayer; and therewith agree 9 H. 6. 4. 26 H. 6. Ex-
ecution 7. and Br. Releaſes 87. So by releaſe of all (/) du-
ties, as well executions as aCtions are releaſed But a releaſe
of ſuit or quarrel is not in this caſe any bar of Gower, no more
than by a releaſe of them, a (g) covenant before the breach
thereof is releated, becauſe the covenantee has no cauſe of
action or ſuit before the covenant broken. As to this word
(b) (ritulum) (which is mentioned in the particular clauſe) it
has two ſignifications, one properly and ſtrictly, as for a title
for which no action lies, as for a condition broken, or upon
alienation in mortinain, &c. and ſo it is taken in Plow. Com. in
Nichols's caſe, fol. 484. In another ſignification it is taken
largely, and in this ſenſe, titulus eff jujta cauſa poſſidendi quod
naſirum ęſi, and fignifies the title which one has to land, as
by fine, feoffment, &c. or by deſcent, &c. and therefore when
the plaintiff makes title in an aſſize, the tenant may ſay, let
the aſhze come upon the title, which is as much as to ſay,
upon the particular conveyance, &c. which he makes to the
land, &c. and it is called (4) titulus a tuendo, quia thereby he
defends his land, et plerumque conflat ex munimentis que muniant
& tuentur cauſam, By releaſe of all title to land, &c. all his


right is extinct, for it ſhall be taken ſtrongly againſt him, and


in the largeſt ſenſe. So when a man has title in the proper
ſenſe, (/) either by a condition or by alienation in mortmain,
the releaſe of ail his right will extinguiſh this title, for he has
jus poſſidendi, and therewith agrees 6 H. 7, 8. a. And the
Engliſh poet faith, ** For true it is, that neither ( fraud nor
might, can make a title where there wanteth right.” The laſt
of the four general words in the deed is (a) (emanda) quod eff
tocabulum artis and if one releaſes to another all demands, it
is (as Litt. faith, 117. a.) the beſt releaſe to him to whom the
releaſe 1s made, that he can have, and ſhall enure moſt to his
advantage; for thereby not only all demands, but alſo all
(9) cauſes of demand, are releaſed. And there are (p) two
manner of demands, ſeil. in deed, and in law; in deed, as
in every Præcipe there is an exprets demand; and thereupon in
real actions he is called demandant; in law, as every entry
into land, diſtreſs for rent, taking or ſeiſure of goods, and
the like acts :1n-pazs, which may be done without any words,


' : : are
Noy 26. Hutt, 17. x Bulſtr. 178. Cr. El. 552. Lit. Rep, 87. 11 Co. 824 b. (o]


(p} Co. Lit. 291, b.


md a Sw Mi - a Qs as


Part VIII. EpwarD ALTHAM's Caſe, 154


are demands in law. And as a releaſe of ſuits is (a) lar a 63
and more beneficial than a releaſe of quarrels, or o 247 *
ſo a releaſe of demands is more large and beneficial than any

of them, for thereby is releaſed all that is by the others re-

leaſed, and more : by releaſe of all demands, all freeholds and

inheritances executory are releaſed, as (h) rents, and the like, (5) Cr. Jac. 487.
20 Aſſ. p. 5. 14 H. 8, 9, 10. By releaſe of all demands, all Bridgm: 124. b.
(c) executions are releaſed, 26 H. 6. Execution 7. 19 H. 6. 4. 11
Litt. 117. 40 Ed. 3. 51. by releaſe of all demands, to the diſ- 2 Roll. 407.
ſeiſor, the right of entry to the land, and all that is contained ( 1Brownl.63,
in it is releaſed, 6 H. 7. 15. So it is reſolved by all the Juſ- TRY _ Tos
tices in (4) Chauncey's caſe, 34 H. 8. Br. Releaſe 90. that he (4) 11 Co: $2.b,
who releaſes all demands excludes himſelf from all actions, en- Co. Lit. 292. a.
tries, and ſeiſures. Litt. cap. Warranty 170. a. holds, that if 2% de 3
tenant in tail enfeoffs his (e) uncle, who enfeoffs another in (%) Co. Lit. 30a.
fee with warranty, if afterwards the feeffee by his deed releaſes b. Lit. 171. a,
to his uncle all manner of warranties, or all manner of real .
covenants, or all manner of demands, by ſuch releaſe the 65 (F) 1 Co.112. by
warranty (which is a covenant real and executory) is extinct ; 5 C0. 71. 4.
and the reaſon of all this was, becauſe by releaſe of demands,

all the means and remedies, and the cauſes of them, which

any one has to lands, tenements, goods, chattels, &c. are

extinct; and by conſequence the right and intereſt itſelf to

the thing. Wherefore it was reſolved, that in the caſe at bar,

by the releaſe of all demands to him in the reverſion, if the

deed of releaſe had not gone farther, the (g) dower of the ſaid (g) 1 Co.112.b.
Marcia had been barred. Note, reader, altho' a releaſe of 12 1 ve R
all demands be of ſo great extent, yet it doth not extend to Co. Lie.” 265. %
ſuch wiits by which nothing is demanded neither in fact, nor 16 E. 3. Fitz.
in law, but lie only to relieve the plaintiff by way of diſcharge, — .
and not by way of demand, as appears before, by the judg- * © #7

ment in (+) Treſcullard's caſe, in 11 Hf. 4. 6. where a releaſe (5) Antea 152.
of all demands is no bar in a writ of error to reverſe an out-. b.

lawry, et fic in ſimilibus. Vide 40 E. 3. 22. 13 R. 2. Avow.

39. (89.) 18 E. 3. 59. 14 H. 4. 4. &c. where by releaſe of

all demands, future (:) incidents are releaſed, and where not. (;) rBrownl.63:
And vide Plow, Com. 484. in Nichols's caſe for this word

(intereſſe Now as to the ſecond part of the deed, ſcil. to the

words of qualification, it was reſolved, that as well the firſt

words, as the ſubſequent words ſpecial, extend only to re-

leaſe all actions, ſuiis, quarrels, demands, title and dower,

&c. de aliquibus terris & tenementis ſuis in Wethersfield,

(k) and not to any lands and tenements in Gosfield, (4) 3 Keb. 580.
for the ſaid latter words, mibi contingent” per mortem didti

Thome, &c. qualify the ſaid general words and reſtrain all

the firlt words to the lands or tenements in Wethersfield,


and


— - — % *
=> — . — 1 Fg acts.
- — ——— ——— — —
_


www my


HM ly


(a) Wing. Max.


15.


( 1 Roll. Rep.


319. Wing. Max.
26. 2 Co. 24. 8.
4 Co. 3 5. a. 8Co.
56. b. 3 Bulſtr.
105. 107, 108,
(e) Winch. 92,
2 Rol!.Rep.279.
(4) Lit. Rep.
345. Hob. 172.


(e) 2 Co. 24. 8


272. 2 Sid. 78.
Poph. 138. Lit.
Rep. 260, 345,
Perk, ſect. 170.
1 Brownl. 45.
Co. Lit. 21. 3.
Cro. Jac. 476.
Dyer 126. pl. 50.
1 Sid. 78. b
3 Bulſtr. 19 5.
(g) Lit. Rep. 345.
Co, Lit. 2 1. a.
2 Jones 4.

(b) Antea118.b,
Raymond. 330.
Hawk's Max.21,
Styles 301.

2 Roll. Rep. 279.
Lit. Rep. 345.
4 Co. 80. b.
Hard. 108.

(i) Co. Lit. 299.
2. I Sid. 137.
Dyer 56, pl. 21.


this appears in the ſaid book of


Erward ALTHAM's Cafe.


Part VIII.


and that for three reaſons: 1. Becauſe all the ſaid three parts
of the deed, ſcil the words of releaſe, the words of qualifica-
tion, and the words of relation are but one period and one
ſentence ; for this conjunction (necnon) conjoins the general
words to the words of qualification, and the relative words
refer to all the words, as (a) well general as ſpecial, and alſo
to the words of qualification, as ſhall hereafter appear, ard
therefore the whole is but one and the ſame ſentence. 2. If
the general words fhould ſtand without any qualification, then
the ſpecial words would be altogether vain and of no eſtect,
& (b) maledifta expoſitio g que corrumpit textum. The third
and the principal reaſon is upon a maxim and principle of
the law, ſcil. (c) quando carta continet generalem clauſulam. poſtea-
gue defcendit ad verba ſpecicha, gue clauſulæ generat ſunt conſen-
tanea, interpretanda eſt carta ſecundum verba ſpecialia. I he
ſame rule almoſt word for word is put and agreed on both
ſides in 7 E. 3. 10. a. Margery (d, Mortimer's caſe, ſe.
„where a deed ſpeaks by general words, and afterwards de-
„ ſcends to ſpecial words, if the ſpecial words agree to the
«« general words, the deed ſhall be intended according to the
«« ſpecial words::” as if a man grants a rent in manerio de D'
perapriend” in 100 acres of land, parcel of the fame manor,
with clauſe of diſtreſs in the 100 acres, the rent ſhall iſſue out
of the 100 acres only, and the general words ſha!l be con-
ſtrued according to the fpecial words: fo it is there alſo
ſaid, if a man grants a rent, (and goes no farther) theſe (e)
general words ſha!l create an eſtate for life, but if the haben-
dum be for years, it ſhall qualify the general words; and all
7 E. 3. Soifa man (/
gives land to one and his heirs, habendum to him and the
heirs of his body, he ſhall have but an eſtate in tail, and no
fee expectant ; for the habendum qualifies the general words
precedent; and therewith agree 25 AM. p. 14. 37 Aſſ. p 5.
& Perkins 35. b. againſt the opin. obiter in 21 H. 6. 24. But
if a man gives lands in the premiſes to cne and (g) the heirs
of his body, Habendum to him and his heirs, he has an eſtate-
tail, and a fee-fimpie expectant ; for that ſtands upon another
rule or principle in law, ſcil. (Y) gereralis dauſula nen por-
rigitur ad ea que antea ſpecialiter ſunt comprehenſa and
therefore when the deed at the firſt contains ſpecial words,
and afterwards concludes in general words, both words as
well general as ſpecial ſhall ſtand: and it is well ſaid in
35 H. 8. Dyer 56. ſubſequent words may qualify and (i)
abridge, but not deſtroy the generality of the words prece-


dent. Vide Dyer 33 H. 8. fol. 50. 21 Af. p. 10. & 2 E. 3.
33. b. To the laſt part of the deed, ſcil the relative
words, (que vel quas, Cc.) It was reſolved, that hy

| _ retwer


»


Part VIII, Eopward ALTHam's Caſe.


refer as well to actions, &c. and demands, as to the fpecial
words, for it would be againſt reaſon that they ſhould refer
to general words, which are more remote, and not to the
words of qualification which are immediate and next to them :
and that is ſo clear and perſpicuous of itſelf that it is not
worthy of any argument, or proof, to confirm it. For the
ſecond point of the caſe it was reſolved, that the ſaid foreign
or collateral averment out of the ſaid deed was not of any
force or effect in law; for every deed conſiſts upon two parts,
ſcil. matter of fact, and upon the conſtruction in law. Matter
of fact is to be averred by the party. and triable by the jurors:
the other, being matter in law, is to be diſeuſſed by
the judges of the law, and quemadmodum (a) ad quæſ-
tionem fatti non reſpondent judices ; ita ad quæſtionem juris non
reſpondent juratores, And therefore if A, levies a fine to Wil-
liam his ſon, to haveand to hold to him and his heirs, upon
this fine the Judge cannot make queſtion for any matter of
law; but now the party comes and avers matter in fact; and
ſaith, that A. had two ſons named William, (6) an elder,
and a younger, and his intent was to levy the fine to William
the younger ; this (c) averment out of the fine is good of this
matter of fact, which well ſtands with the words of the fine,
and ſhall be tried by the country ; and therewith agrees 47
E. 3. 16. b. But if a man by deed gives goods to (4) one of
the ſons of I. S. who has divers ſons, here he ſhall not aver
which ſon he intended ; for by judgment in law upon this
deed, this giſt is void for the uncertainty, which cannot be ſup-
plied by averment. Vide 11 E. 4. 2. a. So if a man leviesa fine
of the manor of Soure, or of the manor of Dirtleby, to two &
heredib”, and in truth there is the (e) manor of North Soure and
South Soure or Great Dirtleby and Little Dirtleby, in this
caſe iſſue may be taken dehors which manor the conuſor in-
tended to paſs, for that is matter of fact not apparent in the
fine, whereof the Judge cannot take conuſance ; but it ſtands
well with the fine, and ſhall be tried by the jury, and there-
with agree 12 H. 7. 7. 26 H. 8. 6 a. 19 E. 2. Grants 93.
but where the words are in the limitation of the eſtate to
two (f) et heredibus, that is apparent in the fine, and by
judgment of law, theſe words et heredibus are uncertain and
void, as it is adjudged in 22 H. 6. 15. b. Vide 19 H. 6. 73.
b. 20 H. 6. 35. b 36. 22 E. 4. 6.(16.) b. and no averment,
dehors can make that good, which upon conſideration of the
deed is apparent to be void. So if a man makes a feoff-
ment to one and his heirs, no averment can be taken that
the intent of the parties was, that the feoffee ſhould
have but an eſtate to him and the heirs of his body,

or


155


(a) 9 Co. 14. a.
2 5. 3. 11. Co.
10. b. 2 Bulftr,
204, 251, 305,
314. 1 Sid, 127,
Co. Lit, 125. a.
155. b. 226. a,
I Roll. Rep. 132.
(2) Br. Noſme
63. 5 Co. 68. a. b.
Br. Fine 28.
Fitz. Feoffment
56.
(c) Moor 105,
ob. 32.
Styles 293.
(d) Br. VDonezi.
10 Co. 51.


(e) Kelw. 49. a.


72 x Co. 85. a.
Hob. 174. Co.
Lit. 8. b. Br.
N. C. 156. Br.
Eſtate 4, 18, 73.
Fitz. Feoffments
& Faits 8.
Plowd. 28, b,


Bridg. 134, 135.


1 Roll. 133.
Perk. ſect. 181.
Kelw. 108. pl. 2 6.
t And. 225.
2 And. 141, 142.
3 Bulſt. 126.
4 Leon. 246.
Godb. 121, 220.


/
1


IN


Epward ALTHAM's Caſe. Part VIII.


for ſuch averment would be againſt the judgment of the law,
which appears to the Judges upon the view of the deed ; fo
in the caſe at bar, if the general word (demanda) had in law,
by the judgment of the Judges, upon the conſideration of the
whole deed of releaſe barred her of her dower, no foreign or
collateral averment dehors could qualify or abridge the force
and operation of the ſaid word, but it ought to be qualified by
apt words contained in the deed itfelf, as in this caſe it was,
And afterwards judgment was given for the demandant,


[A parol agreement cannot control a bond, &c, Fitzg. 75.]


ARTHUR


Part VIII.


ARTH. BLACK AMORE's Caſe.


—


Mich, 8 Jacobi 1:


N original writ was brought in London: Jacobus Dei
gratia Angliæ, Cc. Præcipe Leuenthorp Franke nuper de
Hatfirld Brodock in comitatu Eſſex, Generoſo, alias dicto Leven-


thorp Franke de Hatfield Brodock in comitatu Eſſex, Generoſo, quod R


reddat Arthuro Blackamore, et Jobanni Whittingham, 100 l.
quas eis debet & injuſte detinet, returnable menſe Michaelis; the
entry of the Capias, alias, et pluries, was according to the ſaid
original; but in the Exigent and Proclamation, and the entry
thereof, the defendant (as the truth was) was named Knight,
and in Eaſter term, anno 8 Fac. he put in a Superſedeas by the
name of Knight, and ſo the plaintiff declared againſt him:
and the defendant imparled till Trinity term following, in


156


1 Roll. 138.

Of Amend-
ments, &c. ſee
Co. 121,

ep; . A. 131,
132. 6 Mod.
156, 269 to 287.
Cumberb. 73.
3 Salk. 30, 31.
Lucas 270, &c.
poſt,


which term judgment was given againſt him by default, by


the name of Knight. And this Mich. term, anno 8 Jacobi
Regis a writ of error was brought, and it was moved by
Houghton, Serjeant, that the ſaid original might be amended,
becauſe John Bunbury, the plaintiff*s attorney, drew a note
or title of the writ in this form; London: Leventhorp Franke
nuper de Hatfield in comitatu Eſſex, Militi, alias dif? Leventhorp
Franke de Hatfield Brodock in comitatu Eſſeæ, Generoſa, c ut ſupra,
and delivered this note or title to the Curſitor of London,
and he miſtook it in hoc, that where in primo nomine he ought
to be named Mliliti, in primo nomine the Curſitor named


him Generoſo, as he was named in the obligation, and this


was the true caſe, as appears on the examination of the


1 Roll, 198.


Curſitor, and of the ſaid attorney, upon their oaths, and


upon


—_ - —— —
=


— — ·ũ—UUUTU ICC 2 .u⸗u —


(a) 1 Roll. 195.
Popham 203.


Q. If in the
King's caſe ?
See 6 Mod. 269
to 287,

Cumb. 73.

1 Sal. &c,

(% Fits. Amend-
ment iq. 45 E. 3.
6. b. 8 Co. 26. b.


(e) 8 Co. 26. b.
9 Co. 48. a. Fitz,
Amendment 22.
Br, Eſloign 67.
Br. Brief 212.
Br. Otkce del
Court 6. Br.
Faux Latin 96.
(4) Antea 26. b.
Br. Amend. 59.
Br. Faux Latin
74. Poſtea 162. b.
(e) Br. Amend.


74+

Vs E. z. 25.2.
Fitz, Ameadm.
7 3*


(es) Br. Amend-


ment 26. Fitz.


Amendm. 7.


(b) Br. Amend.
34. Poſtea 158 a.
(i) Co. Lit. 2 60. a.
5 Co. 74. b.


AR TH. Brackamone's Caſe. Part VIII.
upon! view of the note or title in full court. And whether this


was amendable or not by this court, the original being pur-


chaſed out of another court, ſc. the Chancery, was the queſ-
tion. And the caſe was well argued at the bar by counſel on
both fides : and at laſt it was reſolved, per totam curiam, that
the record ſhould be (a) amended by the ſaid Curſitor, and
made according to the note or title delivered him by the attor-
ney. And for the better underſtanding of the law, and of
the true reaſon of the rule of our books in this and other caſes
of amendments. 1. We muſt confider, if in this cafe the
faid original writ was amendable by the common law, or by
any ſtatute, and by what ſtatute? And it was reſolved, that
an original writ was not amendable by the common law in the
caſe of a common perſon “: Vide 13 E. 3. Amendment 63.
which was before 1 ſtatute made concerning amendments,
&c. and 16 E. 3. Variance 59. 29 E. 3. Amendment 68.
But in the King's caſe, in a Quare impedit, where the writ of
Duare impedit was (b) preſentere for præſentare, after exception
taken to it, and before anſwer, by the advice of the Chancel-
lor (out of which court this writ iſſued) and of the Judges of
the King's Bench, the writ was amended in the Chancery,
and the defendant was put to anſwer it by award. Vide (c) 4
H. 6. 16. b. & (4) 40 Aſſ. p. 26. And where there appears
in (e) 20 E. 4. 7. 10 H. 7. 25. a. b. a diverſity of opinions,
whether there were any amendment at the common law, or
not? It is without queſtion, that at the common law a fau't
of entry of a continuance, or of an eſſoign, which was the
miſpriſion of the court itſelf, in the form of entry, was amend-
able by the court; as appears by 5. Ed. 3. 25. () where W.
brought a Præcipe againſt B. who vouched to warranty C. who
entered into the warranty and pleaded to iſſue, a Yenire fac
iſſued, &c. and the jury was reſpited, and in the roll it was
entered, Fur” inter B. & C. (which was between the tenant
and the vouchee) in ſuch a plea, penitur in reſpect” where the
entry ought to be, Jur' inter M. & C. quem B. vocavit ad war-
rant & qui ei warr'; and becauſe this miſpriſion of the entry
in the roll was taken to be the default of the court, it was (as
in the caſe of an eſſoign) amended by the court. So in 10 E.
3. 20. a. The miſpriſion of the court, in the entry of an
eſſoign, was amended by the court. And 12 E. 3. Amend-
ment 62. acc. which books were before any ſtatute of amend-
ment. Vide (g) 2 Hf. 4. 4. a. 18 E. 3. Amendment 55. 19 E.
3. tit. Amendment 65. And at the common law, variance in
any part of the record of the original was amendable by the
common law, as it is ſaid in (4) 7 H. 6.45. a. So at the
common law, the Judges might amend as well their judgment,
as any other part of the record, &c, in the ſame (i) te! 105

Fetal, Sherman. — 5


n . Au n 1 nn rn ann — 4as —_— ac 4a A wn tn EY «+. a « ate


Part VIII. AR TH. BLACRAMOoRRE's Caſe. 157


for during the term the record is in the breaſt of the Judges,

and not in the roll, Vide 7 H. 6. 29. a. b. (a4) q E. 4. 3 b. (a) Fitz. A-
2 R. (6) 3. II. a. b. But at the common law, the miſpriſion 6 Br. K.

of clerks in another term in the proceſs was not amendab'le by wendm. 87.
the court, for in another term the roll is the record, and

therefore by the ſtatute of (c) 14 E. 3. cap. 6. (which was the (e) 5 Co. 43. 4.
firſt act of amendment) it is enacted, by the miſpriſion of

clerks in every place whereſoever it be, no proceſs ſhall be

annulled or diſcontinued by miſtaking, in writing one letter, or

one ſyllable too much or too little, &c. but ſhall be haſtily
NTT due form, Kut this ſtatute extends only to the
amendment of the miſkfake of the clerk in proceſs to be

amended in due form, for anno 15 E. 3. Amendment 58,

which was the next year aiter the ſtatute made, in Detinue of

three writings, by omiſſion of one writing in the continuance,

all the proceeding was diſcontinued, notwithſtanding the new

itatute, (/c:l. 14 E. 3.) which gave that the proceſs ſhould be

amended. Vide (d) 45 E. 3. 19. b. And this ſtatute extends (4) Fitz. A-
to a writ judicial, or procels, as in treſpaſs the Ni privs was Aman _
ad damnum 100 $. where the record was 100 l. and the jury at TY
the Nis prius found 201. and the writ of (e) Nift prius was (9 Br. Amend.


? J . . I Roll. 202.
amended by force of this ſtatute, and made 1001. according p{, Amend.


, Fitz, Amend. 8,
to the record, 2 H. 4. 6. a. vide 45 E. 3. 19. And in 44 E. Poſtea 162. a.


3- 18. it is obſerved, that a man has often teen the judicial Wag P25:
writs amended by the roll, but the roll never (before the ſame (f)a in.
caſe, as it is there faid) was amended, vide 40 E. 3. 15, 36.


19 H. 6. 15. 3 H. 4. 8. & 11. 47 E. 3. 14. 7 E. 4. 15. b. * Poſtes 162.


9 H. 7. 8. 4 H. 6. 6. But this ſtatute doth not extend to an bitz. Amend. 81.


original writ, nor to a writ which is in the nature of an ori- *
ginal, for that is not included within this word Proceſs. And

therefore (g) Finchden faith, in 41 K. 3. 14. a. if an original (g) Br. Amend.
writ wants form it is abateable, becauſe an original is made egg.
in one place, and pleadable in another, and by conſequence ,
cannot be amended ; otherwiſe it is of a writ judicial, vide

11 H. 4. 70. a. ) A protection thall not be amended in the (5) Br. Amend.


h 2 „ G
ommon Pleas, becauſe made in another court. So it is held 1 130


N 9

in 4 H. 6 4. a. Every original writ ſhall abate for want of Br. Preteckion
form (as if the wife be named before (i) the huſband) as well 35 Br, 3
as if it wants matter, without any amendment: but a judicial Hz, Fig.


. IL . riance 33. Fits.
writ ſhall not abate for want of form, if it has ſufficient mat- Variance 45.


ter, (4) 3 H. 4. 4. a. An original, or that which is in the (i) 4 H. 6. 3. b.


nature of an original, ſhall not be amended, and therewith 8


agree 29 E. 3. Amendment 68. in Wagam's caſe, 22 E. 4. Brief 208. Br.
47. vide 8 H. 6. 37. a. So in (/ 46 E. 3. Amendment 53. in Faux Latin 3 49.
a writ of entry ſine aſſenſu capituli brought by an Abbot againſt DOR
R. who pleads non dimiſit, Ic. & de hoc ponit ſe ſuper patriam, 24.

& preditt” R. ſimiliter; where it {ſhould be, & pred” Abbas ſimi- (Br. Miſnoſm.


liter, and the jury wasdiſcharged, and it was not amended, for it = Af ans
Wag riance 29.
(1) Poſtea 157


—
— "=
— i nnd — —
— — — _—_—— - — — — 5 8 —
=> oe Ed — 2 - — =
—


E 4


.
— —— —


_
<< EE .
— Bo —= -


— —
— —


— —
—


—


(a) F. N. B. 22. i.
24. d.


— -


(5)Antea 157. a.


(e) Br. Amend-
ment 110.


(d) Fitz. A-
mendment 15.
Br. Amendm. 18,


Aru. BLACKAMORE'S Caſe; Part VIII.


was not within the ſtatute which gave, that proceſs ſnhould
be amended in due form, and therefore the parties repleaded.
And it is to be known, that this word (Proceſs) which is the
only word in this ſtatute which is to be amended, is taken in


Jaw in two ſignifications, in one largely, and in the other


ſtrictly; and in the large ſenſe it is taken for all the proceed-
ings in all real and perſonal actions, and in all criminal and
Common Pleas : & proceſſus derivatur a procedendos ab originali
uſque ad finem. Vide Britton 138. And in this ſenſe it is taken
in the Regiſter Original 128. a. in the writ De continuando pro-
ceſſum poſi mortem Capitalis FuſtiC in a writ of Oyer and ler-
miner, within which words (Proceſſus) as it there appears, is
included not only the judicial proceſs, but alſo the commil-
Hons, indictments, rolls, & alia memoranda : and in alis ſenſu,
this word ( Proceſſus) is taken more ſtrictly, /c. for the pro-
ceedings after the original upon the plea-roll before judg-
ment, and that appears in the writ of error in the Regiſter
216. and (a) F. N. B. the words of which are, Quia in recerdo
& proceſſu, ac etiam in redditione judicii, c. where recor dum
contains the plea-roll, and proceſſus all the proceeding upon it
until the judgment. See the writ of Certiorari in the Regilter
167. a. And in this ſenſe, in all actions real, perſonal, and
mixt, and not in pleas of the crown, is the ſaid act of 14 K.
1 to be intended. And this appears by the ſaid book in (5) 46
. 3. Amendment 53. for the miſprifion was in the plea-roll,
and therefore it was not amended, and 46 E. 3. 19. a. b.
in Treſpaſs, diſtreſs iſſued (c) Quindena Trin' retornable
—_—_ Mich, and the roll was, De guinden' Trin' ad quinden'
tar” and at Quinden Mich it was was pleaded to iſſue, and
found for the plaintiff, and the defendant ſhewed this matter
in arreſt of judgment, and the Juſtices would not amend the
roll (which there is called the original) but awarded the parties
to replead. But in 18 E. 3. Amendment 56. the miſtake
was in the entry of the eſſoign, which was out of the record
or plea-roll, and that was part of the proceſs, i. e. proceeding
amendable by the ſaid act; and that appears more fully aſter,
But upon this ſtatute there were diverſity of opinions in divers
points, /c. If the Juſtices before whom the plea ſhould be de-
pending by adjournment, error, or otherwiſe (Jide 17 Aſſ. p.
2.) ſhould have power to amend the mittake of the clerk in
proceſs in writing a letter or ſyllable, &c. alſo, if they might
amend it as well after judgment as before; and theſe doubts
were explained and declared by the ſtat. of g H. 5. c. 4.& 4 H.
6. c. 3. to extend to all the Juſtices, and as well after as beſore
judgm. And alſo a great doubt was conceived on theſe words,
Writing a letter or ſyllable too much or too little, if a word mig ht
be amended ; and (d) 40 E. 3. 34. b. Belknap faith, that the _
0


avs r > STEW GS en denn ůmũdã n.. ʒ ZCNUll wlll ww == .. wmgc̃ͤ » oy Fg aes Rr al. a nf Occ acocds _ ae A Got Aa


A A AW @@ + oa wu a DA£Oam lcd ig ac


part VIII. Aa rg. Brackamone's Caſe,


of 14 E. 3. c. 6. that (a) a letter or ſyllable too much or too
little in a word may be amended,“ but where there wants a
word, of that the ſtatute ſpeaks nothing. Thorn, It was
heretofore debated here before us, if a word fail in the record,
if it might be amended, as if it had failed but in a ſyllable or
letter; and Sir Hugh Green and I went together to the coun-
cil, and they were twenty-four of the Biſhops and Earls, and
we (s) demanded of them who made the ſtatute, if the record
might be amended ; and the Archbiſhop or Metropolitan
ſaid, that it was a nice demand, and a vain queſtion of them,
if it might be amended or not; for he ſaid, that it might be
as well amended in this caſe, as if it were but one letter, for
if a letter or ſyllable fail in a word, it is no word, wherefore
if all the word fail it may be amended as well as if it failed
but of a letter, or of a ſyllable, for there is no more difference
in the one caſe than in the other. And 39 E. 3. 21. a. the
queſtion alſo was, if a word might be amended by the ſtatute
of 14 E. 3. and there 'Thorp ſaid, that it ſhall be amended
by the ſtatute, for heretofore we were in doubt of it; and
becauſe there was diverſity in the ſurname in a writ, it was
brought for the ſame cauſe into Parliament ; and the Lords
who made the ſtatute ſaid, their meaning was, that in all
theſe caſes the proceſs ſhould be amended. Note, where it is
ſaid in 40 E. 3. 34. b. That the Juſtices went to council; it
appears by 39 E. 3. 21. a. that they went to the Parliament
to know the opinion of thoſe who made the law, 11 H. 4. 70.
a. Ina Præcipe the original was, Mich. de T. and the mean
proceſs was, Mich. T. and (c) (de) omitted, and a protection
was caſt by the name of M. T. and the meſne profits was
amended by the ſtatute of 14 E. 3. and that a word ſhall be
amended, within theſe words letter or Hyllalle, and eo potius,
becauſe (de) is a word and ſyllable alſo; but the protection
was not amended, becauſe it was made in another court. 7
H. 6. 45. it ſeems that a (4) title ſhall be amended within
theſe words, letter or ſyllable. To take away all which doubts,
and to enlarge the power of the Juſtices in amendments, the
ſtatute of 8 H. 6. cap. 12. * was made, and that ſtands upon
two general parts, /c. 1. Againſt corrupting and falſifying of
records, by raſing, interlining, &c. which clauſe doth not
concern the caſe in queſtion. 2. Againſt the miſtake of
Clerks (by force of which the amendment was in the caſe
at bar) the words of which branch are, And that the King's
„Judges of the courts, and places in which any record, procels,
&« word, plea, warrant of attorney, writ, (original or judicial, for
« ſothe ſtat. ſpeaks in the firſt clauſe) pannel, or return which for

Vo. IV. K k « the


158


(a) Br. Amend -
ment 18.
Fitz. Amend-
ment 15.


(b) 1 Mod. Rep


153.
See 3 Salk. 39s


(c) 2 Roll. 329.
Antea 157. a.
Br. Protect. 35.
r. Miſnom. 22.
Br. Variance 33.
Fitz. Vari-
ance 45.
r. Amend. tot.
(4) Antea 136 b.
Br. Amend. 34.


* Cumberb. 26,


ArTH. BIAckAMoR E's Caſe, Part VIII.


te the time ſhall be, ſhall have power to examine ſuch record,
& proceſs, word, plea, warrant of attorney, writ, pannel,
% and return, by them, or by their Clerks, and to reform
„and amend in affirmance of the judgment of ſuch records


& and proceſſes, all that to them, in their diſcretion, ſeemeth


(e) 2 Roll. Rep.
1835.


© to be the miſpriſion of the Clerk in ſuch records, proceſs,
„ word, plea, warrant of attorney, writ, pannel, and return,
« &c. So that by ſuch miſprifion of the clerk, no judgment
« ſhall be reverſed, or annulled.” Note, reader, where the
act of (a) 14 E. 3. ſpeaks only of proceſs, this act of (b) 8 H.
6. is of far greater extent, for it extends to proceſs, and to ſeven
other things, ſcilicet, 1. To = record, 2. Word, 3. Plea,
4. Warrant of attorney. o a writ original and judicial,
as appears by the firſt branch of the act. 6. Panel. 7. Re-
turn. So that the power of the Juſtices as to amendment, is
by this ſtatute greatly enlarged. Alſo, 1. This ſtatute gives
them power of examination. 2. Of reformation and amend-
ment. 3. The ſtatute expreſſes the matter which they ſhall
reform and amend ; il. all that which to them, in their dif-
cretion ſeems to be the miſprifion of the Clerk in ſuch records,
proceſs, word, plea, warrant of attorney, writ, pannel, and
return : as to the firſt, they have power to examine ſuch re-
cords, proceſs, &c. in two manners: 1. By themſelves. 2.
By their Clerks. As to the power of reformation and amend-
ment, they have power only to do it in affirmance of the
judgments of ſuch records, and proceſſes ; but although their
power be thus enlarged, yet the miſprifion of the Clerk (as
it was in the act of 14 E. 3) is only to be amended,
And becauſe there appears prima facie, great uncertainty in
our books concerning amendments (whereas in truth there
are not any more certain rules in the law, if they are well ob-
ſerved and underſtood, than in caſe of amendment) it will be
neceſſary briefly to collect them out of the books at large,
touching the conſtruction of this ſtatute. And becauſe this
ry a caſe was of the amendment of an original: 1. It
all be ſhewed in what caſes the miſpriſion of the Clerk in
original writs, ſhall be amended within this ſtatute, and
in what not. Every original writ ſtands upon two parts,
one upon an artificial form, according to the Regiſter,
and that the (c) Clerk ought ex officio to do by his know-
ledge and ſkill, without any inſtruction of the party:
the other upon the true inſtruction by the party, of
the truth and particularity of his caſe, requiſite to
the compoſing of the writ, and that the Clerk *
| | "


I © 4.00 oa ah. a. edn ih 6 eg et TAL .


Part VIII. ATH. BLAckAMokE's Caſe, | 159


do without the party: ſo that an original writ may be vicious,

by miſpriſion either of the Clerk, or of the party: by miſpri-

ſion of the Clerk in five manners: 1. By miſtaking the legal

form. 2. By miſtaking of one word which is not any Latin

for another. 3. By omiſſion or addition of words. 4. By

miſtaking the record, ſpecialty, writing, copy, inſtruction,

note, or titling of the writ delivered to the (a) Clerk, or taken ( a) Cr. El. 79.
by the Clerk for framing the writ. 5. By miſpriſion of the

Clerk, or officer, in negligent keeping, or voluntary defacing,

& c. of a record, &c. And becauſe the caſe of amendment in

the caſe at bar was not for any miſpriſion of the bond on which

the writ was grounded (for he has purſued it in all) in which

bond the defendant was named Generojus, as he was in the

writ, But the miſpriſion of the Clerk of the Chancery was in

this, that he did not purſue the note or inſtruction in writing

delivered him, ſcil. to name the defendant Knight in primo

nomine, becauſe after the making of the bond, he was made

Knight: this diffrrence is firſt to be obſerved, that if the

original writ wants legal form, it is ſuch a (5) miſpriſion which (r. El. 170.
is not amendable by this act, for the officers and Clerks of the 5 C0. 45: 4. b.
Chancery are bound by the duty of their offices to have ſkill

and knowledge in the true form of original writs (which are

the (c) foundations upon which the whole law depends) and (+) 3 co. 48. a,
therefore if form of original writs ſhall be neglected, ignorance, Co. Lit. 73. b.
the mother of error and barbarouſneſs will follow, and in the Ff. F. N. B.
end all will be involved in confuſ in ſubverſ. of the ancient law

of the land, for in this caſe it is true that forma dat eſſe ; and

therefore it was never the meaning of the makers of the act

within theſe general words, (miſpriſion of the Clerk in ori-

ginal writ) to {4) extend it to miſpriſion of the form of the (4) Cr. El. 179,
original writ, which would introduce ſo great inconvenience ; 4%-

and therewith agrees a notable judgment, in 22 E. 4 21. b.

& 22. a. in Eliz. Hatley's caſe, where a writ of debt was

brought againſt executors for a debt due by the teſtator in the |

( Debet et Detinet, where by the form of the Regiſter it (e) Br. Amendm.
ought to be in the Detinet only, and there it is reſolved by the 78. Fitz. Amend,
whole court, that it ſhall not be amended, for there a difference 4 5 C. 35. o.
is taken and reſolved, between /) negligence, and 1gnorance (f) Cr, El. 170.
of the Clerk; for neghgence, that is, the overſight of the

Clerk in miſtaking, as if he has the bond or a copy of the bond,

and doth not follow it, (g) the miſtaking, that is overſight and (g) Cro. El. 9g,
negligence in this caſe, and in all like caſes, ſhall be amended 25% 435

by the ſtatute of 8 Hen. 6. But (4) ignorance, or not know- (5) Cr. El, 219.


ing, (for ſcientia ſciolarum eft * ignorantia) of the Clerk 1 |
2 —


-
.


Arn. BLAckAMokk's Caſe. Part VIII.


the legal form, and courſe of the original, is not a miſpriſion
amendable by the ſaid ſtatute. So if the writ be Præcipe quod
(a) 22 E. 4-21-b. ſolvat, for (a) Præcipe quod reddat, or Warr' chartæ unde pactum
Amend. 75. habet, for unde chartam habet, theſe are faults of form, and
therefore are not amendable by this act. And for the firſt part
of this difference, as to the copy of the bond, it is held, in
38 H. 6. 4. a. that where the Clerks of the Chancery uſe to
take titling of the matter which the party ſhews them, if the
rty to have a Formedon in deſcender ſhew the Clerk that the
land deſcended to one as ſon and heir of the donees, &c. and
the Clerk draws the writ, that the land deſcended to him as
(5) Fitz, a- fon, (and omits (6) heir) if the Clerk ſhews his titling and will
mendm. 44- f teſtify it, it ſhall be amended in the Common Pleas, and that
G Ire is, by the ſaid ſtatute of (c) 8 H. 6. Vide 22 E. 4. 48. b. 38
= H. 6. 39. a. b. & 11 H. 7. 41. b. agree to the caſe of a copy.
But if the writ wants legal form, it is not amendable, Vide
(d)Fitz. Amend. 14 H. 4. 10, 11. (4) 27 H. 6. 6. b. 17 H. 6. 14. 34 H. 6.
1 26. 28 H. 6. 11. and upon this reaſon it has been often ad-
8 judged fince this ſtat, of (e) 8 H. 6. that falſe Latin“ in an
(08 H. 6. original writ ſhall not be amended, becauſe it wants legal
e ce ib. form, and is to be imputed to the ignorance of the Clerk, 9
(f) Br. Faux La- H. 7+ 16. b. (as /) hes breve, for hoc breve : and the common
tin. 78. 2 Vent. law is curious in obſerving the form of the Regiſter, and
4 Sand. 39. therefore it is adjudged in 6 E. 3. 36. b. 37. a. that where a
9 treſpaſs done by divers is joint or ſeveral, at the will of the
plaintiff, yet in an action againſt John, guardian of the hoſ-
pital of B. and brother Rob. L. and brother Rich. F. inaſmuch
as this default of the Clerk for want of form, that theſe breth-
ren are not named Confreres, as it ought to be by the for
of the Regiſter, the writ ſha!l abate againſt all, although the
guardian be well named. But in treſpaſs againſt two, miſno-
mer of one of the defendants ſhall not abate the whole writ,
but it ſhall ſtand againſt the other who is well named; for
there Herle took the difference, when the writ abates by the
plea of the one for want of form, although. the others have
pleaded to iſſue, the writ ſhall abate nar all ; but although
6 Co, 644b. one may abate the writ for matter in fact, as by reaſon of the

miſpriſion of his name, nevertheleſs the writ ſhall ſtand againſt
the others. Vide 2 H. 7. 16. 11 H. 7.5, 6. 21 H. 7.31. 7 E.
4. 10. 5 E. 4. 2. 11 Af. 15. 12 Aſſ. p. 14. 27 Aff p. 45.
9 H. 6. 36. 12 E. 3. Brief 670. 12 E. 3. Brief 481. 27 H.
8. 26. 5. Plow. Com. in Aſſiſe of Freſh Force.

But as to the ſecond manner of miſpriſion in negligent
writing of 2 word which is not a Latin word, that is amend-
) 2 Vent. 173+ able, as (g) imaginavit, for imaginatus eſt, it ſhall be amended,

No. l as it 18 oy in 11 H. 6. 3. 17. So was it adjudged in 3

ven 95" Wy E. 6. as Bendloes, Serjcant, reports, that where in a writ of


(>) 5 Co. 4g. b. Aiel the writ was az, (4) for avie, it was amended,
Moor 5. 1 And.


24. N. Benl. 33. ; ; As
pl. 33. 1 Ley, 2. ſceras contra per Twiſden and Windham ].


1 Lev. 2, &c.


Part VIII. Akrf. BLackamont's Caſe, 160


As to the third manner of miſpriſion in negligent omiſſion
or addition of a thing which it appears he himſelf ought to
have added, or omitted of courſe; as by the omiſſion of Dei
gratid in the King's ſtile, it ſhall be amended. 22 H.6.8.
So 3 E. 6. as Bendloes Serjeant reports, theſe words in a Par-
titione faciend (a) (aſlenſur quare non fecerit) were leſt out, (a) 5 Co. 45. b.
and it was amended. Vide 35 H. 6 6. 10. a. 2 H. 7. 11, b. g Meer s: x And.
H. 7. 19. for addition of that which is apparent ought to be N. rem. _ *
omitted. But the () omiſſion, or addition of any thing which pl. 53.
alters the form of the writ, is not amendable, as the addition, (5) Cr. El. 119.
or omiſſion of (c) Detinet, as appears in 11 H. 6. 14. a. b. or (c) 5 Co. 35. d.
the addition of Debet, as appears in 22 E. 4.21. b. 22. a.

As to the fourth manner of miſpriſion, c. of the record or
ſpecialty, &c. Vide 21 H. 6. 8. 22 H. 6. 43. 37 H. 6. 34.
19 H. 6. Amendment 47. 8 E. 4. 4. |

As to the fifth manner of miſpriſion, in negligence of a
clerk or officer, not in writing, &c. but in negligent keeping
of the records, or in voluntary defacing of them, whereby the
record becomes imperfect, or erroneous, in Trin. 24 Eliz.
the caſe was, that Henry Fitz- Allein late Earl of Cd) Arundel, (4) i And. 79,
in the reign of Queen Mary ſuffered a common recovery of 30.
divers manors, and of lands and tenements in the county of
Suſſex, and the original writ upon which the recovery was had,
being greater and broader than the other writs of the ſame
file, by the negligence of the officer by continual handling of
it, a great part of this writ, which was more ſpacious than
the reſt was obliterate, and worn out, ſo that but one letter
of many of the names of divers of the ſaid manors could be
perceived, but the names of the manors were truly recited as
well in the count (which always briefly recites the writ) as in
the Habere facias ſeiſinam: and whether this original was
amendable, or not, was a great queſtion between P. Howard
Earl of Arundel, couſin and heir of the ſaid Henry Earl of
Arundel, and the Lord Lumley, to whom the ſaid Henry
Earl of Arundel had conveyed divers of the ſaid manors, &c.
And to reſolve this queſtion, Sir Chriſtopher Wray Chief
Juſtice of England, Sir Ed. Anderſon, Ch. Juſt. of the Com-
mon Pleas, Sir Roger Manwood, Chiet Baron of the Exche-
quer, and all the Juſtices of England, aſſembled themſelves
together. And it was reſolved by them all and voce, that the 6 Mod. 133.
original writ ſhould be amended according to the other parts
of the record, ſcil. the count, and the Habere facias ſeiſinam;
and that this miſpriſion and negligence of the Clerk in
keeping of the original writ ſhould be amended by this
ſtatute of 8 H. 6. for here doth not appear any want of Cumberb. 34. &
knowledge in the Clerk, but miſpriſion and negligence in 6 Mod. Tut.
keeping of the writ, which is a miſpriſion within the letter in's case.

K k 3 and


2 r
—


£ ä ——ͤ — ͤ—— —
1 —


——_— G_ ___=c—__
—
— 2 —


——


”
OO GOOG CO — — — — — — — — . — -—ů— ci ae — — —
— amount: _ — — — N — — — — " — —


— — 7˙T— U — — — —
— _ — = —— — — —
_ —
_ .
— - - -
89% —ABᷣ„— —


— a — —ʒ
— — — ——ͤ —

S— —U—ä—

- —


—


.
— ——————ꝛ—.. n —— x ĩ —ñä—äöàwçi' — — ——
- — - — — - — — — — — - - — — _ —


—
. — — — — ͤ y— ——— m —³ꝓ³
— — — m'——— — e ꝛ ũũ ̃ - — ũ.—ä:̃ — —
— — —
— — — = - ” 7 - = py .
- = — —
— — — — — — - —
— eg 2
= — — 2 — * — — — *
— — — —


() Palm. 199.
11 Co. 34. b.
zInſt. 70, TI, 72,
94. Standf. Pl.
Cor. 36. b. Dalt.
uſt. 386.
Mod. 280.


Ak rTH. BiracxAMORrE's Caſe, Part VIII.


and meaning of the act; and es potius in this caſe, becauſe it
was in a common recovery ſuffered by aſſent of the parties for
aſſurance of lands. And although it is enacted, that if any
record, or parcel thereof, writ, return, pannel, proceſs, or
warrant of attorney in the King's courts, &c. are voluntarily
(a) ſtolen, carried away, withdrawn, or avoided by any
Clerk, that it ſhall be felony ; that doth not prove, that if the
original writ, or other part of the record be voluntarily ſtolen,
&c. that it cannot be ſupplied and amended by the other parts
of the record : for it was reſolved that in both caſes, as well
where the record becomes imperfect and erroneous by volun-
tary offence of the Clerk, as by his careleſs negligence that it
ſhould be amended, for all is within this general word, miſ-
prifion of the Clerk. But if ſuch part of the record which is
ſo ſtolen, &c. or which appears not, cannot be ſupplied by
the other parts of the record, nor by,any exemplification made
of the record, then it cannot be amended; and vide the
Grit clauſe of this act of 8 H. 6. gives remedy amongſt others,
where any ſubſtraction or diminution is of any record, pro-
ceſs, warrant of attorney, original writ, &c. And according
to this reſolution a fine was amended of Mich. 8 Jac. as ap-
pears by the order and rule of court following.


Crompton. Mich. 8 Jacobi Regis.


Lincoln ſſ. In fine levat in cur hit in Oat Sandti Hilarii,
anno regni dom' Eliz. nuper Reginæ Angliæ 16. inter Robertum
Tyrwhite Militem & al quer' et Edmund Dighton, Armiger et
al” deforc' de maneriis de Magnd Sturton, Parva Sturton, et al
in com” pred*; quia conſlat cur ſuper viſum pedis ejuſdem finis,
guod per humiditatem aeris, et pluviam ſuper illam deſcenden idem
pes ſinis adeo obliteratus efl, ut multæ lineæ ej uſdem totalit” delete
ita ut legi non poſſunt; tamen per breve de conventione, et dedimus
poteflatem de cognitione inde capiend ac per conc:rdiam & notam
ejuſdem finis ſatis liquet et apparet que fuerunt verba in eodem pede
prius ſcript'. Idao ordinat efl, quod pred” ef are cum proclam”
ſuperinde indorſat* per chirographar* de novo reſcribatur, ita quod
concord cum prad” brevi de conuent, dedimus poteſlatem, concor-
dia, et nota ejuſd* ſinis, et cum aliis proclam' indorſat” ſuper pedes
finium ejuſd term” et quod pred” pes fints fic obliterat' a fac inde
abſhrabatur, et pred” pes finis fic de novo reſcript' in loco ejuſdem


affuaur,


And this briefly ſhall ſuffice for amendment of the miſpriſion
of the Clerk in an original writ. And as to the caſe at bar, the


rule


Part VIII. ATR. BAcRAMokE's Caſe,


rule of the court was in theſe words: Crompton. Ordinatum eſt
per cur hic ſuper auditu concilii utriuſque partis et examination
Clerict Curſiſtar London et attornat quer* ſuper ſacramenta ſua in
cur” hic, quad hæc additio (generoſo) nomini defend” in priori parte
brevis original de debito 100 li. inde retorn et affilat' in Banco Hic
menſe Michaelis anno regni Regis nunc ſeptimo, et omnes miſpriſi-
ones in records et proceſ]” ejuſd placiti proinde ſubſeguen emenden-
tur, et fiat (Militt) ſecundum inſtructiones in ſcript prius deliberat”
pref” Curſiflar', viz. pred” breve originale per prefat' Cui ſiſlar
et recordum, et proceſſ* pred” per Philizar” hujus curiæ.

The next word in the act of (a) 8 H. 6. is (record) and the
firſt part of the record is the count; and briefly a count which
wants ſubſtance ſhall not be amended in another term, as
appears (b) 7 H. 6. 26. a. (c) 35 H. 6. 37. b. (4) 38 H. 6.
1 a. (e) 7 Ed. 4. 26. b. 9 Ed 4.5. ( 33 H. 6. 2. a. Vide

8 H. 6. 2. 33. and 30 fl. 8. Br. Amendment 80. for the
ing's caſe. |

But it is enaQted by the ſtatute of (g) 36 E. 3. cap. 15.
that by the ancient forms and terms of pleaders no man
prejudiced, ſo that the matter of the action be fully ſhewed in
the declaration and in the writ. Vide Eveleigh's caſe, 13 Eliz.
Dyer 299. by the ſtat. of 36 E. 3. c. 15. the declaration having
ſubſtance ſhall () not abate for form. Vide 28 H. 6.8. a.
In a writ brought by John Gargrave againſt Tho. Beamond
on a bond, and the bond was, Noverint, &c. me Tho. Beamond,
teneri, Cc. Jo. Gargrave (witnout addition) and the writ was,
Præcipe, Sc. quod reddat Foh. Gurgrave (i) Armig with ad-
dition; and it was moved, that it might be amended by the
ſtat. for it is the mĩſpriſion of the Clerk: but ic was adjudged,
that the writ ſhould abate for this variance and ſhould not be
amended, as it ſhould if it was on the detendant's part ;
for where the ſurpluſage is on the plaintiff's part, as well in
the writ as in the count, a man cannot mend his own count,
And this judgment was after the ſaid ſtat. of (4) 8 H. 6. which
proves that the ſaid firſt clauſe of this very act, which ſpeaks
of addition or diminution, &c. extends only to corruption,
and miſdemeanor in addition or diminution, and in vitiat-
ing of a record, and not where it is done in rc veritate, al-
tho' it be by miſpriſion Vide 4 E. 4. 14. b. („%) A ſpace
in the declaration for the place where the obligation was
made, was not amendable in another term. And this which
has been ſaid of the count ſhall ſuffice. Other parts of the
record are, piea in bar, replication, &c. and regularly
matter of ſubſtance in them, and eſpecially matters of fact
ſhall not be amended in another term, as omiſſion of aver-
ment, et hoc parat” eft verificare, Qc. * tor in ſome caſes, as
in avowry, &c. it is not of neceſſity, but colour which is of
courlc, and in which there is a miſpriſion oi the Clerk, ſhall

K K 4 be


.


161


(a) 8 H. 6. cap.
12.


(5) Fitz. Count
12.
Br. Amendment


O.
5 Br. Amend-
ment 15.
Br, Count 22.
Br. faits 5.
Fitz. Forger de
Faux, Faits 14.
(d) Br. Count


804.
(e) Br, Countgz.
(J) Br. Amend-
ment 8,

(e) 10 Co.132.b,
Cr. Eliz. $5.

2 Bulſtr. 214.
Dyer 299. pl. 32.
Co Lit. 304. b.
(b)Plowd. 83. b.


2 Bulſtr. 214.


Dyer 299. pl. 32.
(i) Fitz. Amend-
ment 37.

Br. Amendment
2 Nap

Fitz. Brie f 10g.
Br. Brief 28.

Br. Nugation,
&C. 23.

(4) 8 H. 6. cap.
12.


(Fitz. Amend-
meat 49.

Br. Amendment
68. Br. Brief
478. Br. Count
64. 1 Roll. 208.
20 H. 6. 18. a.
Br. Amend. To
Fitz Amend-
ment 28.

o Vide ſtat. 4

& 5 Anne, c.
16.


(a) Cr. Eliz.258.
Salk. 50, 51.


(Fitz. Amend-
ment 35·
Br. Amend. 6.
Br. Brief 519.
Antea 159. b.
(<) Br. Amend-
ent 112,
) Br. Amend-
ment 5.
Fitz. Amend. 28.
(e) Br. Amend. 1.
72 Or: Car. 38.
Cr. Jac. 64, 65.


(g) Cr. Jac. 587.
1 Roll. 200.
3 Salk. 31.


Skinner 191.


I) Fitz. A-
mendment 25
Br. Amend. 82.


AR ru. Bracktamons's Caſe. Part VIII.


be amended. And the record in another term may be amended
by the (a) paper book of the office, for it was the miſpriſion
of the Clerk in the entering of it, and no fault in the party or
his counſel, (5) 27 H. 6. 6. b. (c) 10 H. 7. 23. a. b. 25. a.
11 H. 7. 2. a b. (4) 20 H. 6. 18. a. (e) 27 H. 8. 1. b. the
miſpriſion of a certificate of a record on a writ of error ſhall
be amended according to the record, 22 E. 4. 46. and 21 H.
7. 41. but that is by the expreſs proviſion of the ſaid ſtatute
of 8 H. 6. for it was the act of the Judge, which was not
amendable by the faid branch of the act, as {hall be ſaid after.
A thing apparent to be a miſpriſion, which the %) Clerk of
courſe ought to have added, without any inſtruction of the
party, although it be in a material point, ſhall be amended in
another term. As if in debt brought, the defendant pleads
nil debet, et de hoc ponit ſe ſuper patriam, et pred” defendens ſimi-
liter; where it (g) ought to be, et præd' querens ſimiliter, it
ſhall be amended by this act of 8 H. 6. 11 H. 7. 2. acc. which
caſe was not amendable by the act of 14 E. 3 as appears by
the book in 46 E. 3. before; for the firſt act ſpeaks only
of proceſs, and this act ſpeaks of the record and plea. So in
an action brought againſt Sir Rog. Townſend, he pleaded in
bar, and concluded, which matter pred” Fohar' is ready to
aver, where it ſhould be Rygerus, and it was amended by the
advice of all the Juſtices; as it is reported in 11 H. 7. 25. a.
And as to the writ of Ni/i prius, it is to be known, that the
miſprifion of the Clerk of the treaſury, who writes it, is alſo
therein amendable by this ſtatute, and to be made according
to the record, but with this caution, ſcil. that the record of
Niſi prius have ſufficient matter in it either expreſſed or im-
plied, to give authority to the Juſtices of Niſi prius to try the
iſſue; for they cannot try any iſſue by force of the ſtatutes


made thereof, without authority given to them wm of


Niſi prius, and ſo it is adjudged in 11 H. 6. 11. a: b. in debt
againſt J. S. huſbandman ; iſſue was taken, if he was huſ-
bandman die impetrat!” brevis; and the writ of M prius was,
whether he was huſbandman (omitting theſe words, die (/)
impetrationis brevis) which was ihe material point of the iſſue :
but the roll was wel, and the jury paſſed ſor the plaintiff,
and found that the defendant was huſbandman die impe-
trationis brevis, and the writ of Niſi prius could not be
amended by the ſtat. of 8 H. 6. becauſe the Juſtices of Nif
war have no power to try the ifſue contained in the record,

ecaule die impetr* brevis was omitted in the Nui prius;
and if the Juſtices of Ni prius had taken the verdict ac-
cording to the iſſue in the writ of Ni prius that he was huſ-
bandman generally, without ſaying die impetrat' brevis, it


had been contrary to the roll; wherefore it was awarded,


(3) x Roll. 202.


Dyer 260, 261.
pl. 24, 25-


that the plaintift ſhould ſue a Venire facias de novo. But 9
Eliz. Dyer 260, 261. in partitione fac by Wotton againſt
(i) Anthony Cook and Temple, who appeared, and Temple

conſeſſed


Cr, Car. 54, 278. 2 Brownl. 47. 3 Pulſtr. 161. Velv. 109. Cr. Eliz. 776. Palm. 524. Moor 681.


Part VIII. AR TH. BLAeR AMOR E's Caſe; 162


confeſſed the partition, and judgment given accordingly, {ed -

ceſſet executio. Cook gens fem title' in ſeveralty, and traverſed

the ſuppoſal of the writ and count by ab/que hoc, the plaintiff

maintained the writ and count, et hoc petit quod inquiratur per

patriam, et pred? Anthonius ſimiliter, ideo 12, &c. And in the

record of Ni Prius the ifſue was well recited and no part of

it omitted; but where the plaintiff concluded, et hoc petit quod

inguiratur per patriam, by the negligence of the Clerk of the

Treaſury, the writ of I prius was, et pred” ſimiliter, omitting

this word Anthonius in the cloſe and joining of the iſſue. And

farther, the jury entered into the record of Niſi privs was,

inter Wotton plaintiff and Cook and Temple defendants,

where Temple had made a confeſhon of the partition before,

and fo a ſtranger to the iſſue : but the record which warranted

it was well enough; and notwithſtanding theſe faults and

miſpriſions, the ifſue was tried at Ni prius, and afterwards

by the rule of the court of Common Pleas, the verdict was

well taken, and the ſaid miſpriſions were amended ; for ſuffi-

cient authority was given by the writ of Ni prizs (which is

but the tranſcript of the record) to try the iſſue, and to take

the verdict, If a man declare of damages of 100li. and the

record of Niſi prius is 1008. and the jury give damages 20 li.

the (a) Niſi prius ſhall be amended and made 100li. according 82 *

to the roll: for it is the miſpriſion of the Clerk, which doth Der 261. pl.25.

not change the iſſue. Vide 11 H. 7. 1. b. 10 H. 7. 25. a. b. Br. Amendment

and fo was it adjudged in 2 H. 4. 6. a. Vide 39 E. 3. Br. Pl, Roll 202:

105. () 7 E. 4. 15. vide after, when miſpriſion of the Clerk Moor 68 1.

in the entry of the verdict or judgment, which are other parts (5) Antea 155. 8.

of the record, ſhall be amended. As to (word) that has been 2 5 |.

explained before. (c) Palm. 23 * T4
As to this word (plea) that has been explained before in the B. N. C. 43 i *

word (record) which includes it. 9 100

As to (c) (warrant of attorney) ſee“ 23 Hen. 8. Amend - in medio. 9 | Mi

ment 85. 24 Hen, 8. Amendment 47. 2 Ma. Dyer (d) 105. 24 H. 8. | 5

2 Eliz. Dyer (e) 180. 5 Eliz. Dyer (f) 225. 6 Eliz. Dyer (2) Vi amendment 1 il


*


— — — — — — —
— — — — 22 — —
— — — —
—


— — ũ —
— — ——
—


— — — —
— 2
— — — —


: g * 47. in fine.
231. But when no warrant of attorney is put in, it is not re- (4) Dyer ro.


medied by this act. As to panel and return, in what caſes pl. 16. 1 Roll, 4
miſpriſions of them ſhall be amended within this ſtat. vide (%) * - —
2 E. 4. 7. a. b. 9 E. 4. 14. a. 33 H. 6. 42. after the Sheriff (c) Dyer ke I
is removed or dead, &c. 37 H. 6. 12. 3 H. 7. 14. 12 Hf. 7. pl. 48. 1 Roll.
19. But no return is not helped by this ſtatute. 282 3 —
And it is to be obſerved, that (i) thoſe things which are gag
amendable before the writ of error brought, are amendable / Dyer 225.
after the writ brought: and if the (+) interior court doth not 1%, 7 Rell:
amend them, the ſuperior court may amend them. (2) Dyer 230,
It is neceſſary now to ſhew two things; 1. What things 237. pl. 58.
are not amendable by this act of H. 6. 2. How many of ee
them, not remedted by this act, are remedied by other ſtat. (5) Rar
As to the firſt, this act of 8 H. 6 c. 12. nor the act of 8 H. 6. mendm. 48.
c. 15. do not extend to 14 miſpriſions. 1. They do not extend G 1
to want of an original, but to miſpriſion of the Clerks, as 33.
is (0) 2 Roll. Rep.
253


: W


(a) 5 Co. 45. a.
16, 17 C. 2. c. 8.


5) Palm. 260.
AK. 53.


(e) 5 Co. 41. b. g
4.4


® palm. 151,1 62.
5 Geo. c. 13.


Au rn. Braetrawone's Caſe, Part VIIT,


is aforeſaid in an original. 2. They do not extend to miſ-
priſion of (a) form in the original, either falſe Latin, or va-
riance from the regiſter. 3. They do not extend to a mate-
rial variance betwixt the original and the count. 4. They do
not extend to inſufhcient trial, /ci/. when the venue is miſ-
taken: but miſpriſion of the Clerk in the entry of the (5) ver-
dict ſhall be amended in another term, according to the note
found by the jurors: ſo was it adjudged in Rawlin's caſe in the
Fourth Part of my Reports 29 & 3o Eliz. 52. b. 5. They do
not extend to a jury returned by the Coroners, where the
Sheriff ought to return it, or e contra. Vide Bainham's caſe,
in the Fifth Part of my Reports, fol. 36. b. Vide 21 & 22
Eliz. Dyer 367. 6. T hey do not extend to a trial where no
return is endorſed on the Venire facias, (c) Rowland's caſe,


in the Fiſth Part of my Reports, Mich. 35 & 36 El. fol. 41.


b. 7. They do not extend to a trial, where one appears who
was not returned on the Venire facias. The Countels of Rut-
land's caſe, in the Fifth Part of my Reports, fol. 42. 8.
They do not extend to a return of the Venire facias without
the“ name of the Sheriff. 9. They do not extend to a jeofail,
want of colour, inſufficient pleading, or to any other default
of the party, or of his counſel. 27 H. 6. 10. 18 E. 4. 3. 20
E. 4. 6. 11 H. 6. 28. For the ftatute extends only to miſ-


priſion of Clerks. 10. For the ſame reaſon they do not extend


(4) 2 Roll.Rep.
253» 254+


(e) 11 Co. 6. b.
5 Co. 36. b.

x Anderſ. 26.
27- pl. 60.

O. Benl. 12.
N. Beni. 37.
Beal, in Kelw.
207. b,

Beal. in Aſh.
pl. . Hob. 281.
2055 c. 13.

® Vide ſtat. 4 &
5 Annæ, c. 16.


to any error or miſpriſion of the Judges in any term paſt. 2
R. 3. 11. 9 E. 4. 3. Vide 30 H. 6. 1. But miſpriſion of the
Clerk in the entry of the judgment of a thing which is appa-
rent, (4) and not of neceflity, is amendable, as the miſpri-
ſion of the ſumming of the arrearages before and pending the
writ of annuity, ſhall be amended, 35 H. 8. Dyer 55. 11.
They do not extend to that, where the Juſtice of Ni prius
takes the Verdict p ipſum diem in Bank, 1 Ma. Dyer 97.
and 33 H. 6. 25. 12. They do not extend to want of war-
rant of attorney. 13. This ſtat. nor the ſtat. of 32 H. 8. c.
30. do not extend to help any of the imperfeQtions or miſpri-
ſions, where a verdict is given on an iſſue joined betwixt the
demandant and the (e) vouchee, or the tenant and the vouchee,
as it was reſolved Mich. 1 & 2 Phil. & Mar. Bendloe. But if
any error in law be in the judgment, as idee in miſericordia, for
pro capiatur, or e contra, or the like; * that is not amendable
in another term, as it has been oftentimes adjudged. 14.
Nor do they extend to an appeal, nor to pleas of the crown,
nor to any proceeding upon them, for they are excepted, nor
to the amendment of any exigent, to make any one to be out-
lawed, &c. 20 H. 6. 18. 7 E. 4. 16. 22 E. 4.7. 38 H. 6. 3.
21 H. 7. 34. Vide 7 H. 4. 27. Now as to miſpriſions not reme-
died, neither by the (tat. of 32 H. 8. c. 30. nor by the ſtat of 18
El. c. 14. 1. All the faid miſpriſions not remedied by the ſaid
ſtat. of 8 H. 6. remain yet not remedied by any law or ſtatute
where no verdict is given upon iſſue joined: as if be


Part VIII. Arn. BLacxamore's Caſe. 163


be given upon confeſhon, demurrer, nihil dicit, non ſum infore

matus, or otherwiſe than by verdict of twelve men upon iſſue

joined. 2. When a verdict upon iffue tried is given, ten

miſpriſions are not remedied by the ſtatutes of 32 H. 8. 18

Eliz. or any other ſtatute, but yet remain not amendable. 1.

Material variance betwixt the original and the count, as it is

reſolved in Biſhop's caſe, in the Fifth Part of my Reports 37.

2. When the original or count wants ſubſtance : Vid Free-

man's caſe, Paſch 41 Eliz. in the Fifth Part of my Reports,

fol. 45. 3. Inſufficient trial, /ci/. when the (a) venue is 6) 2x Inc. c. 73.

miſtaken, and verdict paſſes. 4. When the return of the Hob. 27.

jury is by the Coroner, (5) where it ought to be by the She- (5) 5 Co. 36. b.

riff, or e converſi. 5. When the Sheriff doth not put his“ *Palm.151,x52.

name ta the return of the jury, 6. Where on the Venire fa-

cias, &c. no return is endorſed, although verdict paſſes. 7.

When one appears, and is ſworn, and amongſt the others

gives verdict who is not (c) returned on the Venire facias, &c. (e) Cr. Car.278,

8. In an appeal, or plea of the crown, as indiftments, &c. 79. Jones goa.

or any proceeding upon them; for they are excepted in the

acts of 8 H. 6. and 18 Eliz, and the ſtatute of 32 H. 8. doth

not extend to them. 9g. Although verdict on iſſue tried be

given for the plaintiff, yet if on (4) the whole record it appears (4) Antear20,b,

to the court, that the plaintiff has no cauſe of action, he ſhall 133 b. 3 Co.

never have judgment, and that is not remedied by any ſtatute, 7 —

as it has been oftentimes adjudged. 10. An error in law by

miſpriſion of the judges in the gone entered in another

term is not amendable by any ſtatute. If the plaintiff in an

aſhſe recovers, and has not put in any warrant of attorney, [BIN

this error was not remedied by the ſtatute of 32 H. 8. as ap- | 0

pears 20 Eliz. Dyer (e) 363. for the words of that act are, („) Dyer 363. PIN

&« for lack of any warrant of attorney of the party againſt pl. 23. Bridg. 73. | 4l Wl!

« whom the ifſue ſhall be tried :” ſo that when the verdict 2 Bain, 7. . | "

* * Ae

paſſes for the plaintiff, the lack of warrant of attorney for the Uh;

r is not aided by that ſtatute, nor e contra, but it is 1
elped by the ſtatute of (f) 18 Eliz. for there the words are %) qe, c. 10. ö ind

Wo


general, for want of any warrant of attorney,” ſo that theſe |
words extend as well to lack of warrant of attorney of the "0 1b
party for whom as againſt whom the verdict paſſes,

[See now the ſtat. of 4 & 5 Anne, for the amendment of
the law, and Quære if that ſtatute makes the want of a war-
rant of attorney error. And note 4 Mod. 6. and 5 Mod. 258.
damages recovered, and 5 1. coſts per jur* hic de incremento ad-
Judicat” ; for per cur, &c. and held not amendable. Sce 2
Salk. 660, &c. ]


22. -


—
1 — k


Caſes


2 _— IJ 2
_— —
—
— 2. —


Godb. 293.

6 Co. 76. a.

Co. Lit. 78. a.
76. a, b.

2 Roll. Rep. 303.


Part VIII.


Caſes in the Court of Wards.


MY SG H T's Caſe.
Trin. 7 Fac. 1.


N Curia Wardorum hoc termino, It was reſolved by the
two Chief Juſtices, and the Chief Baron, and by the
Court of Wards, that where Jeffery Myght with his own pro-
r money purchaſed twelve acres of land, late Lumner's to
im and Simond Mond, an infant, to them and their heirs,
held of Queen Eliz. by knights ſervice; that this original
purchaſe could not be averred to be by colluſion, to take away
the wardſhip which might accrue after the death of Jeffery
Myght, becauſe the ſaid Jeffery was never ſole tenant to the
King, nor by the death of Jeffery in reſpect of the ſurvivor,


by force of jointenancy, any wardſhip or primer ſeiſin could


(a) 32 H. 8. c.1.
34 H. 8. c. 5.
(6) 3 Co. 31- a.
Cr. Car. 34.

(e) Cr. Car, 33»
34


accrue to the King. 2. It was reſolved, that no feoffment
which Jeffery could make of his moiety could be averred to
be by colluſion, to take away the wardſhip or primer ſeiſin
due = his death; for if no feoffment was made, no be-
nefit could accrue to the Queen by his death. Allo he is
out of the ſtatute of (a) 32 & 34 H. 8. for the ſtatute of 34
H. 8. which is a ſtatute of (5) explanation, ſpeaks only of
a (c) ſole ſeiſin in fee; for the words are, „having a ſole
« eſtate or intereſt in fee- ſimple, &c.“ 3. It was reſolved,
that when the father makes a feoffment for the advance-
ment of his wife, preferment of his children, or N

18


Part VIII. Mronr's Caſe. 164


his debts, that that cannot be averred to be upon covin or
colluſion, to give cauſe to the Queen to ſeiſe all the land; for
the ſtatute of 32 H. 8. gives power to the tenant to diſpoſe two Co. Lit. 78. a.
arts to ſuch uſes; and the ſtatute of 34 H. 8. explains, that if all 2 « Fo f

be diſpoſed, it ſhall be good for two parts; and ſo upon the e
conſideration of both the ſtatutes, no averment can be of any
covin in ſuch cafes, for the clauſe of 34 H. 8. concerning
covin is: If any perſon, &c. having eſtate of inheritance,
„ of or in any lands, &c. holden of the King by knights-ſer-
vice in chief, or otherwiſe of the King by knights-ſervice,
„ hereafter ſhall give, will, deviſe, or aſſign, by will, or
e other act executed in his life, his manors, &c. by fraud or
© covin to any perſon for years, life or lives, with one re-
ce mainder over in fee, or with divers remainders over for
© term of years, life, or in tail, with a remainder over in
te fee-fimple, &c. or ſhall convey or make by fraud or covin,
*« contrary to the true meaning of this act, any eſtates, con-
« ditions, meſnalties, tenures or conveyances, to the intent
& to defraud or deceive the King of his prerogative, primer
“ ſeifin, &c. which ſhould, or ought to accrue or grow, &c.
«© by or after the deceaſe of his or their tenant by force, and
« according to the former ſtatute, and of this preſent act and
* declaration, and the ſame eſtates, and other conveyances,
© being found by office to be ſo made and contrived by covin,
© fraud, and deceit, as is aboveſaid, contrary to the true
„meaning of the ſaid former act, and of this act, that then
„ the King ſhall have as well the wardſhip of the body, and
« cuſtody of the lands, &c. as livery, primer ſeiſin, &c. which
* ſhould or ought to appertain to the King, according to the
« true intent and meaning of the ſaid former act, and of this
« preſent act, as though no ſuch eſtates or conveyances by
% covin had never been had or made.” So that this branch
oftentimes refers this clauſe of covin to be contrary to the true
intent and meaning of the former act, and of this act: and
therefore it is firſt to be known, what is the true intent and
meaning of the act of 32 H. 8. And that appears by the
words thereof, /c:/. © That all and ſingular perſon and perſons
& having, &c. ſhall have full power and authority to give, dit-
&« poſe, will, or aſſign, by his laſt will in writing, or otherwilc,
„ by any act or acts lawfully executed, two parts, &c. to or for
* the advancement of his wife, preferment of his children,
and payment of his debts, or otherwiſe, at his will and plea-
© ſure.” And the words of the ſtatute of 34 Hen. 8. ſhall
© have full and free liberty, power, and authority to give,
“ difpoſe, will, or aſſign to any perſon or perſons, &c. two
parts, &c.” Upon which acts being conſidered together
in all their parts, it was reſolved by the two Chief Juſtices,
and the Chief Baron, and the court of Wards, that in
all caſes when the King's tenant conveys his land by
| ile,


6 Co. 76. a.
Co. Lit. 78. a.


Co, Lit. 78. a,


2 Co. 94. 2.
2 Inſt. 109,110,


MycnrT's Caſe: Patt VIII.


life, years, or in tail to his children, or when a ſtranger was
Joined with the heir in eſtate, or when a remainder was
limited in fee, or when an eſtate was declared by will (all
which caſes were out of the ſtatute of Marlbridge, and in which
caſes no colluſion could have been averred, as appears by Sir
George Curſon's caſe, in the Sixth Part of my Reports, and
by our books there cited) that in all ſuch caſes, now by the
expreſs letter of the clauſe of 34 H. 8: concerning covin and
colluſion, covin may be averred for the King but only for a
third part, and not for the two parts, for both the acts have
enabled the King's tenants to diſpoſe of two parts at their
wills and pleaſures, as appears by the expreſs letter of both
the acts; and therefore where no covin could have been
alledged for the King in the caſes aforeſaid, before this act,
now covin may be alledged for the third part only, and there-
of the act of 32 H. 8. puts example, cl. that he may convey
two parts for the advancement of his wife, preferment of bis
children, and payment of his debts (againſt which no collu-
fion could be averred at the common law) and concludes with
general words, “or otherwiſe at his will and pleaſure :” and
it was objected, that in caſe where the King may take advan-
tage of colluſion apparent, or averrable within the ſtatute ;of

arlbridge, c. 6. de his qui primageniios et heredes infra atatem
exiſlentes feoffare ſolent, &c. ſcil. to advance only his ſon and
heir of an eſtate in fee-ſimple, if ſuch covin be found by
office, the King ſhall take benefit thereof. To which it was
anſwered and reſolved, that by the expreſs letter of 32 H. 8.
which enables the tenant to convey two parts for the prefer-
ment of his children, the Queen ſhall have but the third part
in ſuch caſey for the ſaid branch of 32 H. 8. concludes, © any
« Jaw, ſtatute, cuſtom, or other thing to the contrary not-
„ withſtanding.” And ſo the ſtatute gives in many caſes
remedy to the King, where he had not any before; and in
ſome caſe more benefit to the ſubject than he had before. And
the caſe of Myght as to this point was ſuch, that Jeffery
Myght being ſeiſed of divers lands and tenements in the
county of Norfolk, in fee, ſome of them held of Queen
Elizabeth in capite, made feoffments of divers parts of them to
divers particular uſes, to his brother and others of his
blood, to ſome of them for life, and to ſome for years,
the remainder to Tho. Myyht his ſon and heir apparent
in tail, the remainder to Jeffery bis younger ſon in tail,
the remainder to Anne his daughter in tail, the remainder
to Edward Money in tail, the remainder to Jeffery bis
ſon in tail, with ſeveral remainders over in tail, the
remainder to Thomas Myght in fee. And it was found by
office after the death of Jeffery, that all the ſaid eſtates


and feoffments were made by fraud and covin, to ow”
an


Part VIII. MronrT's Caſe, 165


and defraud the late Queen of her prerogative, ward, and

marriage, and that Thomas was within the age of twenty

one years, and afterwards accompliſhed mig age of twenty-

one years, and before livery Thomas the ſon died without

iffue ; after whole death another office was found, anno tertio

Jacobi, with all the ſpecial matter, and Queen Elizabeth

granted the ward and marriage of Thomas the ſon, to R.
Chamberlain, &c. and that Thomas the ſon, after his full

age, died without iſſue of his body, before any livery pro-

ſecuted, and that Jeffery the ſon is his brother and heir, and

within age, and alſo next heir to the ſaid Jeffery the father.

And it was reſolved by the Court of Wards, in the time of

Queen Elizabeth, that although the covin was found by office,

that yet the Queen ſhould have but a third part of the profits,

and not the whole, for the cauſes and reaſons aforeſaid, and
accordingly the Queen had but the third part of the profits,

which concurs with the reſolution before. It was alſo re-

ſolved by the Juſtices, that after the death of Thomas with-

out iſſue, Jeffery ſhould not be in ward, for the covin could

not extend to Jeffery as heir to Jeffery the father, for at the Co. Lit. 78. «,
time of the feoffment he was the youngeſt ſon, and the re- 2 Co. 93. b.
mainder was limited to him to take effect aſter the death of — 2 4
Thomas the eldeſt ſon without iſſue, and the * had once 55
taken advantage of the ſtatute after the death of Jeffery. and

after the death of Thomas the ſon, he could not be in ward;

for Jeffery the ſon claimed by force of a remainder, and Tho-

mas had nothing but in tail, and he is dead without jiſſue. :
And it was alſo reſolved by the ſaid Juſtices, that if the King's

tenant leave a third part to the King, that no covin or collu-

ſion can be averred for the two parts, for the letter and intent

of both the acts was, that the King ſhould be fatisfied with

the third part; and therewith agrees Dyer, 10 Eliz, in the Dyer 276. pl. 50.
Lord Dacre's caſe, where it is faid, that this is the very

meaning of both ſtatutes joined together,


DIGBY'


DI G B Y/?s Caſe.


Mich. 8 Jac. 1.


IR Everard Digby ſeiſed in fee of the manor of Stoke in
the county of Rutland, and of the manor of "Tilton in
the county of Leiceſter, held (by way of admittance) of
the King by knights ſervice in capite, by act executed in his
lifetme, and before any treaſon by him committed, conveyed


the ſaid manors to the uſe of himſelf for life, and afterwards


to the uſe of his eldeſt ſon and heir apparent in tail, with

divers remainders over to his other iſſues ; and afterwards the

ſaid Sir Ev. Digby was attainted and executed for the heinous

— — and * (a 8 aye: committed after the ſaid con-
gen. 433, Veyance, his eldeſt ſon being then within age. The queſ-
— — 8 whether the vardchip of the body or of the third
part of the ſaid manors ſhould be to the King, by force of the

ſtatutes of 32 & 34 H. 8. And it was reſolved by the two

Chief Juſtices, the Chief Baron, and the whole Court of

Wards, that the King ſhall never have (5) wardſhip or primer

ſeiſin, but where there is an heir general or ſpecial. F or the

(b) 10 Co, 84, ſaid ſtatutes of (c) 32 & 34 H. 8. give wardſhip or primer ſeiſin
$5. a, tothe King in divers caſes where there is no deſcent; as if the
(e) 3 "7 . King's tenant conveys his land for the advancement of his
Cs. Lit. 58.4. Wife, preferment of his children, or payment of his debts ;
but doth not give wardſhip or primer ſeiſin in any caſe where

there 18 not any heir general or ſpecial ; becauſe wardſhip or

Co. Lit. fol. 78. a. primer ſeiſin ought to be of the land of ſome anceſtor who has
an heir. And the words of the writ of Diem clauſit extremum,

10 Co. 8 f. a Or Mandamus, as well after as before the ſaid ſtatutes are,
F. N. B. 251» Et quis propinquior heres ejus fit, Alſo livery ought to be
28 1 +> ſued in the name of the heir: but it was agreed, that
155 Fes in ſome caſe the King ſhall have wardſhip, or primer


ſeifin


Part VIII.


„ ²˙ ad. w ¼ -w. y—é% ee


Dicsy's Caſe.


Part VIII.


ſeifin of the ſon, although the father be attainted of treaſon;
and thereby the blood corrupt. And therefore, if (a) tenant
in tail of the King's gift, to hold by knights ſervice in capite,
had been attainted of treaſon before the ſtat. of 0) 26 H. 8.


and died, his ſon within age, in that caſe, although the blood
is corrupt, yet, becauſe by force oſ the ſtatute De donis condi-
tionalibus, the land notwithſtanding ſuch attainder deſcends to
the ſon, he ſhall be in ward to the King, becauſe he is a ſpe-
cial heir in ſuch caſe, and that is proved by the book of 7 H.
4. 32, a. b. where the caſe was, King R. 2. by his letters pa-
tent granted divers manors, &c. to Thomas Holland Earl of
Kent, to have and to hold to him and the heirs of his body;
and afterwards the Earl, 1 H. 4. made an inſurrectiou, and
levied war againſt the King, and, committing the ſaid trea-
ſon, was killed without judgment, his ſon Edw. within age;
after whoſe death the faid Thomas Earl of Kent was attainted
by Parliament of high treaſon : and farther it was ordained,
that all his lands in fee-ſimple, and no other ſhould be ſorfeit-
ed; by reaſon of which act of Parliament the King ſeiſed the
ſaid manors, and they were in the King's hands during the
nonage of Edw. the ſon, and afterwards the ſaid Edw. at his
full age, ſued out of the Chancery a writ of Handamus, by
which the ſaid gift and tenure, and that the faid Edward was
heir per formam doni was found ; and thereupon the faid
Edward came into the Chancery, and prayed to have livery :
and there it was reſolved by Norton, Tremain, Hulls, Hank-
ford, and Thirning, that in ſuch caſe the ſon ſhall be in
ward, and although the King ſeiſed as for forfeiture of trea-
ſon, yet when the King is in poſſeſſion, the law will adjudge
him in by reaſon of wardſhip, becauſe this is his beſt right;
for the law more reſpects a ſmall eſtate during the minority of
the iſſue by right, than a great eſtate in fee-ſimple by wrong.
But there Markham held, that when the King ſeiſes any land
by forfeiture of treaſon, or other cauſe claiming fee, although
one who claims a right in the land comes into the Chancery,
and prays a Mandamus, thoſe of the Chancery ſhall not grant
it: and Gaſcoign ſaid, that all the matter in this caſe is, if
the writ of Mandamus iſſued well out of the Chancery or not:
and all this appears by the faid book. And it was agreed,
that if there be (c) grandfather, father, and fon, and the grand-
father is tenant in tail, and the father is attainted of high trea-
ſon, and dies, and afterwards the grandfather dies ſeiſed, al-
though the blood be corrupt, yet the land ſhall deſcend to the
fon per formam don, and this deſcent ſhall toll an entry, for
the ſon is in by deſcent, |


Vor IV. L i The


166


(a) 2 Roll. 48.


(5) Co. Lit. 392.
b. 3 Inſt. 19,

4 Inſt. 42.

1 Co. 22. a.

7 Oo. 33. 2 34. by
9 Co. 140. a.

12 Co. 6.

3 Co, 10. b.
26H. 8. e. 13.
1 Leon. 21.

1 Roll. Rep. 162.
2 Roll. Rep. z 143
315, 318, 319.
320, 321, 3233
324, 325, 340,
374» 416, 418,
420, 501, 5033
507, 508.

1 Jones 70, 7.
75, 7 77> 8o.
Oro. Car. 428.
2 And. 34.
Palm. 439.
Hetl. 151, 157,
Godb. 300, 303s
307, 308, zog.
311, 313, 315,
3213 322, 3233
324.

Co. Lit. 372. b.
Plowd. 552. b.
Hob 334, 339,
340, 341, 343.
344, 340, 347,
348.

Dyer 332. pl. 25.
343. pl. 46.

Co. Ent. 4221 a,


(c) 4 Co. 10. b.
Godb. 315, 316.
2 Roll. Rep. 32 1,
325, 418, 428,
496, 504, 508.
2 And. 34.
Hob. 43

Cro. El. 28.

2 Jones 82.

1 Sid, 199.


* 2
*
— —
— ͤ — OI — —ů —— —
— % - - —


=
— — ä 4—ͤ—ñ— —äw——


—


— * y———ñ—


— _—_- DJ 4
- - — <4. 2 — —


— —


reren
— — —
_— - — — —
2 —
— - — -
= * ” - «A a« =
— —
.


See Sk innerß 3 5.
Lane 39, 40, 41.


Lane 39, 49s


part VIII.


The Earl of CuuBERLANP's
| Cale.


Mich. 7 Jac. 1.


N the great caſe of the Earl of Cumberland, heard in the
Court of Wards this term, before the Earl of Saliſbury,
Maſter of the Wards and Liveries, with the aſſiſtance of
the two Chief Juſtices and Chief Baron, for the caſtle and
manor of Skipton in Craven, &c. in the county of York: it
was held by the two Chief Juſtices and Chief Baron, that
where King E. 2. by his letters patent had granted the ſaid
caſtle and manor of Skipton in Craven, &c. to Robert de
Clifford in tail, King H. 6. conceſſit (as it was found by
office) Tho, Domino Clifford (couſin and heir of the body
of the ſaid Robert de Clifford) reverſion” pred” caſtri et mane-
711 de Skipton in Craven, &c. cum ſuis pertinen” necnon caſtrum
& manerium præd , that admitting that the ſaid grant in
tail to the ſaid Robert de Clifford was void (which was only
put by way of admittance, without prejudice to any of the
parties) that yet the faid caſtle and manor did paſs by the
later grant to Thomas Lord Clifford in fee-ſimple in poſſeſ-
fion. For the intent of King H. 6. was, that be it in poſ-
ſeſſion or reverſion, it ſhould paſs, and his words agree
with his intent; for firſt, he grants the reverſion, if the firſt
eſtate-tail was good; and if the eſtate-tail was not good,
then he farther grants the ſaid manor in poſſeſſion, and fo
his words in his letters patent agree with his intention,
and both agree with the law. As many leaſes made
by. the King and other his progenitors before him, to
one to begin after the determination of ſuch a leaſe, if
the leaſe be good, and if the leaſe be not good, from ſuch
a feaſt, and ſuch leaſes are good. Note reader, as 2
‚ e


Part VIII. The Earl of CumpEktand's Caſe;


167


the recital of an eſtate tail, or leaſe for life or years, by theſe


words, mentionatur fore concedi, or dimitti, &c. it was but of


late, (and yet of good) invention, but the ancient form was to
recite the firſt grant, and to grant the reverſion, and farther
to grant the lands in poſſeſſion, and theſe ſeveral] grants in
(a) a patent are as good and ſtrong in law as if the King by
a patent had recited the eſtate-tail, and granted the reverſion,
and by another patent had granted the land in poſſeſſion;
without queſtion the one or the other will be good; ſo is it
when the ſeveral grants are contained in one and the ſame
patent; for (b) fruftra fit per plura, guod ſieri poteſt per pauci-
ora. And the opinion of (c) Huſly, C. J. in 9 H. 7. 2. a. b.
is good law, if it be well underſtood, for non in legendo, ſed in
intelligendo leges conſiſtunt. For where he faith, it is clear, if
the King intending to ratify and confirm a grant made by his
predeceſſor of a frauchiſe by his letters patent, and he ratifies
arid confirms the eſtate, and further adds this clauſe, damus


et concedimus ; this is but a void grant, which ought to be thus


intended, that for fear of a forfeiture of the franchiſe, the pa-
tentee took a confirmation of the ſucceſſor King, which is
ſufficient (before office found of the forfeiture) to diſcharge the
patentee of any forfeiture ; and therefore he well ſaid, that
the ſubſequent words, damus et concedimus, are but void, for
the King in ſuch caſe has not any eſtate grantable in law be-
fore office found, and therefore of neceſſity it ought to
take effect by way of confirmation, and cannot enure by way
of grant, and all this appears by Huſſey's reaſon expreſſed in
the ſaid book, why damus et concedimus in ſuch caſe are void:
for (as he ſaith) (if) it ſhall not paſs by this confirmation and
by grant, then it ſhall enure by wy of confirmation, and not
by way of grant. Vide 11 E. 4. 1. b. 7 H. 7. 14. a. b. Plow.
Com. 297. But in the caſe at bar, there is not any conflirma-
tion which preſuppoſes that the King has but a title or right
not grantable, but both eſtates as well of the reverſion as of
the poſſeſſion are grantable eftates, and ſo not like the faid
caſe put by Huſſey. And when the King's charter may be
taken to (4) two intents, and both intents are of effect and
good, in many caſes it ſhall be taken to fuch intent which is
molt beneficial tor the King ; but if it may be taken to one
(e) intent of effect and good, and to another intent void and
of none effect, it ſhall be taken and conſtrued according to
ſuch intent, that the King's grant ſhall take effect, and
which in judgment of law ſtands with the King's intent,
for it was not the King's intent to make a void grant; and
therewith agrees the book in (/) 21 E. 4. 44. in the
Abbot of Waltham's caſe: the reaſon and rule of which


(a) Cart, 149,


() 9 Co. 94. b.
Co, Lit. 362. b,
3 Bulſtr. 170.
Noy 164.

1 Roll. Rep. 85.
Hard. 113.


(e) Plov d. 397. b.


(d) 1 Co. 48. 2
8 Co. 56. hy


10 Co. 67. b.
11 Co. 11. a b.
Bulſtr. 6. Kew.
175. a. 198. a.
2 Sid. 141.

3 Leon. 243.

2 Roll. 200.

2 R. 3. 4+ 2. b,
) Antea 56. a,
6 Co. 56. a,

11 Co. 11, a. b.
(f) 1 Co. 45. as
2 R. 3. 4.


11 Co. 11, b,
3 Keb. 234.


Dyer 269. pl. 19. Br. Patent 71, 90. Br. Exemption 9. Br. Expoſition 28. Plowd. 324 a. 126, 4.
143+ b. 331. b. Fitz. Grant 29. Moor 165. Hard. 500. 2 Roll. Rep. 275, 2 Sid. 82.


1 FS book


The Earl of CumszxLanD's Caſe, Part VIII
book over-rule the caſe now in queſtion : ſcil. either to make
the grant good, either of the reverſion, if the former grant in
tail was good, or of the poſſeſſion, if the former grant was
void, or if no grant was made omnins; but not to make the
King's grantutterly void, as well of the reverſion as of the poſſeſ-
ſion, when the — has either the reverſion or the poſſeſſion
in him. 80 it was held, if the King grants totum illud man-
rium ſtue firmam de D. or totam illam rectoriam ſive advocatio-
nem de D. that if the King has a manor, or a farm and no ma-
nor, or a reCtory impropriate, or an advowſon and no rectory,
that which the King has ſhall paſs; for the effect of the grant

is, be it a manor or farm, impropriate or ad vowſon,
that which the King in truth has, ſhall


4 PARIS


Part VIII.


Paris SToUGHTER's Caſe.


Hil. 7 Tac. 1.
Which began Mich. 7. of the ſame King.


ARIS STOUGHTER was ſeiſed of the manor of Over-
Stoughter in the county of Glouceſter, to him and the
heirs males of his body, and had iſſue Chambers Stoughter,
and died: by writ of Mandamus, anno 2 Fac. it was found,
that the ſaid Paris was ſeiſed of the ſaid manor, as is aforeſaid,
and died ſeiſed the 22d of Feb. anno 40 Eliz. and that Cham-
bers was his ſon and heir ; and that the ſaid manor was held
at the time of the death of the ſaid Paris of Queen Eliz. as
of her manor of Nether-hall in the ſaid county, by fealty
and rent, in free and common ſocage, &c. Trin. 7 Jacobi
a Melius inquirendum was awarded, reciting the former office
to enquire only of this point, whether the ſaid manor of
Over-Stoughter at the time of the death of the faid Paris was
held of our ſovereign lord the King in capite by knights
ſervice, or otherwiſe by knights ſervice. By virtue of which
writ it was found, that the ſaid manor was held, at the
time of the death of the ſaid Paris, of the late Queen Eli-
zabeth by knights ſervice, as of her manor of Nether-Stough-
ter, and that at the time of the taking of the ſame inqui-
ſition, the ſaid manor of Over-Stoughter was held of the K.
which now is, by knights ſervice, as of his ſaid manor of


Nether-hall, And it was clearly reſolved by the two Chief


Juſtices and the Chief Baron, that the ſaid writ of Mehus
inguirendum was PRI. 19 itſelf, and gave not autho-


13 rity


Ley 34.


(a) Dyer 155.
IS
F. N. B. 25 ö. b. d.
13 Co. 92.


. 6 Co. 45. a,
7 Co. 44. b.
12 Co. 24.

2 Inſt, 340.

2 Bulſt. 99.
Hob. 159.


(5) Co. Lit 77. b.
Dy. 292. pl. 71.


(c) Ley. 28.

2 Inſt, 206,689.
28 H. 6. 9. b.
Standf, Pra. 8 I,
d2,


Paris SToucuTER's Cale. Part VIII,


rity to find ſuch office as was found. For the ſaid Paris died
40 Eliz. and the writ of /Melrus inguirendum was to enquire
whether at the time of the death of the ſaid Paris the ſaid ma-
nor of O. was held of our lord the King which now is, which
was impoſſible and repugnant, that in anne 40 El. the ſaid
manor of O. ſhould be held of our lord the King, who then
was King only of Scotland, and not of England. And al-
though the finding was well, yet foraſmuch as it was without
the warrant of the writ, all was infuſficient and void, and a
new writ of Melius inguirendum ought to be awarded. VideF.
N. B. 255. D. that a Mielius inguirendum ſhall be awarded on
a ſurmiſe in Court that the lands are of greater (a) yearly va-
lue than is declared in the office, and by the like reaſon on a
ſurmiſe that they are held by other ſervices ; or that he is ſeiſed
of another eſtate than is recited in the office. But it was re-


Tolved, that if on the writ of Moelius inguirendum in theſe caſes


it be again found againſt the King, the Ang ſhall not have a
new writ of Mielius inguirendum, and that for three reaſons :
1. Becauſe then there would be no end thereof; but ſuch
writs would iffue infinitely, & “ infinitum in jure reprobatur.
2. As if a writ of Diem clauſit extremum, or Mandamus, &c.
is found againſt the King, there ſhall not be a new writ of
Diem clauſit extremum, or Mandamus awarded; ſo if upon the
MAHielius it be found againſt the King, no Melius ſhall be farther
awarded, Vide 12 Eliz. Dyer (6) 292. the Melius is in the
nature of the firſt writ of Diem clauſit extremum. 3. If office
be found forthe King, the party grieved may traverſe it, and
it the traverſe be found againſt him, it makes an end of the
buſineſs. So if it be found for him who tenders the traverſe,
it ſhall bind the K. as to this matter. And ſo when the firſt of-
tice is found againſt the King, and the Melins inguirendum al-
ſo, the King thereby is bound from having another Melius in-

quirendum for the ſame matter, for the comparative degree is
above the poſitive, and the ſuperlative above the comparative,
and not comparative upon comparative, no more than ſuper-
Jative upon ſuperlative. But if upon the Malius inguireudum
it be found for the King, yet the party grieved may traverſe
it: and it ſtands with reaſon, F when. office is found
for the King, that foraſmuch as the party grieved is not con-
cluded by it, but may traverſe it; ſo when it is found againit
the King, foraſmuch as the King cannot traverſe it, that he
ſhould have a wiit of Melius ing uirendum, and yet the
Regiſter has not any writ in ſuch caſe. Note, reader,
it appears by the ſtatute of (c) Lincoln, made 29 E. 1.
that at the common law, the elcheztors uſed to ſeiſe the
lands of the King's tenants before ollice; and therefore it is


| enacted


Part VIII, Paris Srovegrrz's Caſe, 169


enacted by the ſtatute, that when inquiſitions are found by

writ before eſcheators, quod nihil tenetur de ipſo dom Rege, etc.

quod flatim abſque dilatione mandetur per breve dom" Reg de

CancelP præcipiend' quod Eſcheatores de terris & tenementis fic in

manus dom Regis per 255 capt! manus ſuas amoveant omnino,

c. ſalvo ſemper domino Regi quod ſi poſtea Eſcheatores ſuas manus

amoverint per breve ipſius domini Regis, ut pred eft, aliquid con-

tigerit inveniri in Cancellarid vel ad Scaccarium, vel alibi in cur?

ipſius dom? Regis per quod cuſtædia terrarum aut tenementorum es-

rundem, de quibus Eſcheatores manus ſuas amoverint in forma præu

dom Regi pertineat, quod flatim premuniatur ille per breve de

Cancellarid, &c. And this act doth not make againſt the ſaid

reſolutions, for two reaſons. I. It is a rule in law, and af-

firmed by this act, that where the King's hands are once re-

moved by matter of record, there for any title ancienter than

the amover, the King ſhall not reſeiſe upon any new office

found without a#Scire facias; and that appears in (a) 28 H. (a) Br, Scire fa
6. 9. b. (5) g Ed. 4. 51. b. Vide 5 H 5. 2. a. But in the cia, 9.

caſe at bar there was never any ſeiſure into the King's hands, Br. Reſeiſer 1.
and by conſequence there could be no Amoveas manus, and Ae. n
A this caſe is clearly out of that ſtatute. At this day — pre $2.b,
the Eſcheator (c) before office found, cannot ſeiſe any lands (c) 2 Init. 206,
into the King's hands; but the ſeiſure ought to be after office 573: , .
found; and that appears by the ſtatute of W. 1. cap. 24. ide Br. Office, &c.
5 Ed. 6. Br. Office 55. and many other books, and ſo is the 38.
common experience at this day; and therefore the caſe at

bar is out of the ſaid ſtature. And true it is, that after a

Diem clauſit extremum, or Mandamus, &c. awarded and found

againſt the King, no new writ of Diem clauſit extremnm, or

Mandamus, ſhall iſſue, as it is held in (4) 4 Hen. 7. 15. b. (4) Br. Office,
& 16. a. 14 Ed. 4. 5.a. 15 Ed. 4. 11, 8 Eliz. Dyer (e) 248, Ke. 33. |
& 249. But in ſuch caſe a writ of elius inguirendum thall * ary 572.
iſſue, as is aforeſaid, and as the common courſe in the Court « 4 3
of Wards is, and always has been: and with this difference all

the books are well reconciled, and agreed; & fic interpretare

& concordare leges legibus eft optimus interpretandi modus But

in good diſcretion no Mielius inguirendum ſhall be awarded at-

ter office found againſt the King, without fight of ſome re-

cord, or other pregnant matter for the King, tor avoiding of

vexation of the ſubject. Vide 12 Eliz. Dyer (/) 292, ,, 50

It is found by office, on a Diem clauſit extremum, that the Byer 292 i"
land was held de domind Regina ſed per que ſervitid jura- Co. Lit. 77. b.
tores ignorant. whereupon a Melius inquirendum was a=

warded, by which the tenure was found of a ſubject, and all

other points certainly found, by that the firſt oſſice is void

in all per ſenſum flatuti de 2 Edw. 6. (g) cap. 8. And all (11.0 (28.
theſe reſolutlons were affirmed ſor good law. Mich. 8 Jac. 689.


„ by


Parts STOUGHTER'S Caſe. Part VIII,


60 Ley-27,28 by the ſaid Chief Juſtices and Chief Baron in Stephen (a)


Garner's caſe in Curia M ardorum, for lands in Furſeby and
Steeping in the county of Lincoln, as to the ſaid writs of
Melms inquirendum, 4 fn it was found by the firſt office,

that the lands were held of Euſtace Hart, Eſq. and his wife,
as in the right of his wife of their manor of Steeping : and
upon the Metius it was found that the ſaid lands were held of
Sir Edw. Carre, Knight, as of bis manor of Monkthorp ; and
notwithſtanding this variance of the offices, yet it was reſolved
ut ſupra, that no new writ of Melius ſhould iflue, for the rea»
ſons and cauſes before alledged. ff


TOUR»


„ .


TOVURSON“ês Caſe.


Paſch. 8 Jacobi 1.


ILLIAM TOURSON, an ideot, @ nativitate, by
force of a remainder after the death of his father, was
Jointly ſeiſed with his elder brother for term of their lives ; the
lefſor purchaſed the eſtate of the elder brother, and took the
body of the ideot, and all the profits of the land, and after-
wards William Tourſon was found an ideot @ natiuitate by in-
quiſition: the queſtion was, whether the King ſhould have the
meſne profits of the moiety-from the time of the firſt ſeiſin of
the ideot, or from the time of the office; and it was reſolved,
that the King ſhould not have the profits, but after the office ; .
and yet to ſome intent the office ſhall have relation from the
time of the birth, ſcil. to avoid all meſne acts done by the |
ideot ; and therewith agree F. N. B. 202. e. and (a) 18 E. 3. () 4 co. 126. b.
Secire facias 10. 32 E. 3. Scire facias 106. 50 Aſſ. pl. 2, &c. Co. Lit. 247. a,
Vide Beverley's caſe, in the Fourth Part of my Reports 124, Sunf. Præ. 33. b.
125, But for the meſne profits, it ſhall not have relation but 4 © FN
from the time of the office found ; for thereby it appears of re-
cord, that the King has right to ſeiſe the lands; as if the
King's tenant commits felony, anne 1 Fac. and afterwards an.
3. he is attainted for the ſame felony, and afterwards anno 4. Co. Lit. 390. b.
all is found by office: now this office ſhall have relation to the 391.
time of the felony, to avoid all meſne alienations and incum- Poſtea 272. b.
brances; but for the meſne profits, it ſhall have relation to the
time of the attainder, for then the King's title appeared of re-
cord; and therewith agree Plow. Com. 488. & 38 Ed. 3. 31, 32.
by Kirton. Vide 29 H. 8. Br. Chart'dePardon 52. and there is a
difference when the King ſhall have the cuſtody, by reaſon of
a ſeigniory, as in caſe of wardſhip, there the King after
office found, ſhall have the meſne profits' from the time of
the death of the anceſtor, for there the King has the cuſto-


dy


Tours0N's Caſe, Part VIII.


dy, by reaſon of his ſeigniory, and he loſes his rent and ſer-

vices in the mean time, But the King has the cuſtody of an

x And. 23. ideot, not in reſpect of any ſeigniory, but jure protectionis

—_— 25 ſug regie, becauſe his ſubjeCt is not able to govern himſelf,

{PL nor the lands or tenements which he has; and this protection

begins by the office found. And the ſtatute De prerogativa

Regis, cap. 9. faith, guad Rex habebit cuſtodiam terrarum fatu-

Stanf. præ. 33. b. orum, captends exitus, &c. & inveniet eis neceſſaria ſua, &c,

* by which it appears, that the King ſhall take the profits from

ä the time that he is charged with the finding of the ideot and

his family neceſſaries, and that is after the office found; ſo

that when the King ſeiſes jure protectionis regiæ, as in the caſe

1 Leon. 4- pl. go. at bar, or nomine diſtrictionis, as in caſe of alienation of land in

3 Leon. 175- capite without licence, or of marriage of his widow without

* licence, there, after office found, the King ſhall not have any

meſne profits before the office, as it is held in 8 E. 4.4. 40

AT. pl. 36. But when the King ſeiſes ratione prioris recti jeu

tituli, by reaſon of a former right or title, there the King

Thall have the meſne profits from the time of his right or title

firſt accrued, as 18 AM. pl. 18. from the time of the condition

broke, 41 Ed. 3. 21. from the time of the alienation of his

tenant in mortmain ; and if the lands are held of others, from

the time of the title devolved to him, 46 E. 3. Forfeiture 18.

upon the ſtatute of Weſtminſter 2. cap. 45. which gives the

contra formam collationis, from the time of the alienation ; for

by thoſe acts the King's title and right accrues : vide 35 E. 3.

Vill. 22. 40 Aſſ. pl. 36. 9 E. 4, 5. And in the principal

caſe no precedent can be found, that the King was anſwered

the meſne profits beſore the oſſice found, but only after the

oſſice, and ſo the Quære in Stamford's Prerogativa Regis, 34.
b. is well reſolved, | |


Moor 293. 5


Sir


Sir GERRARD FLEETWOOD's
Caſe.


Paſch. 8 Jacobi 1.


IR William Fleetwood, anne 35 Eliz. was poſſeſſed of

a houſe and certain lands in Pynner in the pariſh of
arrow, in Harrow in the county of Middleſex, for certain
years yet during, and anne 36 Eliz. he became Receiver Ge-
nera!, of the revenue of the Court of Wards, &c. and entered
into twenty bonds, each of them 2001. with condition to
make a yearly perfect account before the 20th of June, &c.
and afterwards upon ſeveral accounts in the years 36, 37, 38,
and 39 Eliz. he became indebted to the Queen in great ſums
of money; and he being ſo indebted, by his indenture, 10
Feb. 40 Eliz. in conſideration of 11001. bargained and ſold
the ſaid leaſe to James Pemberton, by force whereof he en-
tered and was thereof poſſeſſed ; which meſne conveyance,
and in conſideration of 13001. was fold to Sir Gerrard Fleet-
wood. The queſtion was, Whether the ſaid meſſuage and
lands are now extendable, or liable to the King's debt ? and
although it is at the election of the Sheriff, either to extend or
to ſell a leaſe, ſo long as it remains in the debtor's hands,
as appears in the books of (a) 31 Aſſ. p. 6. 38 Aff. p. 4. 44 E.
3. 16. 7 H. 6. 2, &c. yet it was reſolved, that the ſaid ſale
of the term ſhould bind the King, becauſe the term was
but a chattel, and there was no covin in the caſe, and a
fale (c) bond fide of chattels is good after judgment,” but not
(4) aſter execution awarded, as appears in 2 H. 4. 14. per
ur”, 9 H. 6. 58. 11 H. 4. 7. and of the freehold or inheri-
tance, which he has at the time of the (e) judgment, in caſe
of a common perſon, and from the time one becomes the
King's debtor, 5 Eliz. Dyer 224, 225. Sir William (f) Ca-
vendiſh's caſe. And the caſe in (g) 50 Aſſ. p. 4. was urged
to the contrary, where the King's debtor took a leaſe to
him and his wife for years, and before execution the huf-
band died, execution was ſued againſt the wife, for it was
the act of the huſband, and he had power of the term
h ' 4 q a at


171


If not bona fide,
it ſhall not bind
the King. 12
Co. a, 3.


(a) Br. Execut.
84. Br. A ſſiſe
318. Br. Extin-
guiſhment 61.
() Br. Aſſiſe 347.
c) 2 Roll. 15 | We
d )Cro. Jac.45 l.
Cro. El. 174,
131, 440. *
2 Roll. 157.
Cro. Car. 149.
1 Leon. 145, 304.
Kelw. 87. a.
29 Car. 2 c. 3.
Moor 352, 873.
I Roll. 893.
(e) Cro. Jac. 451,
452. 7 H. 6. 2.
Cr. Car. 149.
Kelw. 8. a.
29 Car. 2. cap. 3.
53 Co. 12. b.


11 Co. 93. a. Plowd. 421. a. Godb. 292, 297. 2 Roll. Rep. 300, 302. Hard. 25, 26. Dyer 224,
225, pl. 32. 33. (g) 1 Roll. 346. 2 Roll. x56, 157. Plowd, 261, a. 50 Afl. pl, 3. Fitz, Execut.


113. Br. Execution 148, Co. Lit. 185. a.


<3


*


Sir G. FEE TwWOOp's Caſe. Part VIII.


at the time of his death, and the wife came to it without
valuable conſideration, and quodammodso continued in of the
intereſt of her huſband. And Coke, Chief Juſtice, faid, that
a receiver, or other accomptant who is indebted, ſhall not be
8 in a worſe caſe than a (a) felon or traitor, who may, after
Aatea:70,a, thefelony or treaſon, and before conviction, ſell bond fide for
his ſuſtenance, &c. his chattels, be they real or perſonal,


HALE's


Part VIII.


H A L E's Caſe.


Paſch. 8 Jacobi 1.


Y office aſter the death of Sir James Hale, it is found , 1 on. 157.
that he died ſeiſed of divers lands in the county of Kent Rep. 340.
in fee ſimple, whereof part was held of Queen Eliz. by
knights ſervice in capite, and that Cheyny Hale was his ſon
and heir, and within the age of 21 years, and in ward to the
Queen; and afterwards Cheyny Hale accompliſhed his full
age, as appeared by the computation of the firſt office, and
ſo he was in truth, and he tendered his livery, and was ad-
| mitted to it, and within the uſual time given him for the pro-
ſecution of the livery, by deed indented and inrolled, he bar-
gained and fold part of his ſaid lands to another in fee, and
died alſo within the ſaid time. And two queftions were
moved; 1, If the livery of the ſaid Cheyny Hale be loſt b
his death ? 2. Whether the iſſues and profits of the lands fo
aliened, after the tender of the livery and death, are to be
anſwered to the King for want of livery, and for what time ?
and it was agreed, that at the common law, the King ſhall
have primer ſeiſin when the anceſtor dies, his heir within age, |
and was in ward, and that the ſtatute of Pr @rogat:va Regis, |
cap. 3- is but an affirmance of the common law, ſeil. Rex habe- |. K |
bit primam ſeiſinam, poſi mortem ecrum qui de eo tenent in capite giant bot” |
de omnibus terris de quibus, Fc. cujuſcunque etatts hæredes fuerint, 11. b. 12. &c. |
cap. exitus, Wc. donec, c. ceperit homagium hujuſmodi heredis.
For when he has been in ward, he upon his livery ſhall pay
but half a year's profit ; and when he is of full age, a whole |
year's profit ; and that was the common law, tor no ſuch |
diſtinction is made by the ſaid act. And it appears by the f
faid act, that primer ſeiſin is, that the King ſhall take the
proſits of the land, donec ceperit homagium, which is as much as
to 15


Co, Lit. 77. 4.


HA ti mn i. Part VIII.


to ſay, until he has ſued livery, for upon his livery he doth
homage ; ſo that the King's intereſt is ſubje& to this doner,
which is a limitation in law ; then when the heir, at his full
age, tenders his livery, which includes tendering of his ho-
mage, it is all that the heir can do; and therefore if no laches
be afterwards in the heir in the proſecution of his livery, he
ſhall have as much advantage by his tender, as if he had done
homage, and had had his livery when he made his tender,
and the convenient time which the law gives the heir to pro-
ſecute his livery out of the King's hands after tender, is three
(a) 6 Mois Lit. (a) months, becauſe many things are requiſite and neceſſary,
Repo 340 with great care and diligence, to be well and duly purſued in
the proſecution thereof, than when the heir dies within the
ſaid time: ſo that the doing of his homage, and ſuing out
his livery without fault in him, is become impoſſible by the act
(3) 4 Co. 11. a. of God, (6) impotentia in hoc caſu excuſat legem, and in judy-
5 — 166 ment of law, (c) the King's intereſt by the ſaid limitation is
1 C0. gs. a, determined, as if the King had taken the homage of the heir
9 Co.t31,132.D, when he made the tender. And with this reſolution agree
ard. 387- all the precedents of the court; and therefore when the heir
Co Lin. * a, tenders his livery, the Court of Wards, for fear of death,
(e) 9 Co. 132. a. have uſed to take collateral aſſurance for that which is due to
the King. But if the heir, after he comes of full age, or if
Co. Lit, 77. 3, he be of full age at the time of the death of his anceſtor, dies
9 Co. 132. * without any tender; the livery is gone, as is aforeſaid, But
the King ſhall have all the meſne profits until the death, for
default of tender; but the tender, if it be purſued, or if
within the time it becomes impoſſible, by the act of God,
ſel. the death of the heir, there the King by law is barred
from having the meſne profits, as is aforeſaid. Vide Stamford
Prerog. 12, 13. &c. And it was reſolved, that in this cafe
the King's intereſt, by the faid limitation and act in law,
was determined by the death of the heir, ſo that the bar-
gainee might enter and occupy the land without any Man-

flrans de droit, or Amoveas manum, Oc.


NN
by -


a Part VII. — "BF$


Sir HENRY ConsTABLE's Caſe.


Paſch. 8 Facobi 1.


IR Henry Conſtable, Knight, 15 Decembris, anne 5

Yo died ſeiſed of an eſtate in fee-fimple of lands held of
the King by knights ſervice in capite, Henry Conſtable his
ſon and heir being within age, and made a knight in the life
of his father, 1 Julii, anno 7 Fac. Henry the fon accom- 6 Co. 73. a,
pliſhed his age of twenty-one years. Henry the ſon ten-
dered his livery after the death of his father before his
age of twenty-one years, and continued it: and the queſ-
tions were, 1. Whether the profits of the land ſhould be ſaved
to him by the ſaid tender and continuance ? 2. Whether the
King ſhould have the rates within the age of twenty-one
years? And both queſtions were clearly reſolved againſt the
King, and that the King ſhould have primer ſeiſin, as if he
had been of 21 years at the time of the death of his father, (i) Lit. ſec.
becauſe the King, being the ſovereign of knighthood, has 103. 6 Co. 73,
adjudged him of full age to (a) do knights ſervice in the life 7+ 5. C5. Th
of his father, for the reaſons reported at large in Sir Drue 186, 489. 3 Co.
Drurie's Caſe, in the Sixth Part of my Reports, fol. 73. All 34. b. Hob. 46.
which were affirmed for good law by the Chief Juſtices, and RIS
Chief Baron, n Inn


VIRGIL


-
-
=
\
11


Part VIII.


VIRGIL PARK ERCs Caſe.
Trin, 8 Fac. 1.


(a) 1000. 84. Alb. IRGIL PARKER, (a) ſeiſed of the manor of Fuſhil

in fee, held of the King by knights ſervice, as of his

duchy of Lancaſter, anno 27 Eliz. made a feoffment of one

half of the ſaid manor to John Coxwell, and others, before

marriage, to the uſe of himſelf for life, and afterwards to the

uſe of Mary Coney, whom he then intended to marry, for life,

for her jointure, and afterwards to the uſe of himſelf in tail,

with divers remainders over, and afterwards he married the

ſaid Mary; after which marriage, ſc. 39 Eliz. the ſaid Virgil

leaſed the other half of the ſaid manor to the ſaid John Cox-

well, and Edward Long, for divers years, for payment of

his debts and legacies, and afterwards made his will, and

thereby deviſed 10001. in portions to his younger children,

and died, his ſon and heir within age. And the queſtion

was, if the King ſhould have the third part out of the half of

the manor in leaſe only, or out of the wife's half and this half

alſo? And it was reſolved, that foraſmuch as the advancement

(8) Co. Lit, 96, of his wife is as well within the ſtatute, as (5) payment of

d. 78. 4. his debts, and preferment of his children, and foraſmuch as

the operation of the ſtatute principally takes its effect by the

death of the King's tenant; for this reaſon, although the

eſtate of the wife has the precedency, it was reſolved, that

(c) 10 Co. 84, the King's third part ſhould be taken (c) equally out of both

4. b. 9 Co. 133, halves, and not out of the half ſo leaſed only, And ſo was it

d. Moor , reſolved in Mich, 41 & 42 Eliz. betwixt Remington and Sa-

3 vage, and 23 Eliz. in Thynne's caſe; and therewith agrecs
the common experience of the Court of Wards,


FINIS.


The Order of the CASES in this
Eighth Book.


1 PHE Prince's Caſe
2 Caly's Caſe

3 Payne's Caſe

4 Caſe of Barretry

Greiſly's Caſe

e Whittingham's Caſe

7 Jehu Webb's Caſe

8 Sym's Caſe.

9 Earl of Rutland's Caſe
10 Beecher's Caſe
11 Swayn's Caſe
- 12 Sir Will. Forſter's Caſe
13 Loveday's Caſe
14 Edward Crogate's Caſe
15 John Trollop's Caſe
16 Whitlock's Caſe

17 Greneley's Caſe
16 Stafford's Caſe
19 Wyat Wilde's Caſe
20 Vynior's Caſe
21 Sir Rich. Pexhal's Caſe
22 Buckmere's Caſe
23 Frances's Caſe
24 Edward Fox's Caſe
25 Mat. Manning's Caſe
26 Baſpole's Caſe


" Sir Rich. Lechford's Caſe
2


John Talbot's Caſe

29 Doctor Bonham's Caſe
30 City of London's Caſe
31 Thetford School's Caſe
32 'Turnor's Caſe
33 Mary Shipley's Caſe
34 Sir Joh. Nedham's Caſe
35 Sir Fr. Barrington's Caſe
36 Doctor Drury's Caſe.

Vor. IV.


M m


Hil. 3 Jac.
Paſch. 26 Eliz.
Trin. 29 Eliz.
Paſch. 30 Eliz.
Trin. 30 Eliz.
Hil. 45 Eliz.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Mich: 6 Jac.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Mich. 6 Jac.
Hil. 6 Jac.
Paſch. 7 Jac.
Trin. 7 Jac.
Trin. 7 Jac.
Trin. 7 Jac.
Trin. 7 Jac.
Mich. 7 Jac.
Mich. 7 Jac.
Hil. 7 ; 54
_ 7 1
il. 7 Jac.

Hil. 7 Jac.
Hil. 7 Jac.
Hil. 7 Jac.
Hil. 7 Jac.
Paſch. 8 Jae.
Paſch. 8 Jac.
Paſch. 8 Jac, .
Paſch. 8 Jac.
Paſch, 8 Jac.
Trin. 8 Jac,


139
37 Daven-


— —
— 2 — 4


The Order of the Caſes in this Eighth Book.


37 Davenport's Cafe Trin. 8 Jac.
38 The Six Carpenters Caſe Mich. 8 Jac.
39 Edward Altham's Caſe Mich. 8 Jac.


40 Arth. Blackamore's Caſe Mich. 8 Jac.


The Caſes of the Court of Wards;


41 Myght's Caſe Trin. 7 Jac,
42 Digby's Caſe Mirb. 7 Jac.
43 E. * Rutland's Caſe Mich. 7 Jac.
44 Paris Stoughter's Caſe Hil. 7 Jac.
45 Tourſon's Caſe Paſch, 8 Jac.
46 Sir Ger. Fleetwood 's Caſe Paſch. 8 Jac.
Hale's Caſe Paſeh. 8 Jac.
4 Sir Hen. Conſtable's Caſe Paſch. 8 Jac.


49 Virgil Parker's bale Trin, 8 Jac.


4


F INI S.
